Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 3 ( 1964)

Preface

Volume 3 of Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants continues a commentary on the Doctrine and Covenants from the writings and sermons of the prophets, seers, and revelators of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. It contains Sections 77 through 106. The first two volumes of this four-volume work contain commentary on Sections 1 through 41, and 42 through 76, respectively.

At each general conference convened semiannually in April and October, and in one stake conference each year, members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have an opportunity to sustain or reject the General Authorities of the Church. This privilege was revealed as the law of common consent. (D&C 20:61-66; 26:1-2; 124:143-144.) As indicated in the prefaces to Volumes 1 and 2, the First Presidency, the Twelve Apostles, and the Patriarch to the Church are known as prophets, seers, and revelators. This designation is a special calling that carries the right and authority to declare the mind and the will of the Lord to the Saints, under the direction of the President of the Church, who holds all of the keys of the priesthood and to whom the Lord reveals his will for the instruction of the Church. The President of the Church is the prophet, seer, and revelator for the Church. (D&C 28:2; 43:3-7; 90:9, 12-16; 107-8, 65-66, 91-92.)

Each Latter-day Saint may know whether or not a person speaks under the guidance of the Holy Ghost because this is determined by that same Spirit. (D&C 68:3-4; 2 Nephi 33:1-2.) Reading the sermons and writings of the prophets, seers, and revelators of this dispensation can not only enhance one's knowledge of the gospel, but it can also inspire to greater efforts to keep the commandments. As one strives to keep the commandments with all his might, mind, and strength, the Spirit confirms the truth of the spoken word. (D&C 50:21-24.) Edification by the Spirit is received as stated by Elder Abraham O. Woodruff of the Council of the Twelve (1897-1904):

It is the right of every Latter-day Saint, who is living in accordance to the commandments of the Lord, to know of the truthfulness, correctness, and righteousness of every enactment that is made by the Church of Christ, for we believe in revelation. We believe that God will manifest these things unto us, not simply to those who stand at the head of the Church, but to all the members of the Church of Christ. It is our privilege to know and understand whether anything that is done by the Church is right or not, if we are living in accordance with the commandments of the Lord. (Conference Report, October 1899, p. 62.)

The experience of faithful men and women of the Church is that obedience to the counsel of the prophets, seers, and revelators brings success in this life with the promise of an eventual assurance of eternal life in the world to come. The member of the Church who is keeping the commandments knows that to hearken unto the voice of the Lord's servants is to bring blessings upon his head. So the Lord has declared. (D&C 124:45-46.)

Volume 3 of Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants contains thirty revelations received from March 1832 to November 1834, with commentary. During this period the Church was located in Ohio, with the beginning of settlements in Missouri the year before. Three revelations were received by the Prophet Joseph Smith while in Missouri. (Sections 82, 83, 105.) The only other revelation outside of Ohio that was received during this period was Section 100 (Perrysburg, New York), received while the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon were doing missionary work.

This thirty-two-month period was one of great enlightenment for the Saints, as well as one of great concern for their safety and also that of the Church. The Prophet continued the work of revising the Bible; organized the School of the Prophets; brought the Quorum of the First Presidency into being (March 18, 1833); commenced work on the Kirtland Temple (June 5, 1833); and organized high councils in Kirtland (February 17, 1834) and Missouri (July 3, 1834). This growth of the Church was initiated by revelations that greatly augmented the knowledge of the Saints concerning doctrine, organization, and the events of their own times and of the years ahead.

Beginning in the spring of 1833, dark clouds of persecution gathered over the Church in Jackson County, Missouri. Threat of expulsion from Zion matured into mob action until November 1833, when 1200 Saints found themselves in winter weather, without shelter, on the banks of the Missouri River. Many died of exposure; the remainder found temporary refuge in Clay County. A little-known but most significant prophecy concerning the future of the Church was spoken by Joseph Smith amid these deplorable conditions. For the Saints then and those who have followed, its fulfillment is certain. (D&C 103:5-12.) The persecutions in Missouri brought, by the Lord's command, the famous Zion's Camp and its blessing to the Church in providing a trial for men who were to lead the Church through perilous times.

Some of the revelations upon which the latter-day prophets have spoken, as recorded in this volume, are among the best-known sections in the Doctrine and Covenants. Subjects covered in these thirty revelations include:

Interpretation of the Book of Revelation—77.

By-products of the Prophet's revision of the Bible—77, 91.

The Law of Consecration, or United Order—78, 83, 104.

Missionary calls and instruction—79, 80, 99, 100.

Important instructions concerning the keys of the kingdom and the First Presidency—81, 90.

Importance of and powers of the priesthood; the temple in the New Jerusalem—84.

Counsel against deception, the One Mighty and Strong—85.

Prophecies concerning war—86, 87; the law of war and forgiveness—98.

Temporal commandments to build houses and a temple; and the Word of Wisdom—88, 89, 94, 95.

The Constitution of the United States—98, 101.

Why the Church failed to redeem Zion, and what is necessary to accomplish this—101, 103, 105.

Minutes of the first high council (procedural pattern for Church judicial cases)—102.

Section 88 may be considered one of the most important revelations recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants. In the pages devoted to this revelation, one will find wonderful treasures of wisdom. The subject matter ranges from counsel on the value of the proper amount of sleep to the destiny of man and of the Lord's innumerable creations. Among the truths discussed are: the manner in which God controls and directs his creations; the resurrection of man and the earth, and their destiny as measured by their works; the need for missionary preparation and events preceding the second coming of Christ; millennial events; and words of wisdom on how man will find the greatest happiness in this life and in the world to come. The manner in which the Lord offers peace of mind and security to his children is also found interwoven throughout Section 88, as the Lord's "Olive Leaf" to his people.

In conclusion, truth, that which "abideth and hath no end," continues to bear witness of itself in the revelations of the Lord through the Prophet Joseph Smith. Vindication of Joseph Smith as a prophet is found throughout the pages of this commentary, as the prophets, seers, and revelators of this dispensation provide inspiring commentary upon these revelations.

These great revelations for the temporal and spiritual welfare of man and other guideposts for lighting the way in a dark world are commented upon by those ordained with a special calling as prophets, seers, and revelators. ]

May the reader seek prayerfully for that Spirit which will confirm the words of the prophets, living and dead. (D&C 46:7-10; 50:21-24; 2 Nephi 33:1)
