Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 3 ( 1964)

Section 77

Revelation given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Hiram, Ohio, March, 1832.—An explanation of part of the Revelation of John.

A. It is the earth, in its sanctified, immortal, and eternal state.

A. They are figurative expressions, used by the Revelator, John, in describing heaven, the paradise of God, the happiness of man, and of beasts, and of creeping things, and of the fowls of the air; that which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal; and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, as also the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created.

A. They are limited to four individual beasts, which were shown to John, to represent the glory of the classes of beings in their destined order or sphere of creation, in the enjoyment of their eternal felicity.

A. Their eyes are a representation of light and knowledge, that is, they are full of knowledge; and their wings are a representation of power, to move, to act, etc.

A. We are to understand that these elders whom John saw, were elders who had been faithful in the work of the ministry and were dead; who belonged to the seven churches, and were then in the paradise of God.

A. We are to understand that it contains the revealed will, mysteries, and the works of God; the hidden things of his economy concerning this earth during the seven thousand years of its continuance, or its temporal existence.

A. We are to understand that the first seal contains the things of the first thousand years, and the second also of the second thousand years, and so on until the seventh.

A. We are to understand that they are four angels sent forth from God, to whom is given power over the four parts of the earth, to save life and to destroy; these are they who have the everlasting gospel to commit to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people; having power to shut up the heavens, to seal up unto life, or to cast down to the regions of darkness.

A. We are to understand that the angel ascending from the east is he to whom is given the seal of the living God over the twelve tribes of Israel; wherefore, he crieth unto the four angels having the everlasting gospel, saying: Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads. And, if you will receive it, this is Elias which was to come to gather together the tribes of Israel and restore all things.

A. They are to be accomplished in the sixth thousand years, or the opening of the sixth seal.

A. We are to understand that those who are sealed are high priests, ordained unto the holy order of God, to administer the everlasting gospel; for they are they who are ordained out of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, by the angels to whom is given power over the nations of the earth, to bring as many as will come to the church of the Firstborn.

A. We are to understand that as God made the world in six days, and on the seventh day he finished his word, and sanctified it, and also formed man out of the dust of the earth, even so, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years will the Lord God sanctify the earth, and complete the salvation of man, and judge all things, and shall redeem all things, except that which he hath not put into his power, when he shall have sealed all things, unto the end of all things; and the sounding of the trumpets of the seven angels are the preparing and finishing of his work, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years—the preparing of the way before the time of his coming.

A. They are to be accomplished after the opening of the seventh seal, before the coming of Christ.

A. We are to understand that it was a mission, and an ordinance, for him to gather the tribes of Israel; behold, this is Elias, who, as it is written, must come and restore all things.

A. They are two prophets that are to be raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration, and to prophesy to the Jews after they are gathered and have built the city of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

About the first of March, in connection with the translation of the Scriptures, I received the following explanation of the Revelation of St. John: [Section 77, follows]. (HC 1:253, March, 1832; Hiram, Ohio.)

Oh, ye elders of Israel, harken to my voice; and when you are sent unto the world to preach, tell those things you are sent to tell, preach and cry aloud, "Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand; repent and believe the Gospel." Declare the first principles, and let mysteries alone, lest ye be overthrown. Never meddle with the visions of beasts and subjects you do not understand. Elder Brown, when you go to Palmyra, say nothing about the four beasts, but preach those things the Lord has told you to preach about—repentance and baptism for the remission of sins. (HC 5:344, April 1843.)

John Taylor: Introduction

I have never said much about the beasts, etc., in my preaching. When I have done it, it has been to attract attention and keep the people from running after a greater fool than myself. (HC 5 345, April 1843.)

D&C 77 1Joseph Smith: 1

D&C 77 1While at dinner, I remarked to my family and friends present, that when the earth was sanctified and became like a sea of glass, it would be one great Urim and Thummim, and the Saints could look in it and see as they are seen. (HC 5:279, February 18, 1843.)

D&C 77 2First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, John R.Winder, Anthon H. Lund): 2

D&C 77 2The spirit of man is in the form of man, and the spirits of all creatures are in the likeness of their bodies. This was plainly taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith. (Doctrine and Covenants, 77:2.) (IE, January 1909; 13:78.)

D&C 77 2By His almighty power He organized the earth, and all that it contains, from spirit and element, which exist co-eternally with Himself. He formed every plant that grows, and every animal that breathes, each after its own kind, spiritually and temporally—"that which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal, and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which' is spiritual." (77:2.) (IE, January 1909, 13:75-81.)

D&C 77 2Orson Pratt: 2

D&C 77 2The spirit of man in the likeness of his person

D&C 77 2Here the pre-existence of man was taught in the Book of Mormon. [Ether 3:14-16.] All men in the beginning were created after the image of this body which he [Jesus Christ] was then shewing. All the human family that then existed, and that would exist in future time upon the earth, were created in the beginning after the image of that body; that is, that body which he showed was not a body of flesh and bones, but a pure spiritual body, organized out of pure spiritual substance, filled with light and truth. . . .

D&C 77 2Here, then, was a great deal of information given to us, concerning the formation of the human spirit, the formation of men,—the formation of their persons, and their individualities, before the foundation of this world. (JD, November 12, 1879, 21;199.)

D&C 77 2Parley P. Pratt: 2

D&C 77 2The spirit of man in the likeness of his person

D&C 77 2The spirit of man consists of an organization of the elements of spiritual matter, in the likeness and after the pattern of the fleshly tabernacle. It possesses, in fact, all the organs and parts exactly corresponding to the outward tabernacles. (Key to the Science of Theology, 1943, p. 124.)

D&C 77 3Joseph Smith: 3

D&C 77 3John saw curious looking beasts in heaven; he saw every creature that was in heaven,—all the beasts, fowls and fish in heaven,—actually there, giving glory to God. How do you prove it? (See Rev. 5:13.) "And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea and all that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto Him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever."

D&C 77 3I suppose John saw beings there of a thousand forms, that had been saved from ten thousand times ten thousand earths like this,—strange beasts of which we have no conception: all might be seen in heaven. The grand secret was to show John what there was in heaven. John learned that God glorified Himself by saving all that His hands had made, whether beasts, fowls, fishes or men; and He will glorify Himself with them.

D&C 77 3Says one, "I cannot believe in the salvation of beasts." Any man who would tell you that this could not be, would tell you that the revelations are not true. John heard the words of the beasts giving glory to God, and understood them. God who made the beasts could understand every language spoken by them. The four beasts were four of the most noble animals that had filled the measure of their creation, and had been saved from other worlds, because they were perfect; they were like angels in their sphere. We are not told where they came from, and I do not know; but they were seen and heard by John praising and glorifying God. (HC 5:343-44, April 8, 1843.)

D&C 77 3First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, Anthon H. Lund): 3

D&C 77 3He [God] made the tadpole and the ape, the lion and the elephant; but He did not make them in His own image, nor endow them with Godlike reason and intelligence. Nevertheless, the whole animal creation will be perfected and perpetuated in the Hereafter, each class in its "distinct order or sphere," and will enjoy "eternal felicity." That fact has been made plain in this dispensation. (D&C 77:3.) (IE, January 1909, 13:81.)

D&C 77 4Joseph Fielding Smith: 4

D&C 77 4These beasts here represented are of course symbolical; so likewise is the description of their eyes and wings. The Lord has promised those who obtain the exaltation that they shall possess great wisdom, and knowledge and power shall be given unto them. The righteous in the kingdom of God, shall be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ as sons and daughters of God, and the fulness of his kingdom will be given to them. We also learn from this revelation and the word of the Lord in other revelations that in the eternities the animals and all living creatures shall be given knowledge, and enjoy happiness, each in its own sphere, in "their eternal felicity." These creatures will not then be the dumb animals that we suppose them to be while in this mortal life.

D&C 77 4The Prophet Joseph Smith said: "I make this broad declaration, that whenever God gives a vision of an image, or beast, or figure of any kind, he always holds himself responsible to give a revelation or interpretation of the meaning thereof, otherwise we are not responsible or accountable for our belief in it. Don't be afraid of being damned for not knowing the meaning of a vision or figure, if God has not given a revelation or interpretation of the subject." (CHMR, 1948, 2:68-69.)

D&C 77 5Joseph Fielding Smith: 5

D&C 77 5The four and twenty elders . . . belonged to the seven churches

D&C 77 5It will be recalled that the forepart of John's Revelation contains a charge to the seven churches, or branches of the Church, in Asia Minor. [Rev. 1-3.] We may judge from what is written that these seven branches were all that were considered worthy of a standing in the Church at that time, indicating that the apostasy had at that day become extensive, and each of these branches received a deserved rebuke. The seven candlesticks and the seven stars also have reference to these seven branches of the Church and the seven angels spoken of had to do with these churches, or branches. (CHMR, 1948, 2:69.)

SCD&C 77 6D&C 77 7Orson F. Whitney: 6-7

SCD&C 77 6D&C 77 7John, after being told what he should write unto the seven churches, saw a vision of the past and the future. He beheld a sea of glass like unto a crystal, shining before a heavenly throne, upon which sat a glorious being, holding in his hand a book sealed with seven seals. Joseph Smith declares that that sea of glass was the earth in its sanctified and immortal state, and that the book with seven seals symbolized the history of the earth—its true history—the hidden acts of men and the mysteries of God pertaining to this planet during the seven thousand years of its temporal existence. The opening of the first seal was the revealing of the acts of the first thousand years, the opening of the second seal the revealing of the acts of the second thousand years, and so on until the seventh. We gather from this and other teachings of the Prophet that this earth has been appointed a certain time in which to accomplish its mortal probation, prior to its glorification. It was created, not as something out of nothing, as many have absurdly taught and supposed, but was organized from everlasting spirit and element, and was made for the children of God firstly as a temporary abode, and lastly as an eternal inheritance. It has been given a certain time in which to fulfil its mission as a mortal creature. It keeps the law of God, the celestial law, which means that it lives by every word that proceeds from His mouth, and because of this it shall be sanctified. [Sec. 88:25-26.] Yea, though it die, yet shall it live again, be resurrected, to shine as a celestial body, as "a sea of glass mingled with fire," and beings of a celestial order shall inherit it forever. [Sec. 88:17-20.] (MS, January 17, 1895, 57:33-34.)

D&C 77 6Joseph Fielding Smith: 6

D&C 77 6By the seven thousand years of temporal existence is meant the time of the earth's duration from the fall of Adam to the end of time, which will come after the Millennium and "a little season" which will follow. [Sec. 29:22-23; 88:111.] The earth and all on it were in a spiritual condition before the fall, for mortality had not come bringing temporal conditions. We are now living in the second period of the earth's history, which is referred to as being a telestial condition. In other words, a condition where wickedness and all the vicissitudes of mortality endure. (CHMR, 1948, 2:64.)

D&C 77 8Joseph Fielding Smith: 8

D&C 77 8These angels seem to fit the description of the angels spoken of in the parable of the wheat and the tares, (Matt. 13:24-43 and D&C 86:17), who pled with the Lord that they might go forth to reap down the field. They were told to let the wheat and the tares grow together to the time of the end of the harvest, which is the end of the world. (Matt. 13:38-39.) There are some very interesting prophetic discourses on this by President Wilford Woodruff, delivered on several occasions shortly before his death, in which he proclaimed by revelation that the time had now come when these angels had been loosed and sent on their mission. A portion of his remarks follow:

D&C 77 8"What are the signs of the times? Can the Latter-day Saints comprehend them? This is a fast age. The Lord is going to cut his work short in righteousness. Read these revelations, for they contain the history of what is going to pass in the earth. The Lord said to Joseph Smith in the beginning of this Church": (He then quoted verses 5-7 of Sec. 86 and then continued), "What is the matter with the world today? What has created this change that we see coming over the world? Why these terrible judgments? What is the meaning of all these mighty events that are taking place? The meaning is, these angels that have been held for many years in the temple of our God have got their liberty to go out and commence their mission and their work in the earth and they are here today in the earth. I feel bold in saying this to the Latter-day Saints. There is a meaning in these judgments. The word of the Lord cannot fall unfulfilled. If you want to know what is coming to pass, read the revelations of St. John; read the Book of Mormon and the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and these things are at our doors. What is the matter with this nation? Thousands of men striking, mobs rising up and destroying property, and tribulation prevailing! I want to say that you will all find before you are many years older that Utah is a pretty good place to live in.

D&C 77 8"So far as temporal matters are concerned, we have got to work and provide for ourselves. The day will come when, as we have been told, we shall all see the necessity of making our own shoes and clothing and raising our own food, and uniting together to carry out the purposes of the Lord. We will be preserved in the mountains of Israel in the day of God's judgment. I therefore say to you, my brethren and sisters, prepare for that which is to come." (MS 56:643-44.)

D&C 77 8These angels have been given power over the four parts of the earth and they have the power of committing the everlasting Gospel to the peoples of the earth. The fulness of the Gospel was not restored by any one messenger sent from the presence of the Lord. All the ancient prophets who held keys and came and restored them, had a hand in this great work of restoration. There are, we learn from this revelation, four angels unto whom the power has been given, to shut up the heavens, to open them and with power unto life and also death and destruction. These are now at work in the earth on their sacred mission. (CHMR, 1948, 2:70-71.)

SCD&C 77 9D&C 77 10Joseph Fielding Smith: 9-10

SCD&C 77 9D&C 77 10As previously stated [Sec. 77:8] the restoration of the Gospel did not come through just one messenger, but there are several who came and bestowed their keys of authority and power. The name Elias, is a title. This we have been taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith. (Teachings, p. 335.) Is it not possible, therefore, since so many ancient prophets had a hand in the restoration, that in speaking of the Elias who was to come and restore all things, do we not have a composite picture of several Eliases, rather than one single individual? The angel with the seal directs the four angels holding the destiny of the world in their hands, not to hurt the earth until the servants of the Lord have been sealed. This could not be accomplished until the Gospel was restored and proclaimed to the nations of the earth. (CHMR, 1948, 2:71.)

D&C 77 11Orson Pratt: 11

D&C 77 11The ten tribes will have to come forth and come to this land, to be crowned with glory in the midst of Zion by the hands of the servants of God, even the Children of Ephraim; and twelve thousand High Priests will be elected from each of these ten tribes, as well as from the scattered tribes, and sealed in their foreheads, and will be ordained and receive power to gather out of all nations, kindreds, tongues and people as many as will come unto the general assemblage of the Church of the first-born. Will not that be a great work? Imagine one hundred and forty-four thousand High Priests going forth among the nations, and gathering out as many as will come to the Church of the first-born. All that will be done, probably, in the morning of the seventh thousand years. The work is of great magnitude, Latter-day Saints, and we are living almost upon the eve of it. (JD, November 22, 1873, 16:325-26.)

D&C 77 11Joseph Fielding Smith: 11

D&C 77 11This certainly is a great honor to be one of the 144 thousand who are especially called by the power of "the angels to whom is given power over the nations of the earth," to bring souls unto Christ. John the Apostle had the great desire to bring souls to Christ. [Sec. 7.] The three Nephite Disciples likewise sought this great honor and it was granted to them. [3 Nephi 28.] It is one of the noblest desires that a man can have. It will be a wonderful blessing to those who are called in this great group. This 144 thousand will not be the only ones who worship the Father and the Son, for after speaking of the twelve thousand out of each of the tribes, John records: "After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands; and cried with a loud voice, saying: Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. And all the angels stood round about the throne, and about the elders and the four beasts, and fell before the throne on their faces, and worshipped God." [Rev. 7:9-11.] (CHMR, 1948, 2:71-72.)

D&C 77 11Joseph Smith 11

D&C 77 11I am going on in my progress for eternal life. It is not only necessary that you should be baptized for your dead, but you will have to go through all the ordinances for them, the same as you have gone through to save yourselves. There will be 144,000 saviors on Mount Zion, and with them an innumerable host that no man can number. Oh! I beseech you to go forward, go forward and make your calling and your election sure. (HC 6:365, May 12, 1844.)

D&C 77 12Orson F. Whitney: 12

D&C 77 12The symbolism of the Sabbath, and the symbolism of other days as well, is plainly indicated in the writings of Joseph Smith. In one place he says—or the Lord says through him: "All things have their likeness, and are made to bear record of me." (Moses 6:63.) We need not be surprised, therefore, to find among the Prophet's teachings this—I quote now from his Key to the Apocalypse: [Sec. 77:6, 12, quoted.]

D&C 77 12The "days" here referred to were not ordinary days of twenty-four hours each, based upon earth's diurnal revolutions. He who "made the world" before placing man upon it, had not then appointed unto Adam his reckoning. (Abr. 5:13.) They were not man's days, but God's days, each having a duration of a thousand years.

D&C 77 12"The book which John saw" represented the real history of the world—what the eye of God has seen, what the recording angel has written; and the seven thousand years, corresponding to the seven seals of the Apocalyptic volume, are as seven great days during which Mother Earth will fulfill her mortal mission, laboring six days and resting upon the seventh, her period of sanctification. These seven days do not include the period of our planet's creation and preparation as a dwelling place for man. They are limited to Earth's "temporal existence," that is, to Time, considered as distinct from Eternity.

D&C 77 12The Prophet's translation of the Book of Abraham explains that these greater days are "after the time" or according to the reckoning of Kolob, a mighty governing planet nearest the Celestial Throne, a planet revolving once in a thousand years. (Abr. 3:4.) This period, then, is a day upon Kolob. One might well suppose such a day to have figured in the warning given to Adam: "In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die" (Gen. 2:17); for Adam, after eating of the forbidden fruit, lived on to the age of nine hundred and thirty years. (Gen. 5:5.) This, of course, refers to the temporal life. Adam died spiritually as soon as he had transgressed the divine command. Shut out from the Heavenly Presence, he was dead as to the things of the spirit. (D&C 29:40, 41.) St. Peter may have had the same thing in mind when he wrote: "One day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day." (2 Peter 3:8.)

D&C 77 12According to received chronology—admittedly imperfect, yet approximately correct—four thousand years, or four of the seven great days given to this planet as the period of its "temporal existence," had passed before Christ was crucified; while nearly two thousand years have gone by since. Consequently, Earth's long week is now drawing to a close, and we stand at the present moment in the Saturday Evening of Time, at or near the end of the sixth day of human history. Is it not a time for thought, a season for solemn meditation? Morning will break upon the millennium, the thousand years of peace, the Sabbath of the World! (Saturday Night Thoughts, 1921, pp. 10-12.)

D&C 77 12Orson Pratt: 12

D&C 77 12Unto the end of all things

D&C 77 12After the thousand years here referred to [Rev. 20:5], this earth will die; it will pass through a change similar to that of our bodies; it will pass away, as an organized world, but not a particle, however, will be destroyed or annihilated; it will all exist, and when it is resurrected again, it will be a new earth. Then those immortal beings who came up out of their graves, at the beginning of the thousand years, will again descend from heaven upon the new earth; and the earth will be eternal. And the earth will at that time have no more need of the light of a luminary like our sun, or any artificial light, for it will be a globe of light; for when God makes this earth immortal, he will make it glorious like the inhabitants that will be permitted to live upon it. They will become immortal, and be crowned with crowns of glory, and light will radiate from their personages and countenances; so will the earth radiate its light, and shine forth in a celestial splendor. (JD, 1878, 19:290.)

D&C 77 13Joseph Fielding Smith: 13

D&C 77 13These terrible events pictured in the ninth chapter of Revelation are now being fulfilled. Part of this we have witnessed, the rest will shortly come to pass. This is, and will be, in the nature of the cleansing process to prepare the earth and its inhabitants, those who will be fortunate enough to remain, for the coming of our Savior when he shall commence his reign for a thousand years upon the earth. The reading of this chapter with the knowledge that the time of its fulfillment is at hand, should cause all men some thoughtful sober thinking. (CHMR, 1948, 2:72.)

D&C 77 14Joseph Fielding Smith: 14

D&C 77 14John as an Elias with power of restoration is yet to come. The little book is symbolical of his great mission in preparing Israel for its return in these last days. At the conference of the Church held in June 1831, the Prophet Joseph Smith said "that John the Revelator was then among the ten tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion." (Essentials, p. 126.) (CHMR, 1948, 2:72.)

D&C 77 14Orson Pratt: 14

D&C 77 14Do not think that we are the only people who will have Prophets. God is determined to raise up Prophets among that people [ten tribes] but he will not bestow upon them all the fulness of the blessings of the Priesthood. The fulness will be reserved to be given to them after they come to Zion. But Prophets will be among them while in the north, and a portion of the Priesthood will be there; and John the Revelator will be there, teaching, instructing and preparing them for this great work; for to him were given the keys for the gathering of Israel at the time when he ate that little book, while on the Isle of Patmos. At that time, John was a very old man; but the Lord told him that he must yet prophesy before many kingdoms, and nations, and peoples, and tongues, and he has got that mission to perform, and in the last days the spirit and power of Elias will attend his administrations among these ten tribes, and he will assist in preparing them to return to this land. (JD, April 1875, 18:25-26.)

D&C 77 15D&C 76 15Orson Pratt: 15

D&C 77 15We might bring up, also, the declaration of John in relation to the two witnesses who are to prophesy about that period. They are, to prophesy three and a half years, and their field of labor will be Jerusalem, after it shall have been rebuilt by the Jews. By means of their prophecies and the power of God attending them, the nations who are gathered together against Jerusalem will be kept at bay, these Prophets will hold them in check by their faith and power. By and by these nations overcome the two witnesses and, having finished their mission, they are slain, and their bodies will lie three days and a half in the streets of the city. Then a great earthquake will take place, and these two witnesses will be caught up to heaven. (JD, December 28, 1873, 16:329.)

D&C 77 15D&C 76 15Parley P. Pratt: 15

D&C 77 15Zechariah, in his 14th chapter has told us much concerning the great battle and overthrow of the nations who fight against Jerusalem, and he has said, in plain words, that the Lord shall come at the very time of the overthrow of that army, yes, in fact, even while they are in the act of taking Jerusalem, and have already succeeded in taking one-half the city, and spoiling their houses, and ravishing their women. Then, behold their long-expected Messiah, suddenly appearing, shall stand upon the Mount of Olives, a little east of Jerusalem, to fight against those nations and deliver the Jews. Zechariah says the Mount of Olives shall cleave in twain, from east to west, and one-half of the mountain shall remove to the north, while the other half falls off to the south, suddenly forming a very great valley, into which the Jews shall flee for protection from their enemies as they fled from the earthquake in the days of Uzziah, king of Judah, while the Lord cometh and all the saints with Him. Then will the Jews behold that long, long-expected Messiah, coming in power to their deliverance, as they always looked for Him. He will destroy their enemies, and deliver them from trouble at the very time they are in the utmost consternation, and about to be swallowed up by their enemies. But what will be their astonishment when they are about to fall at the feet of their Deliverer, and acknowledge Him their Messiah! They discover the wounds which were once made in His hands, feet, and sides, and, on inquiry, at once recognize Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews, the man so long rejected. [Sec. 45:49-53.] Well did the Prophet say, they shall mourn and weep, every family apart, and their wives apart. But, thank heaven, there will be an end to their mourning, for He will forgive their iniquities and cleanse them from uncleanness. Jerusalem shall be a holy city from that time forth, and all the land shall be turned as a plain from Bega to Rimmon, and she shall be lifted up and inhabited in her place, and men shall dwell there, and there shall be no more utter destruction of Jerusalem, "And in that day there shall be one Lord, and his name one, and He shall be king over all the earth." (Zech. 14:9.)

D&C 77 15John, in his 11th chapter of Revelation, gives us many more particulars concerning this same event. He informs us that, after the city and temple are rebuilt by the Jews, the Gentiles will tread it under foot forty and two months, during which time there will be two Prophets continually prophesying and working mighty miracles. And it seems that the Gentile army shall be hindered from utterly destroying and overthrowing the city, while these two Prophets continue. But, after a struggle of three years and a half, they at length succeed in destroying these two Prophets, and then overrunning much of the city, they send gifts to each other because of the death of the two Prophets, and in the meantime will not allow their dead bodies to be put in graves, but suffer them to lie in the streets of Jerusalem three days and a half, during which the armies of the Gentiles, consisting of many kindreds, tongues and nations, passing through the city, plundering the Jews, see their dead bodies lying in the street. But after three days and a half, on a sudden, the spirit of life from God enters them, and they will arise and stand upon their feet, and great fear will fall upon them that see them. And then they shall hear a voice from heaven saying, "Come up hither," and they will ascend up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beholding them. And having described all these things, then comes the shaking, spoken of by Ezekiel [Ezek. 38:18-20], and the rending of the Mount of Olives, spoken of by Zechariah. [Zech. 14:4-5.] John says, "The same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand." [Rev. 11:13.] And then one of the next scenes that follows is the sound of voices saying, "The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign forever and ever." [Rev. 11:15.]

D&C 77 15Now, having summed up the description these great events spoken of by these Prophets, I would remark, there is no difficulty in understanding them all to be perfectly plain and literal in their fulfillment.

D&C 77 15Suffice it to say, the Jews gather home, and rebuild Jerusalem. The nations gather against them in battle. Their armies encompass the city, and have more or less power over it for three years and a half. A couple of Jewish Prophets, by their mighty miracles, keep them from utterly overcoming the Jews, until at length they are slain, and the city is left in a great measure to the mercy of their enemies for three days and a half, the two Prophets rise from the dead and ascend up into heaven. The Messiah comes, convulses the earth, overthrows the army of the Gentiles, delivers the Jews, cleanses Jerusalem, cuts off all wickedness from the earth, raises the Saints from the dead, brings them with Him, and commences His reign of a thousand years, during which time His Spirit will be poured out upon all flesh, men and beasts, birds and serpents, will be perfectly harmless and peace and the knowledge and glory of God shall cover the earth as the waters cover the sea; and the kingdom and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the Saints of the Most High. (A Voice of Warning, 1847, pp. 40-42.)
