Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 3 ( 1964)

Section 80

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Hiram, Ohio, March, 1832.—Commandment concerning ministerial labors to Stephen Burnett and Eden Smith.

D&C 80 1George Teasdale: 1

D&C 80 1Go ye into the world and preach the gospel

D&C 80 1The Lord Jesus Christ said unto His disciples anciently, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved." [Mark 16:15-16.] Believeth what? Believeth in the Lord Jesus Christ, in the atonement, in the resurrection, in holding communication with the heavens, in the spirit of revelation, in putting our trust in God, in doing good, in fulfilling our individual missions, and being in obedience to the principles of the Gospel. (CR, April 1902, p. 67.)

SCD&C 80 4D&C 80 5Orson Pratt: 4-5

SCD&C 80 4D&C 80 5I have been abroad with several companies of missionaries from this place, and I have seen them lament and mourn, and have heard them tell their feelings one to another; saying—"O that I had occupied my time that I have spent as it were in folly, in treasuring up the principles of eternal life,—that I had studied the scriptures—that I had made myself acquainted more extensively with the doctrines of the Church—that I had made myself acquainted with those principles revealed from heaven for our guidance! I should then have been prepared to stand before the inhabitants of the earth and edify them with regard to our principles." I have heard these lamentations for months after they were in their fields of labour; and I have really been astonished at the idleness of those who are growing up, who expect to be servants of God and to occupy a conspicuous place in the kingdom of God. I know many of us can plead some sort of an excuse. . . . Not only hours, but days are spent that might have been used for better purposes; consequently, you have not a sufficient excuse to justify you in spending your time in idleness. (JD, August 28, 1859, 7:75-76.)

D&C 80 4John A. Widtsoe: 4

D&C 80 4The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints possesses the full truth relative to the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, the one divine plan of salvation, and also the authority to officiate in God's name in the building up of the Church of Christ. There is but one gospel; there can be but one Priesthood; there is but one Church which encompasses the whole truth of the gospel, and into which all truth may find its place. In that sense the Church claims to possess the full fundamental truth, call it monopoly if you choose, necessary for full salvation in the celestial kingdom of God. This the Church does humbly and gratefully, keenly sensible of its high commission and vast responsibility, to lead all mankind into a fulness of the knowledge leading to eternal progression in the presence of the Lord. (Evidences and Reconciliations, 1943, 1:18-19.)

D&C 80 4These . . . are the steps on the way to truth: Desire, prayer, study and practice. They form the eternal price which must be paid for truth.

D&C 80 4This way must be found by each person for himself. Another cannot desire, pray, study, or practice in our stead and for us. Truth must be won individually.

D&C 80 4The way to truth is the way to a testimony of the truth of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. Try it! It never fails those who travel it sincerely. Those who live most, live by truth. (Evidences and Reconciliations, 1951, 3:84-85.)
