Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 3 ( 1964)

Section 83

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Independence, Missouri, April 30, 1832. This revelation was received as the Prophet sat in council with his brethren.—Claims of women and children for support upon their husbands and fathers—Claims of widows and orphans upon the Church.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

On the 27th we transacted considerable business for the salvation of the Saints, who were settling among a ferocious set of mobbers, like lambs among wolves. It was my endeavor to so organize the Church, that the brethren might eventually be independent of every incumbrance beneath the celestial kingdom, by bonds and covenants of mutual friendship, and mutual love.

On the 28th and 29th, I visited the brethren above Big Blue river, in Kaw township [Missouri], a few miles west of Independence, and received a welcome only known by brethren and sisters united as one in the same faith, and by the same baptism, and supported by the same Lord. The Colesville branch, in particular, rejoiced as the ancient Saints did with Paul. ["It should be remembered that those Colesville Saints were among the first to receive the Gospel under the teachings of the Prophet, and hence his heart was naturally tender towards them, and this visit was doubtless especially delightful both to the Saints and to the Prophet."] It is good to rejoice with the people of God. On the 30th I returned to Independence, and again sat in council with the brethren, and received the following: [Section 83, quoted.] (HC 1:269, April 27-30, 1832.)

SCD&C 83 1D&C 83 2D&C 83 3D&C 83 4D&C 83 5D&C 83 6Joseph F. Smith: 1-6

SCD&C 83 1D&C 83 2D&C 83 3D&C 83 4D&C 83 5D&C 83 6I have no doubt that the law of tithing has always existed when the Lord had a people on the earth. The purpose of the law of tithing is similar to that of the law of revenue which is enacted by every State, every county and every municipality in the world, I suppose. There is no such thing as an organization of men for any purpose of importance, without provisions for carrying out its designs. The law of tithing is the law of revenue for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Without it it would be impossible to carry on the purposes of the Lord. I want to read to you one of the objects for which the law of tithing is given. It is recorded in Section 83 of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. The Lord said to the Prophet Joseph at Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, April 30, 1832: [Sec. 83:1-6, quoted.]

SCD&C 83 1D&C 83 2D&C 83 3D&C 83 4D&C 83 5D&C 83 6Here is one of the great purposes for which the law of tithing is instituted in the Church. It is intended that the widows shall be looked after when they are in need, and that the fatherless and the orphans shall be provided for from the funds of the Church; that they shall be clothed and fed, and shall have opportunity for education, the same as other children who have parents to look after them. When a child is fatherless and motherless the Church becomes the parent of that child, and it is obligatory upon the Church to take care of it, and to see that it has opportunities equal with the other children in the Church. This is a great responsibility. Have we ever seen the day since the Church was organized when we could carry out the purpose of the Lord fully and to our heart's content? We have not, because we never have had the means to do it with. But if men will obey the laws of God so that there shall be abundance in the storehouse of the Lord, we will have wherewith to feed and clothe the poor and the orphan and to look after those who are in need to the Church. (CR, October 1899, pp. 39-40.)

SCD&C 83 4D&C 83 5D&C 83 6 James E. Talmage: 4-6

SCD&C 83 4D&C 83 5D&C 83 6A system of unity in temporal matters has been revealed to the Church in this day; such is currently known as the Order of Enoch, or the United Order, and is founded on the law of consecration . . . in the early days of the Latter-day Church the people demonstrated their inability to abide this law in its fulness [Sec. 105], and in consequence, the lesser law of tithing was given [Sec. 119]; but the saints confidently await the day in which they will devote not merely a tithe of; their substance but all that they have and all that they are, to the service of their God; a day in which no man will speak of mine and shine, but all things shall be the Lord's and theirs. . . . As far as the plan of this prospective organization has been revealed, it provides that a person entering the order shall consecrate to the Lord all that he has, be it little or much, giving to the Church a deed of his property sealed with a covenant that cannot be broken. The person thus having given his all is to be made a steward over a part of the property of the Church, according to his ability to use it.

SCD&C 83 4D&C 83 5D&C 83 6The varying grades of occupation will still exist; there will be laborers, whose qualifications fit them best for unskilled toil; and managers who have proved their ability to lead and direct; some who can serve the cause of God best with the pen, others with the plow; there will be engineeers and mechanics, artisans and artists, farmers and scholars; teachers, professors, and authors—every one laboring as far as practicable in the sphere of his choice, but each required to work, and to work where and how he can be of the greatest service. His stewardship is to be assured him by written deed, and as long as he is faithful to his charge, no man can take it from him. [Sec. 51:3-5; 58:14-l8.] Of the proceeds of his labors, every man may use as he requires for the support of himself and his family [Sec. 42:32; 51:3]; the surplus is to be rendered to the Church for public and general works, and for the assistance of those who are justifiably deficient. As further illustrative of the uses to which the surplus is to be devoted, we read: [Sec. 83:4-6, quoted.] Any faithful steward, requiring additional capital for the improvement of his work, has a claim for such upon the custodians of the general fund, they in turn being held accountable for their management, which constitutes their stewardship.

SCD&C 83 4D&C 83 5D&C 83 6Equal rights are to be secured to all. . . .

SCD&C 83 4D&C 83 5D&C 83 6Freedom of agency is to be secured to every individual; if he be unfaithful he will be dealt with according to the prescribed rules of church discipline. [Sec. 42:42; 51:5.] A corresponding power of self-government will be exercised by the several stakes or other divisions of the Church, each having independent jurisdiction over its own storehouses and its affairs of administration, all being subject to the General Authorities of the Church. (AF, 1950, pp. 439-41.)
