Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 3 ( 1964)

Section 85

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, November 27, 1832, concerning the Saints in Zion, Missouri. See History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 298.—Inheritances in Zion to be received through consecration—Provision made for the assignment of inheritances among the Saints.

Joseph Fielding Smith: Introduction

On the 27th day of November, 1832, the Prophet wrote [Kirtland, Ohio] to Elder William W. Phelps who was in Independence, Missouri, in charge of the printing and with authority to assist the bishop in matters concerning the establishing of their inheritances and expressed to him in words of tender fellowship, his love and confidence. Matters pertaining to the establishing and building up of Zion weighed heavily on the mind of the Prophet Joseph Smith. His anxiety was very great because of the strictness of the commandments the Lord had given, and because of the grave responsibilities which had been placed upon his brethren to see that the covenants pertaining to consecration were faithfully kept. Especially was he concerned over the duties and responsibilities of the bishop in Zion, for they were very great. It was the duty of the bishop, assisted by his brethren, to see that justice was done, as the Lord had pointed out in the revelations, in the matter of deciding and allotting inheritances in Zion. The history reveals that there were some things that had not been attended to in the Spirit and according to the instructions which had been declared essential in the revelations. These matters caused the Prophet some anxiety and therefore he wrote to Brother Phelps stating that there were some things that were "lying with great weight" on his mind. By the Spirit of prophecy he uttered this prayer, as though it were a prayer in the heart of William Phelps.

"My God, great and mighty art Thou, therefore show unto Thy servant what shall become of all those who are essaying to come up unto Zion, in order to keep the commandments of God, and yet receive not their inheritance by consecration, by order of deed from the Bishop, the man that God has appointed in a legal way, agreeably to the law given to organize and regulate the Church, and all the affairs of the same."

Then the Prophet adds: "Brother William, in the love of God, having the most implicit confidence in you as a man of God, having obtained this confidence by a vision of heaven, therefore, I will proceed to unfold to you some of the feelings of my heart, and to answer the questions." Then what follows by the inspiration of the Spirit of the Lord has been accepted by the Church as a revelation. [D&C Sec. 85.] (CHMR, 1948, 2:111-12.)

SCD&C 85 1D&C 85 2D&C 85 3D&C 85 4D&C 85 5Joseph Fielding Smith: 1-5

SCD&C 85 1D&C 85 2D&C 85 3D&C 85 4D&C 85 5When stewardships were assigned, it was supposed that each man would be given the work which he was most capable of doing, and if he had faith he would put forth every effort to be successful for the building up of the kingdom and the establishment of Zion. The names of all faithful members were to be recorded, with an account of their stewardship, their faith and their works. What a happy people that would have been if they had hearkened with singleness of heart to these commandments, for the Lord had promised to protect them in these inheritances if they would be faithful to him. The Lord knew that there would be some among them who would falter; some who would come to Zion not willing to enroll themselves and consecrate themselves and their property to the welfare of Zion, and therefore could not be given stewardships in the covenant which the Lord had made with the Saints. He, therefore, commanded that all those who came to Zion and who were not willing to receive an inheritance, and consecration agreeable to his law should not be numbered among the faithful. It was the intention of the Lord to have his people consecrated in preparation "against the day of vengeance and burning," which so many of the prophets in ancient times as well as now, have predicted shall come. [Mal. 3:1;2 Thess. 1:7-10; D&C 29:17; 97:25-26.] This class as well as the apostate who may have entered into these covenants, were not to have their genealogy kept, "or to be where it may be found on any of the records or history of the church." This was a matter far more serious perhaps, than it was supposed at the time this revelation was given. The Lord said, "Their names shall not be found, neither the names of the fathers, nor the names of the children written in the book of the law of God, saith the Lord of Hosts." The book of the law of God was the book to be kept by the Lord's clerk. There is also another book which is kept in heaven, and the one kept in heaven, and the one kept by the Lord's clerk should be accurately kept so that it would agree with the Lamb's Book of Life. In the Lamb's Book of Life only the names are received of those who have washed their garments white "in the blood of the lamb." This is in harmony with the word of the Lord to John:

SCD&C 85 1D&C 85 2D&C 85 3D&C 85 4D&C 85 5"And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie: but they which are written in the Lamb's book of life." [Rev. 21:27.] (CHMR, 1948, 2:113.)

D&C 85 3Rudger Clawson: 3

D&C 85 3The day of vengeance and burning

D&C 85 3The Lord says: [Sec. 85:1-12, quoted.]

D&C 85 3Brethren and sisters, the Lord in revealing to the Prophet Joseph that a day of vengeance and burning is coming upon the earth did not desire, I think, to arouse any feelings of fear or anxiety in the minds of His people. It was simply that they should be made acquainted with the fact that such a day is coming upon the earth and also that there should be a preparation made by his people for that time, that they might be able to abide that great and dreadful day of the Lord. One peculiar feature of this revelation is that while the Lord speaks of this time of trouble and calamity, he also comes down to the simple matter as it might seem to some, of giving instructions to his clerk. He says that his clerk shall keep a history and a general Church record of all things that transpire in Zion, and in the manner of life and faith and works of His people, and especially that it should be recorded of His people that they pay their tithes and offerings, and later perhaps that they shall observe the law of consecration, that they may escape the day of vengeance and burning. We see that the Lord is very particular in this matter. . . .

D&C 85 3The lines are being drawn. It must be known to the authorities of this Church and to the people who are faithful and who are not faithful. God requires it and it must be recorded for the reason plainly set forth in the revelation that those whose names are not found recorded in the book of the law of God shall have no inheritance in Zion in that day when our eternal inheritances shall be divided out to use. (CR, April 1900, pp. 43-44)

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, Anthon H. Lund): 6-8

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8Perhaps no other passage in the revelations of the Lord, in this dispensation, has given rise to so much speculation as this one. [Sec. 85:6-8.] Also, it has been used by vain and foolish men to bolster up their vagaries of speculation, and in some cases their pretensions to great power and high positions they were to attain in the Church. In a word, some have made claims that they were the particular individual mentioned in the revelation, the "one mighty and strong holding the scepter of power in his hand, clothed with light for a covering, whose mouth shall utter words, eternal words; while his bowels shall be a fountain of truth, to set in order the house of God, and to arrange by lot the inheritances of the Saints."

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8One would think in such a matter as this "that" sufficient native modesty would assert itself to restrain a man from announcing himself as the one upon whom such high honors are to be conferred, and who is to exercise such great powers in establishing the Saints in their inheritances; and that even if one suspected, for any reason, that such a position, and such exceptional powers were to be conferred upon him, he would wait until the Lord would clearly indicate to the Church, as well as to himself, that he has been indeed sent of God to do the work of so noble a ministry, as is described in the passage under question. Those, however, who have so far proclaimed themselves as being the "one mighty and strong," have manifested the utmost ignorance of the things of God and the order of the Church. Indeed their insufferable ignorance and egotism have been at the bottom of all their pretensions, and the cause of all the trouble into which they have fallen. They seem not to have been aware of the fact that the Church of Christ and of the Saints is completely organized, and that when the man who shall be called upon to divide unto the Saints their inheritances comes, he will be designated by the inspiration of the Lord to the proper authorities of the Church, appointed and sustained according to the order provided for the government of the Church. So long as that Church remains in the earth—and we have the assurance from the Lord that it will now remain in the earth forever [Sec. 65]—the Saints need look for nothing for God's appointing that will be erratic, or irregular, or that smacks of starting over afresh or that would ignore or overthrow the established order of things. The Saints should remember that they are living in the dispensations of the fulness of times, when the Church of Christ is established in the earth for the last days and for the last time, and that God's Church is a Church of order, or law, and that there is no place for anarchy in it. (D&C Sec. 112:30; also Secs. 33:3; 43:28-31.)

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8The revelation from which the passage is quoted is a portion of a letter to William W. Phelps, written by the Prophet from Kirtland under date of November the 27th 1832. William W. Phelps, at the time was at Independence, Missouri. In order that the reader may have the whole matter before him, the letter is reproduced in extenso, and the parts afterwards accept as the word of the Lord indicated: [HC 1:297-99, quoted.]

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8It is to be observed first of all that the subject of this whole letter, as also the part of it subsequently accepted as a revelation, relates to the affairs of the Church in Missouri, the gatherings of the Saints to the land and obtaining their inheritances under the law of consecration and stewardship; and the Prophet deals especially with the matter of what is to become of those who fail to receive their inheritances by order or deed from the bishop. The petition which the Prophet puts into the mouth of his correspondent, Elder Phelps, is:

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8"Show unto Thy servant what shall become of all those who are essaying to come up unto Zion, in order to keep the commandments of God, and yet receive not their inheritance by consecrations, by order or deed from the Bishop, the man that God has appointed in a legal way, agreeably to the law given to organize and regulate the Church and all the affairs of the same."

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8This paragraph clearly proved that the subject in hand is the settling of the Saints in Missouri, granting them their inheritances, and the order of it all. In addition, the "bishop," who was Edward Partridge, is especially referred to as "the man that God has appointed in a legal way, agreeably to the law given to organize and regulate the Church and all the affairs of the same. . . . "

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8It was while these conditions of rebellion, jealousy, pride, unbelief, and hardness of heart prevailed among the brethren in Zion, [Sec. 84:54-58, 76, quoted]—Jackson County, Missouri—in all of which Bishop Partridge participated, that the words of the revelation taken from the letter to William W. Phelps, of the 27th of November, 1832, were written. The "man who was called and appointed of God" to "divide unto the Saints their inheritance"—Edward Partridge—was at that time out of order, neglecting his own duty, and putting "forth his hand to steady the ark," hence, he was warned of the judgment of God impending, and the prediction was made that another, "one mighty and strong," would be sent of God to take his place, to have his bishopric—one having the spirit and power of that high office resting upon him by which he would have power to "set in order the house of God, and arrange by lot the inheritance of the Saints"; in other words, one who would do the work that Bishop Edward Partridge had been appointed to do, but had failed to accomplish.

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8"But," it will be asked, "does Bishop Partridge fulfill the terms of the prophecy that relate to the man 'falling by the shaft of death, like a tree that is smitten by the vivid shaft of lightning?' " That should not be said without some qualification; although Edward Partridge died eight years later, in the forty-seventh year of his age, a victim of the persecution he suffered in Missouri.

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8Edward Partridge, in common with most of the Saints in Missouri, as a result of the reproofs and warnings of the Prophet and others, was brought to a partial repentance; still, as late as March, 1833, notwithstanding the partial repentance referred to, the Lord expressed himself as being "not well pleased" with Bishop Partridge and others: [Sec. 90:34-36, quoted.]

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8Because of the failure of the Saints in Zion to fully repent and keep the commandments of the Lord, the fury of their enemies burst upon them, and they were driven from their possessions into exile, and their homes were destroyed. We here give the Lord's explanation of the troubles that came upon the people; it is found in a revelation given under date of December 16th 1833: (Sec. 101:1-9, quoted.]

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8In the midst of the troublous times in Missouri, Edward Partridge acted a most noble and self-sacrificing part, and bore many indignities with the greatest patience. He was taken to the public square of Independence, partly stripped of his clothing, and bedaubed with tar and feathers, amid the jeers of the mob. He neither complained nor murmured at this treatment, but bore it well, with meekness and dignity. He was one with five others to offer himself as a ransom for the Church, "Willing to be scourged or even put to death," if that would but satisfy the tormentors of the Saints, and stop the inhuman cruelties practiced towards them by the Missourians. He was also active in settling the Saints in upper Missouri, in 1836-8. He shared in all the labors and hardships incident to the settlement of a new country, and subsequently passed through the trials attendant upon the exodus of the Saints from Missouri. Who shall say that his repentance, his sacrifices, his sufferings and faithfulness did not procure for him a mitigation of the severe judgment decreed against him in the revelation contained in the eighty-fifth section of the Doctrine and Covenants? At any rate, the Lord said, some three years later, that he was well pleased with Edward Partridge. The word of the Lord came to the Prophet to this effect, on the 7th of November, 1835:

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8"Behold, I am well pleased with my servant Isaac Morley, and my servant Edward Partridge, because of the integrity of their hearts in laboring in my vineyard, for the salvation of the souls of men. Verily I say unto you, their sins are forgiven them, therefore, say unto them in my name, that it is my will that they should tarry for a little season, (in Kirtland) and attend the school and also the solemn assembly, for a wise purpose in me. Even so. Amen." (History of the Church, Vol. II, pp. 302-3.)

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8Certainly in the face of this plain statement of the Lord's that the sins of Edward Partridge were forgiven him we do not feel that his sad and early death was the fulfillment of the threatened judgment of the revelation. But that he was the man so threatened in that revelation, there can be no question; not only on account of what is here set forth, but also because Orson Pratt, one familiar with Edward Partridge, and an active participant in all these historical matters, publicly declared from the pulpit in Salt Lake City, about the time of the death of President Young, that the man referred to in that passage of revelation in question, was Bishop Edward Partridge. Of the fact of his statement, there can be no doubt; and at the time he was the historian of the Church as well as a member of the quorum of the Apostles.

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8Now, as to the "one mighty and strong," who shall be sent of God, "to set in order the house of God, and to arrange by lot the inheritance of the Saints." Who is he? What position will he hold in the Church? In what manner will he come to his calling? We draw attention first of all to the fact that this whole letter to William W. Phelps, as well as the part afterwards accepted as the word of the Lord, related to the affairs of the Church in Zion, Independence, Jackson County, Missouri. And inasmuch as through his repentance and sacrifices and suffering, Bishop Partridge undoubtedly obtained a mitigation of the threatened judgment affixed against him of falling "by the shaft of death, like as a tree that is smitten by the vivid shaft of lightning," so the occasion for sending another to fill his station—"one mighty and strong to set in order the house of God, and to arrange by lot the inheritances of the Saints"—may also be considered as having passed away and the whole incident of the prophecy closed.

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8If, however, there are those who will still insist that the prophecy concerning the coming of "one mighty and strong" is still to be regarded as relating to the future, let the Latter-day Saints know that he will be a future bishop of the Church who will be with the Saints in Zion, Jackson County, Missouri, when the Lord shall establish them in that land; and he will be so blessed with the spirit and power of his calling that he will be able to set in order the house of God, pertaining to the department of the work under his jurisdiction; and in righteousness and justice will '"arrange by lot the inheritances of the Saints." He will hold the same high and exalted station that Edward Partridge held; for the latter was called to do just this kind of work—that is, to set in order the house of God as pertaining to settling the Saints upon their inheritances, as will appear from the following passage: [Sec. 57:7, 15; 58:14, 17, quoted.]

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8This future bishop will also be called and appointed of God as Aaron of old, and as Edward Partridge was. He will be designated by the inspiration of the Lord, and will be accepted and sustained by the whole Church, as the law of God provides. His coming will not be the result of a wild, erratic movement, or the assumption of authority by a self-appointed egotist seeking power that he may lord it over the people; God's house is one of order, and admits of no such irregular procedure.

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8Certainly this prophecy does not allude in any way to any President of the Church, past, present, or to come. The revelation under consideration does not relate to matters that especially concern the duties of the President of the Church: but to the arranging "by lot the inheritances of the Saints," and that is the whole substance of the revelation, a matter distinctly placed under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of the Church. If it shall be urged that the phrase "to set in order the house of God," indicates a larger scope of action than that contemplated in settling the Saints upon their inheritances, the reasonable and sufficient answer is that the scope of this phrase should most certainly be interpreted by the whole subject of the revelation, and not the meaning of the revelation by the particular phrase. So that the phrase, "set in order the house of God" is limited to setting in order the house of God by arranging by lot the inheritances of the Saints.

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8In conclusion, we would say that the Latter-day Saints by this time, should be so well settled in the conviction that God has established His Church in the earth for the last time, to remain, and no more to be thrown down, or destroyed; and that God's house is a house of order, of law, of regularity, that erratic disturbers of that order of men of restless temperament, who, through ignorance and egotism became vain babblers, yet make great pretensions to prophetic powers and other spiritual graces and gifts, ought not to have any influence with them, nor ought the Saints to be disturbed in their spirit by such characters and their theories. The Church of Christ is with the Saints. It has committed to it the law of God for its own government and perpetuation. It possesses every means for the correction of every wrong or abuse or error which may from time to time arise, and that without anarchy, or even revolution; it can do it by processes of evolution—by development, by an increase of knowledge, wisdom, patience and charity.

SCD&C 85 6D&C 85 7D&C 85 8The presiding quorums of the Church will always be composed of such men; they will be chosen in such manner, that the Saints can be assured that solid wisdom, righteousness, and conscientious adherence to duty, will characterize the policy of those who are entrusted with the administration of the affairs of the Church. While from time to time, as the work of the Lord may have need of their services, men of exceptional talents and abilities will develop among the people of God; and without disorder, or eruption, or excitement, they will be called of the Lord, through the appointed agencies of the Priesthood and Church authority, to positions that will afford them opportunity for service. They will be accepted by the Saints in the regular order, appointed by the law of the Church, just as Edward Partridge was called and accepted [Sec. 41:9] ; and just as the "one mighty and strong" will be called and accepted; when the time comes for his services. (IE, October 1907, 10:929-33, 936-43.)

D&C 85 6Harold B. Lee: 6

D&C 85 6The still small voice

D&C 85 6A way by which we receive revelation is the way that the Prophet Enos spoke of. After he'd gone up and received the great commission to carry on the work and to write the record, he pens this very significant statement in his record in the Book of Mormon. "And while I was thus struggling in the spirit, the voice of the Lord came into my mind saying—." [Enos 10.] In other words, sometimes we hear the voice of the Lord coming into our minds and when it comes the impressions are just as strong as though he were talking as with a trumpet into our ear. Jeremiah says something like that in the first chapter of the Book of Jeremiah: "Then the word of the Lord came unto me saying—." [Jer. 14.] He was having the voice of the Lord into his mind, as Enos said. In the story of the Book of Mormon we have Nephi upbraiding his brothers, calling them to repentance, and in his statement to them he gives voice to the same thought when he says, "And he hath spoken unto you in a still, small voice, but ye were past feeling, so that ye could not feel his words." [1 Nephi 17:45.] Thus the Lord, by revelations, brings into our mind as though a voice were speaking. May I bear humble testimony, if I may be pardoned, to that fact? I was once in a situation where I needed help. The Lord knew I needed help and I was on an important mission. I was awakened in the hours of the morning as though someone had wakened me to straighten me out on something that I had planned to do in a contrary course, and there was clearly mapped out before me as I lay there that morning what I should do and what I should say the following morning, just as surely as though someone had sat on the edge of my bed and told me what to do. Yes, the voice of the Lord comes into our minds and we are directed thereby. (BYU Speeches of the Year, October 15, 1952.)

SCD&C 85 9D&C 85 10D&C 85 11D&C 85 12Joseph F. Smith: 9-12

SCD&C 85 9D&C 85 10D&C 85 11D&C 85 12I will read now a few verses from Section 85 of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, commencing at the 9th verse: [to v. 12, quoted.]

SCD&C 85 9D&C 85 10D&C 85 11D&C 85 12I am going to turn now to Ezra (chapter 2) and see what is said there. We read:

SCD&C 85 9D&C 85 10D&C 85 11D&C 85 1261. And the children of the priests; the children of Habaiah, the children of Koz, the children of Barzillai; which took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called after their name:

SCD&C 85 9D&C 85 10D&C 85 11D&C 85 1262. These sought their register among those that were reckoned by genealogy, but they were not found: therefore were they, as polluted, put from the priesthood.

SCD&C 85 9D&C 85 10D&C 85 11D&C 85 1263. And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the most holy things, till there stood up a priest with Urim and with Thummim.

SCD&C 85 9D&C 85 10D&C 85 11D&C 85 12This is the position the people will be in when they come to claim an inheritance in Zion, if their names are not found recorded in the book of the law of God. And I want to tell you that this refers directly to the law of tithing. In the first place it referred to the law of consecration, but that law, as has been explained, was not properly kept, and inasmuch as people are under the greater condemnation when they keep not the laws that are given them, the Lord in His mercy withdrew from the Latter-day Saints the law of consecration, because the people were not prepared to live it, and as long as it was in force and they kept it not they were under condemnation. The law of tithing was given in its place.

SCD&C 85 9D&C 85 10D&C 85 11D&C 85 12Some people may not care very much whether their names are recorded or not, but this comes from ignorance of the consequences. If their names are not recorded they will not only be cut off from the assistance which they would be entitled to from the Church if they needed it, but they will be cut off from the ordinances of the house of God; they will be cut asunder from their dead and from their fathers who have been faithful, or from those who shall come after them who shall be faithful, and they will be appointed their portion with the unbelievers, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth. It means that you will be cut off from your fathers and mothers, from your husbands, your wives, your children, and that you shall have no portion or lot or inheritance in the kingdom of God, both in time and in eternity. It has a very serious and far reaching effect. It is therefore the more obligatory upon me and upon my fellow-servants in the Church of God to make these matters known to the people that our skirts may be free from their blood. (CR, October 1899, p. 42.)

D&C 85 12Franklin D. Richards: 12

D&C 85 12As . . . recorded in the second chapter and sixty-first and second verses of Ezra

D&C 85 12Look back to the time when Israel returned to Jerusalem from their captivity. How were they enabled to set in order the congregation, the singers, the priests in their courses, and the Levites? It was given to them by genealogy. The Lord had promised to Levi that the service of the Temple and the Sanctuary should belong to his tribe, his family, and especially that the Priesthood should go to the descendants of Aaron. [Num. 3:5-13.] But when they returned from their captivity in Babylon and wanted to be reinstated in their places to officiate at the altar and to eat of the holy bread, the records were searched and those whose names were not found were put away from the Priesthood as polluted, until a Priest should rise up having the Urim and Thummim, who could declare their genealogy, their right and title to this Holy Priesthood. (MS, October 10, 1895, 57:644.)
