Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 3 ( 1964)

Section 86

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, December 6, 1832.—Exposition of the Lord's parable concerning the wheat and the tares—Its application to the latter days.

SCD&C 86 1D&C 86 2D&C 86 3D&C 86 4D&C 86 5D&C 86 6D&C 86 7Joseph Fielding Smith: 1-7

SCD&C 86 1D&C 86 2D&C 86 3D&C 86 4D&C 86 5D&C 86 6D&C 86 7In this revelation the Lord has given a more complete interpretation than he gave to his apostles as recorded by Matthew. (13:24-30, 37-43.) The reason for this may be accounted for in the fact that it is to be in these last days that the harvest is gathered and the tares are to be burned. In Matthew's account the Lord declares that he is the sower of the good seed, and in the Doctrine and Covenants it is stated that the apostles were the sowers of the seed. There is no contradiction here. Christ is the author of our salvation and he it was who instructed the apostles, and under him they were sent to preach the Gospel unto all the world, or to sow the seed, and as the seed is his and it is sown under his command, he states but the fact in this revelation and also in the parable.

SCD&C 86 1D&C 86 2D&C 86 3D&C 86 4D&C 86 5D&C 86 6D&C 86 7After the death of the apostles, "the great persecutor of the Church, the 'apostate' " filled with all manner of iniquity and filth, and who made the nations drink of her cup, under the command of Lucifer, Satan, the dragon, he sowed the tares and crushed out the wheat so that the Church was then forced into the wilderness. (Verse 2 and Rev. 12.) This John saw in his vivid vision and he has given a very clear account of the attempt of the great red dragon to devour the man-child (Priesthood) who was protected and "caught up unto God and to his throne," while the woman (Church) fled into the wilderness where a place was prepared for her until the time should come when she and her son who is "to rule the nations with a rod of iron," (the Gospel), should be restored again. [Sec. 33:3-5.] After the departure of the Priesthood and the Church due to the persecutions of the dragon and the "apostate" the enemy continued to make war with "the remnant of her seed which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ." This is a very important and wonderfully descriptive record by prophetic vision, of the great apostasy and the persecutions which were poured out upon all who endeavored to keep the commandments of the Lord until most of these were also crushed and destroyed.

SCD&C 86 1D&C 86 2D&C 86 3D&C 86 4D&C 86 5D&C 86 6D&C 86 7In these latter days, when the woman and her son (i.e. the Church and the Priesthood) have again been brought back to the earth, the dragon once more raises his head and endeavors to plant the seed of evil and destruction among the wheat which has been newly planted. To some extent he is successful and we find the tares once more among the wheat which has been newly planted in the present dispensation. The angels were to permit the wheat and the tares to grow together until the end of the harvest, and then the Lord would give them the liberty and authority to go forth and reap down the earth. These angels are to be commanded to "gather out of his kingdom (the Church) all things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear." (Matt. 13:41-43.)

SCD&C 86 1D&C 86 2D&C 86 3D&C 86 4D&C 86 5D&C 86 6D&C 86 7While the field is the world and the wheat represents the righteous who hear the Gospel and the tares the rebellious and workers of iniquity, let us not forget that even in the Church the tares are to be found. It is the tares which are to be gathered up and burned from all over the world, but those in the Church will also be gathered out and find their place in the fire. [Sec. 112:23-26.] The Savior also bore witness of this when speaking to the Nephites he said: "For it shall come to pass, saith the Father, that at that day whosoever will not repent and come unto my Beloved Son, them will I cut off from my people, O house of Israel." [3 Nephi 21:20.] (CHMR, 1948, 2:117-18.)

D&C 86 5Wilford Woodruff: 5

D&C 86 5The angels are . . . waiting to be sent forth

D&C 86 5I want to ask this congregation a question: When I have the vision of the night opened continually before my eyes, and can see the mighty judgments that are about to be poured out upon the world, when I know these things are true and are at the door of Jew and Gentile; while I know I am holding this position before God and this world, can I withhold my voice from lifting up a warning to this people and to the nations of the earth? I may never meet with this people again; I cannot tell how that may be, but while I live and see these things continually before my eyes I shall raise my warning voice. Now, the question I wanted to ask you is this: We have fourteen [hundred] million people on this earth, and over them all there hangs a cloud of darkness almost entirely upon their shoulders. Can you tell me where the people are who will be shielded and protected from these great calamities and judgments which are even now at our doors? I'll tell you. The priesthood of God who honor their priesthood, and who are worthy of their blessings, are the only ones who shall have the safety and protection. They are the only mortal beings. No other people have the right to be shielded from these judgments. They are at our very doors; not even this people will escape them entirely. They will come down like the judgments of Sodom and Gomorrah. And none but the priesthood will be safe from their fury. God has held the angels of destruction for many years, lest they should reap down the wheat with the tares. But I want to tell you now, that those angels have left the portals of heaven, and they stand over this people, and this nation now, and are hovering over the earth waiting to pour out judgments. And from this very day they shall be poured out. Calamities and troubles are increasing in the earth, and there is a meaning to these things. Remember this, and reflect upon these matters. If you do your duty, and I do my duty, we'll have protection, and shall pass through the afflictions in peace and in safety. Read the scriptures and the revelations. They will tell you about all these things. Great changes are at our doors. The next twenty years will see mighty changes among the nations of the earth. You will live to see these things, whether I do or not. I have felt oppressed with the weight of these matters, and I felt I must speak of them here. It's by the power of the gospel we shall escape. (YWJ, August 1894, 5:512-13.)

D&C 86 5Joseph Fielding Smith: 5

D&C 86 5The angels are . . . waiting to be sent forth

D&C 86 5It was in August twenty years later that the World War broke out. In July (15th), 1894, President Woodruff repeated this prophecy [v. 5, above] and again declared that the angels had been sent forth to reap down the earth, while speaking at the Weber Stake Conference in Ogden, and again, October 4, 1896 at the general conference of the Church in Salt Lake City. On divers other occasions he also warned the Saints and told them that the gathering of the tares had commenced. (CHMR, 1948, 2:120.)

D&C 86 8Joseph Smith: 8

D&C 86 8The priesthood

D&C 86 8Its [Higher Priesthood] institution was prior to "the foundation of this earth, or the morning stars sang together, or the Sons of God shouted for joy" (Job. 38:4, 7], and is the highest and holiest Priesthood, and is after the order of the Son of God, and all other Priesthoods are only parts, ramifications, powers and blessings belonging to the same, and are held, controlled, and directed by it. It is the channel through which the Almighty commenced revealing His glory at the beginning of the creation of this earth, and through which he will make known his purposes to the end of time. (HC 4:207, October 1840.)

D&C 86 9Wilford Woodruff: 9

D&C 86 9Eternal life is what we are or ought to be after, and that, whatever our circumstances and condition in life may be, should be our first object.

D&C 86 9I say to the brethren and sisters—you have your appointment; the Lord has raised up these Elders of Israel, and I can prove from the Book of Doctrine and Covenants that you received the Priesthood from eternity, and your lives have been hid with Christ in God, and you knew it not. You are literally and lawfully heirs of the Priesthood through the lineage of your fathers, and that Priesthood will continue throughout eternity; therefore, you have received your appointment, and the Lord looks to you to build up his Zion and kingdom upon the earth.

D&C 86 9Let us try to be faithful and to live our religion; let us try to believe in the revelations of God. (JD, September 12, 1875, 18:120.)

D&C 86 9Joseph Fielding Smith: 9

D&C 86 9During the ages in which we dwelt in the pre-mortal state we not only developed our various characteristics and showed our worthiness and ability, or the lack of it, but we were also where such progress could be observed. It is reasonable to believe that there was a Church organization there. The heavenly beings were living in a perfectly arranged society. Every person knew his place. Priesthood, without any question, had been conferred and the leaders were chosen to officiate. Ordinances pertaining to that pre-existence were required and the love of God prevailed. Under such conditions it was natural for our Father to discern and choose those who were most worthy and evaluate the talents of each individual. He knew not only what each of us could do, but what each of us would do when put to the test and when responsibility was given us. Then, when the time came for our habitation on mortal earth, all things were prepared and the servants of the Lord chosen and ordained to their respective missions. (The Way to Perfection, 1943, pp. 50-51.)

D&C 86 9George Q. Cannon: 9

D&C 86 9I have this belief concerning us: that it was arranged before we came here how we should come. We were not born of the seed of Ham; we were not born of some questionable race; but as the Lord has taught us in the eighty-sixth section of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, our Priesthood has been hid with God. That section says: [Sec. 86:8-11, quoted.]

D&C 86 9I believe that it was arranged that we should come here as we have done. No doubt when we trace our ancestors back, we will find that they trod in muddy places. We shall find that there was wickedness among them. There can be little doubt about this, because they were human beings; they were exposed to temptation and to sin. . . . One generation will be linked to another by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood until we get back to the time when the Priesthood was upon the earth, and when the authority to administer these ordinances was among men in former times. (MS, July 4, 1894, 56:356.)

D&C 86 9Joseph Fielding Smith: 9

D&C 86 9We have no scriptural justification . . . for the belief that we had the privilege of choosing our parents and our life companions in the spirit world. This belief has been advocated by some, and it is possible that in some instances it is true, out it would require too great a stretch of the imagination to believe it to be so in all, or even in the majority of cases. Most likely we came where those in authority decided to send us. Our agency may not have been exercised to the extent of making choice of parents and posterity. (The Way to Perfection, 1943, pp. 44-45.)

D&C 86 9Because of Abraham's faithfulness and obedience, the Lord said unto him:

D&C 86 9And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations;

D&C 86 9And I will bless them through thy name: for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father;

D&C 86 9And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee, and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, thy Priesthood), for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal. (Abr. 2:9-11.)

D&C 86 9It is in harmony with this promise to Abraham [Abr. 2:9-11] the Lord declared to these Elders of the Church that the Priesthood had continued through the lineage of their fathers "for ye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh, and have been hid from the world with Christ in God." Moreover that this Priesthood must remain through them and their lineage until the restoration of all things. This saying does not mean that the Priesthood has come down from olden times by lineage from generation to generation, for there was a great apostasy intervening between the days of their fathers who held the Priesthood and these elders unto whom this revelation was given. But since they were of the House of Israel, and therefore descendants of Abraham, they were lawful heirs to the Priesthood according to the covenant made with Abraham, and the Priesthood which they held and came down to them from them of old who held it. Then, again, we discover in Section 84, verses 32-34, that all who are true to the Priesthood and the Church become the sons of Aaron and Moses and the seed of Abraham, and the Church and the kingdom, and the elect of God. All souls coming into the Church become the seed of Abraham according to the promise, and there is a literal change which comes over them by which they are grafted into the House of Israel even if they are not literally of his lineage. Speaking of this change the Prophet Joseph Smith has said:

D&C 86 9"The . . . Holy Ghost has no other effect than pure intelligence. It is more powerful in expanding the mind, enlightening the understanding, and storing the intellect with present knowledge, of man who is of the literal seed of Abraham, than one that is a Gentile, though it may not have half as much visible effect upon the body; for as the Holy Ghost upon one of the literal seed of Abraham, it is calm and serene; and his whole soul and body are only exercised by the spirit of intelligence; while the effect of the Holy Ghost upon a Gentile, is to purge out old blood, and make him actually of the seed of Abraham." [HC 3:380, June 27, 1839.] (CHMR, 1947, 1:356-57.)

D&C 86 9Franklin D. Richards: 9

D&C 86 9The Lord graciously told the brethren in the early days that "the Priesthood hath continued through the lineage of your fathers, for ye are lawful heirs according to the flesh, and your lives have been hid from the world with Christ in God." What a glorious development! What! the Priesthood came down from the days of the ancients, through the dark and bloody channels of war and rumors of war, crusades and persecutions? Yes, certainly. It is evident the eye of God has been over us, and the eyes of His angels have watched over the continuation of the fathers down through the generations that have come unto us. This is shown by the very fact that the Lord has cared for a lineage which has given you and me the right to the Holy Priesthood, and has awakened our souls to trace back that lineage as far as it can be discovered by records, or dreams, or visions, or revelation, or by the Urim and Thummim, until we go back with our labors on that lineage, and thus return the only grateful acknowledgment we can make to them for being our fathers and mothers and giving us such honorable birth, and at such a period of time, when the Priesthood is revealed again, and that we can receive blessings of untold worth, that we never ourselves shall know the full of, until we overcome this mortality, put on immortality and enter into the exaltation which is promised unto the faithful. (MS, June 25, 1894, 56:402-3.)

D&C 86 9Stephen L Richards: 9

D&C 86 9According to the flesh

D&C 86 9It seems to me . . . that there runs in some blood strains a higher susceptibility to the refining and saving influences of testimony than in other strains. I don't know that I understand it, but I have thought that the significance of the "blood of Israel" is that there is in that great blood strain, following the blessings and promises of God, a susceptibility to the influence of the Holy Spirit that does not run in other strains. Science has made some rather remarkable discoveries upon the inherited traits and qualities that go with blood strains. . . . I believe that it [testimony] is inheritable, and that the tendency to faith may descend from father to son. It seems to me that Paul had that in mind when writing to Timothy, he said in substance: "I do perceive in thee the faith that was in thy grandmother Lois," [2 Timothy 1:5] thus recognizing that this tendency to faith, this susceptibility to testimony courses along in the very blood strains of the race. (CR, October 1925, pp. 118-19.)

SCD&C 86 8D&C 86 9D&C 86 10D&C 86 11Melvin J. Ballard: 8-11

SCD&C 86 8D&C 86 9D&C 86 10D&C 86 11The Lord admonishes the Latter-day Saints to have faith and confidence in the former promises made by the prophets of old, and gives us an assurance that we are living in a day when these great and precious promises are to be fulfilled; and the language which I now quote is as follows: [Sec. 86:8-11, quoted.]

SCD&C 86 8D&C 86 9D&C 86 10D&C 86 11How great and wonderful is this promise, that through this Church and this Priesthood shall be restored ultimately all that has been predicted and prophesied of concerning the great things God would do for men: and that these things are to be fulfilled and realized in our time. The Latter-day Saints are a people with a mission and a destiny, and we have not forgotten, I am sure, by the presence of this vast assembly, that we are still pursuing our destiny. We did not aspire to it, the Lord appointed it unto us, and the fulfillment of these promises surely can be and shall be realized in the Lord's own due time, and through his providing.

SCD&C 86 8D&C 86 9D&C 86 10D&C 86 11Three things seem to be to be essential in the accomplishment of these wonderful promises: The Lord must have the right kind of people to do his work; he must have them in the right place; and they must have the right plan. I said the Latter-day Saints are a people with a mission, they are entitled to that mission. (CR, October 1924, pp. 27-28.)
