Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 3 ( 1964)

Section 87

Revelation and Prophecy on War, given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, December 25, 1832.—Wars predicted—Division between the Northern States and the Southern States—Great calamities in manifestation of the chastening hand of God.

Joseph Smith: Introduction

Appearances of troubles among the nations became more visible this season than they had previously been since the Church began her journey out of the wilderness. The ravages of the cholera were frightful in almost all the large cities of the globe. The plague broke out in India, while the United States, amid all her pomp and greatness, was threatened with immediate dissolution. The people of South Carolina, in convention assembled (in November), passed ordinances, declaring their state a free and independent nation; and appointed Thursday, the 31st day of January, 1833, as a day of humiliation and prayer, to implore Almighty God to vouchsafe His blessings, and restore liberty and happiness within their borders. President [Andrew] Jackson issued his proclamation against this rebellion, called out a force sufficient to quell it, and implored the blessings of God to assist the nation to extricate itself from the horrors of the approaching and solemn crisis.

On Christmas day, I received the following revelation and prophecy on war. [Section 87, quoted.] (HC 1:301, December 25, 1832.)

SCD&C 87 1D&C 87 2D&C 87 3Orson Pratt: 1-3

SCD&C 87 1D&C 87 2D&C 87 3Well, it seems as if the Lord, our God, is giving the nation a pretty thorough warning; He told this nation by revelation, twenty-eight years before it commenced, of the great American war. He told all about how the Southern States should be divided against the Northern States, and that in the course of the war many souls should be cut off. This has been fulfilled.

SCD&C 87 1D&C 87 2D&C 87 3I went forth before my beard was gray, before my hair began to turn white, when I was a youth of nineteen, now I am fifty-eight, and from that time on I published these tidings, among the inhabitants of the earth. I carried forth the written revelation, foretelling this great contest, some twenty-eight years before the war commenced. This prophecy has been printed and circulated extensively in this and other nations and languages. It pointed out the place where it should commence in South Carolina. That which I declared over the New England States, New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, and many other parts in the East, when but a boy, came to pass twenty-eight years after the revelation was given.

SCD&C 87 1D&C 87 2D&C 87 3When they were talking about a war commencing down here in Kansas, I told them that was not the place; I also told them that the revelation had designated South Carolina, "and," said I, "you have no need to think that the Kansas war is going to be the war that is to be so terribly destructive in its character and nature. No, it must commence at the place the Lord has designated by revelation."

SCD&C 87 1D&C 87 2D&C 87 3What did they have to say to me? They thought it was a Mormon humbug, and laughed me to scorn, and they looked upon that revelation as they do upon all others that God has given in these latter days—as without divine authority. But behold and lo! in process of time it came to pass, again establishing the divinity of this work, and giving another proof that God is in this work, and is performing that which He spoke by the mouths of the ancient prophets, as recorded in the Book of Mormon before any Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was in existence. [Ether 2:8-10.] (JD, April 10, 1870, 13:135.)

SCD&C 87 1D&C 87 2D&C 87 3Anthony W. Ivins: 1-3

SCD&C 87 1D&C 87 2D&C 87 3Nearly thirty years before it occurred, Joseph Smith predicted the great civil war which should occur in our own country. Well, the unbeliever says, "Any far-seeing man might have known that the Southern states would be divided against the Northern states and there would be war." But the Prophet states more than that. He told us just where the war would begin. He told us just what the result would be, and has the sequel not proven that that war began just as this revelation said it would begin, in South Carolina? We might have some reason to doubt or to question the inspiration of this prophet of the Lord, if during that war the Southern states had not called upon Great Britain for assistance. There might be some reason to doubt if in a single detail there had been a mistake, but it chanced that the Southern states did call upon Great Britain, and we were very nearly at war with that nation because of her participation in behalf of the Confederacy in that struggle. (CR, October 1914, pp. 94-95.)

SCD&C 87 1D&C 87 2D&C 87 3Wilford Woodruff: 1-3

SCD&C 87 1D&C 87 2D&C 87 3Many persons have looked forward to the year 1860 with great interest; and this has been the case with many of the Latter-day Saints. What took place in that year? The dissolution of the American Union; for in that year the South took a stand against the North, and the North against the South, in fulfillment of a certain revelation given by Joseph Smith thirty years before it took place. Joseph Smith predicted that there would be a great rebellion in the United States—the South and the North warring against each other, and that this rebellion would commence in South Carolina, and would end in the death and misery of many souls and that in process of time—after many days, the slaves would rise against their masters, and that one nation would call for aid upon another, for war would be poured upon the whole earth. I wrote this revelation twenty-five years before the rebellion took place; others also wrote it, and it was published to the world before there was any prospect of the fearful events it predicted coming to pass.

SCD&C 87 1D&C 87 2D&C 87 3Joseph Smith once said in a speech at Nauvoo, to a company, that whosoever lived to see the two sixes come together in '66 would see the American continent deluged in blood. That was many years before there was any prospect of a rebellion. The history of '60 and of '66 is before the world, and I do not wish to spend time in referring to it. (JD, January 1, 1871, 14:2.)

SCD&C 87 1D&C 87 2D&C 87 3Charles A. Callis: 1-3

SCD&C 87 1D&C 87 2D&C 87 3Joseph Smith was an inspirer of souls. He said he did nothing but what the ancient prophets said he would do. He was a fulfiller of Bible prophecy. [Isa. 29; Mal. 4:5; Micah 4:1-2; Acts 3:19-21; Rev. 14:6-7.] Consider some of the prophecies which he uttered: The exodus of the Saints to the Rocky Mountains, where they would become a great and a mighty people; his prediction of the Civil War, twenty-eight years before it occurred—and only a month before that bloody conflict, statesmen were saying—"'Peace, peace, there will be no war." But the God of heaven had spoken and desolation swept over the land. Oh, if those statesmen had only heeded the words, if they had only accepted the remedy, the solution which the great statesman-prophet, Joseph Smith, gave to them, a million lives would have been spared and eight billions of dollars in property would not have been destroyed! (CR, April 1934, p. 50.)

D&C 87 1George Q. Cannon: 1

D&C 87 1The death and misery of many souls

D&C 87 1Fierce, protracted and bloody battles have again been fought in Virginia—whose soil has already been so often soaked in the blood of contending armies—by the Federal army under the command of General Grant, and the Confederate army under General Lee. The last mail brings the intelligence that upwards of a week had been spent, with scarcely any intermission, in the bloody work. General Grant opened the campaign on Thursday morning, the 5th ult., and he was still stubbornly pressing the enemy within the evening of Thursday, the 12th ult., closed upon him and his army. The Confederates retreated during that night, and the next day found Grant in pursuit, obstinately bent on closing again with his foes to resume the struggle. The bare perusal of the brief telegrams [received in England] which summarize the accounts of these conflicts, is sufficient to horrify and make heart-sick the reader. Such carnage, so ferocious, unrelenting and revolting in all its details, has not been witnessed in the wars of modern times. It almost seems incredible that such scenes can transpire in a land where, but a few years since, all was peace, and the boast of whose people was that, however much other nations and governments would be shaken and totter, that they, at least, would be exempt from such a fate. Who would have believed such things possible in the United States of America! Who would have thought that in so short a space of time, a writer in Europe would have had it in his power to say, in reference to these battles, that "war never came before us in a shape so appalling," and that the Americans "have certainly fought more desperately, for a longer time, and with more dreadful slaughter, than any nation before them!" Such a condition of affairs might have been perceived in the visions and revelations of the Almighty by a Prophet—the manifestations of the Spirit of God might enable those unto whom it revealed itself, to obtain some glimpses and ideas of the dreadful events which were crowding forward, and which were at the threshold of the nation; to the man who was destitute of these means of knowledge they would, a few years since, have been utterly inconceivable; a description of them would have been treated with contempt and incredulity, and the person who would have delineated them, would have been viewed an impostor or fool, or as the victim of a distempered imagination. There was nothing to indicate to ordinary men such a dreadful future as this which the States are now experiencing. (MS, June 4, 1864, 26:360-62.)

D&C 87 3Orson Pratt: 3

D&C 87 3How is it that the American war has terminated without all or any of the nations being drawn into it? How is it that Great Britain has not been called by the Southern States to assist them against the Northern States? . . .

D&C 87 3Answer: First, there is nothing in the revelation, alluded to, which either indicates or declares that all nations, or even one foreign nation should be drawn into the American war. Second, the Southern States did, by their representatives sent to England expressly for the purpose, call most earnestly upon Great Britain to assist them against the North! but Great Britain did not yield to their entreaties [in "being drawn into" the war] . (MS, August 18, 1866, 28:51.)

D&C 87 3James E. Talmage: 3

D&C 87 3And then war shall be poured out upon all nations

D&C 87 3A prominent instance of Latter-day prophecy, already fulfilled in part, is embodied in a revelation given through Joseph Smith, the Prophet on December 25, 1832. Consider this: [Sec. 87:1-3, quoted,]

D&C 87 3This prediction was treated as but baseless conjecture on the part of the Prophet; yet in due time the outbreak began through the defection of the State of South Carolina; the Southern States were arrayed against the Northern States; the assistance of Great Britain was sought; and from the time of the great Civil War in America preparations for war among the nations of the earth went forward, until in August, 1914, the storm broke, marking the beginning of what is recognized as the greatest armed conflict in human history—the World War.

D&C 87 3This revelation was printed and published in 1851—a full decade before the outbreak of the Civil War; but it had been made of record twenty-eight years prior to that outbreak, and had been proclaimed by the missionaries of this Church throughout the interim.

D&C 87 3Now as to the opinions expressed by men of learning before the outbreak of the World War. In his widely-read book, War and Waste, issued as late as 1913, David Starr Jordan expressed a conclusion to which many leading thinkers had come, that any war of major proportions, involving the great nations, was impossible. Note this brief extract:

D&C 87 3"What shall we say of the Great War of Europe, ever threatening, ever impending, and which never comes? We shall say that it will never come. Humanly speaking, it is impossible.—The bankers will not find the money for such a fight, the industries of Europe will not maintain it, the statesmen cannot. So whatever the bluster or apparent provocation, it comes to the same thing in the end. There will be no general war until the masters direct the fighters to fight. The masters have much to gain, but vastly more to lose, and their signal will not be given."

D&C 87 3The eminent author spoke to the same effect from the pulpit of the Great Tabernacle in Salt Lake City in the early part of 1914. But the World War came, with all its horrors and frightfulness; and now, twelve years after its close, the nations are staggering under the terrible burden of its cost in terms of lives and material wealth. (Sunday Night Talks by Radio, 1931, pp. 480-81.)

D&C 87 3Only a few months before the outbreak of the terrible world conflict [World War I] . . . there stood here in this pulpit, where I now stand, one of the nation's great men, who set forth the results of his study and his investigations regarding certain problems; and who declared, as a result, that the conditions of the nations were today such as to make great international war impossible. There would possibly be, said he, little uprisings, such as then had already begun in Mexico, but a war between the great powers could not take place. He emphasized by reiteration. The financial affairs of the world, he averred, were such as to link and weld the nations together; and should emperors, czars, or kings declare war, the bankers would veto their decision. I spoke with the gentleman here in this stand, at the conclusion of his address, in substance to this effect: "I wish I could believe you, Doctor." "You don't?" "I do not." "What is wrong with my deductions?" "They may be logically drawn, but your premises are wrong. You have failed to take into account certain essential factors; you have discarded and ignored the predictions of the prophets; and on such a question as this I shall accept the word of the prophet rather than the conclusion of the academician, even though he be as distinguished as yourself, sir." I could not discuss the matter at length, but such I said. Within a short span of months after that time, several of the most powerful nations of the world were locked in the deathgrapple, which has been tightening with the passage of the years. So, as I read the words of the prophet that war should be poured out upon all nations, and that in this day and dispensation, in which we live, this the land of Zion should be the only land wherein safety might be found, I said to myself again: Yea, let God be true, though all the world's wise ones be liars. [Rom. 3:4.] (CR, October 1916, pp. 74-75.)

D&C 87 3John A. Widtsoe: 3

D&C 87 3And then war shall be poured out upon all nations

D&C 87 3The prophecy [Section 87] went on to say that "the days will come that war will be poured out upon all nations." World Wars I and II, three quarters of a century and more later were complete fulfillments of this part of the prophecy.

D&C 87 3This great and remarkable prophecy still stands as evidence of Joseph Smith's mighty prophetic power. (Joseph Smith, 1951, p. 279.)

SCD&C 87 4D&C 87 5Daniel H. Wells: 4-5

SCD&C 87 4D&C 87 5Political affairs became more and more complicated, until the first gun was fired from Fort Sumter, on the 14th of April 1861, which was the signal for the commencement of that dreadful war, which has raged ever since with increasing fury. Detailed accounts of all the most remarkable events which have transpired since that time, have been given to, and perused by the world, and amongst these may be mentioned the fact, that many of the slaves formerly belonging to the Southern States, have been "marshalled and disciplined for war" by the North, and arrayed in deadly combat against their former masters. On July 10th, 1863, a Federal officer thus wrote: "They (the slaves) are now springing up like dragons' teeth from the soil unto which they have been crushed. Masters of the ground they tread upon, they are sweeping forward in steady, solid legions. Forty thousand strong are already in the service. They are destined to wield the sword of just retribution, to teach their former masters which of them is the superior race." This number has since been greatly increased, and as stated by President Lincoln, in an official document issued in the latter part of 1864, the Federal Government had then upwards of 200,000 Negroes, formerly slaves, engaged in its military service. Although this is a literal fulfillment of that portion and of the prophecy referring to the slaves, we anticipate a much more general terrible accomplishment of the whole in the future.

SCD&C 87 4D&C 87 5There are some very important portions of this prophecy, however, which yet remain to be fulfilled. To add to the sufferings and great calamities of the American nation, they will be greatly distressed by the aborigines, who will "marshall themselves, and become exceeding angry and shall vex them with a sore vexation." This event, we believe, may not take place in its fulness until the nation has been greatly weakened by the death of millions in their own revolutionary battles. To what extent the Indians will have power over the nation, is not stated in this revelation; but from what Jesus informed their forefathers at the time of his personal ministry among them, as recorded in the Book of Mormon, they will have power in a great measure over the whole nation. In speaking upon this subject, Jesus prophesied as follows:

SCD&C 87 4D&C 87 5"Therefore, it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not believe in my words, who am Jesus Christ, which the Father shall cause him" (Joseph Smith) "to bring forth unto the Gentiles, and shall give unto him power that he shall bring them forth unto the Gentiles, (it shall be done even as Moses said) they shall be cut off from among any of my people who are of the covenant; and my people, who are a remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles, yea, in the midst of them, as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who if he go through, both treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver." (3 Nephi 21:11-12.)

SCD&C 87 4D&C 87 5It appears more improbable, now, to the people of the United States, that the Indians should ever become so powerful an enemy and so dreadful a scourge to them, they would ever engage in so dreadful a civil war as that now raging. Yet this will as surely be fulfilled as have the other portions of this prophecy. (MS, March 25, 1865, 27:186-87.)

D&C 87 6Wilford Woodruff: 6

D&C 87 6The Lord made the earth and placed man upon it, and He owns it still and He will cut off wickedness, no matter where it exists, so that there will be room for the good fruit to grow. As true as the Lord lives, if we wish to exist upon the earth in these days, we must be righteous; if we expect to have a place, an inheritance, and dwell on the earth, we must keep the law of God, or we shall be cut off. This will apply to all, to Jew and Gentile, bond and free; this will apply to all men in every nation, and under all circumstances.

D&C 87 6It is the decree of the Almighty God, that the kingdom of heaven shall be established, and shall never again be overthrown, that judgments shall lay waste the nations, enough at least to give that kingdom room to grow, and spread, and prosper. This is the truth, and you will all find it so. Those judgments have begun, that will never leave the earth until it is swept as with the besom of destruction, until thrones are cast down and kingdoms [Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants Vol. 3 overthrown, until each man draws his sword against his neighbor, and every nation and kingdom that exists will be at war with each other, except the inhabitants of Zion. The Lord has spoken it, and it will come to pass. [Sec. 45:66-75.] (JD, February 25, 1855, 2:201.)

D&C 87 6Franklin D. Richards: 6

D&C 87 6Until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations

D&C 87 6This same Jesus, risen from the dead, and again speaking to His Prophet in the last days, has spoken to us more definitely and significantly upon this point [wars and rumors of wars] than He did at that time to the brethren with Him. He was pleased to say to His Prophet, Joseph Smith, on the 25th day of December, 1832, the day celebrated as the anniversary of the birth of Christ, that there should come wars in this land, and specifically [Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants Vol. 3 stated that they should commence in the state of South Carolina. . . . It is now a matter of national history, and all the human family should know that it was given to Joseph Smith in 1832, some twenty-nine years before it occurred, and which cost this nation so much anguish and the lives of nearly a million precious souls.

D&C 87 6This has come to pass, and the same Lord Jesus Christ has given us through the same Prophet, Joseph Smith, to understand that the day is near at hand when peace shall be taken from the earth [Sec. 1:35], and that it has begun to be taken from the earth. . . . Now, we may as well understand that as the other great revelation of 1832 was fulfilled which the whole human family know who are of civilized or semi-civilized condition, just so certain is this also likely to be fulfilled. (CR, April 1898, pp. 80-81.)

D&C 87 7George Q. Cannon: 7

D&C 87 7There is no sin that a nation can commit, which the Lord avenges so speedily and fearfully, as he does the shedding of innocent blood, or, in other words, the killing of his anointed and authorized servants. No nation which has been guilty of this dreadful crime has ever escaped his vengeance. The thunderbolts of his wrath have been always launched forth for the destruction of the perpetrators of such wickedness. It is a rank offence against the majesty of Heaven and the authority of the Creator, which he never suffers to pass unrebuked; for such men act in his stead, and are his representatives on the earth. [Sec. 1:38; 84:35-38.] (MS, June 4, 1864, 26:363.)

D&C 87 8James E. Talmage: 8

D&C 87 8Stand ye in holy places, and be not moved

D&C 87 8Even now, if the nations will turn unto the Lord it shall be unto them as it was unto Nineveh [Jonah ch. 3]—they shall be spared; but if they will not, then the Lord will permit the judgments to come upon them until they are brought to a realization of the fact that they do depend upon the Lord God of heaven and of earth. The forces of nature are co-operating and are permitted to wreak destruction and the end is not yet. Latter-day Saints, remember the admonition of the Lord; "Stand ye in holy places," and we cannot do that unless we are holy. "Stand ye in holy places, and be not moved" [Sec. 101:22], but await the working out of the Lord's purposes, the while living lives of righteousness and crying repentance unto the people of the world.

D&C 87 8This is the day of consummation, and the coming of the Lord is nearer than we are willing to admit. Let us not seek to set times or dates, for such we are told shall never be made known until the day of the Lord's coming; not even the angels in heaven are to know beforetime. [Matt. 24:36.] Therefore, away with all attempts to fix times for the Lord. But he has told us that the time of his advent is near; and it is over a hundred years nearer than it was when he spake first to his prophet in this dispensation. (CR, October 1923, pp. 54-55.)
