Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 3 ( 1964)

Section 89

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, February 27, 1833, known as the Word of Wisdom.—Abstinence from wine, strong drink, tobacco and hot drinks enjoined—Moderation in the eating of meat—Wholesome foods—Promises to those who live according to these precepts.

*These verses constitute the Explanatory Introduction in all editions of the Doctrine and Covenants prior to the 1876 edition.

George Q. Cannon: Introduction

On the 27th day of February, 1833, [at Kirtland, Ohio] the Prophet received the revelation known as the Word of Wisdom, warning the people to abstain from impurities and grossness in their food and drink, and promising them rich blessings of physical strength and protection from the power of the adversary as a reward for their obedience. . . . Its delivery to Joseph marks another step in the divine plan for man's eventual elevation to divine acceptability—a plan which had already proved itself of heavenly origin by its sublime character. (Life of Joseph Smith, 1907, pp. 129-30.)

Brigham Young: Introduction

I think I am as well acquainted with the circumstances which led to the giving of the Word of Wisdom as any man in the Church, although I was not present at the time to witness them. The first school of the prophets was held in a small room situated over the Prophet Joseph's kitchen, in a house, which belonged to Bishop [Newel K.] Whitney, and which was attached to his store, which more probably might be about fifteen feet square. In the rear of this building was a kitchen, probably ten by fourteen feet, containing rooms and pantries. Over this kitchen was situated the room in which the Prophet received revelations and in which he instructed his brethren. The brethren came to that place for hundreds of miles to attend school in a little room probably no larger than eleven by fourteen. When they assembled together in this room after breakfast, the first they did was to light their pipes, and, while smoking, talk about the great things of the kingdom, and spit all over the room, and as soon as the pipe was out of their mouths a large chew of tobacco would then be taken. Often when the Prophet entered the room to give the school instructions he would find himself in a cloud of tobacco smoke. This, and the complaints of his wife at having to clean so filthy a floor made the Prophet think upon the matter, and he inquired of the Lord relating to the conduct of the Elders in using tobacco, and the revelation known as the Word of Wisdom was the result of his inquiry. (JD, February 8, 1868, 12:158.)

SCD&C 89 1D&C 89 2D&C 89 3Stephen L Richards: 1-3

SCD&C 89 1D&C 89 2D&C 89 3Every commandment of God is spiritual in nature. There are no carnal commandments. We have learned this from modern revelation. [Sec. 29:34-35.] While the commandments have effect upon the body and temporal things they are all in essence spiritual. The Word of Wisdom is spiritual. It is true that it enjoins the use of deleterious substances and makes provision for the health of the body. But the largest measure of good derived from its observance is in increased faith and the development of more spiritual power and wisdom. Likewise, the most regrettable and damaging effects of its infractions are spiritual, also. Injury to the body may be comparatively trivial to the damage to the soul in the destruction of faith and the retardation of spiritual growth. So I say, every commandment involves a spiritual principle. (CR, April 1949, p. 141.)

D&C 89 1Joseph Fielding Smith: 1

D&C 89 1A Word of Wisdom, for . . . the saints in Zion

D&C 89 1I attended a stake conference a number of years ago and spoke on the Word of Wisdom. At the close of the conference a good sister came up somewhat excited and said: "Brother Smith, you never said a word about backbiters and fault-finders, and I think it is far worse to bear false witness and to backbite than it is to drink a cup of tea."

D&C 89 1I said, "I think I can say things just as emphatic perhaps about backbiters as I can about people who break the Word of Wisdom, but I did not have that for a subject this afternoon."

D&C 89 1When I went to the rear of the building nearly everybody had left, but a man held out his hand and said.

D&C 89 1"Brother Smith, that is the first discourse on the Word of Wisdom that I ever liked."

D&C 89 1I said: "Haven't you heard other discourses on the Word of Wisdom?"

D&C 89 1He said: "Yes, but this is the first one that I ever enjoyed."

D&C 89 1I said: "How is that?"

D&C 89 1He said: "Well, you see, I am keeping the Word of Wisdom now." (CR, October 1935, p. 12.)

D&C 89 1Gordon B. Hinckley: 1

D&C 89 1The so-called Mormon code of health, widely praised in these days of cancer and heart research, is in reality a revelation given to Joseph Smith in 1833 as a "Word of Wisdom" from the Lord. (D&C 89:1.) In no conceivable way could it have come of the dietary literature of the time, nor from the mind of the man who announced it. Today, in terms of medical research, it is a miracle, whose observance has saved incalculable suffering and premature death for uncounted tens of thousands. (CR, April 1977, pp. 94-95.)

D&C 89 2Brigham Young, Jr.: 2

D&C 89 2Not by commandment or constraint

D&C 89 2If I remember aright, I heard from this stand the servant of God say that the time was when the Word of Wisdom came to us as a word of persuasion and council, but now, he said, it is a commandment from God that this people observe it. Does anyone remember hearing those words from this stand more than twenty years ago? (MS, February 7, 1895, 57:82.)

D&C 89 2Francis M. Lyman: 2

D&C 89 2Not by commandment or constraint

D&C 89 2It behooves the Latter-day Saints to order their lives in harmony with this law, which we heard read here today, for it is a very important law. I remember so distinctly, and, no doubt, many in this congregation remember the same, when President Brigham Young, speaking as the mouthpiece of God, announced, from this stand, that from that time forth the Word of Wisdom was a commandment, binding upon all Latter-day Saints. (CR, October 1908, p. 55.)

D&C 89 2Joseph F. Smith: 2

D&C 89 2Not by commandment or constraint

D&C 89 2The reason undoubtedly why the Word of Wisdom was given—as not by "commandment or restraint" was that at that time, at least, if it had been given as a commandment it would have brought every man, addicted to the use of noxious things, under condemnation; so the Lord was merciful and gave them a chance to overcome, before He brought them under the law. Later on, it was announced from this stand, by President Brigham Young, that the Word of Wisdom was a revelation and a command of the Lord. I desired to mention that fact, because I do not want you to feel that we are under no restraint. We do not want to come under condemnation. (CR, October 1913, p. 14.)

D&C 89 2George F. Richards: 2

D&C 89 2By revelation and the word of wisdom

D&C 89 2Now the Lord says: "If ye love me, keep my commandments. If a man love me, he will keep my word." (John 14:15, 23.] Some people say: "But the Word of Wisdom is not a commandment." If the Lord has commanded that I love him with all my heart, with all my soul, with all my might and then has said that if I love him I will keep his word, therein is a commandment to me that I keep the Word of Wisdom. Regard it as you will, to me it is sufficient to know that it is the mind and will of God. That is what we are here for . . . to learn his mind and will and then with his help to do it at whatever cost it may entail. (CR, April 1926, p. 150.)

D&C 89 2George F. Richards: 2

D&C 89 2Showing forth the order and will of God

D&C 89 2We have accepted Joseph Smith as the prophet, seer, and revelator of this last dispensation, and in doing so we accept these revelations as being the word of the Lord to us. Here the Lord expresses His will, in very plain terms, that this revelation is given "showing forth the order and will of God." If for no other reason, this should be sufficient for any consistent Latter-day Saint to induce him to yield implicit obedience unto this word. I can think of no gospel subject that will apply directly to more people among us as Latter-day Saints than this Word of Wisdom, unless it may be the principle of obedience, which includes yielding obedience unto this world; or repentance, which also includes turning away from these things which are forbidden, and obeying the will of the Lord. In our onward march towards perfection we will not leave the first principles of the Gospel of the Master, but will continue to observe them. . . . I desire to say here that we never can reach perfection until we yield obedience unto this simple word of the Lord. We are required to do the will of God, at any sacrifice. I have in mind the word of the Lord upon this subject, contained in the revelations: "Let no man be afraid to lay down his life for my sake; for whoso layeth down his life for my sake, shall find it again, and whoso is not willing to lay down his life for my sake is not my disciple." [Sec. 103:27, 28.] We are not asked now . . . to lay down our lives to show our obedience to the Lord, and our worthiness to be His disciples, but we are asked by the Lord to abstain from the use of strong drinks and tobacco, in every form, also to abstain from the use of meats to excess. This is a simple requirement. How can we hope to have faith to lay down our lives, how can we claim to be willing to do so, while our lives and actions every day, show to our neighbors and to the Lord that we are not willing to rid ourselves of the use of strong drink or tobacco—those things which are forbidden of the Lord? Let us be consistent with ourselves and our professions of faith. (CR, October 1908, pp. 87-88.)

D&C 89 2Joseph F. Smith (Patriarch): 2

D&C 89 2Will of God in the . . . salvation of all saints

D&C 89 2Many parents, in so simple a thing as keeping the Word of Wisdom excuse themselves sometimes on the basis of social exigency, sometimes on the basis of business exigency. There is only one basis for it and that is either a lack of belief or moral cowardice. No parent would deliberately subject his child to physical suffering. Any parent who would do that we would say is cruel, and yet it is just as much an act of cruelty and ultimately more damaging, to impale the child on the horns of a dilemma of conflicting loyalties. He cannot be fully loyal to a Church which teaches one doctrine and fully loyal to parents who decline to observe that doctrine. That conflict will be resolved either by the destruction of one or other or both of those loyalties. We need oneness. (CR, April 1944, p. 78.)

D&C 89 4John A. Widtsoe: 4

D&C 89 4The first of the four distinct parts of the revelation [Section 89], a warning against "evils and designs" of "conspiring men," which may interfere with full human health, is prophetic. Throughout the ages the lust for gold has tempted men to place adulterated or dangerous foods upon the market. While pure food and drug laws now protected the people more than in the past, these "evils and designs," through excessive and misleading advertising, continue to appear in new and deceptive forms. The danger of fraud in human activities is ever present, perhaps more so now than in the past. (Evidences and Reconciliations, 1951, 3:154.)

D&C 89 4David O. McKay: 4

D&C 89 4One of the most significant statements in the Doctrine and Covenants, one which carries with it evidence of the inspiration of the Prophet Joseph Smith, is found in the 89th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants: [Sec. 89:4, quoted.]

D&C 89 4"Evils and designs which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men. . . . "

D&C 89 4The purport of that impressed me in the twenties and the thirties of this century. I just ask you . . . to recall the methods employed by certain tobacco interests to induce women to smoke cigarettes.

D&C 89 4You remember how insidiously they launched their plan. First, by saying that it would reduce weight. They had a slogan: "Take a cigarette instead of a sweet."

D&C 89 4Later, some of us who like the theatre, noticed that they would have a young lady light the gentleman's cigarette. Following this a woman's hand would be shown on billboards lighting or taking a cigarette. A year or two passed and soon they were brazen enough to show the lady on the screen or on the billboard smoking the cigarette. . . .

D&C 89 4Now, it is common to see beautiful young ladies depicted on billboards, and in the popular journals advertising certain brands of cigarettes. . . .

D&C 89 4"The radio has become one of the most successful means of advertising cigarettes. Attractive programs are presented, not for the purpose of entertaining the youth, but for the purpose of enticing and encouraging them to reach for a cigarette."

D&C 89 4Parents meekly submit to this and later deplore the fact when their children are hopeless cigarette addicts. (CR, September 1949, pp. 185-86.)

D&C 89 4Mark E. Petersen: 4

D&C 89 4The United States Congress made an investigation of cigarette advertising, and after their investigation they published a report known as "False and Misleading Advertising," having to do with filter-tip cigarettes. It was published by a committee on Government Operations of the House of Representatives of the United States Congress on February 20, 1958. It was published by the United States government in the Government Printing House and paid for by government money. I would like to read just an excerpt or two from it. The Hon. Robert T. Secrest, a member of the Federal Trade Commission, was one of the men who gave testimony in connection with this investigation, and among other things he said that the Surgeon General's recent statement that "excessive cigarette smoking is one of the causative factors in lung cancer" calls for a "new approach" by the commission in its regulation of cigarette advertising. Then the report goes on to say this:

D&C 89 4"The cigaret industry had done a grave disservice to the smoking public, initially, blatantly, and more recently, very subtly, publicizing the filtertip smoke as a health protection. . . .

D&C 89 4"Despite repeated private and even public invitations to appear before the subcommittee, the tobacco industry refused all such invitations. In one instance the invitation was accepted only to be declined later because of a 'previous engagement,' when it was learned no other tobacco-company official would appear.

D&C 89 4"During a period fraught with public concern over grave health implications of cigaret smoking, business responsibility and even decency would apparently dictate that the American public is entitled to an accounting from the cigaret manufacturers. It is indeed most reprehensible that the tobacco industry should so shirk its vast responsibilities to the consumer and apparently conspire to boycott the hearings of a congressional committee. . . . "

D&C 89 4Young people, in the face of things like that, do you believe cigaret advertising? Do you believe that cigarets make the man, or that cigarets make the woman? What makes a man? What makes a woman? Is it the cigaret or the cocktail, or is it the clean life, the development of good character, faith in God, and keeping his commandments? (CR, October 1958, pp. 15-16.)

SCD&C 89 5D&C 89 6D&C 89 7First Presidency (Heber J. Grant, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., David O. McKay): 5-7

SCD&C 89 5D&C 89 6D&C 89 7The world is smitten, nigh unto death, with great and grievous tribulations, following the commission of cardinal sins.

SCD&C 89 5D&C 89 6D&C 89 7Over the earth, and it seems particularly in America, the demon drink is in control. Drunken with strong drink, men have lost their reason; their counsel has been destroyed; their judgment and vision are fled; they reel forward to destruction.

SCD&C 89 5D&C 89 6D&C 89 7Drink brings cruelty into the home; it walks arm in arm with poverty; its companions are disease and plague; it puts chastity to flight; and it knows neither honesty nor fair dealing; it is a total stranger to truth; it drowns conscience; it is the bodyguard of evil; it curses all who touch it.

SCD&C 89 5D&C 89 6D&C 89 7Drink has brought more woe and misery, broken more hearts, wrecked more homes, committed more crimes, filled more coffins, than all the wars the world has suffered. . . .

SCD&C 89 5D&C 89 6D&C 89 7But so great is the curse of drink that we should not be held guiltless did we not call upon all offending Saints to forsake it and banish it from their lives forever.

SCD&C 89 5D&C 89 6D&C 89 7God has spoken against drink in our day, and has given to this, the Lord's own Church, a specific revelation concerning it, as a "word of wisdom by revelation—" [Sec. 89:5-7, quoted.]

SCD&C 89 5D&C 89 6D&C 89 7This declares the divine wisdom. It is God's law of health, and is binding upon each and every one of us. We cannot escape its operation, for it is based upon eternal truth. Men may agree or disagree about this word of the Lord; if they agree, it adds nothing; if they disagree, it means nothing. Beyond His word we cannot reach, and it is enough for every Latter-day Saint, willing and trying to follow divine guidance.

SCD&C 89 5D&C 89 6D&C 89 7For more than half a century President [Heber J.] Grant has on every appropriate occasion admonished the Saints touching their obligation to keep the Word of Wisdom. He has told them what it means to them in matters of health, quoting the words of the Lord thereon. He has pointed out that treasures of knowledge, even hidden knowledge, would come to those who lived the law. He has, over and over again, shown what it would mean financially to every member who would keep the law, what it would mean financially to our people and what it would mean in ending human woe, misery, sorrow, disease, crime, and death. But his admonitions have not found a resting place in all our hearts.

SCD&C 89 5D&C 89 6D&C 89 7We the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, now solemnly renew all these counsels, we repeat all these admonitions, so we reinvoke obedience to God's law of health given us by God himself. (Pamphlet, "Message of the First Presidency," October 3, 1943, pp. 6-10.)

SCD&C 89 5D&C 89 6D&C 89 7David O. McKay: 5-7

SCD&C 89 5D&C 89 6D&C 89 7A . . . battle still raging, and in which the opposition seems to be gaining ground, is the battle against intemperance. The attitude of the Church of Jesus Christ towards temperance is unmistakable. On February 27, 1833, the Prophet Joseph Smith received what is known as the Word of Wisdom for the benefit of the council of the high priests assembled in Kirtland, and the Church, and also the Saints in Zion, given by revelation which sets forth the order and will of God in the temporal salvation of all Saints in the last days. Wine and "strong drinks" are condemned as beverages, and the use of them discountenanced in all cases except in the use of wine for sacramental purposes, and even this should be "pure wine of the grape of the vine, of your own make."

SCD&C 89 5D&C 89 6D&C 89 7Tobacco is condemned also as being "not good for man."

SCD&C 89 5D&C 89 6D&C 89 7At the time the Church took this decided stand against whisky and tobacco, no state in the Union had passed any law against the liquor traffic. It is true that temperance societies had been organized, and the cause of temperance was gaining impetus, but it was not until 1851—eighteen years after the revelation on the Word of Wisdom—that the first permanent prohibition law was passed in Maine. Later religious denominations began to organize temperance societies. It appears, therefore, that the Mormon Church was among the very first organizations, if not the first organization or church in the United States to legislate as an organized body against the use of alcoholic drinks and tobacco. (CR, October 1945, pp. 133-34.)

D&C 89 5David O. McKay: 5

D&C 89 5Strong drink . . . is not good

D&C 89 5It is recorded that the Lord said to His servants that in consequence of the adulteration in the wine produced from the grape of the vine, pure water is acceptable to Him, even in the administration of the Lord's supper. [Sec. 27:1-4; 89:4-6.]

D&C 89 5The particular sentence that I wish to call attention to is this: "Inasmuch as any man drinketh wine or strong drink . . . behold it is not good, neither meet in the sight of your Father." That is the word of God to the people of this generation. It stands with just as much force as the words of the Savior, "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." [John 7:17.] . . . Just so strong, just so eternal stands this truth expressed seventy-eight years ago, the 27th day of last February, "Strong drink is not good for man." Yet those seventy-eight years have passed, and during that time this doctrine has been preached every week, if not every day, in some congregation of Israel, and still we find in our midst a few who say, by their acts, It is good for man. I am glad when I study this passage, to find that the Lord did not say, "Strong drink to excess is not good;" nor "Drunkenness is not good." Suppose He had weakened that expression by modifying it and saying, "Strong drink in excess, or when taken in large quantities, is not good," how soon we should have justified ourselves that a little drink is good. But like other eternal truths it stands unqualified; strong drink is not good. I have met men, particularly during the agitation that is now manifested against the liquor evil, who have said: "I do not want to be deprived of the privilege of taking a little, if I want it. When I think it is going to do me good, I want to take it." Others, I rather think, would say that the Church is a little too strict in regard to the word of wisdom: "A little beer," they say, "does not hurt any one; a little wine is not injurious." Well, it is sufficient for me to know that God has said, "Wine, strong drink, is not good for man"; and I wish that all Israel would accept that divine statement, and prove in their lives to the whole world that they accept this as a revelation from God. (CR, April 1911, pp. 61-62.)

SCD&C 89 8D&C 89 9Joseph Smith: 8-9

SCD&C 89 8D&C 89 9The Lord has not ordained strong drinks for the belly, but for the washing of the body. [Sec. 89:8, quoted.] Tobacco is a nauseous, stinking, abominable thing, and I am surprised that any human being should think of using it. For an Elder especially to eat or smoke it is a disgrace—he is not fit for the office; he ought first to learn to keep the word of wisdom and then to teach others. God will not prosper the man who uses it. Again, hot drinks are not for the body or belly. There are many who wonder what this can mean, whether it refers to tea or coffee, or not. I say it does refer to tea and coffee. (TS, 1842, 3:799-801.)

D&C 89 8Mark E. Petersen: 8

D&C 89 8Tobacco . . . is not good for man

D&C 89 8God has spoken to us by his latter-day prophets. He has given us modern-day revelation, declaring that tobacco is not good for man. That is the word and the will of the Lord to Latter-day Saints. Whenever we turn our back upon that principle, to that extent we turn our backs upon the Lord. . . .

D&C 89 8If you adopt the cigaret habit, it will, in large measure determine the kind of life you are going to live, the kind of friends you will have, the kind of person you are going to marry, even the kind of children you may have. Do you regard that as an extreme statement? Let us think about it for a few moments. . . .

D&C 89 8You want to smoke some more, inasmuch as you have fallen for the temptation, but you do not want to do it in private all the time, and you do not want to be the only smoker in a non-smoking crowd, so you seek out other people who smoke, so you can smoke with them. It may be that you already have some smoking friends and that they were the ones who provided those first cigarets and that you began to smoke with them. In either case, you begin breaking off your connections with your non-smoking friends and start to form your associations among smokers. And in this way, your cigarets begin to choose your friends for you.

D&C 89 8One of the very difficult things about this is that the habits of smokers so often do not stop with smoking, but include drinking and unwise partying, as well, and when you start going with people who do those things it will not be very long before you are doing the same things they are, and in that way the cigaret lays the foundation on which you form other evil habits.

D&C 89 8If you are going to be a smoker, you realize that you are breaking one of the commandments of God, and you do not feel good about it. You know that over in the ward they speak about the Word of Wisdom every once in a while and now that you are a smoker you do not like to hear about the Word of Wisdom. You have heard about it all your life, and you do not want your conscience to hurt you any more than it already does, so you tell yourself you had better stay away from your meetings. You begin to realize that for a Latter-day Saint, worship and smoking just do not go together. And so the cigaret persuades you to stay away from church.

D&C 89 8When you were small, your parents taught you to pray, and you prayed with more or less regularity all your life. But now that you are a smoker, you feel out of harmony with the Lord and you hesitate to go to him in prayer. . . .

D&C 89 8When you get old enough to get married, you ask yourself, "Whom shall I marry?" . . . And then you tell yourself that you like Tom better than Harry, and Jane better than Elizabeth. And why do you like them better? Because you know them better. And how did you get to know them better? Because they are in the crowd you go with; you know, the smoking crowd. And they do the things that you do. They are like you. Why, you would not even think of marrying one of your former friends in the non-smoking crowd. . . . You are going to marry one of your own crowd. And then, if you want to sit down together and smoke together you can, and there is no embarrassment—so you tell yourself. There is nobody to get after you if you fill the house full of tobacco smoke, and no one to nag at you if your cigaret burns a hole in the overstuffed, or if you drop hot ashes on the new rug, So your cigaret has helped to choose the kind of person you marry.

D&C 89 8What kind of home will you have? There will not be much faith in it, because the cigarets have already undermined your faith. And you will not say very many prayers because the cigarets have taken care of that too. And there will not be much Church activity in your house, because the cigarets have checked that off also. So you will have a worldly home with precious things and little spirituality in it. Is that really the kind of home you want? Will you have any children in that home? . . .

D&C 89 8What will they be like? Why, they will be just like you. They will not believe very much in God, because you will not make religion very important in their lives. They will not say very many prayers because you will not teach them how. And they will not go to Church much because you do not. And when they get a little older, they will acquire the other habits that you have, and they will be just about like you. So the cigaret determines in large measure the kind of children you will have. . . .

D&C 89 8And so I come back to the question with which I began: Have you ever really considered what cigarets mean to a Latter-day Saint? You who smoke now, do not make the mistake of supposing that the Church is against you, because it is not. It only desires your welfare, and it hopes and prays for the day when you will declare your independence from the slavery of nicotine. And you who do not smoke, before you take that first cigaret ask yourself, "Will it help me or hurt me?" (CR, April 1948, pp. 152-56.)

D&C 89 9Brigham Young: 9

D&C 89 9Hot drinks

D&C 89 9We, for instance, exhort the Saints to observe the Word of Wisdom, that they may through its observance, enjoy the promised blessing. Many try to excuse themselves because tea and coffee are not mentioned, arguing that it refers to hot drinks only. What did we drink hot when that Word of Wisdom was given? Tea and coffee. It definitely refers to that which we drink with our food. I said to the Saints at our last annual conference, the Spirit whispers to me to call upon the Latter-day Saints to observe the Word of Wisdom, to let tea, coffee, and tobacco alone, and to abstain from drinking spiritous drinks. This is what the Spirit signifies through me. If the Spirit of God whispers this to His people through their leader, and they will not listen nor obey, what will be the consequence of their disobedience? Darkness and blindness of mind with regard to the things of God will be their lot; they will cease to have the spirit of prayer, and the spirit of the world will increase in them in proportion to their disobedience until they apostatize entirely from God and His ways.

D&C 89 9This is no new or strange thing that you are required to do. Thirty-five years ago we were called upon to reform in our lives, by giving heed to the same words of Wisdom; and if any man comes to you and tells you that you must have a little tea and a little coffee, by the same rule he may urge you to take a little tobacco and a little intoxicating liquor, or a little of any other substance which is hurtful to man. This destroys their claim and right to the spirit of revelation, and they go into darkness. There is not a single Saint deprived of the privilege of asking the Father, in the name of Jesus Christ, our Savior, if it is true that the Spirit of the Almighty whispers through His servant Brigham to urge upon the Latter-day Saints to observe the Word of Wisdom. All have this privilege from the apostle to the lay member. Ask for yourselves. (JD, August 17, 1867, 12:117-18.)

SCD&C 89 10D&C 89 11D&C 89 12D&C 89 13D&C 89 14D&C 89 15D&C 89 16D&C 89 17Joseph Fielding Smith: 10-17

SCD&C 89 10D&C 89 11D&C 89 12D&C 89 13D&C 89 14D&C 89 15D&C 89 16D&C 89 17So much stress has been placed upon the "Don'ts" in this revelation that whenever we hear it mentioned the vision of prohibited liquors, tobaccos, teas, coffees, etc., comes before us. We seldom hear of the things mentioned which are "ordained for the constitution, nature, and use of man." The Lord has given us all good herbs, fruits and grains. These are to be the main foods of men, beast, and fowls. But we should not overlook the fact that they are to be used with "prudence and thanksgiving." In another revelation (Sec. 59) we are told they are not to be used "to excess, neither by extortion." The difficulty with most of the human family, is eating too much, and failing to heed his counsel. There would be less disease and mankind would live longer if all would also heed the counsel of the Lord concerning the use of wholesome foods. Many a man thinks he keeps the Word of Wisdom, who knows only the "don'ts" which is but a part of its great meaning. Some have stumbled over the meaning of the expression "in the season thereof," and have argued that grains and fruits should only be used in the season of their growth and when they have ripened. This is not the intent, but any grain or fruit is out of season no matter what part of the year it may be, if it is unfit for use. The apple under the tree bruised and decaying is out of season while the good fruit is waiting to be plucked from the tree. Neither is it the intent of this revelation to include grains and fruits in the restriction placed upon meats, that they should be used only in famine or excess of hunger. The antecedent of "these" in verse 15, may not be clear, but common sense teaches us that it does not refer to grain in the preceding verse.

SCD&C 89 10D&C 89 11D&C 89 12D&C 89 13D&C 89 14D&C 89 15D&C 89 16D&C 89 17While it is ordained that the flesh of animals is for man's food [Sec. 49:18-19], yet this should be used sparingly. The wording of this revelation is perfectly clear in relation to this subject, but we do not always heed it. The designated grains for the use of man, beasts and fowls, is scientifically correct. (CHMR, 1948, 2:148.)

SCD&C 89 10D&C 89 11D&C 89 12D&C 89 13D&C 89 14D&C 89 15D&C 89 16D&C 89 17John A. Widtsoe: 10-17

SCD&C 89 10D&C 89 11D&C 89 12D&C 89 13D&C 89 14D&C 89 15D&C 89 16D&C 89 17The . . . positive part of the revelation is of first importance, since obedience to it lessens the appetite for injurious substances. . . .

SCD&C 89 10D&C 89 11D&C 89 12D&C 89 13D&C 89 14D&C 89 15D&C 89 16D&C 89 17This part of the revelation further teaches, in addition to the sparing use of meat, that all wholesome vegetables (herbs), fruits, and all grains, notably wheat, should be eaten for good health. . . .

SCD&C 89 10D&C 89 11D&C 89 12D&C 89 13D&C 89 14D&C 89 15D&C 89 16D&C 89 17In the observance of the Word of Wisdom caution should be used. Personal opinions often color our practices. We have the right of free agency, but nevertheless we should not try to stretch the Word of Wisdom to conform with our own opinions.

SCD&C 89 10D&C 89 11D&C 89 12D&C 89 13D&C 89 14D&C 89 15D&C 89 16D&C 89 17For example: The Word of Wisdom is not a system of vegetarianism. Clearly, meat is permitted. Naturally, that includes animal products, less subject than meat to putrefactive and other disturbances, such as eggs, milk, and cheese. These products cannot be excluded simply because they are not mentioned specifically. By that token most of our foodstuffs could not be eaten.

SCD&C 89 10D&C 89 11D&C 89 12D&C 89 13D&C 89 14D&C 89 15D&C 89 16D&C 89 17That man can live without meat is well known, and he may live well if his knowledge is such as to enable him to choose adequate vegetable protein. And, all have the right if they so choose to live without meat.

SCD&C 89 10D&C 89 11D&C 89 12D&C 89 13D&C 89 14D&C 89 15D&C 89 16D&C 89 17The phrase "in the season thereof," referring to fruits and vegetables, has raised much speculation. It indicates simply the superior value of fresh foods as demonstrated by modern science, but does not necessarily prohibit the use of fruits or vegetables out of season if preserved by proper methods. (Evidences and Reconciliations, 1951, 3:155-57.)

SCD&C 89 18D&C 89 19D&C 89 20D&C 89 21John A. Widtsoe: 18-21

SCD&C 89 18D&C 89 19D&C 89 20D&C 89 21A statement of the blessings that will follow the observance of the rules laid down in the Word of Wisdom: [Sec. 89:18-21, quoted.] That is, the reward for keeping the Word of Wisdom is four-fold. 1. Self-control is developed. That is implied in verse 3 of the revelation which states that the Word of Wisdom is "adapted to the capacity of the weak and the weakest of all saints, who are or can be called saints." 2. Strength of body, including resistance to contagion, is a result of wise living. 3. Clearness of mind is the gift of those whose bodies are in a healthy condition. 4. Spiritual power comes to all who conquer their appetites, live normally and look upward to God. (Program of the Church, 1938, pp. 39-40.)

SCJoseph Fielding Smith: 18-20

SCD&C 89 18D&C 89 19D&C 89 20Among . . . questions received we find such as this: "Why does not the Lord give us further revelation to cover the many other stimulants and drinks and the proper foods for the body?" The answer is because such revelation is unnecessary. The Word of Wisdom is a basic law. It points the way and gives us ample instruction in regard to both food and drink, good for the body and also detrimental. If we sincerely follow what is written with the aid of the Spirit of the Lord, we need no further counsel. This wonderful instruction contains the following promise: [Sec. 89:18-20, quoted.]

SCD&C 89 18D&C 89 19D&C 89 20Thus by keeping the commandment we are promised inspiration and the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord through which we will know what is good and what is bad for the body, without the Lord presenting us with a detailed list separating the good things from the bad that we may be protected. We will learn by this faithful observance that the promises of the Lord are fulfilled. . . . The Lord has not condemned the use of white flour, nor white granulated sugar. There are some among us who cannot eat whole wheat bread and the coarser foods because of peculiar physical conditions. . . . Some persons are allergic to one thing and others to another, yet what they cannot take are wholesome to others. Any perfect food that is good for the body, can be harmful by overindulgence. According to the promise of the Lord we will have wisdom to understand these things by virtue of faithful observance of this basic law—the Word of Wisdom.

SCD&C 89 18D&C 89 19D&C 89 20A safe guide to each and all is this: If in doubt as to any food or drink, whether it is good or harmful, let it alone until you have learned the truth in regard to it. If anything offered is habit-forming, we will be safe in concluding that it contains some ingredients that are harmful to the body and should be avoided. (IE, February 1956, 59:78-79.)

SCD&C 89 18D&C 89 19George Albert Smith: 18-19

SCD&C 89 18D&C 89 19In referring to the advice and counsel contained in the eighty-ninth section of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord made this promise: [Sec. 89:18-19, quoted.]

SCD&C 89 18D&C 89 19While Joseph Smith might write those words, he couldn't fulfil that promise. . . . Observance of that commandment has placed the membership of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the tops of these everlasting mountains in a class by themselves. Not only do we have the lowest death rate of any people in all the world, but we also have a high birth rate as well. That was the promise that was given by the Lord in the days of the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Lord said that the destroying angels should pass by us and not slay us if we kept his counsel. What has been another result? The age of men and women in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has increased until the average term of life among us is longer than among any other people in the world.

SCD&C 89 18D&C 89 19Another promise: The Lord said that he would give to those who would keep this word of wisdom, "great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures." I refer you to the February, 1944, number of The Improvement Era wherein was published a graph showing the relative position of the states of the Union as to the number of scientists born in those states in proportion to population. Strange as it may seem, if you began at the lower corner of that graph and followed up state by state, you would come to the state of Massachusetts next to the highest on the graph, yet you would not have reached the state of Utah. You have to go twenty percent points higher up the graph to find Utah, the state that has produced more scientists born within its borders per capita than any other state in the American Union. That wasn't an accident; it was fulfilment of the promise of God as a result of observance of the Lord's commandments. (CR, October 1945, pp. 21-22.)

D&C 89 18Ezra T. Benson: 18

D&C 89 18Walking in obedience to the commandments

D&C 89 18When we first heard the revelation upon the Word of Wisdom many of us thought it consisted merely in our drinking tea and coffee, but it is not only using tea and coffee and our tobacco and whisky, but it is every other evil which is calculated to contaminate this people. The Word of Wisdom implies to cease from adultery, to cease from all manner of excesses, and from all kinds of wickedness and abomination that are common amongst this generation—it is, strictly speaking, keeping the commandments of God, and living by every word that proceedeth from His mouth. (JD, April 8, 1855, 2:358.)

SCD&C 89 19D&C 89 20D&C 89 21Spencer W. Kimball: 19-21

SCD&C 89 19D&C 89 20D&C 89 21Rich promises: [Sec. 89:19-21, quoted.]

SCD&C 89 19D&C 89 20D&C 89 21Think of it! Knowledge—testimony—spiritual strength—physical vigor and immunity from the destroying angel! Remember also that here comes protection from that more deadly destruction:

SCD&C 89 19D&C 89 20D&C 89 21"And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both body and soul in hell." (Matt. 10:28.)

SCD&C 89 19D&C 89 20D&C 89 21But the Lord knows the weakness of men, and he says in the 58th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants:

SCD&C 89 19D&C 89 20D&C 89 21"And I command and men obey not: I revoke and they receive not the blessings. They say in their hearts this is not the work of the Lord, for his promises are not fulfilled. But wo unto such, for their reward lurketh beneath, and not from above." [D&C 58:32-33.] (CR, April 1952, p. 23.)

D&C 89 19John A. Widtsoe: 19

D&C 89 19In the early days of the Church the Lord declared to the Prophet Joseph Smith "that all things unto me are spiritual, and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal . . . for my commandments are spiritual." (D&C 29:34, 35.)

D&C 89 19In harmony with this basic statement, the final and most important effect of the Word of Wisdom must be of a spiritual nature. Whoever obeys this law will be blessed in body, purse and mind, and also in spiritual development.

D&C 89 19This is really self-evident. Obedience to the Word of Wisdom means eagerness and willingness to conform to the "word and will" of God, the beginning of all wisdom. It also implies conquest of the appetites of the body, the first step towards spiritual development.

D&C 89 19Love of the Lord and obedience to divine law qualify a person for spiritual communion. Guidance from the unseen world is most easily received by those who are so prepared.

D&C 89 19Those who, because of their acceptance and use of the Word of Wisdom, possess a clean body, a clear mind and a spirit in tune with the infinite, are best able to assist in establishing the Kingdom of God on earth, and thereby to render greatest service to their fellow men.

D&C 89 19They also find the greatest happiness in life, for their capacity for joy is unhindered by a weak body, a dull mind, and dim spiritual vision. They find a new wealth of joy in every commonplace of life. They have eyes and they see; ears and they hear. Their understanding is reinforced with the spiritual light of truth.

D&C 89 19There are many laws of the Gospel that lead towards spirituality. Among them the Word of Wisdom stands unchallenged. (The Word of Wisdom, pp. 244-45.)

D&C 89 19LeGrand Richards: 19

D&C 89 19Is there any Latter-day Saint in this world who wouldn't want his children to get hidden treasures of knowledge? . . .

D&C 89 19The Lord said, "And they shall find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge." Is there any treasure of knowledge in this world to be sought after, more desirable than to know that God lives, that Jesus is the Christ, to know that his kingdom has been established again in the earth, to know that God has promised a reward for every commandment that he has given, to know that he has created this earth that we might prove unto him that we would do all things, not just a few of them, all things whatsoever the Lord our God hath commanded? (CR, April 1961, pp. 45-46.)

D&C 89 21J. Reuben Clark, Jr.: 21

D&C 89 21How glorious are the blessings promised to those who do keep God's laws: [Sec. 89:18-21, quoted.]

D&C 89 21This does not say and this does not mean, that to keep the Word of Wisdom is to insure us against death, for death is in the eternal plan, co-equal with birth. This is the eternal decree. [1 Cor. 15:22; 2 Nephi 9:6.] But it does mean that the destroying angel, he who comes to punish the unrighteous for their sins, as he in olden time afflicted the corrupt Egyptians in their wickedness [Exod. 12:23, 29], shall pass by the Saints, "who are walking in obedience to the commandments," and who "remember to keep and do these sayings." These promises do mean that all those who qualify themselves to enjoy them will be permitted so to live out their lives that they may gain the full experiences and get the full knowledge which they need in order to progress to the highest exaltation in eternity, all these will live until their work is finished and God calls them back to their eternal home, as a reward.

D&C 89 21These blessings will come to those who qualify as sure and certain as life itself.

D&C 89 21Whenever we are inclined to appraise the dealings of God with His children, we should remember that God's ways are not man's ways [Isa. 55:8-9], and that behind what we see and understand, are the all-wise purposes of an All-wise God. (CR, October 1940, pp. 17-18.)

D&C 89 21Rudger Clawson: 21

D&C 89 21This promise [Sec. 89:21] greatly emphasizes also the spiritual character of the law, as well as the temporal, and justifies one in saying that the Word of Wisdom is not only temporal in its nature, but is also spiritual for surely wisdom and great treasures of knowledge are spiritual. In further evidence of this the Lord said to Joseph Smith in the revelation of the Three Glories namely: [Sec. 76:5-10, quoted.]

D&C 89 21Let me say here, in all solemnity, that those who fail to keep this law cannot justly claim the promise.

D&C 89 21I fancy I hear some one say: "Ah, Brother Clawson, my father was a good man, a faithful Latter-day Saint. He kept the commandments of God, he was an observer of the Word of Wisdom. At the age of seventy he died, and the destroying angel came and took him away."

D&C 89 21My answer to that is: "Brother, would you make the promise of God of non-effect? Would you intimate that the Lord who gave this law and this promise unto its people failed in your father's case to keep his promise? Surely it was not so. True, the angel of death may have been in your father's home when he passed away, in fact may have come for your father, but he was not a destroying angel, no, he was an angel of peace, of mercy, of hope, of love and he came to open the door of light and life and everlasting joy to your good father."

D&C 89 21Death comes to all. The death of the righteous is sweet but the death of the wicked, of the rebellious, of those who are wilfully neglectful of their duty and treat lightly the sacred commandments of God, is bitter. [Sec. 42:46-47.] (CR, April 1925, pp. 61-62.)

D&C 89 21Marion G. Romney: 21

D&C 89 21This reference to the destroying angel passing by the children of Israel brings to mind that to persuade the Egyptians to let Israel go, " . . . the Lord smote all the first-born in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharoah that sat on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle . . . and there was a great cry in Egypt; for there was not a house where there was not one dead." (Exod. 12:29-30.)

D&C 89 21But in his death-dealing mission the "destroyer" was to pass by, and did pass by, without slaying the firstborn therein, the homes of those Israelites who had marked their door lintels and side posts with the blood of a lamb, as directed by the Lord. [Ibid., 12:21-22.]

D&C 89 21From this promise in the Word of Wisdom and other scriptures, it appears that there are destroying angels who have a work to do among the peoples of the earth in this last dispensation. [Sec. 86:4-7.] The Lord told the Prophet Joseph Smith that because all flesh was corrupted before him, and the powers of darkness prevailed upon the earth, these angels were "waiting the great command to reap down the earth, to gather the tares that they may be burned." (Sec. 38:11-12.) That was in 1831. In 1894, President Woodruff said: "God has held the angels of destruction for many years lest they should reap down the wheat with the tares. But I want to tell you now, those angels have left the portals of heaven, and they stand over this people and this nation now, and are hovering over the earth waiting to pour out the judgments. And from this very day they shall be poured out. Calamities and troubles are increasing in the earth, and there is a meaning to these things." (IE 17:1165.)

D&C 89 21Now . . . in view of this revealed knowledge and understanding which the Lord has given concerning what is transpiring about us, is it not a glorious thing to have the assurance that if we will clothe ourselves with bodies purified through observance of the Word of Wisdom, these destroying angels will pass us by, as they did the children of Israel, and not slay us? Well, this is one of the blessings to follow observance of the Word of Wisdom. (CR, October 1952, pp. 32-33.)
