Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 3 ( 1964)

Section 91

Revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio, March 9, 1833. The Prophet was at this time engaged in the study of the ancient writings regarded by some as Scripture and known distinctively as the Apocrypha.—These writings not to be accepted as Scripture—Enlightenment of the Spirit requisite to discernment of the truth contained in these books.

D&C 91 1James E. Talmage: 1

D&C 91 1The Apocrypha

D&C 91 1The Apocrypha embrace a number of books of doubtful authenticity, though such have been added to the Septuagint [Greek version of the Old Testament, translated from the Hebrew], and for a time were accorded recognition among the Alexandrine Jews. However, they have never been generally admitted, being of uncertain origin. They are not quoted in the New Testament. The designation apocryphal, meaning hidden, or secret, was first applied to the books by Jerome. The Roman church professes to acknowledge them as scripture, action to this end having been taken by the Council of Trent (1546); though doubt as to the authenticity of the works seems still to exist even among Roman Catholic authorities. The sixth article of the Liturgy of the Church of England defines the orthodox view of the church as to the meaning and intent of Holy Scriptures; and, after specifying the books of the Old Testament which are regarded as canonical, proceeds in this wise: "And the other books (as Hierome [Jerome] saith) the church doth read for example of life and instruction of manners; but yet doth it not apply them to establish any doctrine; such as these following:—The Third Book of Esdras; The Fourth Book of Esdras; the Book of Tobias; The Book of Judith; the rest of The Book of Esther; The Book of Wisdom; Jesus, The Son of Sirach; Baruch the Prophet; The Song of the Three Children; The Story of Susanna; Of Bel and the Dragon; The Prayer of Manasses; The First Book of Maccabees; The Second Book of Maccabees." (AF, 1950, pp. 244-45.)

SCD&C 91 1D&C 91 2D&C 91 3D&C 91 4D&C 91 5D&C 91 6Joseph Fielding Smith: 1-6

SCD&C 91 1D&C 91 2D&C 91 3D&C 91 4D&C 91 5D&C 91 6On the 9th of March 1833, while the Prophet was busy considering the translation of the Scriptures, he inquired of the Lord regarding the Apocrypha of the Old Testament. He received the answer that it was not necessary for him to translate this record, for it contained many things that were not true, having been interpreted by the hands of men. However, in the main it was correctly translated but its value was not of sufficient import for time to be taken to revise it. The statement is made that those who have the spirit of discernment and are led by the Spirit of truth will be able to cull from these writings the truth for their edification. (CHMR, 1948, 2:153.)
