Roy W. Doxey, Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , vol. 3 ( 1964)

Section 100

Revelation given to Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Sidney Rigdon, at Perrysburg, New York, October 12, 1833. The two had been long absent from their families and felt some concern over them.—Comforting assurances as to their families—Many of the Lord's people in that region—Sidney Rigdon to be a spokesman unto the Prophet and to be mighty in expounding the Scriptures— Assurances concerning affairs in Zion.

George Q. Cannon: Introduction

The Prophet felt that the field of souls was white for the harvest and that it was incumbent upon him to thrust in his sickle and gather the honest-in-heart. On the 5th day of October, 1833, he departed from Kirtland upon a missionary journey to Canada, in company with Sidney Rigdon and Freeman A. Nickerson. At various places on the road, they stopped and proclaimed the word of the Lord unto the inhabitants. In some villages they found God-fearing men and women who were praying for light and were willing to obey when the simple gospel was presented before the eyes of their understanding. On the 12th day of October they had arrived at Perrysburg, New York, where they halted for a little time. Here the Prophet received a revelation [Sec. 100] in which the Lord instructed him that Zion must be chastened yet for a season, although she would finally be redeemed. (Life of Joseph Smith, 1907, p. 142.)

Joseph Smith: Introduction

On the 12th of October, we left Westfield, and continuing our journey, stayed that night with a man named Nash, an infidel, with whom we reasoned, but to no purpose. (I feel very well in mind. The Lord is with us, but have much anxiety about my family.) On the twelfth we arrived at Father Nickerson's, at Perrysburg, New York, where I received the following revelation: [Section 100, quoted.] (HC 1:419-20, October 11-12, 1833.)

SCD&C 100 1D&C 100 2John Taylor: 1-2

SCD&C 100 1D&C 100 2As regards the circumstances of their [missionaries'] families, it is proper and correct that men should have some feelings for those they have left at home. It is true there ought to be sympathy and some care for those with whom they have been immediately associated; yet their families as well as our families, and all of us and our affairs are in the hands of God, and, inasmuch as they go forth putting their trust in the living God all will be peace, and they will find peace and contentment from this time forth until they return, inasmuch as they will magnify their callings and lean upon their God. In this is their safety, in order that they may be enabled to bear a faithful testimony to the world among whom they may travel to deliver their message of warning and of glad tidings of great joy to the honest in heart. (JD, April 27, 1862, 10:37.)

D&C 100 6Orson F. Whitney: 6

D&C 100 6Knowing just what to say, on any occasion, is very important. Knowing how to say it, or having the power to say it in a way that appeals, is equally so. A machine in a big plant broke down, and an expert was called in to fix it. He gave two taps with his hammer, and the machine started. The bill was $250. The superintendent as soon as he could get his breath, demanded an itemized statement. It came, and read as follows. "Tapping with hammer, $1.00; knowing where to tap, $249.00."

D&C 100 6It is just so with the speaker. He must know where to tap and even then must leave it to the Lord to do the tapping. Our Heavenly Father knows our needs, and He alone can supply them. He knows where to tap, and the speaker is the hammer that he taps with. The sledge-hammer blows struck during this Conference are samples of His handiwork. They ought to be sufficient to set any machine going—in the right direction. (CR, October 1927, p. 144.)

D&C 100 8Henry D. Moyle: 8

D&C 100 8The Holy Ghost . . . bearing record unto . . . whatsoever ye shall say

D&C 100 8Some may ask the question as to how we convert others to the truth. The answer is, we do not. Conversion comes from above. Our part in this work is to plant the seeds of truth. These seeds are born of our conviction when we testify of the divine mission of Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, who offered himself as a sacrifice for the sins of the world. We rely upon the gift and power of the Holy Ghost to carry our message into the hearts of our listeners and witness unto them the truthfulness of our stated conviction. (CR, April 1961, pp. 101-2.)

D&C 100 8Joseph F. Smith: 8

D&C 100 8The Holy Ghost . . . bearing record unto . . . whatsoever ye shall say

D&C 100 8It occurred to me that there are thousands of men who have heard the voices of the inspired servants of God, unto whom the Almighty has borne record of the truth, and yet they have not believed it. It is my opinion that the Lord bears record to the testimonies of His servants unto those who hear those testimonies, and it is left with them whether or not they will harden their hearts against the truth and not listen to it, and abide the consequences. I believe the Spirit of the Almighty God is upon most of the Elders who go out into the world to proclaim the Gospel. I believe their words are accompanied by the testimony of the Spirit of God. But all men are not open to receive the witness and the testimony of the Spirit. And the responsibility will rest with them. Yet it may be possible the Lord withholds His Spirit from some, for a wise purpose in Him, that their eyes are not opened to see and their minds not quickened to comprehend the word of truth. As a rule, however, it is my opinion that all men who are seeking after the truth and are willing to receive it, will also receive the witness of the spirit which accompanies the words and testimonies of the servants of the Lord; while those whose hearts are hardened against the truth and will not receive it when it is borne record of to them, will remain ignorant and without a comprehension of the Gospel. (CR, April 1899, p. 40.)

D&C 100 9George Q. Cannon: 9

D&C 100 9Sidney, . . . a spokesman unto my servant Joseph

D&C 100 9He [Sidney Rigdon] was baptized in the town of Kirtland, and the foundation of a great work was laid there. God afterwards revealed that this man was to be a spokesman, and he became the spokesman to this people and to the world for the Prophet Joseph. Those who knew Sidney Rigdon, know how wonderfully God inspired him, and with what wonderful eloquence he declared the word of God to the people. He was a mighty man in the hands of God, as a spokesman, as long as the prophet lived, or up to a short time before his death. Thus you see that even this which many might look upon as a small matter, was predicted about 1,700 years before the birth of the Saviour, and was quoted by Lehi 600 years before the same event, and about 2,400 years before its fulfillment [2 Nephi 3:18], and was translated by the power of God, through his servant Joseph, as was predicted should be the case, and at a time, as I have said, when there was not a man upon the earth who was a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Church had not yet been organized, and Joseph did not know, unless he knew by the spirit of revelation, whether any man would receive the Gospel. (JD, April 6, 1884, 25:126-27.)

D&C 100 10Parley P. Pratt: 10

D&C 100 10In one of those tedious nights, [in a Richmond, Mo. jail] we had lain as if in sleep till the hour of midnight had passed, and our ears and hearts had been pained, while we had listened for hours to the obscene jests, the horrid oaths, the dreadful blasphemies and filthy language of our guards, Colonel Price at their head as they recounted to each other their deeds of rapine, murder, robbery, etc., which they had committed among the "Mormons" while at Far West and vicinity. They even boasted of defiling by force wives, daughters and virgins and of shooting or dashing out the brains of men, women and children.

D&C 100 10I had listened till I became so disgusted, shocked, horrified, and so filled at the spirit of indignant justice that I could scarcely refrain from rising upon my feet and rebuking the guards: but had said nothing to Joseph [Smith], or any one else, although I lay next to him and knew he was awake. On a sudden he arose to his feet, and spoke in a voice of thunder, or as the roaring lion, uttering, as near as I can recollect, the following words:

D&C 100 10"SILENCE, ye fiends of the infernal pit. In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you and command you to be still; I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die THIS INSTANT!"

D&C 100 10He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty. Chained, and without a weapon; calm, unruffled and dignified as an angel, he looked upon the quailing guards, whose weapons were lowered or dropped to the ground; whose knees smote together and who, shrinking into a corner, or crouching at his feet, begged his pardon, and remained quiet till a change of guards.

D&C 100 10I have seen the ministers of justice, clothed in magisterial robes, and criminals arraigned before them, while life was suspended on a breath, in the Courts of England; I have witnessed a Congress in solemn session to give laws to nations; I have tried to conceive of kings, of royal courts, of thrones and crowns; and of emperors assembled to decide the fate of kingdoms; but dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight, in a dungeon in an obscure village of Missouri. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, November 1838, pp. 210-11.)

D&C 100 14Joseph Smith: 14

D&C 100 14About this time, Elders [Orson] Hyde and [John] Gould arrived in Zion, and the Church having made the necessary preparations, Elders W. W. Phelps and Orson Hyde were dispatched to the Governor of Missouri [Daniel Dunklin], residing at Jefferson City, the capital of the state, with the following. [Petition setting forth the outrages committed against the Saints by mobs and redress asked for.] (HC 1:410-15, September 28, 1833.)

D&C 100 15George Q. Cannon: 15

D&C 100 15All things shall work together for good to them that walk uprightly

D&C 100 15No power could have been more effective in leveling class distinctions, and it may be said in destroying them, than the revelation of this Gospel and the establishment of the Church. The thousands who have heard the Gospel in various lands, in lands of oppression, in the midst of poverty and destitution and hopelessness, where there was no prospect before them and their children, only to toil and live lives of drudgery, of poverty and deprivation—the thousands who in this condition have heard the message of salvation have had their hearts gladdened; it has been an emancipation for them or a means of emancipation to deliver them from these sad and disheartening circumstances, because this brought to them a knowledge; they that were almost deprived of all hope, have heard the Gospel. It has come as a salvation to them and a means of deliverance. I heard one man say . . . that in Scandinavia, where he lived, he envied the position of the horse, and wished he had been born a horse. Why? Because the horse was cared for; the horse was fed; the horse was carefully housed; he had value; when he died it was a loss to his master; but as to him, the working man, he might die, and what loss would it be to anybody? Not to his master. It might be to his wife, or to his children, but not to his master. He could toil, could go hungry, he could go partly clad; he could go miserably housed and provided for; the animal that possessed value was worth something, that could be cared for, blanketed at night, fed well and kept in a warm stable, and if he were sick, taken care of that he might not die. This man's statement concerning his feelings was very strongly put; but his condition was that of thousands when this Gospel reached them. What has it done for them? It has lifted them up, it has made them feel that they are the children of God—peers of every one else on the earth, no matter how rich, no matter how learned, no matter how many advantages others may possess, they are equal before the Lord with all of them. "Mormonism" has done this for the world. It has made every man, that is worthy, a Priest of God; it has had this effect. . . . Every man that has embraced this Gospel is raised to this dignity and to this power. (CR, April 1899, pp. 18-19.)

D&C 100 15Heber J. Grant: 15

D&C 100 15To them that walk uprightly

D&C 100 15When you are in the line of your duty it is like standing in front of a line of posts, and every post is in line. But step one step aside, and every post looks as though it were not quite in line. The farther you get away from that straight line, the more crooked the posts will appear. It is the straight and narrow path of duty that will lead you and me back to the presence of God. (CR, October 1935, p. 5.)

D&C 100 16Stephen L Richards: 16

I will raise up unto myself a pure people

D&C 100 16Where is the man, impure in body and defiled, within whom may dwell the Spirit of the Most High? Is there not the closest of relation between the condition of our tabernacles and the spirits which therein reside? I take it that one of our supreme messages to the whole world is the word which comes from this transcendent statement of the fundamentals of our very faith: Keep clean your bodies and undefiled, in order that you may serve God and work out your destiny in mortality. (CR, October 1927, p. 2)
