Themark ofThe beasT

John described a time when people would be compelled “to be

marked on the right hand or forehead” (Revelation 13:16). This mark

would indicate an individual’s allegiance to the Antichrist. Between

the Old and New Testaments, some Jews were forced to be branded

with the symbol of the god Dionysius; this event may provide part of

the background for this text.143 But what did the mark of the beast

imply for people in the first century? And what might the mark mean

for people today?

the mark of the beast to be some

sort of physical implant or mark

that will be required during the

future great tribulation. Without

this mark, people will not be able

to buy or to sell (Revelation 13:17).

how, in the Old Testament,

God commanded his people

to place the memory of their

© Bruce Rolff

redemption “as a mark on your hand, even bound between

your eyes” (Exodus 13:16). The original intent of these words

seems to have been to allow God’s redemption and God’s Word

to mold the hearer’s thoughts (“bound between your eyes”) and

actions (“a mark on your hand”). In the same way, a mark “on

the right hand or forehead” could imply acting and thinking

in accordance with this beast. In John’s day, this would have

meant worshiping the emperor. Cities such as Pergamum and

Thyatira had well-established trade guilds that could prevent

persons from conducting business if they refused to participate

in the emperor cult; it is quite possible that Christians in other

cities experienced similar persecution in their buying and selling

(Revelation 13:17).144

This is just one page from Rose Guide to the End-Times Prophecy, is an easy-to-understand overview. It helps ©2012 Rose Publishing. You may print

you go through the key portions of Scripture and explains different ways that Christians have interpreted them. 10 copies, but do not post on the internet

Simple charts and illustrations help you see the whole picture. ISBN 9781596364196. Save $5 on your $25 or send via email.Your friends may sign up

for Free Rose Bible eCharts & Newsletters

order. Enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com.

at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

Four Views of the End Times

DVD Series

This six-week study shows four different Revelation

time lines and tackles Dispensational Premillennialism,

Postmillennialism, Historic Premillennialism, and

Amillennialism. For each view, Four Views of the End Times

includes a definition, supporting Scriptures, a time line of

the view’s popularity, and a sampling of Christian leaders

supporting that view.

Book 9781596364127

Temple

Pamphlet

The full-color, glossy 12-panel pamphlet covers the

Tabernacle in the wilderness to the Temple. built by King

Solomon, Zerubbabel, and Herod’s Temple, the one Jesus

knew so well. Each of the Temple furnishings are explained

in detail, as well as their functions, purposes, and the

meanings they have for believers today.

End-Times Prophecy

Pamphlet 9781596360013

Jesus talked a lot about the end of time and his second

coming. These are key teachings that every Christian

Rose Guide to The Temple

should know. So why don’t they? is an easy-to-

Book

Rose Guide to the Temple is a full-color overview of the

understand overview. It helps you go through the key

Temple, with more than 100 images, charts, diagrams,

portions of Scripture and explains different ways that

photos, and illustrations, many of which have never published

Christians have interpreted them. Simple charts and

before. Rose Guide to The Temple is a clear and easy-to-

understand examination at the temple and contains clear

illustrations help you see the whole picture.

plastic overlays and stunning posters that no other Temple

guide has. It covers the span of time from Abraham to

Book 9781596364196

modern day.

Book 9781596364684

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible eCharts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
