John A. Widtsoe, Joseph Smith&mdash;Seeker after Truth, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1951)

Chapter 41 How Revelations Were Received

There was little self-assumption in Joseph Smith. He did not attempt to display his own powers nor to depend upon them. When questions arose in his work, and among his fellow workers, he followed the method of the First Vision. He appealed to the Lord, and received the required help.

258As far as known, every revelation came as an answer to a prayer to God for help. His life was led by revelation. The Church which he was instrumental in organizing rests upon continuous revelation. In the words of the prophet of old, the Lord "slumbers not nor sleeps." [^1] This gives revelation first place in the life work of Joseph Smith.

258It is significant that no revelation appears to have been volunteered by the Lord. The First Vision came in answer to prayer; all later ones followed the same pattern. The revelations may therefore be viewed as answers to questions that arose from time to time to meet the issues of the day.

258The answers frequently went beyond the question. A simple question was often answered with a wealth of new knowledge. God cares less for the completeness of a question than for the need and humble attitude of mind and heart of the questioner.

258While Joseph Smith asked questions because of conditions that confronted him, it must be conceded that at times the Lord inspired him to ask questions. Joseph Smith was commissioned by the Lord to do a great work. Naturally, the Lord often moved upon him as needs arose. But he always asked questions. He was never content with ignorance. He was always the seeker after truth.

258However, revelation following questions did not mean that the individuality of the man was eliminated. From the beginning, the man himself was a party to the process of revelation. The manner of the question and the use of the revealed answer always involved the personality of the man. His fitness to commune with the unseen world and how soon, how emphatically, how courageously, how persistently the revelation was requested and used were parts of the nature of the man himself.

259 Revelation did not always come to Joseph Smith in the same manner. In fact, the exact manner in which most of the revelations were given is only partly known. But the manner in which some were given may be clearly understood.

259The first revelation, the so-called First Vision, was received by the boy Joseph directly from God the Father and God the Son. They spoke to him as man to man. A week following the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, the Savior appeared in that sacred building and spake in person to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. [^2] When the revelation teaching that the degree of human salvation varies with our works was given, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon had direct visual and oral communication with the Lord. [^3]

259On several other occasions communications came from heavenly beings delegated to perform certain tasks. Moroni, an ancient American Prophet, conversed several times with Joseph concerning the plates of the Book of Mormon, Joseph's work in translating them, and the restoration of the Church of Jesus Christ. [^4] Later John the Baptist, and after him the Apostles, Peter, James, and John, personally conferred upon Joseph Smith and his companion Oliver Cowdery, respectively, the Aaronic [^5] and Melchizedek Priesthood. [^6] On one occasion, Joseph Smith was seeking wine for the sacrament. A heavenly messenger met him by the way, and explained that water could be used instead of wine. [^7] Such direct messages from the Lord or from delegated personages were not many. Most of his revelations were obtained otherwise.

260Before Joseph received the Urim and Thummim he had a stone, obtained during the digging of a well for Clark Chase. This stone through the blessing of the Lord, became a seer stone which was used frequently by him in his spiritual work. [^8]

260The use of the seer stone explains in part the charge against Joseph Smith that he was a "peep stone gazer." All his activities were well-known and performed above board. The use of the seer stone and the Urim and Thummim was well-known to the people of his time and neighborhood. [^9]

260The use of stones in sacred work has been frequent; for example, the ball known as the Liahona, [^10] the rod of Aaron, [^11] and the twelve stones used by Lehi. [^12] The brother of Jared used sixteen small stones which gave light in the barges. [^13] Aids to human senses are always recognized in ecclesiastical history. [^14]

260Along with the plates of the Book of Mormon were the Urim and Thummim, "two stones in silver bows," used by Joseph Smith as helps in the translation of the inscription on the plates. When the young man was in a suitable spiritual and mental condition, these instruments made the meaning of the inscriptions clear to the translator's mind.

260The Urim and Thummim were also used by him at the beginning of his work to receive revelations from the Lord. Several of the early revelations begin with the statement, "I inquired of the Lord through the Urim and Thummim, and received the following," or words to that effect. [^15]

261 The available evidence indicates that the use of these sacred instruments required intense mental and spiritual effort. They were not merely a kind of magnifying glasses. Revelation did not come easily, even with the Urim and Thummim. The price of self-effort had to be paid for them. It seems likely that these helps enabled him to concentrate sufficiently to hear and understand messages from the unseen world.

261After the translation of the Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith seldom referred to the Urim and Thummim in the revelations that came to him. Indeed he may not any longer have had them in his possession. Instead he seems to have developed the necessary spiritual and mental power or concentration within himself to communicate with the unseen world, without external help, under the influence of the higher priesthood which he had received.

261Thus he often says that revelations were received "By the spirit of prophecy and revelation" [^16] or "The Holy Ghost was poured out upon us to a very great degree, some prophesied, whilst we all praised the Lord, and rejoiced exceedingly. Whilst yet together, I received the following commandment." [^17] In this manner most of his revelations were received.

261Some of the revelations were received in the presence of others. Elder Parley P. Pratt has left the record of one such event:

261After we had joined in prayer in his translating room he dictated in our presence the following revelation. [^18] Each sentence was uttered slowly and very distinctly, and with a pause between each sufficiently long for it to be recorded by an ordinary writer in long-hand.

261This was the manner in which all his written revelations were dictated and written. There was never any hesitation, reviewing or reading back in order to keep the run of the subject; neither did any of the communications undergo revisions, interlinings, or corrections.

261As he dictated them, so they stood, so far as I have witnessed; and I was present to witness the dictation of several communications of several pages each. [^19]

262Remember that this was the procedure also in the translation of the Book of Mormon.

262This method of direct inspiration or revelation was the one commonly used. That Joseph Smith could so obtain the deep truths of the gospel was due, first to his divine call, then to his pure love of the work.

262His earlier spiritual experiences had developed within him a power of intense concentration. Those who were present when such revelations were received have commented upon the physical change in the man, his pallor as if the blood had drained out of his face, and his complete absorption in communicating with the unseen world. [^20]

262Except in revelations copied from spoken words of celestial messengers, the language of the revelations is almost wholly the language of Joseph Smith, made forceful and eloquent by the exaltation of inspiration. God gives the ideas; the Prophet expresses them as best he can.

262In the preface of the book containing the revelations, the Lord says:

262Behold, I am God and have spoken it, these commandments are of me, and were given unto my servants in their weakness, after the manner of their language, that they might come to understanding. [^21]

262That is a good lesson for all teachers.

262This procedure seemed simple to the onlooker. Oliver Cowdery, Joseph's scribe and close companion who shared with him several heavenly manifestations, desired the gift of translation and communication with the unseen world. He was given permission to try it. He failed completely. Thereupon the Lord through Joseph Smith said to Oliver:

262Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me. But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore you shall feel that it is right.

263But if it be not right, you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong; therefore you cannot write that which is sacred save it be given you from me. [^22]

263This is a major key to revelation-a universal key-which was always followed by Joseph Smith and by those who have followed him in the leadership of the Church. It is a method that may be followed by all men who desire communication with a higher power. But it requires, as in the case of Joseph Smith, an unwavering love of truth, a pure mind and heart with a consuming desire to know what to do, and an intense concentration upon the subject.

263As far as is known, the revelations to Joseph Smith came (1) through words spoken directly by the Lord, (2) through messages spoken by heavenly messengers delegated to visit him, (3) through the help of the Urim and and Thummim and similar helps, (4) and, most frequently, through inspiration after intense desire and earnest prayer.

263While we may not know fully how Joseph Smith received revelations, we can test their contents by any proper method for their verity. They have withstood assaults of doubters through the years. The contents of the revelations certify to their divine origin.

263It should be added that revelation is not confined to one man or set of men. Every child of God has the need for revelation to fit his personal needs and may claim it. All members of the Church are entitled to communications with the unseen world. Such manifestations depend, however, upon the need of the individual, recognized by the Lord, and also upon the worthiness of the seeker to receive such a blessing.

263Impressions from the unseen world come with varying degrees of emphasis, depending usually upon the fitness of the recipient to sense the message. Men must labor to become sensitive to such messages.

264All individual manifestations are for the comfort and direct help of the individual and should be kept sacred and not noised abroad. Those who seek such help should not expect such messages as came through Joseph Smith. He received revelations not only for himself but also for the Church he was commissioned to restore.

264Official communications for the Church or its divisions come only through officials of the Church. The President of the Church receives revelations for the whole Church; none others may do so. Communications for stakes and wards come only through the properly appointed heads of these units of the Church and must be in harmony with the voice of the President of the Church.

264All communications from the Lord, inspirations and impressions, are in reality varying degrees of revelation. They are all phases of the Lord's communication with his children on earth. An official divine communication for the Church is usually called a revelation. A personal communication is commonly spoken of as an inspiration. But they all come from the same sacred source to men of worthy lives.

264The revelations to Joseph Smith form a body of truth convincing to all honest readers of Joseph's close communion with heaven. The contents of the revelations form the best proof of their divine origin.

264It may be said here that much time has been wasted in the attempt to learn just how Joseph translated the Book of Mormon plates. David Whitmer held that the English version appeared above the characters until it was copied. Numerous other explanations have been offered. These are all wrong. The exact mechanism is not known. Joseph Smith the translator merely says that they were translated by "the gift and power of God." [^23] That is enough.

1951 Bookcraft

---
Notas:
[^1] Ps. 121:4.
[^2] Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 110.
[^3] Ibid., D&C 76; History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 245.
[^4] History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 12.
[^5] Ibid., vol. 1, p. 39; Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 13.
[^6] History of the Church, vol. 1, pp. 39-40.
[^7] Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 27.
[^8] Edward Stevenson, Reminiscences of the Prophet Joseph, p. 30; Millenial Star, vol. 24, p. 119; vol. 40, p. 49; George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith, p. 56.
[^9] George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith, p. 56; B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 129; Edward Stevenson, Reminiscences of the Prophet Joseph, pp. 10-19; David Whitmer, Address to the World, p. 32; B. H. Roberts, New Witness for God, vol. 2, p. 113 ( Y.M. M. I. A. Manuals); B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, vol. 6, p.230; B. H. Roberts, Defense of the Faith and the Saints, vol. 1, pp. 255-311.
[^10] 1 Ne. 16:28; Mosiah 1:16.
[^11] Ex. 4:20; Numbers 17: 6-9.
[^12] 1 Ne. 2:7.
[^13] Ether 3:1, 6:2.
[^14] Arch S. Reynolds, The Urim and Thummim and How Did Joseph Smith Translate?
[^15] Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 3, 6, 11, 14, 17.
[^16] Doctrine and Covenants, preface to D&C 20.
[^17] History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 78.
[^18] Ibid., vol. 1, p. 170.
[^19] Parley P. Pratt, Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, 1938 edition p. 62; 1874 edition, p. 66.
[^20] Preston Nibley, Exodus to Greatness, p. 2; John A. Widtsoe, Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 142; Journal of Discourses, vol. 9, p. 89.
[^21] Doctrine and Covenants 1:24; History of the Church, vol. 1, p. 222.
[^22] Doctrine and Covenants 9:7-9.
[^23] B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, vol. 1, pp. 138.
