James E. Talmage, Vitality of Mormonism ( 1919)

21

THE VOICE OF JOHN THE BAPTIST AGAIN HEARD

Repent Ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand

THE personal ministry of Jesus Christ in the flesh was directly heralded by the preaching of John the Baptist, whose voice was that of one crying in the wilderness: "Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand." The proclamation of the appointed harbinger was vindicated by the appearance of the Lord Himself, who came and opened the way of the Kingdom of God to all who would enter therein.

In these modern days that same John, now a resurrected personage, has again officiated on earth. In him was vested of old the authority of the Priesthood of Aaron. On the 15th of May, 1829, a heavenly messenger, who declared himself to be John known as the Baptist, appeared in light and glory, and, laying his hands upon the heads of the modern prophet Joseph Smith and a companion in the ministry, conferred upon them the Aaronic Priesthood, saying:

"Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins." (D&C, Sec. 13).

Thus was fulfilled in part the vision prophecy of the ancient Revelator, that in the last days an angel would come, "having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth." (See Rev. 14:6, 7).

Repentance, which stands eternally established as an indispensable condition of salvation, is today proclaimed anew under the authority of the restored Priesthood, and the call is to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. The second advent of the Christ is near, and but little time remains to prepare for His coming, which shall be in power and great glory, to the accompaniment of the resurrection of the righteous dead, the glorification of the worthy who are still in the flesh, and the destruction of the wilfully and hopelessly wicked.

Repentance, as the ordained requirement whereby remission of sins may be attained, consists essentially in a genuine sorrow for sin and comprises: (1) a personal conviction of guilt; (2) an earnest desire to secure foregiveness; and (3) a resolute determination to forsake sin and follow the path of righteous living. The first step in the course of effective repentance consists in the acknowledgment or confession of sin before God; the second in the sinner forgiving those who have sinned against him; and the third in his acceptance of Christ's atoning sacrifice as shown by a willingness to obey the further requirements embodied in the Gospel of salvation.

"If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." (1 John 1:8, 9).

In this modern age the voice of the Lord Jesus Christ has been heard to the same effect:

"Verily I say unto you, I, the Lord, forgive sins unto those who confess their sins before me and ask forgiveness, who have not sinned unto death."

And further:

"By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins. Behold, he will confess them and forsake them." (D&C 64:7; and 58:43).

Through His revelations to the restored Church in the current age, the Lord has emphasized this essential element of repentance:

"Wherefore I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another, for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses, standeth condemned before the Lord, for there remaineth in him the greater sin. I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men." (D&C 64:9, 10).

Without repentance salvation is impossible. The Savior followed the ringing call of His forerunner with the command: "Repent ye and believe the Gospel" (Mark 1:15). So also taught the Apostles of old, that God "commandeth all men everywhere to repent" (Acts 17:30). And in the present dispensation the word of God has come through the Prophet Joseph Smith:

"And we know that all men must repent and believe on the name of Jesus Christ, and worship the Father in his name, and endure in faith on his name to the end, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God." (D&C 20:29).

Against the awful danger of procrastination, whereby the ability to repent may be forfeited, the Book of Mormon solemnly warns:

"For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors, . . . For behold, if ye have procrastinated the day of your repentance, even until death, behold, ye have become subjected to the spirit of the devil, and he doth seal you his; therefore, the Spirit of the Lord hath withdrawn from you, and hath no place in you, and the devil hath all power over you." (Book of Mormon, Alma 34:32, 35).
