James E. Talmage, Vitality of Mormonism ( 1919)

22

ARISE AND WASH AWAY THY SINS

The Only Way

WE believe that the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel are: (1) Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; (2) Repentance; (3) Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; (4) Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. (Articles of Faith, 4).

"Men and brethren, what shall we do?" Such was the eager, anguished, almost despairing cry of the humbled multitude who, at the first Pentecost following the crucifixion of Christ, were brought to a realization of their awful guilt through the inspired utterances of Peter, the presiding Apostle.

What shall we do? What can we do? Is hope yet open to us? This is the wail of contritely penitent souls, everywhere, always. When convicted of sin at the bar of his own conscience through genuine repentance, when at last able to see himself in all the repulsive pollution of his transgression, the self-accusing sinner yearns with fervid purpose to make all possible reparation and is zealous to learn and obey the conditions of forgiveness, if such there be.

To every soul thus brought into the depths through the benign though afflicting influences of repentance, to all who thus appeal for mercy and rescue, the answer is direct and prompt:

"Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." (See Acts 2:37-39).

The promise of remission is as wide as the domain of sin; for, excepting those (and be it said to our comfort that they are few) who sink so far into the quagmire of iniquity as to be numbered among the "sons of perdition," to whom effective repentance is impossible, all may be saved by compliance with the requirements set forth by the Author of the plan of salvation. The need of forgiveness is likewise universal; "for there is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good, and sinneth not" (Eccles. 7:20).

Is it not reasonable, and wholly in keeping with the ordinary ways of men in their mutual dealings, that some substantial evidence shall be demanded to attest the genuineness of the repentance we voice in words? Is it enough that the debtor shall merely acknowledge his obligation and express regret that he has not heretofore been able to meet it? He must do something more, or he remains forever in debt. The seal by which repentance is validated is Baptism in water for the remission of sins; for by this is the blood of Jesus Christ made effective to cleanse from sin. (See 1 John 1:7).

The voice in the wilderness heralding the advent of the Lord, the proclamation that aroused Jerusalem and reverberated throughout Judea and Galilee, was "the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins." (Mark 1:4; Luke 3:3). The cleansing ordinance was not to be administered indiscriminately, however; it was reserved for those who had brought forth "fruits meet for repentance," those whose profession of penitence was a true index to their contrite state.

Saul of Tarsus when rebuked for his ill-directed zeal in persecuting the Lord's own, exclaimed in agony: "What shall I do, Lord?" By the mouth of devout Ananias came the answer: "Arise, and be baptized and wash away thy sins." (See Acts 22). And Saul, thereafter known as Paul, a preacher of righteousness and an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, taught the saving doctrine that by baptism in water comes regeneration from sin.

Pastors and prophets who ministered to the ancient fold of Christ on the American continent led the people in the same path, that of repentance and baptism by water, the only way by which remission of sins could then or can ever be secured. Read for yourselves in the Book of Mormon, which is verily the Scripture of the Western Continent:

"For the gate by which ye should enter, is repentance, and baptism by water; and then cometh a remission of your sins by fire, and by the Holy Ghost." (2 Nephi 31:17).

"Shew unto your God that ye are willing to repent of your sins, and enter into a covenant with Him to keep His commandments, and witness it unto Him this day, by going into the waters of baptism." (Alma 7:15).

Hear the words of the Lord Jesus Christ through the prophet Mormon:

"Turn, all ye Gentiles from your wicked ways, and repent of your evil doings, of your lyings and deceivings, and of your whoredoms, and of your secret abominations, and your idolatries, and of your murders, and your priestcrafts, and your envyings, and your strifes, and from all your wickedness and abominations, and come unto me, and be baptized in my name, that ye may receive a remission of your sins, and be filled with the Holy Ghost, that ye may be numbered with my people, who are of the house of Israel." (3 Nephi 30:2).

And further:

"The first fruits of repentance is baptism; and baptism cometh by faith, unto the fulfilling the commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins." (Moroni 8:25).

To His commissioned servants in the current age, the bearers of the Holy Priesthood again restored to earth, the Lord has given commandment that they proclaim anew to the world the same unchangeable truth, that only through baptism is remission of sins promised. Thus we read:

"But thou shalt declare repentance and faith on the Savior and remission of sins by baptism and by fire, yea, even the Holy Ghost." (D&C 19:31).

Such is the immutable law of God throughout the ages. There is no other way provided on earth or in heaven by which the merits of the Atonement of Jesus Christ may bring salvation to mankind.
