James E. Talmage, Vitality of Mormonism ( 1919)

25

THE BAPTISM OF FIRE

Power of the Spirit

WE believe that the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel are:—(1) Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; (2) Repentance; (3) Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; (4) Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. (Articles of Faith 4).

John the Baptist proclaimed the necessity of repentance and of baptism by water, which latter he administered to all who came in contrition seeking admission to the kingdom of God. With equal fervency, this voice crying in the wilderness foretold a second or higher baptism, which, however, John was not authorized to give. This he characterized as the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, ordained to follow his administration, and to be given by that Mightier One, whose preeminence John delighted to proclaim. This was the Baptist's testimony:

"I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance: but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire." (Matt. 3:11).

That the Mightier One referred to was none other than Jesus the Christ is thus set forth in the words of John: "Behold the Lamb of God. . . . This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man which is preferred before me: for he was before me. . . . And I knew him not: but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost." (John 1:29-33).

In His incisive instructions to Nicodemus respecting the works essential to salvation, the Savior did not stop with the specification of the watery birth. Baptism by immersion in water, though administered by one invested with the power of the Holy Priesthood, is incomplete without the quickening effect of the Spirit. "Born of water and of the Spirit" is the indispensable status of every man who shall gain admission to the kingdom of God.

While yet in the flesh our Lord specifically and repeatedly assured the Apostles that after His departure the Comforter or the Spirit of Truth would be sent unto them; and the scriptural context plainly shows that these expressive appellations have reference solely to the Holy Ghost. Amidst the solemnities of His ascension, the Lord reiterated these assurances of a spiritual baptism, saying: "For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence." (Acts 1:5).

A rich fulfilment was realized at the succeeding Pentecost, when the assembled Apostles were endowed with unprecedented power from heaven, being filled with the influence of the Holy Ghost so that they spake in tongues other than their own as the Spirit gave them utterance. An outward manifestation of this Divine investiture was seen in the tongues of flame which rested upon them severally. The Lord's promise, so miraculously fulfilled upon themselves, was repeated by the Apostles to those who sought their instruction. Conditioned upon their repentance and baptism in water, Peter assured the penitent Jews that they should "receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2:38).

That the bestowal of the Holy Ghost is an ordinance requiring higher authority than that by which water baptism may be performed is evidenced by Scripture. Philip—not the Apostle Philip, but presumably one of the seven men who had been set apart for a lesser ministry (Acts 6:3-6)—preached to the Samaritans and baptized many. Plainly Philip was empowered to administer water baptism; and it is equally clear that an authority greater than his was requisite for the higher baptism of the Spirit or the conferring of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. To this the Scriptures testify:

"Now when the apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John: Who, when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost: (For as yet he was fallen upon none of them: only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.) Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost." (Acts 8:14-17).

Very illuminating is the instance of Paul's ministry unto certain devout Ephesians (Acts 19:1-7) who professed to have been baptized "unto John's baptism," but who were plainly uninstructed as to the necessity of the baptism of the Spirit. It is probable that these men had submitted to immersion by unauthorized hands; and therefore Paul caused that they be baptized "in the name of the Lord Jesus. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them; and they spake with tongues, and prophesied."

To the Twelve Disciples who were ordained by the resurrected Lord among the Nephites on the American continent, Christ gave special power, so that all baptized believers upon whom they would lay their hands should receive the Holy Ghost; and thus is the assurance recorded:

"Yea, blessed are they who shall believe in your words, and come down into the depths of humility and be baptized, for they shall be visited with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and shall receive a remission of their sins." (Book of Mormon, 3 Nephi 12:2; see alsoMoroni chap. 2.)

And in this modern day, the authority of both the Lesser or Aaronic Priesthood, which is requisite to water baptism, and of the Higher or Melchizedek Priesthood, without which the gift of the Holy Ghost cannot be authoritatively bestowed, has been restored to earth, through the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Elders of the Church today are commanded to preach the Gospel, to baptize the penitent, "And to confirm those who are baptized into the church, by the laying on of hands for the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, according to the Scriptures." (D&C 20:41).
