James E. Talmage, Vitality of Mormonism ( 1919)

55

PERPETUITY OF AMERICAN NATION

Assured by Prophecy

As late as but a few months prior to that fateful date—August 1, 1914—when the war storm burst in Europe, some of the world's great ones, eminent in scholarship and leaders of thought, aggressively proclaimed their belief that a great war was impossible. They held that the affairs of nations were so intimately related, the interests common to humanity so closely knit, as to safeguard the world against any such devastating conflict as would be entailed by the outbreak of war among great nations with the frightfully efficient enginery of destruction developed by present-day science. There was neither ambiguity nor reservation in the academic pronouncement that the human race, in its course of evolutionary progression, had happily risen above the barbarous incentive to wholesale murder and ruthless destruction such as characterized the less cultured epochs of history.

Certain optimistic protagonists averred that if, contrary to their demonstrated facts and figures, great nations should plunge recklessly into war, the struggle would of necessity be brief, for the total wealth of the world was insufficient to maintain for more than a few weeks at most the waging of war with modern equipment.

Yet in spite of all prognostications, as though derisively flouting the wisdom of the wise, August 1, 1914, was so deeply crimsoned that the weathering of ages future will not dull the stain. That day and all the days since have witnessed the fulfilment of the prediction relating to the last dispensation, the time in which we live, as voiced by Isaiah:

"Behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." (Isa. 29:14.)

Verily the accumulated wisdom of men has failed us in the time of need, has failed to forecast and fails to expound the dread happenings of these eventful times. Where is the master mind that can interpret the problems of contemporary history, with factors innumerable, with relations so intricate and differentials so varied that the calculus of time is inadequate to solve?

Human reasoning unillumined by Divine revelation offers but dark and insecure refuge from the turmoil of current events. Whither then shall we look for guidance? Or, must we abandon ourselves to the despairing conclusion that to the storm-lashed ocean of the ominous present there is no haven of hope, and to our buffeted bark no anchor of comforting assurance?

To him who listens in faith there rises even above the roar of strife, the voice of prophecy citing earlier prediction of events now materializing in rapid sequence, and telling of the eventual triumph of righteousness and the vindication of man's right to liberty and happiness.

The great world conflict was predicted by both ancient and modern prophets. Joseph Smith, speaking the word of God, told of the imminent outpouring of war upon all nations, wisdom of the world's wise men to the contrary notwithstanding. And in these utterances the modern prophet spake in harmony with the predictions of earlier seers, as did he also of the promises made concerning America, which is described as a land choice above all others. Read these words of assurance given through an ancient Jaredite: "Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it, shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, who hath been manifested by the things which we have written." (Book of Mormon, Ether 2:12.)

Furthermore, hearken unto the following with reference to this same choice land, spoken unto the ancient inhabitants of this continent through Jacob the Nephite: "But behold, this land, saith God, shall be a land of thine inheritance, and the Gentiles shall be blessed upon the land. And this land shall be a land of liberty unto the Gentiles, and there shall be no kings upon the land, who shall raise up unto the Gentiles. And I will fortify this land against all other nations." (2 Nephi 10:10-12.)

We hold that the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States are inspired documents, veritable scriptures of the nation, framed by men under Divine direction, men specifically empowered and raised up for this high mission; and that these charters of liberty constitute a pattern after which the governments of the nations shall be shaped. Thus shall be fulfilled, in part at least, the prophecy of the ancient revelator, that out of this land, which in solemn truth is the land of Zion, shall go forth the law of the Lord unto the world at large. In the majesty of her high destiny our Nation has taken a stand as the champion of freedom and human rights. Her enduring greatness is conditioned only by the righteousness of her people, who, if they will but serve the God of the land—the God of Heaven and earth—shall never be subject to alien domination.

It is not written in the book of destiny that America shall bow the knee to autocracy; but, to the glorious contrary, it is inscribed on the scroll of the Divine purpose, that this, the land of Zion, shall be the haven of refuge to the oppressed: "And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand. And it shall come to pass that the righteous shall be gathered out from among all nations, and shall come to Zion, singing with songs of everlasting joy." (D&C 45: 70-71.)
