James E. Talmage, Vitality of Mormonism ( 1919)

70

GOD OF THE LIVING

All Live Unto Him

BUT as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living." See Matt. 22:23-33.

These words of the Master were addressed to a party of Sadducees, who had asked, though in irony, concerning certain details of the resurrected state, all the while holding to their unscriptural dogma that there could not be a resurrection from the dead.

The Lord dismissed their circumstantial instance with terse reproof and brief explanation, and went direct to the real point of their question—the actuality of the resurrection then future. He cited a Scripture often quoted in the rabbinical discourses of the time, daily sung in the refrain of the temple chants, and of frequent recurrence in their ceremonial orisons: "I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob."

Jehovah's affirmation of His own identity as expressed in this passage was made to Moses at Horeb. See Exo. 3. At that time Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with whom He who there spake unto Moses from amidst the fiery splendor of the burning bush had made covenant of everlasting effect, were dead. The climax of the Master's explanatory and positive doctrine was unanswerable: "He is not a God of the dead, but of the living: for all live unto him." (Luke 20:38.)

Small wonder that certain of the Scribes exclaimed, "Master, thou hast well said," nor that the multitude "were astonished at His doctrine." To acclaim as one of the distinguishing titles of Jehovah that He was the God of the patriarchs whom they most revered, and yet hold that those worthies were dead in the Sadducean sense of death, was inconsistency itself.

The real import of death varies with the point of view. Looked at from this side of the veil it means bereavement, departure, separation, and as some ignorantly profess to believe, annihilation. From the other side it is seen in its verity as the disembodiment of the living, active, intelligent spirit, which existed before its entrance into a tabernacle of flesh and bones, which maintains its individuality after bodily dissolution, and which is destined to be reembodied in the resurrection.

In these several states of existence the spirit is the same being, with specific powers and functions, endowed with agency or choice, and therefore strictly accountable. Death of the body in no sense extinguishes the conscious personality of the spirit nor does it terminate individual accountability.

Peter tells us of disembodied spirits who had lived in the flesh during the Noachian dispensation, and who through disobedience and wilful rejection of the Gospel had incurred bodily destruction, and imprisonment of their undying spirits throughout the centuries from Noah to Christ. Unto them the disembodied Savior went and preached the Gospel. They were therefore alive, possessed of understanding, and capable of accepting or again rejecting the Gospel of salvation.

Yet they were all numbered among the dead as man counts the departed; and for that matter so was the Christ, for His visitation to those "spirits in prison" was made during the interval of His death on the cross and His emergence from the tomb with spirit and body reunited—a resurrected Soul.

The Nephite prophet Alma set forth in words of inspired plainness the continuity of intelligent existence after death:

"Now concerning the state of the soul between death and the resurrection. Behold, it has been made known unto me, by an angel, that the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body; yea, the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life. And then shall it come to pass that the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise; a state of rest; a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow. . . . Now this is the state of the souls of the wicked; yea, in darkness, and a state of awful, fearful, looking for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God upon them; thus they remain in this state, as well as the righteous in paradise, until the time of their resurrection." (Book of Mormon, Alma 40.)

And as to the individual existence in and after the resurrection, the same revelator has given us this Scripture:

"Now, there is a death which is called a temporal death: and the death of Christ shall loose the bands of this temporal death, that all shall be raised from this temporal death. The spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame, even as we now are at this time; and we shall be brought to stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright recollection of all our guilt. Now this restoration shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous." (Alma 11.)
