James E. Talmage, Vitality of Mormonism ( 1919)

89

SIMPLICITY OF THE GOSPEL

None Need Err Therein

SALVATION of the soul consists essentially in the attainment of a state of blessedness beyond the grave, and therefore comprises immunity from the penalties incident to condemnation. Both salvation and condemnation involve graded conditions, or degrees, every soul receiving according to his just deserts, based on his works done in the flesh, be they good or evil.

Our individual status in the hereafter, both during the period of disembodiment and in the resurrection from bodily death, will be determined by the record of our earthly life, which will be fully declared by what we actually are. In the judgment of souls conflict of testimony or evidence will be impossible. Every fact bearing upon our condition of worthiness or guilt, of cleanliness through righteousness or defilement through sin, will be known.

To each of these asseverations the Holy Scriptures of both former and current time bear abundant and unequivocal testimony. The same high and unimpeachable authority, embodying the very words of Divine decree, declares that only by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel of Jesus Christ is salvation in the Kingdom of God possible unto man.

Consider the fundamental rite, which is baptism. The words of the Christ to the timid but truth-seeking rabbi of Jerusalem are as free from ambiguity as language makes possible: "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (John 3:5.)

This solemn affirmation was made to Nicodemus at the time of great excitement and controversy in Judea and neighboring provinces over the activities of John the Baptist, who was boldly preaching the necessity of baptism at his own hands as of one having particular authority, and who was administering baptism by immersion to all repentant applicants. John further declared that the watery baptism in which he officiated would be followed by a higher endowment to be administered by a Mightier One than himself, and this he designated the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost. Our Lord's declaration to the uninformed "master of Israel" set the seal of an authority higher than John's on the absolute necessity of baptism as conditioning man's attainment of salvation.

The crucified and resurrected Christ left this parting command and commission with the Apostles: "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost" (Matt. 28:19); and further declared: "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." (Mark 16:16.)

To the Nephite branch of the Israelitish stock on the American continent the Lord taught the same doctrine in language and style as simple as before: "And again I say unto you, Ye must repent, and be baptized in my name, and become as a little child, or ye can in no wise inherit the kingdom of God." (Book of Mormon,3 Nephi 11:38.) In full harmony with these ancient injunctions, the Lord has said to the Church in the present dispensation: "Go ye into all the world, preach the gospel to every creature, acting in the authority which I have given you, baptizing in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, and he that believeth not shall be damned." (D&C 68:8, 9.)

Could Scripture be simpler or plainer? Without baptism administered by the requisite authority, salvation in the kingdom of God is impossible, else the Word of God is void. But baptism to be effective must be preceded by repentance of sin. When unrepentant sinners came to John the zealous Baptist denounced them in stinging epithet as a "generation of vipers" and laid upon them the condition to make themselves acceptable by bringing forth fruits meet for repentance.

But to repent of sin in humility and contrition, with the earnest purpose and soulful desire of making amends for offenses done and thereby to become reconciled with and acceptable to God, one must have unqualified trust and faith in Him. The basal principles and fundamental ordinances of the Gospel, through which alone the saving efficacy of the Atonement wrought by Jesus Christ is made certain in assuring individual salvation, are ranged in the following order, as the Scriptures prove: (1) Faith in God the Eternal Father, and in His Son Jesus Christ as the Redeemer and Savior of humankind, and in the Holy Ghost; (2) repentance in full purpose of heart—active, vital repentance that shall lead and impel to good works and renunciation of sin; (3) baptism by immersion in water; and (4) bestowal of the Holy Ghost through the laying on of hands—both ordinances being administered by men duly authorized to officiate by ordination to the Holy Priesthood.

The man of thoughtful mind and contrite heart cannot fail to find inexpressible comfort and profound cause for devout thanksgiving and praise through contemplating God's infinite mercy in having made so simple and easy these indispensable conditions of salvation. Had the terms been such as only vast wealth could meet, or the requirements so intricate or strenuous that great physical strength or high intellectual ability were necessary to accomplish the feat of compliance, then indeed the mortal or fallen state of the race would be deplorable beyond conception; and, withal, justice would be eliminated from the category of Deity's attributes. But lo! The Gospel plan is so simple that the child may comprehend, and he that runs may read.
