Various authors, Testimonies of Book of Mormon Witnesses

Martin Harris Interviews and Later Years

D. B. DILLE'S ACCOUNT OF AN INTERVIEW WITH MARTIN HARRIS, 1853

Source: D. B. Dille, "Additional Testimony of Martin Harris," Millennial Star 21 (August 1859):545-46.

(From a manuscript found in the Millennial Star Office, written by Elder D. B. Dille.)

ADDITIONAL TESTIMONY OF MARTIN HARRIS (ONE OF THE THREE WITNESSES)

TO THE COMING FORTH OF THE BOOK OF MORMON.

September 15, 1853.

Be it known to all whom this may concern that I, David B. Dille, of Ogden City, Weber County, Salt Lake, en route to Great Britain, having business with one Martin Harris, formerly of the Church of Latter-day Saints, and residing at Kirtland, Lake County, Ohio, did personally wait upon him at his residence, and found him sick in bed; and was informed by the said Martin Harris that he had not been able to take any nourishment for the space of three days. This, together with his advanced age, had completely prostrated him. After making my business known to Mr. Harris, and some little conversation with him, the said Martin Harris started up in bed, and, after particularly inquiring concerning the prosperity of the Church, made the following declaration: "I feel that a spirit has come across me - the old spirit of Mormonism; and I begin to feel as I used to feel; and I will not say I won't go to the valley." Then addressing himself to his wife, he said, "I don't know but that, if you will get me some breakfast, I will get up and eat it."

I then addressed Mr. Harris relative to his once high and exalted station in the Church, and his then fallen and afflicted condition. I afterward put the following questions to Mr. Harris, to which he severally replied with the greatest cheerfulness: "What do you think of the Book of Mormon? Is it a divine record?"

Mr. Harris replied and said, "I was the right-hand man of Joseph Smith, and I know that he was a Prophet of God. I know the Book of Mormon is true." Then smiting his fist on the table, he said, "And you know that I know that it is true. I know that the plates have been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice declared it unto us; therefore I know of a surety that the work is true." "For," continued Mr. Harris, "did I not at one time hold the plates on my knee an hour and a half, whilst in conversation with Joseph, when we went to bury them in the woods, that the enemy might not obtain them? Yes, I did. And as many of the plates as Joseph Smith translated I handled with my hands, plate after plate." Then describing their dimensions, he pointed with one of the fingers of his left hand to the back of his right hand and said, "I should think they were so long, or about eight inches, and about so thick, or about four inches; and each of the plates was thicker than the thickest tin."

I then asked Mr. Harris if he ever lost 3,000 dollars by the publishing of the Book of Mormon. Mr. Harris said, "I never lost one cent. Mr. Smith," he said, "paid me all that I advanced, and more too." As much as to say he received a portion of the profits accruing from the sale of the book.

Mr. Harris further said, "I took a transcript of the characters of the plates to Dr. Anthon, of New York. When I arrived at the house of Professor Anthon, I found him in his office and alone, and presented the transcript to him, and asked him to read it. He said if I would bring the plates, he would assist in the translation. I told him I could not, for they were sealed. Professor Anthon then gave me a certificate certifying that the characters were Arabic, Chaldaic, and Egyptian. I then left Dr. Anthon and was near the door, when he said, "How did the young man know the plates were there?" I said an angel had shown them to him. Professor Anthon then said, "Let me see the certificate!" - upon which I took it from my waistcoat pocket and unsuspectingly gave it to him. He then tore it up in anger, saying there was no such thing as angels now - it was all a hoax. I then went to Dr. Mitchell with the transcript, and he confirmed what Professor Anthon had said."

Mr. Harris is about 58 years old [he was in reality 70 years old], and is on a valuable farm of 90 acres, beautifully situated at Kirtland, Lake County, Ohio.

THOMAS COLBURN'S INTERVIEW WITH MARTIN HARRIS, 1854 Source: Thomas Colburn to Elder Snow, editor, in St. Louis Luminary, 5 May 1855, p. 2. St. Louis, May 2, 1855.

Elder Snow, Editor of the Luminary:

Dear Brother—At the conference held in St. Louis, in October, 1854, Brother W. W. Rust and myself received a mission to travel in the northern and eastern states, to hunt up the lost sheep and endeavor to gather them into the fold. Accordingly, we left St. Louis on or about the middle of the month on the Reindeer, stopped at Alton a few days, visiting the Saints, and then passed on to Springfield, Illinois, called on a Brother Palmer, when behold, William Smith, brother of the Prophet Joseph, had taken up his abode here for the time being. He grasped me by the hand, said it did him good to take an old Mormon by the hand. I inquired of him (in Yankee style) what his business was in Springfield. He said he was preaching the first principles of the Gospel. I wished to know whether he preached the gathering and acknowledged the authorities of the Church as organized in Utah. His reply was rather evasive, said he and the authorities had had some misunderstanding, the same as Peter and Paul, that he had written to President Young saying he was willing to abide his decision. He wished me to give him the hand of fellowship. I told him under existing circumstances I could not, and advised him, if he was honest- hearted, as he appeared to be, he had better repair immediately to the valleys of the mountains and report himself and abide the decision of the First Presidency. He told me he had written and he wrote a letter to Brother Brigham before we left, whether he sent it or not I know not.

In answer to questions from a number in Springfield as to the authority of William Smith, I replied that it was with him as it would be with a branch severed from the vine, it would wither and die and would be ready to be burned, receiving no nourishment from the vine.

From Springfield we went to Chicago, there I found an uncle that I had not seen in thirty years. I stopped a few days with him and partook of his hospitality, and in return I gave him an offer of salvation on Gospel terms. He said he would consider on it and give me an answer on my return.

We emptied our purses at the depot, and wished the agent to pass us as far as he felt justified in doing, as we were heralds of salvation, alias, Mormon elders; he gave us tickets to Marshall, Michigan, deducting about half the regular fare. No accident occurred until our arrival at Marshall. We partook of the hospitality of the landlord, i.e. supper, lodging and breakfast free of cost.

In the morning we left Marshall on foot, the snow being about six inches deep and storming. It was hard traveling, but we reached Parma, about thirty miles, stayed with a relation over Sunday, gave our testimony and passed on. We traveled some two hundred miles through mud and mire, sometimes we could get shelter for the night, and occasionally a bowl of bread and milk.

We made it a rule to inquire for Saints and places to preach, but no sooner than we had informed them that we were ministers of the Gospel from Salt Lake, their doors were closed against us; we traveled hundreds of miles in Michigan, but obtained but one house to preach in. The fact is, Strang, the Beaver Island Mormon, as he styled himself, is sending his emissaries out to rob, steal, plunder, preaching another Gospel, but styling themselves Mormons; hence, the prejudice that exists in the minds of the people against the servants of God that are sent abroad by the authorities of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

We called at Kirtland, found a few that called themselves Saints, but very weak, many apostates who have mostly joined the rappers. We had a lengthy interview with Martin Harris. At first he was down on polygamy, but before we left he informed me that he never should say a word against it. He confessed that he had lost confidence in Joseph Smith; consequently, his mind became darkened, and he was left to himself; he tried the Shakers, but that would not do; then he tried Gladden Bishop, but no satisfaction; he had concluded he would wait until the Saints returned to Jackson County and then he would repair there. He gave us a history of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and his going to New York and presenting the characters to Professor Anthon, etc. He concluded before we left that "Brigham was governor," and that the authorities were there, and that he should go there as soon as he could get away.

We traveled together until we arrived at New York City, preaching by the way wherever an opportunity offered. From thence, Brother Rust went to Boston, and I went to Tom's River, New Jersey, found the Saints enjoying much of the spirit of God. They number nearly one hundred, and are calculating to emigrate next season. My labor has been in New Jersey and New York, with what success time will determine. I feel clear, and have obtained permission to return home, which I shall with joy, and not with grief. May God bless and sustain you, is my prayer, Amen. Yours as ever, Thomas Colburn.

JAMES MCKNIGHT'S ACCOUNT OF MARTIN HARRIS' TESTIMONY Source: James McKnight to Brother Cannon, 27 Feb 1862, in "Correspondence," Millennial Star 24 (19 April 1863):250-51. CORRESPONDENCE. America.

Cleveland, Ohio, February 27, 1862.

Dear Brother Cannon, - Your assurances of the progress of the work of the Lord in Europe are indeed gratifying. That the dark night of Zion's sorrow and mourning is about to be chased away by the brightness of her rising sun of righteousness, is now, to many, a fact most palpable. Her beauty and her glory cannot longer be obscured.

In contrast with the almost utter rejection of the heavenly message of peace by the people here, it is truly refreshing to contemplate the remarkable success of God's messengers among the inhabitants of Great Britain, as also among those of other European countries.

A singular feeling is now stealing over the minds of many in this country—a desire to inquire after and investigate "Mormonism:" whether from intrinsic love of truth, or with a hope to find shelter from the increasing fury of the storm, God knows. There are very many in the regions where I have been laboring who, when I first gave them the privilege of hearing and obeying the truth, turned away in holy abhorrence of the precious gift proffered to them; but now none are more eager to give audience—yea, to solicit information, than this same class. As events are now shaping, there is little likelihood of their being soon again tortured with the sound of "Mormonism." Was it not to this class that Jesus exclaimed—"O generation of vipers! who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?" But it is decreed that there shall come a famine, not for bread, but for hearing the word of God, and that they shall not find it; and if the day of such famine on this land is not at their doors, I have mistaken the signs of the times.

Amid the general gloom of despondency, in the crushing of hopes, the breaking of hearts, and the ruining of fortunes, the demolition of public and private credit and confidence, approaching the verge of universal bankruptcy, of all who stand upon the edge of the pit, to me it seems that the ease of those wretched apostates who go whining through this country about Brigham Young is most hopeless. Disregarded by man—the enemies of God and his servants, they may befittingly prove to all Saints the imperative duty of striving to do as they are told.

While at Kirtland, a few days since, Martin Harris, one of the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon, came to see me. If any wish ocular demonstration of the fact that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God, they need only look at Martin Harris in his present state, and then read the words given through the martyred Joseph concerning him. He is failing perceptibly. Of his property there is little or none left. He has now no home; his son, a worthless scapegrace, with whom he lived, being in prison, and the house deserted. Yet, as you have doubtless often heard, he has never failed to confirm his testimony of the truth of that Book. He says he is going to Utah as soon as the Lord will release him!

The news from "our mountain home" is cheering indeed. Having vainly and repeatedly petitioned for admission as a state prior to the dissolution of the union, and though having since that event given renewed and unlooked-for proofs of what had in years long past been shown beyond all controversy—that they were unflinching defenders of the constitution, yet still coldly spurned, as though menial vagrants, from the door of the union,—who or what shall interpose to prevent the people of Utah from assuming the right of self-government? Who more worthy to govern them than the man of their confidence and choice, President Brigham Young? Who else has shown himself so worthy of their confidence, or so capable of governing that people? Truly and justly did his honor Alfred Cumming, governor of Utah during Mr. Buchanan's administration declare "Brigham Young is my governor." ("His yoke shall be taken from off from thy neck, because of the anointing.") Heaven bless you in your labors. My kind regards to the brethren. Yours truly, James McKnight.

EDWARD STEVENSON DESCRIBES INCIDENTS IN LIFE OF MARTIN HARRIS

Source: Edward Stevenson to Editor of the Deseret News, in "One of the Three Witnesses," Millennial Star 44 (30 Jan 1882):78-79; (6 Feb 1882):86-87.

ONE OF THE THREE WITNESSES

Incidents in the Life of Martin Harris

[The following interesting account of the return of Martin Harris to the Church is taken from the Deseret News, and will doubtless be read with much pleasure by the Saints. Ed.]

Salt Lake City, November 30, 1881.

Editor Deseret News:

Having been interrogated recently regarding Martin Harris, the time of his arrival in this city, and other incidents of his life, and as at the present time newspaper reporters are interesting themselves regarding David Whitmer, the only surviving witness of the Book of Mormon, now living at Richmond, Ray County, Missouri, having resided there as long as Martin Harris did at Kirtland, Ohio, which has been since 1831, 50 years ago, and 39 years previous to his removal to Utah; for these reasons I feel prompted to offer a few facts relating to his removal from Ohio to Utah, his various testimonies, and incidents of personal observation of his life for the past 48 years.

While I was living in Michigan, then a territory, in 1833, near the town of Pontiac, Oakland County, Martin Harris came there, and in a meeting, where I was present, bore testimony of the appearance of an angel exhibiting the golden plates, and commanding him to bear a testimony of these things to all people whenever opportunity was afforded him to do so; and I can say that his testimony had great effect in that vicinity. Martin had a sister living in our neighborhood. About this time Oliver Cowdery, one of the other three witnesses also, in company with Joseph Smith the Prophet bore the same testimony, and further, Joseph the Prophet promised those who with honest hearts obeyed the Gospel should receive the Holy Ghost, and signs would follow them.

As a proof of their testimony, several of that branch of the church enjoyed various gifts; one, Elijah Fordham, who recently died in this territory, spoke in tongues, and as two French travellers were passing they heard him speaking and said to a boy outside the house where they were, that he was speaking in French, bearing testimony to the gospel, he having no knowledge of that language. Martin often bore his testimony while in that neighborhood.

In the year 1869 I was appointed on a mission to the United States. Having visited several of the eastern states, I called at Kirtland, Ohio, to see the first temple that was built by our people in this generation. While there, I again met Martin Harris, soon after coming out of the temple. He took from under his arm a copy of the Book of Mormon, the first edition, I believe, and bore a faithful testimony, just the same as that I had heard him bear 36 years previous. He said that it was his duty to continue to lift up his voice as he had been commanded to do in defense of the book that he held in his hand, and offered to prove from the Bible that just such a book was to come forth out of the ground, and that, too, in a day when there were no prophets on the earth, and that he was daily bearing testimony to many who visited the temple.

After patiently hearing him, I felt a degree of compassion for him, and in turn bore my testimony to him, as I had received it through obedience to the gospel, and that the work was still [going] onward, and the words of Isaiah, second chapter, were being fulfilled, that "the house of the Lord was in the tops of the mountains," and that under the leadership of President Brigham Young all nations were gathering to Zion to learn of God's ways and to walk in His paths, and that the worst wish that we had, was for him to also prepare himself and go up and be a partaker of the blessings of the House of the Lord. My testimony impressed him. A Mr. Bond, who held the keys of the temple, and who had been present at the dedication, and then a faithful Latter-day Saint, said to me he felt as though he would have been far better off if he had kept with the Latter-day Saints, and that if I would preach in the temple, he would open the doors to me. I promised to do so at some future time.

After my arrival in Utah in 1870, I was inspired to write to Martin Harris, and soon received a reply that the Spirit of God, for the first time prompted him to go to Utah. Several letters were afterward exchanged. President Brigham Young, having read the letter, through President George A. Smith, requested me to get a subscription and emigrate Martin to Utah, he subscribing twenty-five dollars for that purpose. Having raised the subscription to about $200.00, on the 19th of July, I took the railroad cars for Ohio, and on the 10th of August, filled my appointment, preaching twice in the Kirtland Temple, finding Martin Harris elated with his prospective journey.

A very singular incident occurred at this time. While Martin was visiting his friends, bidding them farewell, his pathway crossed a large pasture, in which he became bewildered. Dizzy, faint and staggering through the blackberry vines that are so abundant in that vicinity, his clothes torn, bloody and faint, he lay down under a tree to die. After a time he revived, called on the Lord, and finally at twelve o'clock midnight, found his friend, and in his fearful condition was cared for and soon regained his strength. He related this incident as a snare of the adversary to hinder him from going to Salt Lake City. Although in his 88th year he possessed remarkable vigor and health, having recently worked in the garden, and dug potatoes by the day for some of his neighbors.

After visiting New York and calling to visit the sacred spot from where the plates were taken, upon which the characters of the Book of Mormon were engraven, I found there an aged gentleman, 74 years old, who knew Martin Harris, and said that he was known in that neighborhood as an honest farmer, having owned a good farm three miles from that place. He further said, he well remembered the time when the Mormons used to gather at Mormon Hill, as he termed it, where it was said the plates came from.

On the 21st of August [1870], Martin was with me in Chicago, and at the American Hotel bore testimony to a large number of people, of the visitation of the angel, etc. The following is from the Iowa State Register, Des Moines, August 26, 1870:

"Elder Stevenson, of Salt Lake, together with Martin Harris, one of the three witnesses of the Mormon Bible, called at our sanctum yesterday. Mr. Harris is now in his 88th year, hale and hearty, with many interesting things to relate in reference to the finding of the tablets of the testament. We shall have occasion to mention some of these in another issue."

While in Des Moines, the capitol of Iowa, Brother Harris had opportunity of bearing testimony to many, and at a special meeting held in a branch of our Church, brother James M. Ballinger, president, Brother Harris bore testimony as to viewing the plates, the angel's visit, and visiting Professor Anthon, with characters from the plates, who after giving him a certificate, etc., as to the correctness of the characters, asked him to fetch the plates for him to see. Martin said that they were sealed, and that an angel had forbidden them to be exhibited. Mr. Anthon then called for the certificate, tore it up and consigned it to the waste basket, saying that angels did not visit the earth in our day, etc.

On the following day, I baptized a sister to President Ballinger, in the Des Moines River. The branch here contributed a new suit of clothes to Brother Harris for which he felt to bless them. On the 29th of August [1870] we landed in Ogden, and the Ogden Junction said:

"Martin Harris arrived, (with Elder Edward Stevenson) whose name is known almost throughout the world as one of the witnesses of the Book of Mormon. They left Kirtland on the 19th of August."

August 31st [1870], the Salt Lake Herald said:

"Martin Harris, one of the three witnesses of the Book of Mormon, arrived in Salt Lake City last night, accompanied by Elder Edward Stevenson. Two members of the Des Moines Branch of the Church accompanied them to our city."

The Deseret News of August 31, 1870, in over one column, notices the arrival of Martin Harris last evening, at 7:30, "who is in his 88th year. He is remarkably vigorous for one of his years, his memory being very good, and his sight, though his eyes appear to have failed, being so acute that he can see to pick a pin off the ground . . . He has never failed to bear testimony to the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon. He says it is not a matter of belief on his part, but of knowledge. He with the other two witnesses declared, and their testimony has accompanied every copy of the book, that an angel of God came down from heaven, and he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon. This declaration he has not varied from in 41 years . . . We are glad to see Martin Harris once more in the midst of the Saints."

The Salt Lake Herald, September 3, [1870] said:

"We had a call yesterday morning from Elder Edward Stevenson, who introduced Martin Harris, one of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon. Mr. Harris is now 88 years of age, and is remarkably lively and energetic for his years. He holds firmly to the testimony he has borne for over forty years, that an angel appeared before him and the other witnesses, and showed them the plates upon which the characters of the Book of Mormon were inscribed. After living many years separated from the body of the Church, he has come to spend the evening of life among the believers in that book to which he is so prominent a witness. Mr. Harris, who has a number of relatives in the territory, came from the east under the care of Elder Edward Stevenson."

Monday Evening News, September 5, 1870, contains the following:

"SABBATH MEETINGS. The congregation in the morning was addressed by Elder Edward Stevenson, Martin Harris and President George A. Smith. In the afternoon the time was occupied by Elder John Taylor, the house was crowded to overflowing."

Martin Harris related an incident that occurred during the time that he wrote that portion of the translation of the Book of Mormon which he was favored to write direct from the mouth of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He said that the Prophet possessed a seerstone, by which he was enabled to translate as well as from the Urim and Thummim, and for convenience he then used the seerstone. Martin explained the translation as follows: By aid of the seerstone, sentences would appear and were read by the Prophet and written by Martin, and when finished he would say, "Written," and if correctly written, that sentence would disappear and another appear in its place, but if not written correctly it remained until corrected, so that the translation was just as it was engraven on the plates, precisely in the language then used. Martin said, after continued translation they would become weary, and would go down to the river and exercise by throwing stones out on the river, etc. While so doing on one occasion, Martin found a stone very much resembling the one used for translation, and on resuming their labor of translation, Martin put in place the stone that he had found. He said that the Prophet remained silent, unusually and intently gazing in darkness, no traces of the usual sentences appearing. Much surprised, Joseph exclaimed, "Martin! What is the matter? All is as dark as Egypt!" Martin's countenance betrayed him, and the Prophet asked Martin why he had done so. Martin said, "to stop the mouths of fools," who had told him that the Prophet had learned those sentences and was merely repeating them, etc.

Martin said further that the seerstone differed in appearance entirely from the Urim and Thummim that was obtained with the plates, which were two clear stones set in two rims, very much resembling spectacles, only they were larger. Martin said there were not many pages [116] translated while he wrote, after which Oliver Cowdery and others did the writing.

Brother Harris was taught the necessity of being rebaptized. He said that was new doctrine to him. Revelation, second chapter, was explained, that those who had lost their first love and had fallen into evils and snares, were called on to "repent and do their first works," and that rebaptism was a part of the Gospel. He claimed that he had not been cut off from the Church, but said if that was required of him it would be manifested to him by the Spirit. Soon after his arrival in Utah, he applied for baptism, saying that the Spirit had made known to him that it was his duty to renew his covenant before the Lord.

He was also taught a principle that was new to him—baptism for the dead, as taught and practiced by the ancient Saints, and especially taught by Paul the Apostle in the 15th chapter of 1st Corinthians: "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead." After consideration he came and said it had been made known to him that baptism for the dead was a correct principle, for he had seen his father in vision at the foot of a ladder, and he was above, and had to go down and help him up. In a short time the baptismal font was prepared, and by his request I baptized him, and President George A. Smith, and Apostles John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Joseph F. Smith and Orson Pratt confirmed him by the laying on of hands, Orson Pratt being mouth. As soon as he was confirmed he returned to the font and was baptized for several of his dead friends—fathers, grandfathers, etc. Then his sister also was baptized for the female relatives, and they were confirmed for and in behalf of those who they were baptized for, by the same brethren, Joseph F. Smith being mouth. It was a time of rejoicing for all who were present.

Brother Martin visited many of the wards, continuing to bear his testimony both of what he had beheld with his own eyes, and verily knew to be true. He publicly said that many years ago, in Ohio, a number of persons combined and sought to get Martin to drink wine for the purpose of crossing him in his testimony. At the conclusion they asked him if he really believed the testimony that he had signed in the Book of Mormon to be true? He replied no, he did not believe it, but, much to their surprise, he said he knew it to be true!

Soon after receiving his blessings in the house of the Lord, he went to Smithfield, Cache Valley, and lived with his son until he left this mortal life. Just before he breathed his last he sat up in his bed holding the Book of Mormon in his hand, and bore his last testimony to those who were present. Edward Stevenson.

Source: Edward Stevenson, "The Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon," Millennial Star 48 (21 Jun 1886):389-91.

The economy of Martin Harris was particularly illustrated on the occasion of our visit to the Fifteenth Ward of Salt Lake City. The meeting was crowded, as usual, with those anxious to see him, and to hear his constant, undeviating testimony. Sister M. H. Kimball, of the Fifteenth Ward, eminent in the Relief Societies, on their behalf offered to have a new set of artificial teeth made for Brother Harris, to which he replied, "No, sisters, I thank you for your kindness, but I shall not live long. Take the money and give it to the poor."

This calls to my mind a little incident or two that he related to me while we were on our journey from Ohio to Utah. He said that Joseph Smith, the Prophet, was very poor, and had to work by the day for his support, and that he (Harris) often gave him work on his farm, and they had hoed corn together many a day, Brother Harris paying him fifty cents per day. Joseph, he said, was good to work and jovial and they often wrestled together in sport, but the Prophet was devoted and attentive to his prayers. Brother Harris gave Joseph $50.00 on one occasion to help translate the Book of Mormon. This action on the part of Martin Harris so displeased his wife that she threatened to leave him. Martin said that he knew this to be the work of God, and that he should keep the commandments of the Lord, whatever the results might be. His wife, subsequently, partially separated from him, which he patiently endured for the Gospel's sake.

He also stated that the Prophet translated a portion of the Book of Mormon with a seerstone in his possession. The stone was placed in a hat that was used for that purpose, and with the aid of this seerstone the Prophet would read sentence by sentence as Martin wrote, and if he made any mistake the sentence would remain before the Prophet until corrected, when another sentence would appear. When they became weary, as it was confining work to translate from the plates of gold, they would go down to the river and throw stones into the water for exercise. Martin on one occasion picked up a stone resembling the one with which they were translating, and on resuming their work, Martin placed the false stone in the hat. He said that the Prophet looked quietly for a long time, when he raised his head and said: "Martin, what on earth is the matter, all is dark as Egypt." Martin smiled and the seer discovered that the wrong stone was placed in the hat. When he asked Martin why he had done so he replied, to stop the mouths of fools who had declared that the Prophet knew by heart all that he told him to write, and did not see by the seerstone; when the true stone was placed in the hat, the translation was resumed, as usual.

At an evening visit of some of my friends at my residence in Salt Lake City, to see and hear Brother Harris relate his experience (which always delighted him), Brother James T. Woods, who is now present while I am writing this article, reminds me that himself and G. D. Keaton were present on that occasion, and asked him to explain the manner in which the plates containing the characters of the Book of Mormon were exhibited to the witnesses.

Brother Harris said that the angel stood on the opposite side of the table on which were the plates, the interpreters, etc., and took the plates in his hands and turned them over. To more fully illustrate this to them, Brother Martin took up a book and turned the leaves over one by one. The angel declared that the Book of Mormon was correctly translated by the power of God and not of man, and that it contained the fullness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ to the Nephites, who were a branch of the lost sheep of the House of Israel, and had come from the land of Jerusalem to America. The witnesses were required to bear their testimony of these things, and of this open vision to all people and Harris testified not only to those present but to all the world, that these things were true, and before God whom he expected to meet in the day of judgment, he lied not. Brother Woods testifies that he was present at the time above mentioned, and to him it was marvelous to see the zeal that was manifested, and to him it was marvelous to see the zeal that was manifested by Martin Harris, and the spirit of the Lord that accompanied his words.

That Martin Harris was very zealous, somewhat enthusiastic, and what some would term egotistical, is no doubt the case; but the Lord has shown this generation that He can carry on His work independently of all men, only as they live closely and humbly before Him. I will give one or two instances of Martin's enthusiasm.

When President George A. Smith and others of us were being driven by John Henry Smith in a carriage to take a bath in the warm springs, near Salt Lake City, while passing over a high hill, President Smith directed the curtains of the carriage to be raised, giving a magnificent view of the city below. The immense tabernacle and the temple—and in fact the beautiful city in full view—looked wonderful to Brother Harris, who seemed wrapped in admiration and exclaimed, "Who would have thought that the Book of Mormon would have done all this!" On one occasion while celebrating a baptism, several persons being in attendance, Brother Harris with joyful feelings said, "Just see how the Book of Mormon is spreading." Having been absent so long from the body of the Church and considering his great age, much charity was necessary to be exercised in his behalf. His abiding testimony, and his assistance with his property to publish the Book of Mormon, have earned a name for him that will endure while time shall last. Soon after he had received his endowments and performed some work for his dead, he retired to live with his son, Martin Harris, at Smithfield in Cache Valley, where he was comfortably cared for in his declining old age.

On the afternoon of his death he was bolstered up in his bed, where, with the Book of Mormon in his hand, he bore his last testimony to those who were present. Brother Harris was over ninety years of age at the time of his death, and had always enjoyed good health. Bishop Rigby, who preached his funeral sermon, placed the Book of Mormon on his breast, while he lay in his coffin, and it was buried with him. Edward Stevenson.

Source: Edward Stevenson, "The Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon," Millennial Star 48 (5 Jul 1886):421-22.

Before Oliver Cowdery's demise, he left with David Whitmer the manuscript from which the Book of Mormon was printed, or at least, it is claimed to be the same; but this is in dispute, as it is claimed that there were two manuscripts, one being a copy of the other, and that the original one was deposited by the Prophet in the corner stone of the Nauvoo House, at Nauvoo. Be this as it may, it would be hard to convince David Whitmer of it, and would make very little difference, as we have the substance in the book itself, while the difference in either of them would merely be the shadow. There was also a transcript of a portion of the characters as found on the golden plates taken or copied on a small piece of paper, perhaps about six or seven inches by four or five. Seven or eight lines of them were very carefully transmitted to this paper as the words of this book, which were taken to Professor Charles Anthon, of New York, Martin Harris being the bearer of them. Oliver Cowdery also left this relic with David Whitmer.

I had the pleasure of seeing and handling this choice piece of paper last February, and was very much gratified at seeing the singular characters of curious workmanship placed regularly in lines, in system and order. Martin Harris stated to me that the professor pronounced them correct Egyptian characters, but somewhat changed, and gave him a certificate accordingly; but after asking him (Harris) regarding the book of plates, Professor Anthon desired Mr. Harris to bring the plates or book to him. The reply was that they were sealed and he could not do so. Then Mr. Anthon replied that he could not read a sealed book. Upon inquiry how they came by them, Martin replied that an angel from heaven delivered them to the Prophet Joseph Smith. At this juncture of the conversation, the professor asked Brother Harris to let him see the certificate that he had given him. As soon as Brother Harris handed him the paper, Mr. Anthon tore it up, saying there were no angels who visited men in this enlightened day and age of the world. Martin Harris' statement having been published, was disputed by some, and a Mr. E. D. Howe of Painesville, Ohio, addressed a letter of inquiry to Professor Anthon, and obtained the following reply:

"Dear Sir,—I received your letter of the 9th, and lose no time in making a reply . . . Some years ago a plain, apparently simple-hearted farmer called on me with a note from Dr. Mitchel, requesting me to decipher, if possible, a paper which the former would hand me . . . He gave me the following account: 'A gold book, consisting of a number of plates . . . was dug up in the northern part of the State of New York,'" etc. etc.

In the 29th chapter, and 11th to 14th verses, is found an excellent illustration of the above as viewed in vision by the Prophet Isaiah: "And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned (Professor Anthon), saying, read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed; and the book (not the words or transcript) is delivered to him that is not learned, (Joseph Smith), saying, read this, I pray thee, and he saith, I am not learned." In the following verses, the Lord said He would proceed to do "a marvelous work and a wonder," and did He not verily do so? Edward Stevenson.

Source: Edward Stevenson, "The Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon," Millennial Star 48 (7 Jun 1886):367-68.

[In 1886 Edward Stevenson described an incident that occurred while he was traveling to Utah with Martin Harris:]

While on our journey [to Utah], and more particularly at the Des Moines River, at the baptism of the woman spoken of, I took occasion to teach Brother Martin the necessity of his being rebaptized. At first he did not seem to agree with the idea, but I referred him to the scriptural words, "Repent and do the first works having lost the first love," etc. Finally, he said if it was right, the Lord would manifest it to him by His spirit, and he did do so, for Martin, soon after his arrival in Salt Lake City, came to my house and said the spirit of the Lord had made it manifest to him, not only for himself personally, but also that he should be baptized for his dead, for he had seen his father seeking his aid. He saw his father at the foot of a ladder, striving to get up to him, and he went down to him taking him by the hand and helped him up. The baptismal font was prepared, and by arrangement I led Martin Harris down into the water and rebaptized him. Five of the apostles were present, viz., John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Orson Pratt, George A. Smith, and Joseph F. Smith, also J. D. T. McCallister, and others . . . . The occasion was one which interested all present, and reminded us of Christ's parable of the lost sheep . . . .

TESTIMONY OF MARTIN HARRIS RECORDED IN IOWA NEWSPAPER, 1870 Source: Iowa State Register (Des Moines), 16 Aug 1870, in Backman, Eyewitness Accounts.

[While Martin Harris was traveling from Kirtland, Ohio, to Salt Lake City, Utah, in 1870 with Edward Stevenson, he was interviewed by a non-Mormon reporter. Although this testimony which was printed by a Sunday morning edition of the Iowa State Register is similar to many other statements made by this witness, it is the only known statement by one of the eleven witnesses in which an estimate is given of the weight of the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated.]

A witness to the Book of Mormon.—The main facts, or fiction, as the case may be, relative to the discovery of the golden plates from which was translated the present, Book of Mormon, are doubtless as familiar to many of our readers as to ourselves. None of us can claim to have been an eye witness, by those who claimed to have been there, to have seen and handled the tablets of gold, and afterwards, under the divine commission, to have assisted in the translation of the mystic characters inscribed upon them.

A few days since we acknowledged a call at our sanctum, from Martin Harris, who was on his way from Ohio to take up his residence at Salt Lake City, to spend the remainder of his days with the "chosen people." Mr. Harris was now in his 88th year, though still quite vigorous and sprightly, and he is Mormon, soul and body. He, as he claims, and as Mormons claim, together with two others, Oliver Cowdery deceased, and David Whitmer, now an apostate living in Missouri, were the divinely appointed witnesses to the Book of Mormon. The old gentleman evidently loves to relate the incidents with which he was personally connected, and he does it with wonderful enthusiasm.

In September, 1828, as the story goes, Joseph Smith, directed by an angel, proceeded to a spot about 4 miles from Palmyra, New York, and upon the point of a hill, extending northward, dug up a very solid stone chest within which were the tablets of gold, inscribed with the characters which no man could read. Joseph Smith was the first to handle the tablets, and Martin Harris, one of the appointed witnesses, the second. Mr. Harris describes the plates as being of thin leaves of gold, measuring seven by eight inches, and weighing altogether, from forty to sixty lbs. There was also found in the chest, the Urim and Thummim, by means of which the writing upon the plates was translated, but not until after the most learned men had exhausted their knowledge of letters in the vain effort to decipher the characters.

It had been revealed to Joseph Smith that the writing upon the tablets contained a history of the aborigines of this country down to the time of Columbus' discovery, and after, all human means had failed to secure a translation, Smith was commissioned to undertake the task. By means of the Urim and Thummim "a pair of large spectacles," as Mr. Harris claims to have written, of the translations as they were given by Smith, "116 solid pages of cap." The remainder was written by others.

Soon after the finding of these plates of gold, Mr. Harris sold his farm, of which he owned a large one, and consecrated himself to the new religion, to which he has adhered himself tenaciously throughout a long life, and still adheres to its tenets and advocates its genuineness with all the earnestness of an enthusiast. He believes in visitation of angels in bodily form, he has seen and conversed with them, as he thinks and is satisfied.

The old gentleman related some incidents, which, could one feel that they were verities, would be interesting, but as they seem largely imaginative they lose interest.

REPORTS BY DESERET NEWS OF MARTIN HARRIS' TESTIMONY, 1870 Source: Edward Stevenson letter to the editor, Deseret News 19 Aug 1870, p. 3.

Martin Harris, who still lives here, is tolerably well, and has a great desire to see Utah, and his children that live there; and although the old gentleman is in the 88th year of his age, he still bears a faithful testimony to the authenticity of the Book of Mormon, being one of the three original witnesses. He says he saw the plates, handled them and saw the angel that visited Joseph Smith, more than 40 years ago. I have made arrangements to emigrate him to Utah, according to his desire, and will start in about two weeks.

Source: "Local and Other Matters, Deseret News, 30 Aug 1870, p. 3.

August 30, (1870)—Arrived.—By a telegram, per Deseret Telegraph Line, received at half-past three o'clock this afternoon, we learn that Martin harris, accompanied by Elder E. Stevenson of this city, arrived at Ogden by the 3 o'clock train, he comes to this city tomorrow morning.

Source: "Martin Harris, One of the Witnesses of the Book of Mormon, Deseret News, 31 Aug 1870, p. 3.

Considerable interest has been felt by our people in the arrival in this city of Martin Harris, one of the three witnesses of the Book of Mormon. He arrived here at 7:30 p.m. yesterday, in the compnay of Elder Edward Stevenson, who left this city on the 19th of last July for the purpose of bringing him out from Kirtland, Ohio, where he has been living since the Saints first moved there—1831—thirty-nine years ago. Bro. Stevenson has had a strong desire to have Martin Harris brought here. But he himself has thought for years that his mission was in Kirtland, he feeling that the Lord required him to stay there and bear testimony to the Book of Mormon and the first principles, which he has been earnest in doing, and he has felt reluctant to leave. But when Bro. Stevenson corresponded with him about coming out to the Valley, he replied that the spirit testified to him that he should come here, and in every letter that he afterwards received from him he expressed a still stronger desire to come. Bro. Stevenson made a collection, and after raising sufficient means, went to Kirtland and brought him here.

Martin Harris is in his 88th year. He is remarkably vigorous for one of his years, and still retains the use of his faculties, his memory being very good, and his sight, though his eyes appear to have failed, being so acute that he can see to pick a pin off the ground. He has experienced many changes and vicissitudes; but one point, so far as we have heard, he has never changed:—he has never failed to bear testimony to the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon. He says it is not a matter of belief on his part, but of knowledge. He with the other two witnesses declared, and their testimony has accompanied every copy of the book, that an angel of God came down from heaven, and brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings thereon.' This declaration he has not varied from in forty-one years; and it is a remarkable fact that, thought away from the Church, and not maintaining their connection with the Prophet Joseph Smith, not one of the three witnesses has ever failed, so far as known, to bear testimony to the truth of their united declaration contained in the preface of the Book of Mormon!

We are glad to see Martin Harris once more in the midst of the Saints. He feels that this people are led by God, that they are a happy and a blessed people and have the appearance of enjoying God's favor. They are doing the very work which the Book of Mormon said should be done, and are the only people, who as a people, believe in that Book.

The history of this veteran member of the Mormon church would no doubt be as interesting, if written, as his course, since the severance of his connection with the Prophet Joseph Smith at the early rise of the church has been singular. One of the original witnesses of the Book of Mormon, he saw the angel, and handled the plates from which that book was translated. In relation to this, his testimony has never wavered, yet he, for some cause or other, has kept himself aloof from the church for many years, and has taken no part in carrying on the great work, of which he, in connection with Joseph and others, laid the foundation. No greater proof could be given, than the history and course of this man, that the work of God is not dependent upon any man, however great, talented, illustrious or favored he may be. Martin Harris having seen that which few in the flesh are favored to behold, and having received a testimony of the divinity of this work, and of the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon that it was utterly impossible to destroy, one might have supposed, viewing things from a merely human standpoint, that the progress and prosperity of this work would have depended to some considerable extent on his co-operation, and that, lacking that, it would have been retarded. But such is not the case, and in this fact human pride, vanity and talent may learn a salutary lesson if it will.

Mr. Harris saw fit to withdraw himself from the cause, but its course, owing to the workings of Divinity through faithful agents, has been onward to a most remarkable degree.

STATEMENTS OF MARTIN HARRIS TO H. B. EMERSON, 1870-71 Source: Martin Harris to H. B. Emerson, in The True Latter-day Saints' Herald 22 (15 Oct 1875):630.

Sr. H. B. Emerson, of New Richmond, Ohio, wrote to Martin Harris, asking certain questions; the replies to the questions we are permitted to publish, by the kindness of Sr. Emerson. It will be seen that the writer supposed his questioner to be a man.

Smithfield, Utah November 23d, 1870

Mr. Emerson, Sir:—I received your favor. In reply I will say concerning the plates, I do say that the angel did show to me the plates containing the Book of Mormon. Further, the translation that I carried to Professor Anthon was copied from these same plates; also, that the professor did testify to it being a correct translation. I do firmly believe and do know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God; for without I know he could not have had that gift; neither could he have translated the same. I can give if you require it one hundred witnesses to the proof of the Book of Mormon. I defy any man to show to me any passage of scripture that I am not posted on or familiar with. I will answer any questions you feel like asking to the best of my knowledge, if you can rely on my testimony of the same. In conclusion, I can say that I arrived at Utah safe, in good health and spirits, considering the long journey. I am quite well at present, and have been, generally speaking, since I arrived.

With many respects I remain your humble friend, Martin Harris.

Smithfield, Cache County, Utah January, 1871.

To H. Emerson, dear sir:—Your second letter, dated December 1870, came duly to hand. I am truly glad to see a spirit of inquiry manifested therein. I reply by a borrowed hand, as my sight has failed me too much to write myself. Your questions: Question 1, "Did you go to England to lecture against 'Mormonism?'"

Answer. I answer emphatically, No, I did not;—no man ever heard me in any way deny the truth of the Book of Mormon, the administration of the angel that showed me the plates; nor the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, under the administration of Joseph Smith, Junior, the prophet whom the Lord raised up for that purpose, in these the latter days, that he may show forth his power and glory. The Lord has shown me these things by his Spirit—by the administration of holy angels—and confirmed the same with signs following, step by step, as the work has progressed, for the space of fifty-three years.

The Lord showed me there was no true church upon the face of the earth, none built upon the foundation, designated by the Savior, "The rock of revelation," as declared to Peter. See Matt. 16:16, 17, 18 verses. He also showed me that an angel should come and restore the holy priesthood again to the earth, and commission his servants again with the holy gospel to preach to them that dwell on the earth. See Rev. 14:6, 7 verses—He further showed me that the time was nigh when he would "set his hand again the second time to restore the kingdom to Israel," when he would gather the outcasts of Israel and the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth," "when he would bring the record of Joseph which was in the hand of Ephraim, and join with the record of Judah, when the two records should become one in the hand of the Lord to accomplish his great work of the last days." See Ex. 36 and 37 chapters; also Isa. 29 chapter; also from the 58 chapter to the end of the book; also Ps. 50.

Question 2. What became of the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated?

Answer. They were returned to the angel Moroni, from whom they were received to be brought forth again in the due time of the Lord; for they contain many things pertaining to the gathering of Israel, which gathering will take place in this generation, and shall be testified of among all nations according to the old prophets; as the Lord will set his ensign to the people, and gather the outcasts of Israel:—See Isa. 11 chapter.

Now, dear sir, examine these scriptures carefully, and should there still be any ambiguity relative to this great work of the last days, write again and we will endeavor to enlighten you on any point relative to this doctrine.

I am, very respectfully, Martin Harris, Senior
