Q:Are there such things as ghosts and haunted houses?

Many people have heard the expression “I A: The Bible Says... No . People do not remain on earth see dead people” from the horror film The

Sixth Sense. In fact, lots of movies and TV

shows feature haunted houses or sightings beyond death or return to “haunt” of supposed ghosts, as well as dramas places or people. In Luke 16:19–31, about mediums who claim to actually see Jesus describes a rich man who has and hear dead people (and even pets!). died and is suffering in hades; he asks Stories about ghosts have been popular for a person to return from the dead entertainment around campfires for to warn his brothers who are still centuries. But should we believe them? alive, but he is forbidden to do so.

It’s reasonable to conclude in

1 Samuel 28 that God literally brings

the prophet Samuel back from

the dead, because the medium was

surprised by what she saw; this was a

special appearance produced by God

in order to pronounce judgment, and

doesn’t justify efforts to contact the

dead. Hebrews 9:27 states, "Just as

man is destined to die once, and after

that to face judgment.”

©Stephan Zabel

Many high-profile mediums are popular and convincing. John Edward was raised Roman Catholic, although he has stated that he knows his church’s teachings forbid what he does. Edward also believes in reincarnation and

occult meditation, and he admits to having spirit guides. Although Sylvia Browne writes books about topics like prayer and Jesus, she has admitted that she’s not a Christian; she calls herself a “Gnostic Christian” and states in one book that Jesus didn’t die on the cross. Browne admits that a spirit guide named “Francine” gives her the information from “the other side” (a term mediums use to describe the realm of the dead).

Most mediums deny the essential teachings of the Christian faith and have studied or been exposed to the occult, and they usually offer advice and information contrary to

A God’s Word. Mediums may be in contact with fallen angels (demons) who provide them with information that seems to confirm their claims.

You Should Also Know... alleged hauntings and ghost sightings:

There’s no conclusive evidence to 1) Hoaxes

prove that dead people can haunt 2) Human imagination

houses, or that human spirits linger on 3) Natural causes

earth after physical death. 4) Demonic deception

There are four factors that explain

© 2009 Rose This free eChart is taken from the book 10 Q&A on Magic, Spells & Divination (Product © 2012 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, Publishing Inc. This free Bible e-Chart is taken from the pamphlet, 10 Q & A on Magic, Spells & Divination, which Click here to receive FREE Rose

Code 1617X). This downloadable, reproducible pamphlet is an excellent teaching tool that

www.rose-publishing.com also answers questions on Ouija® Boards, astrology, horoscopes, witches, casting spells, and but do not post on the internet or send via email.Your

crystals from a biblical perspective. It gives hope in a much bigger “power,” the Lord God Almighty Bible e-Charts via email.

covers a breadth of topics such as white magick, casting spells, witches, psychics, and much friends may sign up for Free Rose Bible eCharts &

more. who is the only one who knows our future and guides our steps. (ISBN 9781596361539) Rose-Publishing.com/echarts

Save $5 on your $25 order. Enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com. Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

10 Q&A on Angels

“Angels are fascinating beings! They are God’s creatures

given by him for our help. Learn about what the Bible

says (and doesn’t say) about these powerful servants of

God. Author Robert M. Bowman (background: Christian

Research Institute, Watchman Fellowship, lecturer at

Biola University) sorts through myths and misinformation

to answer common questions about angels.

Pamphlet ............ 9781596362833 ...........$3.99

Also available as a PDF.

Christianity, Cults & the Occult

This glossy, fold-out chart contrasts the origins and key

beliefs of Christianity with 11 movements with a wide

range of occult connections. This bestselling pamphlet

takes a focused look at Freemasonry, Kabbalah Centre,

Wicca, Satanism, Spiritualism, Santería, Voodoo,

Theosophy, Anthroposophy, Rosicrucianism (AMORC),

Astrology and Horoscopes and Eckankar.

Pamphlet ............ 9781596360532 ...........$3.99

Also available as a PDF.

10 Q&A on Magic, Spells & Divination

Feasts of the Bible

What does the Bible teach about various forms of the occult like magic

God commanded Israel to observe His feasts and

and spells? The bestselling 10 Q & A on Magic, Spells & Divination

holy days as memorials to the great things that He

downloadable, reproducible pamphlet explains the attraction of the occult

had done. Jesus observed each of the holy days

in today’s society and addresses 10 popular questions with the truth of

throughout his life. Learn about Passover, Feast of

God’s Word. Covers a breadth of topics such as white magick, casting

Weeks, Rosh HaShanah, and more. See how these

spells, witches, psychics, and explains the contemporary rise of occult

special days point to Jesus as the promised Messiah.

elements in the media and in games, and the lure of the occult.

Pamphlet ............ 9781890947583 ...........$3.99

PDF Download ..............Product Code: 1617X .............$3.99

Also available as a PDF, eBook, DVD Study, Wall Chart,

Quantity discounts available.

and PowerPoint®.

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible eCharts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
