Ezra Taft Benson, Come unto Christ ( 1983)

Preface

When I was young, I belonged to the Whitney Ward in Whitney, Idaho. The ward was not large. It had approximately three hundred members, most of whom were faithful Church members. I recall, as a young boy, learning the gospel from the older members who had been "through the fire." I can still see their intent faces and hear their fervent testimonies, which were a great source of strength to me.

The members of that ward were doing what faithful Saints in all ages have done; to use the apostle Peter's phrase, they were "ready always to give . . . a reason of the hope" that was in them. (1 Peter 3:15.)

Today some question the divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ. Others who profess to follow Him claim unwittingly that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a non-Christian organization since we do not agree in all points of doctrine with historical, traditional Christianity.

I therefore deem it expedient to declare my conviction and belief about the Lord Jesus Christ or, like those who have preceded me, to give reason for the hope that is in me.

I offer at least five fundamental reasons to demonstrate why members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are Christian in every sense of the word.

First: We believe that Jesus Christ is divine. We do not qualify the term divinity. We believe Jesus Christ to be God's Only Begotten Son in the flesh. We believe He is, as the name implies, the anointed One—the Promised Messiah.

The marks of His divinity are explained in chapter one, "What Think We of Christ."

Second: We believe the teachings of Jesus. We accept His admonitions and instructions as being binding on the entire human family. Indeed, we affirm that one cannot enter the kingdom of heaven without compliance to the laws and ordinances prescribed by Him, the great Lawgiver.

These teachings are discussed in chapters two through nine.

Third: We believe that Jesus Christ has restored His church on earth today. This church bears all the hallmarks of the original church—apostolic authority, ordinances, and gifts of the Holy Spirit. This restoration of authority and power was necessitated by a universal apostasy that removed the apostolic power from His original church. Indeed, to His own generation, Jesus prophesied, "The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof." (Matthew 21:43.)

Chapters ten and eleven explain the restoration of His church and its prophesied destiny.

Fourth: After the restoration of His church in modern times, Jesus Christ named His church. With impeccable logic, He inquired of a former generation, "How be it my church save it be called in my name? . . . if it be called in the name of a man then it be the church of a man." (Book of Mormon, 3 Nephi 27:8.) Thus by revelation in our day, He named His church—even "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." (See Doctrine and Covenants 115:4.) Since we accept His church as the kingdom of God on earth, we are under obligation, as His disciples, to preach His gospel to all the world and to emulate the standards of His teachings to all men.

Chapters twelve and thirteen discuss some of the expectations of members of His church.

Fifth: We believe that Jesus Christ will come again as our resurrected Lord and Master to reign as King of kings and Lord of lords. Then He will cleanse the earth and establish His millennial reign on earth.

Our hope in these future events is discussed in chapters fourteen and fifteen.

Last: I offer as a conclusion to this volume (chapter sixteen) my own testimony as one of His appointed special witnesses in this day.

I urge all to do as the title of this book invites—come unto Christ. Yes, "come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness; . . . and love God with all your might, mind and strength. Then "is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ." (Book of Mormon, Moroni 10:32.)

Come unto Christ, because "he inviteth . . . all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; . . . all are alike unto [Him]." (Book of Mormon, 2 Nephi 26:33.)

The author wishes to make clear that this is not a Church publication, and the opinions and views expressed by him in this publication are those for which he alone is responsible.
