Ezra Taft Benson, Come unto Christ ( 1983)

Chapter One

What Think We of Christ?

There is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. (Acts 4:12)

The apostle Matthew gives an account of Jesus responding to the Sadducees, who claimed there was no resurrection. Jesus silenced them with His answer. Hearing that the Sadducees had been subdued, the Pharisees tempted Jesus with a question from one of their own: "Master, which is the great commandment in the law?"

Jesus replied, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets."

Then Jesus turned to the Pharisees and questioned them: "What think ye of Christ? whose son is he?" (Matthew 22:36-42.)

Several years ago, a number of prominent theologians were asked the question, What do you think of Jesus? Their replies startled many professed Christians.

One asserted that a "true Christian" must reject the resurrection. Another admitted that New Testament scholars were so divided on the question that one cannot say anything certain about the historical Jesus. Another scholar and teacher of Jesuit priests explained, "It is difficult to say in our age what the divinity of Jesus can mean. We are groping now for a way to express it—we just don't know." ("Easter 1966—A Quest for the True Jesus," Newsweek, April 11, 1966, p. 72.)

In a public opinion poll conducted by George Gallup, Jr., seven in ten adult American respondents said they believed in the divinity of Christ. But 90 percent of these said that Jesus is divine only in the sense that He embodies the best that is in all men. (Church News, October 23, 1983.)

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints consents to no such ambiguity in relation to our position regarding Jesus Christ.

The following marks of His divinity are fundamental truths about our Lord that we believe must be accepted if we truly consider ourselves His disciples.

Jesus Is Divine Because of His Divine Birth

The most fundamental doctrine of true Christianity is the divine birth of the child Jesus. This doctrine is not generally comprehended by the world. The paternity of Jesus Christ is one of the "mysteries of godliness" comprehended only by the spiritually-minded.

The apostle Matthew recorded: "Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost." (Matthew 1:18.)

Luke rendered a plainer meaning to the divine conception. He quoted the angel Gabriel's words to Mary: "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy [being] which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God." (Luke 1:35; italics added.)

Some six hundred years before Jesus was born, an ancient prophet had a vision. He saw Mary and described her as "a virgin, most beautiful and fair above all other virgins." He then saw her "carried away in the Spirit . . . for the space of a time." When she returned, she was "bearing a child in her arms . . . even the Son of the Eternal Father." (Book of Mormon, 1 Nephi 11:15, 19-21.)

Thus the testimonies of appointed witnesses leave no question as to the paternity of Jesus Christ. God was the Father of Jesus' mortal tabernacle, and Mary, a mortal woman, was His mother. He is therefore the only person born who rightfully deserves the title "the Only Begotten Son of God."

From the time of Christ's heaven-heralded birth, heresies have crept into Christianity intended to dilute or undermine the pure doctrines of the gospel. These heresies, by and large, are sponsored by the philosophies of men and, in many instances, advocated by so-called Christian scholars. Their intent is to make Christianity more palatable, more reasonable, and so they attempt to humanize Jesus and give natural explanations to those things which are divine.

An example is Jesus' birth. The so-called scholars seek to convince us that the divine birth of Christ as proclaimed in the New Testament was not divine at all and that Mary was not a virgin at the time of Jesus' conception. They would have us believe that Joseph, the foster-father of Jesus, was His physical father, and that therefore Jesus was human in all attributes and characteristics. They appear generous in their praise of Him when they say that He was a great moral philosopher, perhaps even the greatest. But the import of their effort is to repudiate the divine Sonship of Jesus, for on that doctrine rest all other claims of Christianity.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints proclaims that Jesus Christ is the Son of God in the most literal sense. The body in which He performed His mission in the flesh was sired by that same Holy Being we worship as God, our Eternal Father. Jesus was not the son of Joseph, nor was He begotten by the Holy Ghost. He is the Son of the Eternal Father!

Jesus Is Divine Because of His Ministry

The entire ministry of the Master was characterized by His voluntary subordination to His Heavenly Father's will: "For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me." (John 6:38.)

As the Messiah, He fully understood His atoning mission and the will of His Father. He testified:

"My Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross. . . . that I might draw all men unto me. . . .

"Therefore, according to the power of the Father I will draw all men unto me, that they may be judged according to their works.

"And it shall come to pass, that whoso repenteth and is baptized in my name shall be filled; and if he endureth to the end, behold, him will I hold guiltless before my Father at that day when I shall stand to judge the world." (Book of Mormon, 3 Nephi 27:14-16.)

He came to restore the fulness of a gospel that had been lost by apostasy. He came not to repeal Moses, but to subordinate Mosaic law to the higher law of Christ. In order that His own people would know that He had authority to do so, He proclaimed His Messiahship with words and metaphors that they could not mistake:

"I am that bread of life." (John 6:48.) "I am the good shepherd." (John 10:14.) "I am the light of the world." (John 8:12.) "I am the resurrection, and the life." (John 11:25.) "I am the way, the truth, and the life." (John 14:6.) The hallmark of His ministry, as prophets before Him testified that it would be, was many mighty miracles: "healing the sick, raising the dead, causing the lame to walk, the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear, and curing all manner of diseases." (Book of Mormon, Mosiah 3:5.)

One of the greatest of these miracles was the raising of His friend Lazarus from the dead. You remember how, when He received word that Lazarus was sick, He deliberately delayed going to Bethany to minister to His friend.

The custom among the Jews was to bury their deceased on the same day of death; they held a superstition that the spirit lingered around the body for three days and then departed on the fourth day. Jesus was very familiar with their beliefs, and He therefore delayed His arrival in Bethany until Lazarus had been in the grave for four days. In that way there would be no question about the miracle He was to perform.

As the Savior approached Bethany, He was met by Martha, a sister of Lazarus. She said, "Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died."

Jesus said, "Thy brother shall rise again."

Not understanding, Martha replied, "I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day."

Then Jesus proclaimed: "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die."

Jesus was then taken to the place of burial, a cave with a stone in front. He commanded the mourners to remove the stone, after which He offered up a prayer to His Father. He then cried in a loud voice, "Lazarus, come forth." Here is the apostle John's record of what took place: "And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with graveclothes: and his face was bound about with a napkin." (See John 11:1-44.)

This miracle was such irrefutable proof of the Messiahship of Jesus that the Sanhedrin determined Jesus must die, for, they said, He "doeth many miracles" that will cause the people to believe. (See John 11:47.)

Sadly, however, John also recorded: "Though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they [the people] believed not on him." (John 12:37.)

Today some unbelievers among us spread seeds of heresy, claiming that Jesus could not cast out evil spirits and did not walk on water nor heal the sick nor miraculously feed five thousand nor calm storms nor raise the dead. These would have us believe that such claims are fantastic and that there is a natural explanation for each alleged miracle. Some have gone so far as to publish psychological explanations for His reported miracles. But Jesus' entire ministry was a mark of His divinity. He spoke as God, He acted as God, and He performed works that only God Himself can do. His works bear testimony to His divinity.

Jesus Is Divine Because of His Great Atoning Sacrifice

Were it not for the power that Jesus inherited from His Father, His great atonement would not have been possible.

On the night Jesus was betrayed, He took three of the Twelve and went into the place called Gethsemane. There He suffered the pains of all men, which suffering, He said, "caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink." (Doctrine and Covenants 19:18.)

In spite of that excruciating ordeal, He took the cup and drank! He suffered as only God could suffer, bearing our griefs, carrying our sorrows, being wounded for our transgressions, voluntarily submitting Himself to the iniquity of us all, just as Isaiah prophesied. (See Isaiah 53:4-6.)

It was in Gethsemane that Jesus took on Himself the sins of the world, in Gethsemane that His pain was equivalent to the cumulative burden of all men, in Gethsemane that He descended below all things so that all could repent and come to Him.

The mortal mind fails to fathom, the tongue cannot express, the pen of man cannot describe the breadth, the depth, the height of the suffering of our Lord—nor His infinite love for us.

Yet there are those who arrogantly declare the most pernicious heresy: that the blood which extruded from the physical body of our Lord on that night had no efficacy for the redemption of man. They would have us believe that the only significance to Gethsemane was that Jesus made His decision there to go to the cross. They say that any suffering Jesus endured was only personal, not redemptive for the whole human race. I know of no heresy more destructive to faith than this, for the individual who so accepts this delusion is beguiled to believe that he can achieve salvation on the basis of his own merit, intelligence, and personal effort.

We must never forget that "by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast." (Ephesians 2:8-9.)

As a church, we are in accord with an ancient prophet who said, "It is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." (Book of Mormon, 2 Nephi 25:23.) Grace consists of God's gift to His children wherein He gave His Only Begotten Son in order that whosoever would believe in Him and comply with His laws and ordinances would have everlasting life.

By grace, the Savior accomplished His atoning sacrifice so that all mankind will attain immortality.

By His grace and by our faith in His atonement and our repentance of our sins, we receive the strength to do the necessary works that we otherwise could not do by our own power.

By His grace, we receive an endowment of blessing and spiritual strength that may eventually lead us to eternal life if we endure to the end.

By His grace, we become more like His divine personality.

Yes, it is "by grace that we are saved, after all we can do." What is meant by the phrase "after all we can do"?

"After all we can do" includes extending our best effort.

"After all we can do" includes living His commandments.

"After all we can do" includes loving our fellowmen and praying for those who regard us as their adversary.

"After all we can do" means clothing the naked, feeding the hungry, visiting the sick, and giving "succor [to] those that stand in need of [our] succor" (Mosiah 4:16), remembering that what we do unto one of the least of God's children, we do unto Him (Matthew 25:40).

"After all we can do" means leading chaste, clean, pure lives, being scrupulously honest in all our dealings, and treating others the way we would want to be treated.

As I contemplate the glorious atonement of our Lord, which extended from Gethsemane to Golgotha, I am led to exclaim with reverence and gratitude:

I stand all amazed at the love Jesus offers me,Confused at the grace that so fully he proffers me;I tremble to know that for me he was crucified,That for me a sinner, he suffered, he bled and died.

I marvel that he would descend from his throne divineTo rescue a soul so rebellious and proud as mine;That He should extend his great love unto such as I,Sufficient to own, to redeem, and to justify.

Oh, it is wonderful that he should care for me,Enough to die for me!Oh, it is wonderful, wonderful to me!—Hymns, no. 80

Jesus Is Divine Because of His Literal Resurrection

I have stood in reverent awe at the Garden Tomb in Jerusalem. It is history's most significant tomb—because it is empty!

On the third day following His burial, Jesus came forth. The empty tomb was the cause of consternation to His disciples and others in Jerusalem.

He appeared first to Mary Magdalene. He approached her as she was weeping in the garden and said, "Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou?"

Mary, who supposed that the gardener was speaking, said, "Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away."

Jesus then said, "Mary."

She now recognized His voice and exclaimed, "Rabboni," or in other words, "Master." (John 20:15-17.)

Of all the marks of Jesus' divinity, none has greater support by the testimony of eyewitnesses than His literal, bodily resurrection:

Several women testified that they saw Him alive.

Two disciples on the road to Emmaus dined with Him.

Peter proclaimed himself an eyewitness to the resurrection.

There were many special appearances of the risen Lord to the Twelve.

In addition to these testimonies, over five hundred saw Him at one time.

Paul certified that he saw the resurrected Lord.

Since the day of resurrection when Jesus became the "firstfruits of them that slept" (1 Corinthians 15:20), there have been those who disbelieve and scoff. They maintain there is no life beyond mortal existence. Some have even written books that contain their fanciful heresies to suggest how Jesus' disciples perpetrated the hoax of His resurrection.

I give you my testimony: The resurrection of Jesus Christ is the greatest historical event in the world to date.

He lives! He lives with a resurrected body. There is no truth nor fact of which I am more assured than the truth of the literal resurrection of our Lord.

What think we of Christ? Whose Son is He?

We accept Him as the divine Son of God.

We believe Him to be the promised Messiah.

We rely on His atonement for personal salvation.

We declare His literal bodily resurrection.

Yes, we believe in Jesus Christ, but more. We look to Him, we trust Him, and we strive to emulate His attributes because there has not been, nor will there ever be, any "other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent." (Mosiah 3:17.)
