Ezra Taft Benson, Come unto Christ ( 1983)

Chapter Two

Be Valiant in the Testimony of Jesus

We bear record—for we saw and heard . . . concerning them who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just—They are they who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized after the manner of his burial, . . . and who overcome by faith. (Doctrine and Covenants 76:50-51, 53)

A most priceless blessing available to every member of the Church is a testimony of the divinity of Jesus Christ and His church. A testimony is one of the few possessions we may take with us when we leave this life. Let me explain what it means to have a testimony of Jesus.

To have a testimony of Jesus is to possess knowledge through the Holy Ghost of the divine mission of Jesus Christ.

A testimony of Jesus is to know the divine nature of our Lord's birth—that He is indeed the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh.

A testimony of Jesus is to know that He was the promised Messiah and that while He sojourned among men He accomplished many mighty miracles.

A testimony of Jesus is to know that the laws He prescribed as His doctrine are true and then to abide by those laws and ordinances.

A testimony of Jesus is to know that He voluntarily took upon Himself the sins of all mankind in the Garden of Gethsemane, which caused Him to suffer in both body and spirit and to bleed from every pore. All this He did so that we would not have to suffer, if we would repent. (See Doctrine and Covenants 19:16, 18.)

A testimony of Jesus is to know that He came forth triumphantly from the grave with a physical, resurrected body. And because He lives, so shall all mankind.

A testimony of Jesus is to know that God the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, did indeed appear to the Prophet Joseph Smith to establish a new dispensation of His gospel so that salvation may be preached to all nations before He comes.

A testimony of Jesus is to know that the church He established in the meridian of time and restored in modern times is, as the Lord has declared, "the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth." (Doctrine and Covenants 1:30.)

A testimony of Jesus is to receive the words of His servants, the prophets, for as He has said, "Whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same." (Doctrine and Covenants 1:38.)

A testimony of Jesus means that we accept the divine mission of Jesus Christ, embrace His gospel, and do His works. It means we accept the prophetic mission of Joseph Smith and his successors.

Speaking of those who will eventually receive the blessings of the celestial kingdom, the Lord said to Joseph Smith: "They are they who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized after the manner of his burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this according to the commandment which he has given." (Doctrine and Covenants 76:51.)

These are they who are valiant in their testimony of Jesus, who, as the Lord has declared, "overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true." (Doctrine and Covenants 76:53.)

"Those who are just and true." What an apt expression for those valiant in the testimony of Jesus! These are members of the Church who magnify their callings in the Church (see Doctrine and Covenants 84:33), pay their tithes and offerings, live morally clean lives, sustain their Church leaders byword and action, keep the Sabbath as a holy day, and obey all the commandments of God. They are courageous in defending truth and righteousness. To these the Lord has promised that "all thrones and dominions, principalities and powers, shall be revealed and set forth upon all who have endured valiantly for the gospel of Jesus Christ." (Doctrine and Covenants 121:29.)

Concerning those who will receive the terrestrial, or lesser, kingdom, the Lord said, "These are they who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus; wherefore, they obtain not the crown over the kingdom of our God." (Doctrine and Covenants 76:79.) Not to be valiant in one's testimony is a tragedy of eternal consequence. These are members who know that this latter-day work is true but who fail to endure to the end. Some may even hold temple recommends, but they do not magnify their callings in the Church. Without valor, they do not take an affirmative stand for the kingdom of God. Some seek the praise, adulation, and honors of men; others attempt to conceal their sins; and a few criticize those who preside over them.

Considering some of the challenges that the Church currently faces and that it will continue to face in the future, three statements of former Church leaders are especially significant.

President Joseph F. Smith said, "There are at least three dangers that threaten the Church within. . . . They are flattery of prominent men in the world, false educational ideas, and sexual impurity." (Gospel Doctrine, Deseret Book, 1977, pp. 312-13.) These three dangers are of greater concern today than when they were identified by President Smith.

A second statement is a prophecy by Heber C. Kimball, counselor to President Brigham Young. Speaking to members of the Church who had come to the Salt Lake Valley, he declared:

To meet the difficulties that are coming, it will be necessary for you to have a knowledge of the truth of this work for yourselves. The difficulties will be of such a character that the man or woman who does not possess this personal knowledge or witness will fall. If you have not got the testimony, live right and call upon the Lord and cease not till you obtain it. If you do not you will not stand. . . .

The time will come when no man nor woman will be able to endure on borrowed light. Each will have to be guided by the light within himself. . . . If you don't have it you will not stand; therefore seek for the testimony of Jesus and cleave to it, that when the trying time comes you may not stumble and fall. (Orson F. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, Stevens & Wallace, 1945, p. 450.)

A third statement is from President Harold B. Lee, my boyhood companion and friend, and the eleventh president of the Church:

We have some tight places to go before the Lord is through with this church and the world in this dispensation, which is the last dispensation, which shall usher in the coming of the Lord. The gospel was restored to prepare a people ready to receive him. The power of Satan will increase; we see it in evidence on every hand. There will be inroads within the Church. . . . We will see those who profess membership but secretly are plotting and trying to lead people not to follow the leadership that the Lord has set up to preside in this church.

Now the only safety we have as members of this church is to do exactly what the Lord said to the Church in that day when the Church was organized. We must learn to give heed to the words and commandments that the Lord shall give through his prophet, "as he receiveth them, walking . . . in all patience and faith." (Doctrine and Covenants 21:4-5.) There will be some things that take patience and faith. You may not like what comes from the authority of the Church. . . . But if you listen to these things, as if from the mouth of the Lord himself ,with patience and faith, the promise is that "the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his name's glory." (Doctrine and Covenants 21:6.) (Conference Report, October 1970, p. 152.)

It seems to me that we have within these three prophetic statements the counsel necessary to stay valiant in our testimony of Jesus and the work of His church in these troubled times. One who rationalizes that he or she has a testimony of Jesus Christ but cannot accept direction and counsel from the leadership of His church is in a fundamentally unsound position and is in jeopardy of losing exaltation.

Some want to expose the weaknesses of Church leaders in an effort to show that they too are subject to human frailties and error like unto themselves. The danger of this questionable philosophy is illustrated by the following experience.

President Brigham Young revealed that on one occasion he was tempted to be critical of the Prophet Joseph Smith regarding a certain financial matter. He said that the feeling did not last for more than perhaps thirty seconds. That feeling, he said, caused him great sorrow in his heart. The lesson he gave to members of the Church in his day may well be increased in significance today because the devil continues more active. He said:

I clearly saw and understood, by the spirit of revelation manifested to me, that if I was to harbor a thought in my heart that Joseph could be wrong in anything, I would begin to lose confidence in him, and that feeling would grow from step to step, and from one degree to another, until at last I would have the same lack of confidence in his being the mouthpiece of the Almighty. . . .

I repented of my unbelief, and that too, very suddenly; I repented about as quickly as I committed the error. It was not for me to question whether Joseph was dictated by the Lord at all times and under all circumstances. . . .

It was not my prerogative to call him in question with regard to any act of his life. He was God's servant, and not mine. He did not belong to the people but to the Lord, and was doing the work of the Lord. (Journal of Discourses 4:297; italics added.)

Let us be valiant in our testimony of Jesus all the days of our lives. Let our valiancy be reflected by our actions. Therefore we must—

Seek a witness by the Holy Ghost that Jesus Christ is the Son of God and has restored His church on earth today.

Study His gospel, thereby "feasting upon the word of Christ." (Book of Mormon, 2 Nephi 31:20.)

Sustain His servants whom He has appointed to preside in His church.

Love our fellowmen and seek to serve them.
