Ezra Taft Benson, Come unto Christ ( 1983)

Chapter Five

Walk in His Steps

And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man. (Luke 2:52)

The apostle Paul testified that Jesus "was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin." (Hebrews 4:15.) In His encounters with the adversary, He demonstrated how to overcome temptation. He thus became our great Exemplar.

Because He is our example, it is instructive to ask how He prepared Himself during those thirty years for His three-year public ministry. Turning to the book of Luke in the New Testament, we read these words: "And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man."

We too should be moving from grace to grace in wisdom and stature and in favor with God and man. Consider four areas of Jesus' personal preparation. To walk in His steps, we also should increase in these same four areas.

Jesus Increased in Wisdom

Wisdom is the proper application of true knowledge. Not all knowledge has the same worth, nor are all truths equally valuable. The truths upon which our eternal salvation rests are the most crucial truths that we must learn. No man is truly educated unless he knows where he came from, why he is here, and where he can expect to go in the next life. He must be able to adequately answer the question Jesus posed, "What think ye of Christ?"

This world cannot teach us these things. Therefore, the most essential knowledge for us to obtain is the saving knowledge of the gospel and of its Author, even Jesus Christ.

Eternal life, the greatest gift that God can give and the life for which we all should be striving, comes from knowing our Father in heaven and His Son, Jesus Christ. As the Savior said: "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.)

We cannot know God and Jesus without studying about them and then doing their will. This course leads to additional revealed knowledge that, if obeyed, will eventually lead us to further truths. When we follow this pattern, we will receive further light and joy, eventually leading into God's presence where we, with Him, will have a fullness.

We are admonished to seek "out of the best books words of wisdom." (Doctrine and Covenants 88:118.) Surely such books would first include the scriptures and then the words of prophets, seers, and revelators. Speaking of the president of the Church, the Lord said, "His word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth." (Doctrine and Covenants 21:5.)

While the gospel includes the more crucial saving truths contained within theology, it also embraces truth in other branches of learning. The Lord encouraged the early missionaries to be instructed more perfectly in "things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must surely come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms." (Doctrine and Covenants 88:79.)

With the abundance of books available today, it is a mark of a truly educated person to know what not to read. Of the making of books there is no end. (Ecclesiastes 12:12.) In our reading we would do well to follow the counsel of John Wesley's mother: Avoid "whatever weakens your reason, impairs the tenderness of your conscience, obscures your sense of God, takes off your relish for spiritual things, or . . . increases the authority of the body over the mind."

But wisdom is not just obtained from study nor from books. The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "The best way to obtain truth and wisdom is not to ask it from books, but to go to God in prayer, and obtain divine teaching." (History of the Church 4:425.)

"Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom: and with all thy getting get understanding." (Proverbs 4:7.)

Jesus Increased in Stature

There is no question that the health of the body affects the spirit, or the Lord would never have revealed the Word of Wisdom. God has never given any temporal commandments—that which affects our bodies also affects our souls. There are at least four basic areas that make a difference in our health, in our growing in stature.

First, righteousness. Sin debilitates. It affects not only the soul but also the body. The scriptures are replete with examples of the physical power that can attend the righteous. On the other hand, unrepented sin can diffuse energy and lead to both mental and physical sickness. Disease, fevers, and unexpected deaths are some of the consequences directly related to disobedience. Jesus healed a man of a physical malady and then told him, "Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee." (John 5:14.) Sir Galahad claimed that his strength was as the strength of ten because his heart was pure.

Second, food. To a great extent we are physically what we eat. Most of us are acquainted with some of the prohibitions of the Word of Wisdom, such as no tea, coffee, tobacco, or alcohol. But what needs additional emphasis is the positive aspects—the need for vegetables, fruits, and grain, particularly wheat.

Third, exercise. The body needs the rejuvenation that comes from exercise. Walking in the fresh air can be exhilarating and refreshing. Properly directed running can also have some beneficial effects. Simple sit-ups or sports activities can also be helpful.

Fourth, sleep. Adequate early rest is best. The Lord states that we should "cease to sleep longer than is needful; retire to [our] bed early, that [we] may not be weary; arise early, that [our] bodies and [our] minds may be invigorated." (Doctrine and Covenants 88:124.)

"Early to bed and early to rise" is still good counsel.

Jesus Increased in Favor with God

What increases our favor with God? One of the purposes of this life is for us to be tested to see whether we will "do all things whatsoever the Lord [our] God shall command." (Pearl of Great Price, Abraham 3:25.) In short, we are to learn the will of the Lord and do it. How did Jesus increase in favor with God? Note His words: "I seek not my own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me." (John 5:30.) What a commendable pattern for us to follow!

The essential question of life should be the same as that posed by the apostle Paul: "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" (Acts 9:6.) God's will for us can be determined from three sources:

In clearing our channels and keeping them clear, I would commend the careful reading of President Spencer W. Kimball's book The Miracle of Forgiveness (Bookcraft, 1969).

May I suggest four practices that will increase our favor with God:

First, personal prayer, morning and night. Alma, a great Book of Mormon prophet, gave this sound advice to one of his sons: "Counsel with the Lord in all thy doings, and he will direct thee for good; yea, when thou liest down at night lie down unto the Lord, that he may watch over you in your sleep; and when thou risest in the morning let thy heart be full of thanks unto God; and if ye do these things, ye shall be lifted up at the last day." (Book of Mormon, Alma 37:37.)

Second, daily scripture reading. We live in a world where the philosophies and practices of man surround us. The only way one can keep a spiritual outlook is to invest time to determine the Lord's mind and will for us. Concerning the scriptures, Jesus Christ has said: "These words are not of men nor of man, but of me; wherefore, you shall testify they are of me and not of man; for it is my voice which speaketh them unto you; for they are given by my Spirit unto you, and by my power you can read them one to another; and save it were by my power you could not have them. Wherefore, you can testify that you have heard my voice and know my words." (Doctrine and Covenants 18:34-36; italics added.)

Third, remembering the Sabbath day and keeping it holy. Not only has the Sabbath been made a work day; it has also become a day of amusement and recreation. We please God when we set aside one day a week to worship Him and remember His Son. For He has ordained the Sabbath as "a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High. . . . Remember that on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High." (Doctrine and Covenants 59:10, 12.)

Fourth, keeping our covenants. We go to our chapels each week to worship the Lord and renew our covenants by partaking of the sacrament. We thereby promise to take His name upon us, to always remember Him, and keep all His commandments. Our agreement to keep all the commandments is our covenant with God. Only as we do this may we deserve His blessings and merit His mercy.

If we want the favor of God, we must walk in God's way.

Jesus Increased in Favor with Man

Unselfish, willing service is a key to increasing our favor with man. Jesus provided the example by a life of service. Consider the service He rendered to others: blessing Peter's mother-in-law, restoring to life a woman's son at Nain, the raising of Lazarus from the dead, forgiving the woman taken in adultery, healing the sick, opening the eyes of the blind, and teaching His gospel to bring men salvation. He blessed others wherever he went.

Because His life epitomized service to others, He can command His disciples to "go, and do thou likewise." (Luke 10:37.) Thus He said, "Whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant." (Matthew 20:27.) "For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it." (Matthew 16:25.)

We increase in favor with our fellowmen by loving them.

To walk in the steps of Jesus is to emulate His life and to look unto Him as our source of truth and example. Each of us would do well to periodically review His teachings in the Sermon on the Mount so that we are totally familiar with His way. In that sermon, one of the greatest of all sermons, we are told to be a light to others, to control our anger, to reconcile bad feelings with others before bringing gifts to the Lord, to love our enemy, to refrain from unholy and unvirtuous practices, to not allow lust to conceive in our hearts. We are further instructed how to pray, how to fast, and how to regulate our priorities. When these teachings are applied, Jesus said, we are like the wise man who built his house on a firm, solid foundation.

We, His disciples, must follow the way of the Master. He is our guide to happiness here and eternal life hereafter. Our success in life will be determined by how closely we learn to walk in His steps.
