Ezra Taft Benson, Come unto Christ ( 1983)

Chapter Six

What Would Jesus Do?

Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not. (Doctrine and Covenants 6:36)

The following life-changing experience happened to President George Albert Smith when he was a boy:

As a child, thirteen years of age, I went to school at the Brigham Young Academy. . . . I cannot remember much of what was said during the year that I was there, but there is one thing that I will probably never forget. . . . Dr. [Karl G.] Maeser one day stood up and said:

"Not only will you be held accountable for the things you do, but you will be held responsible for the very thoughts you think."

Being a boy, not in the habit of controlling my thoughts very much, it was quite a puzzle to me what I was to do, and it worried me. In fact, it stuck to me just like a burr. About a week or ten days after that it suddenly came to me what he meant. I could see the philosophy of it then. All at once there came to me this interpretation of what he had said: Why of course you will be held accountable for your thoughts, because when your life is completed in mortality, it will be the sum of your thoughts. That one suggestion has been a great blessing to me all my life, and it has enabled me upon many occasions to avoid thinking improperly, because I realize that I will be, when my life's labor is complete, the product of my thoughts. (Sharing the Gospel with Others, Deseret Book, 1948, pp. 62-63.)

Thoughts lead to acts, acts lead to habits, habits lead to character—and our character will determine our eternal destiny.

King Benjamin understood this. In the next to last verse of his great discourse recorded in the Book of Mormon, he states: "And finally, I cannot tell you all the things whereby ye may commit sin; for there are divers ways and means, even so many that I cannot number them." Then in the last verse he counsels that we must watch ourselves and our thoughts. (Mosiah 4:29-30.)

When Christ appeared on the American continent following His resurrection, He stated: "Behold, it is written by them of old time, that thou shalt not commit adultery; but I say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a woman, to lust after her, hath committed adultery already in his heart. Behold, I give unto you a commandment, that ye suffer none of these things to enter into your heart." (Book of Mormon, 3 Nephi 12:27-29.)

"Enter into your heart"—why, of course, for as the scripture states: "As he thinketh in his heart, so is he." (Proverbs 23:7.)

So critical is it that we understand the necessity of controlling our thoughts that President Spencer W. Kimball devoted a whole chapter to it in his book The Miracle of Forgiveness. The chapter titled "As a Man Thinketh" is the title of a book by James Allen, which President Kimball recommended. He quoted from this book three times. One quotation states:

A man does not come to the almshouse or the jail by the tyranny of fate or circumstance, but by the pathway of groveling thoughts and base desires. Nor does a pure-minded man fall suddenly into crime by stress of mere external force; the criminal thought had long been secretly fostered in the heart, and the hour of opportunity revealed its gathered power. Circumstance does not make the man; it reveals him to himself. (Quoted in The Miracle of Forgiveness, Bookcraft, 1969, p. 105.)

President Kimball also quoted President David O. McKay, who said: "The thought in your mind at this moment is contributing, however infinitesimally, almost imperceptibly to the shaping of your soul, even to the lineaments of your countenance . . . even passing and idle thoughts leave their impression." (Ibid.)

The mind has been likened to a stage on which only one act at a time can be performed. From one side of the wings the Lord, who loves us, is trying to put on the stage of our minds that which will bless us. From the other side of the wings the devil, who hates us, is trying to put on the stage of our minds that which will curse us.

We are the stage managers; we are the ones who decide which thought will occupy the stage. Remember, the Lord wants us to have a fullness of joy like His, while the devil wants all men to be miserable like unto himself. We are the ones who must decide whose thoughts will prevail. We are free to choose, but we are not free to alter the consequences of those choices. We will be what we think about—what we consistently allow to occupy the stage of our minds.

Sometimes we may have difficulty driving off the stage of our minds a certain evil thought. To drive it off Elder Boyd K. Packer suggested that we sing an inspirational song of Zion or think on its words. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has recommended that after the opening song, we might preach a sermon to ourselves.

We should not invite the devil to give us a stage presentation. Usually without our realizing it, he slips into our thoughts. Our accountability begins with how we handle the evil thought immediately after it is presented. Like Jesus, we should positively and promptly terminate the temptation. We should dismiss the evil one without further argument.

It is our privilege to store our memories with good and great thoughts and bring them out on the stage of our minds at will. When the Lord faced His three great temptations in the wilderness, He immediately rebuked the devil with appropriate scripture that He had memorized.

The Lord said, "Look unto me in every thought." (Doctrine and Covenants 6:36.) Looking unto the Lord in every thought is the only possible way we can be the manner of men and women we ought to be.

The Lord asked the question of His disciples, "What manner of men ought ye to be?" He then answered His own question by saying, "Even as I am." (Book of Mormon, 3 Nephi 27:27.) To become as He is, we must have Him constantly in our thoughts. Every time we partake of the sacrament we covenant to always remember Him. (Moroni 4:3; 5:2; Doctrine and Covenants 20:77, 79.)

If thoughts make us what we are and we are to be like Christ, then we must think Christlike thoughts.

Paul, en route to Damascus to persecute the saints, saw a light from heaven and heard the voice of the Lord. Then Paul asked a question—and the persistent asking of the same question changed his life. "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" (Acts 9:6.) The persistent asking of that same question can also change our lives. There is no greater question that we can ask in this world. "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?"

In his book Stand Ye in Holy Places, President Harold B. Lee included a chapter entitled "Lord, What Wilt Thou Have Me Do?" He began the chapter by relating this experience:

Some time ago I heard a leader in a high Church position explain his method of endeavoring to arrive at just and equitable decisions in his council meetings. He explained that as problems would be presented, he would frequently ask himself, "As measured by the record of the Master's teaching, just what would He do in this given situation, or just how would He answer this question or solve this problem?" (Deseret Book, 1974, p. 26.)

While he doesn't mention who the man was, that man in due time became the president of the Church—President David O. McKay.

My friend Tom Anderson told the following story:

There was a little crippled boy who ran a small newsstand in a crowded railroad station. He must have been about twelve years old. Every day he would sell papers, candy, gum, and magazines to the thousands of commuters passing through the terminal.

One night two men were rushing through the crowded station to catch a train. One was fifteen or twenty yards in front of the other. It was Christmas eve. Their train was scheduled to depart in a matter of minutes.

The first man turned a corner and in his haste to get home to a Christmas cocktail party plowed right into the little crippled boy. He knocked him off his stool, and candy, newspapers, and gum were scattered everywhere. Without so much as stopping, he cursed the little fellow for being there and rushed on to catch the train that would take him to celebrate Christmas in the way he had chosen for himself.

It was only a matter of seconds before the second commuter arrived on the scene. He stopped, knelt, and gently picked up the boy. After making sure the child was unhurt, the man gathered up the scattered newspapers, sweets, and magazines. Then he took his wallet and gave the boy a five-dollar bill. "Son," he said, "I think this will take care of what was lost or soiled. Merry Christmas!"

Without waiting for a reply, the commuter now picked up his briefcase and started to hurry away. As he did, the little crippled boy cupped his hands together and called out, "Mister, Mister!"

The man stopped as the boy asked, "Are you Jesus Christ?"

By the look on his face, it was obvious the commuter was embarrassed by the question. But he smiled and said, "No, son, I am not Jesus Christ. But I am trying hard to do what He would do if He were here."

Some years ago Charles Sheldon wrote a book entitled In His Steps. It is perhaps one of the greatest bestsellers in American history. It tells the story of a small group of people within a Christian congregation who took a pledge. The pledge was that for an entire year they earnestly and honestly would not do anything without first asking the question "What would Jesus do?" After asking themselves that question, they were to follow Jesus exactly as they knew how, no matter what the results. The book tells what happened and how their lives were revolutionized.

One of my boyhood friends revealed the impact that the idea expressed in this book had on him. He is Marion G. Romney, now first counselor in the First Presidency of the Church.

Here is his account:

During my early teens a small book or pamphlet titled "What Would Jesus Do?" came into my hands. I do not now remember the name of the author, nor do I remember what he said. The title, however, has been in my mind ever since. The question posed epitomized the desire I had had from my childhood. Countless times as I have faced challenges and vexing decisions I have asked myself "What would Jesus do?" Fortunately, I was exposed early in life to the standard works of the Church. The elementary school I attended was a Church school. Theology was one of the subjects we were required to study daily. Books being scarce, the scriptures were used as texts. It was therefore natural for me, as I pondered the question, "What would Jesus do?" to turn to the scriptures in search of the answer. There in the Gospel as recorded by St. John, I found the clear and certain answer: Jesus would always do the will of his Father. This he himself repeatedly declared.

As he taught in the temple, the Jews "marvelled, saying, How knoweth this man letters, having never learned?

"Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me.

"He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory: but he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him.

". . . he that sent me is true; and I speak to the world those things which I have heard of him.

". . . I do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught me, I speak these things.

"And he that sent me is with me: the Father hath not left me alone; for I do always those things that please him.

"I and my Father are one." (John 7:15-18; 8:26, 28-29; 10:30.)

". . . Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do: for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise." (John 5:19.)

Having learned that Jesus would always do the will of his Father, my next objective was to find out what Jesus would do to ascertain the will of his Father. Searching the New Testament, I discovered that one thing he did was to thoroughly familiarize himself with what his Father had declared his will to be as recorded in the Old Testament. That he did this is evidenced by the fact that in his statements as recorded in the New Testament, Jesus quoted or cited scriptures from the Old Testament more than one hundred times.

Finally, and most importantly, I learned that he communed constantly with his Father through prayer. This he did not only to learn the will of his Father but also to obtain the strength to do his Father's will. He fasted and prayed forty days and forty nights at the beginning of his ministry. (Matthew 4:2; Mark 1:13; Luke 4:2.) He prayed all night just before choosing his twelve apostles. (Luke 6:12-13.) He prayed in the Garden of Gethsemane. (Matthew 26:39.) It would seem that during his earthly ministry he never made a major decision or met a crisis without praying.

From the record of his struggle in Gethsemane—". . . Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me; nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done. And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground" (Luke 22:42, 44)—we learn that although it was not always easy or pleasant for him to do his Father's will, he always did it.

Speaking to the Prophet Joseph 1800 years later concerning his Gethsemane ordeal, Jesus said:

"Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—

"Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men." (D&C 19:18-19.)

Relying upon the foregoing and companion scriptures, I decided in my youth that for me the best approach to the solution of problems and the resolving of questions would be to proceed as Jesus proceeded: foster an earnest desire to do the Lord's will; familiarize myself with what the Lord has revealed on the matters involved; pray with diligence and faith for an inspired understanding of his will and the courage to do it.

By following this pattern, Jesus lived a perfect life. We cannot, of course, equal his performance. We can, however, make greater progress toward it by emulating him than in any other way.

The accomplishments of such men as Nephi and the Prophet Joseph Smith have given me courage to try. Each of those great men embarked upon this course early in life.

Near the beginning of his record, Nephi wrote:

"And it came to pass that I, Nephi, being exceedingly young, nevertheless . . . having great desires to know of the mysteries of God, wherefore, I did cry unto the Lord; and behold he did visit me, and did soften my heart that I did believe all the words which had been spoken by my father. . . ."(1 Nephi 2:16.)

His appreciation of the value of the scriptures in learning the will of the Lord is evidenced by his thoughts when the angel told him to slay Laban in order to get the brass plates.

"And now, when I, Nephi, had heard these words, I remembered the words of the Lord which he spake unto me in the wilderness, saying that: Inasmuch as thy seed shall keep my commandments, they shall prosper in the land of promise.

"Yea, and I also thought that they could not keep the commandments of the Lord according to the law of Moses, save they should have the law.

"And I also knew that the law was engraven upon the plates of brass." (1 Nephi 4:14-16.)

After he obtained the record, he searched it. (1 Nephi 5:21.)

In his fifteenth year the Prophet Joseph, to learn the Lord's will as to which church he should join, searched the scriptures. Upon reading James, first chapter, fifth verse, he prayed about it. Every Latter-day Saint knows the answer that came, as recorded in the Pearl of Great Price.

The most satisfying solutions to problems and the best answers to questions that I have been able to make in my own life, I have arrived at as follows:

This, I think, is in harmony with the pattern Jesus set by precept and example during his ministry on the earth and with the 9th section of the Doctrine and Covenants where, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord said to Oliver Cowdery:

". . . you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me.

"But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right.

"But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought. . . ." (D&C 9:7-9.)

When I feel the burning in my bosom, I conclude that I have done as Jesus would have me do under the circumstances. (Marion G. Romney, "What Would Jesus Do?" New Era, September 1972, pp. 4-6.)

There is no greater, more thrilling, and more soul-ennobling challenge than to try to learn of Christ and walk in His steps. He walked this earth as our Exemplar. He is our Advocate with the Father. He worked out the great atoning sacrifice so we could have a fulness of joy and be exalted in accordance with His grace and our repentance and righteousness. He did all things perfectly and commands that we be perfect even as He and His Father are perfect. (See 3 Nephi 12:48.)

"What would Jesus do?" or "What would He have me do?" are the paramount personal questions of this life. Walking in His way is the greatest achievement of life.

That man or woman is most truly successful whose life most closely parallels that of the Master.

Let us look to Him in every thought.

Think on Christ!
