Ezra Taft Benson, Come unto Christ ( 1983)

Chapter Seven

What Manner of Men Ought We to Be?

What manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am. (Book of Mormon, 3 Nephi 27:27)

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are to emulate the character of the Savior.

And what is His character?

He has identified the cardinal virtues of His divine character in a revelation to all priesthood holders who serve in His ministry. In this revelation, which was given a year before the Church was organized, He said, "Remember faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, godliness, charity, humility, diligence." (Doctrine and Covenants 4:6.) These are the virtues we are to emulate. This is the Christlike character.

Let us discuss a few of these traits.

A priesthood holder is virtuous. Virtuous behavior implies that he has pure thoughts and clean actions. He will not lust in his heart, for to do so is to "deny the faith" and to lose the Spirit. (Doctrine and Covenants 42:23.)

He will not commit adultery "nor do anything like unto it." (Doctrine and Covenants 59:6.) This means fornication, homosexual behavior, self-abuse, child molestation, or any other sexual perversion.

Virtue is akin to holiness, an attribute of godliness. A priesthood holder should actively seek for things that are virtuous and lovely and not that which is debasing or sordid. Virtue will "garnish [his] thoughts unceasingly." (Doctrine and Covenants 121:45.)

Whenever a priesthood holder departs from the path of virtue in any form or expression, he loses the Spirit and comes under Satan's power. He then receives the wages of him whom he has chosen to serve. As a result, sometimes the Church must take disciplinary action, for we cannot condone nor pardon unvirtuous and unrepented actions.

All priesthood holders must be morally clean to be worthy to bear the authority of Jesus Christ.

A priesthood holder is temperate. This means he is restrained in his emotions and verbal expressions. He does things in moderation and is not given to overindulgence. In a word, he has self-control. He is the master of his emotions not the other way around.

A priesthood holder who would curse his wife, abuse her with words or actions, or do the same to one of his own children is guilty of grievous sin. "Can ye be angry, and not sin?" asked the apostle Paul. (Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, Ephesians 4:26.)

If a man does not control his temper, it is a sad admission that he is not in control of his thoughts. He then becomes a victim of his own passions and emotions, which leads him to actions that are totally unfit for civilized behavior, let alone behavior for a priesthood holder.

President David O. McKay once said: "A man who cannot control his temper is not very likely to control his passion, and no matter what his pretensions in religion, he moves in daily life very close to the animal plane." (Improvement Era, June 1958, p. 407.)

A priesthood holder is to be patient. Patience is another form of self-control. It is the ability to postpone gratification and to bridle one's passions. In his relationships with loved ones, a patient man does not engage in impetuous behavior that he will later regret. Patience is composure under stress. A patient man is understanding of others' faults.

A priesthood bearer who is patient will be tolerant of the mistakes and failings of his loved ones. Because he loves them, he will not find fault nor criticize nor blame.

A priesthood bearer is kind. One who is kind is sympathetic and gentle with others. He is considerate of others' feelings and courteous in his behavior. He has a helpful nature. Kindness pardons others' weaknesses and faults.

Can you see how we become more Christlike as we are more virtuous, more kind, more patient, and more in control of our emotional feelings?

The apostle Paul used some vivid expressions to illustrate that a member of the Church must be different from the world. He commended us to "put on Christ," "put off . . . the old man," and "put on the new man." (See Galatians 3:27; Ephesians 4:22, 24.)

What does that mean to us as members of the Church?

It means that we must become like Jesus Christ. We must emulate His way of life in our lives. Of necessity, we must be "born again" and put aside worldly lusts and former behavior unsuited to the Christlike character. We must seek the Holy Ghost to temper our actions.

How is this done?

As I have thought about the serious sins that some of our members have committed, I have wondered, Did they seek the Lord to help them overcome their emotional outbursts or lascivious desires? Did they rely on fasting and prayer? Did they seek a priesthood blessing? Did they ask our Heavenly Father to temper their emotions by the influence of the Holy Ghost?

Jesus said we are to "hunger and thirst after righteousness." (Book of Mormon, 3 Nephi 12:6.) To do this, we must earnestly desire a righteous and virtuous life.

I cite for you an example of a man whose life was changed to a more Christlike life after he earnestly desired such a change and sought the Lord's help.

Lamoni's father was a king who had bitter enmity toward the Nephites. A great missionary by the name of Aaron, one of the sons of Mosiah, had come to the Lamanite nation to bring them the gospel. He proceeded to the king's home and subsequently engaged him in a gospel discussion about the purpose of life. Once the king became receptive to his message, Aaron taught him about Christ, the plan of salvation, and the possibility of eternal life.

This message so impressed the king that he asked Aaron, "What shall I do that I may have this eternal life of which thou hast spoken? Yea, what shall I do that I may be born of God, having this wicked spirit rooted out of my breast, and receive his Spirit, that I may be filled with joy?"

Aaron instructed him to call upon God in faith to help him repent of all his sins. The king, anxious for his own soul, did as Aaron instructed. "O God," he prayed, "Aaron hath told me that there is a God; and if there is a God, and if thou art God, wilt thou make thyself known unto me, and I will give away all my sins to know thee." (Book of Mormon, Alma 22:15-18; italics added.)

Each of us must surrender our sins if we are to really know Christ. We do not know Him until we become like Him. There are some, like this king, who must pray until they, too, have "a wicked spirit rooted" from them so they can find the same joy.

Attaining a righteous and virtuous life is within the capability of each of us if we will earnestly seek for it. If we do not have these character traits, the Lord has told us that we should "ask, and [we] shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto [us]." (Doctrine and Covenants 4:7.)

The apostle Peter tells us that when we possess these traits, we are not "unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ." (2 Peter 1:8.)

To know the Savior, then, is to be like Him. God will bless us to be like His Son when we make an earnest effort.

To be like Christ should be the righteous aspiration of every member of the Church. We should act as He would act in our relationships with others.

The Lord said: "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself . . . all ungodliness, and every worldly lust, and keep my commandments." (Joseph Smith Translation, Matthew 16:25-26; italics added.)

He expects His disciples to follow Him by their actions.

May I comment about our relationships to our wives and our families.

Our wives are our most precious eternal helpmates, our companions. They are to be cherished and loved.

There are only two commandments in which the Lord tells us to love someone with all our heart. The first is the Great Commandment: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind." (Matthew 22:37.)

The second commandment to love another with all our heart is this: "Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else." (Doctrine and Covenants 42:22.)

Only two commandments in which we are commanded to love someone else with all our hearts—the Lord, our God, and our wives!

What does it mean to love someone with all our heart? It means with all our emotional feelings and our devotion. Surely when one loves his wife with all his heart, he cannot demean her, criticize her, find fault with her, or abuse her by words, sullen behavior, or actions.

What does it mean to "cleave unto her"? It means to stay close to her, to be loyal to her, to strengthen her, to communicate with her, and to express love for her.

The same applies to our families. Our homes should be havens of peace and joy for our families. Surely no child should fear his own father, especially a priesthood father. A father's duty is to make his home a place of happiness and joy. He cannot do this when there is bickering, quarreling, contention, or unrighteous behavior.

As fathers of our homes, we have a serious responsibility to assume leadership in the home. We must create homes where the Spirit of the Lord can abide. We must always remember the statement of the Savior that "the spirit of contention is not of [Him], but is of the devil." (3 Nephi 11:29.) We must not allow the adversary to be an influence in our homes.

We must be more Christlike in our attitude and behavior than what we see in the world. We should be as charitable and considerate with our loved ones as Christ is with us. He is kind, loving, and patient with each of us. Should we not reciprocate the same love to our wives and children?

Jesus asked this question of the Nephites: "What manner of men ought ye to be?" Remember His answer to them: "Verily I say unto you, even as I am." (3 Nephi 27:27; italics added.)

He expects us to be like Him. He expects us to demonstrate the fruits of the Spirit in our lives: "love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance." (Galatians 5:22-23.)

These Christlike traits should characterize each member of the Church and should permeate every Latter-day Saint home. It can be done and must be done if we are to honorably bear His name.

Never in the history of mankind has there been a greater need for us to be united in our determination and actions to be Christlike in character. To follow Him is to emulate His character.

Let us firmly resolve to put aside any action that is foreign to the nature of Christ.

Let us resolve to apply the traits of our Lord and Savior in our own lives.

Let us have His image in our countenances. (See Alma 5:14, 19.)

Let us put on Christ!
