Ezra Taft Benson, Come unto Christ ( 1983)

Chapter Eight

Lead Your Children to Christ

We talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, and write according to our prophecies, that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sins. (Book of Mormon, 2 Nephi 25:26)

The Lord declared in modern revelation that "power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable." He revealed that the period of childhood was given to children so that "great things may be required at the hand of their fathers." (Doctrine and Covenants 29:47-48.)

"That great things may be required at the hand of their fathers." What confidence the Lord has in fathers, and what a responsibility He has placed on them!

Great things are required of fathers today.

When I think of fathers, I think of Adam, progenitor of us all, who faithfully taught his posterity in the ways of righteousness. I think of father Abraham, whose faith knows no peer among mortal fathers. I esteem Jacob, or Israel, with a feeling akin to reverence for his diligence and long-suffering. I honor the name of Lehi for the example he gave to his sons.

In this dispensation, I think of Joseph Smith, Sr., the first person to give credence to his prophet-son's testimony. I think of the noble example of Joseph F. Smith, sixth president of the Church and father of the tenth president.

I revere these noble men, not just because they were great prophets, but because they were great fathers who realized what the Lord required of them, and they lived up to that expectation.

Consider three particular things that the Lord requires of fathers. If fathers will do them, their homes will be blessed with peace, their names will be proudly borne by their descendants, and their association with their families will be eternal.

First, fathers should provide homes where love and the Spirit of the Lord may abide.

Children are born innocent, not evil. They are not sent to earth, however, to neutral environments. They are sent to homes that, for good or evil, influence their ideas, emotions, thoughts, and standards by which future choices will be made.

One great thing the Lord requires of each father is to provide a home where a happy, positive influence for good exists. In future years the costliness of home furnishings or the number of bathrooms will not matter much. What will matter significantly is whether our children felt love and acceptance in the home. It will greatly matter whether there was happiness and laughter, or bickering and contention.

I am convinced that before a child can be influenced for good by his or her parents, there must be a demonstration of respect and love.

President Joseph F. Smith said:

Fathers, if you wish your children to be taught in the principles of the gospel, if you wish them to be obedient to and united with you, love them! And prove to them that you do love them by your every word or act to them. For your own sake, for the love that should exist between you and your boys—however wayward they might be, . . . when you speak or talk to them, do it not in anger; do it not harshly, in a condemning spirit. Speak to them kindly; get down and weep with them, if necessary, and get them to shed tears with you if possible. Soften their hearts; get them to feel tenderly towards you. Use no lash and no violence, but . . . approach them with reason, with persuasion and love unfeigned. (The Liahona, Elders' Journal, October 17, 1911, pp. 260-61.)

Many suggestions could be enumerated as to what can and should be done to make our homes places of refuge and happiness.

Once a father determines that a high priority in his life is to see that his wife and his children are happy, then he will do all in his power to bring it about. I am not just speaking of satisfying material desires, but of filling other vital needs, such as the need for appreciation, compliments, comforting, encouraging, listening, and love and affection.

If with pleasure you are viewing Anything your child is doing, If you like him, if you love him, Let him know. Don't withhold appreciation Until others give expression— If he wins your commendation Tell him so. More than fame and more than money Is a disposition sunny, And some hearty warm approval Makes one glad. So you think some praise is due him, Now's the time to give it to him; Tie him close with loving language From his dad. [^1] [^2]

Fatherhood is a supreme opportunity in life. These words directed to fathers by President David O. McKay should be framed by every father:

When one puts businesses or pleasure, or the earning of additional income, above his home, he that moment starts on the downgrade to soul weakness. When the club becomes more attractive to any man than his home, it is time for him to confess in bitter shame that he has failed to measure up to the supreme opportunity of his life, and flunked in the final test of true manhood.

The poorest shack in which love prevails over a united family is of far greater value to God and future humanity than any other riches. In such a home God can work miracles, and will work miracles. Pure hearts in a pure home are always in whispering distance of Heaven. (Church News, September 7, 1968, p. 4.)

Fathers need to evaluate the spirit in their homes.

Second, fathers should teach their children principles of truth and help them to understand those principles.

In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord directed fathers to bring up their children in light and truth. He rebuked several because of their failure to do so. Each father would do well to review those principles given in Doctrine and Covenants, section 93, to Joseph Smith, Jr., Frederick G. Williams, Sidney Rigdon, and Newel K. Whitney.

In this revelation the Lord states that Satan "cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the tradition of their fathers." (Doctrine and Covenants 93:39.) The "tradition of their fathers" likely refers to the bad examples and teachings of fathers.

We must remember that this world is a telestial environment. Our children grow up in this environment. They are constantly exposed to television programs and movies that depict the most seamy and perverse side of life. They are barraged with slogans and advertising designed to induce them to practices that rob them of spirituality.

Some fathers leave solely to the mother or to the school the responsibility of shaping a child's ideas and standards. Too often television and movie screens shape our children's values.

We should not assume that public schools always reinforce teachings given in the home concerning ethical and moral conduct. We have seen introduced into many school systems false ideas about the theory of man's development from lower forms of life, teachings that there are no absolute values, attempts to repudiate beliefs regarded as supernatural, permissive attitudes toward sexual freedom that give sanction to immoral behavior and "alternative life-styles," such as lesbianism, homosexuality, and other perverse practices.

Such teachings not only tend to undermine the faith and morals of our young people, but they also deny the existence of God, who gave absolute laws, and the divinity of Jesus Christ. Surely we can see the moral contradiction of some who argue for the preservation of endangered species but who also sanction the abortion of unborn humans.

There is a solution, and it is that the Lord expects great things from the fathers of Israel. Fathers must take time to find out what their children are being taught and then take steps to correct false information and teaching.

I know fathers who inquire of their children each evening to determine firsthand what their children are being taught in school and what needs to be corrected. Then, if necessary, they instruct them in what the Lord has revealed. This is application of the principles that "light and truth forsake that evil one." (Doctrine and Covenants 93:37.)

The Sunday meeting schedule has been implemented to give fathers more time on the Sabbath to teach their children. This is a golden opportunity for families to study the scriptures and for children to receive instruction from their parents. Blessed is the household that does this on a consistent basis.

What should we teach? The Lord has revealed the specific curriculum that parents should teach. Note His words: "Teach it unto your children, that all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence."

As further noted in this scripture, the fundamental doctrines consist of the doctrine of the Fall, the mission of Christ and His atonement, and the first principles and ordinances of the gospel, which include faith in Christ, repentance, baptism for a remission of sins, and the gift of the Holy Ghost as the means to a sanctified life. (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 6:57-59.)

With few exceptions, righteous sons and daughters who have attained eternal blessings are not just physically begotten by their fathers. They are spiritually regenerated by the examples and teachings of their parents.

Nephi, a Book of Mormon prophet, provided a standard for all latter-day homes by this practice: "We talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, and we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sins." (2 Nephi 25:26.)

Great fathers lead their children to Christ.

Third, fathers should set in order their own household.

Such was the Lord's counsel to fathers in early Church history, and such is His timely counsel to us today!

Setting our homes in order is keeping the commandments of God. This brings harmony and love in the home between spouse and companion and between parents and children. It is daily family prayer. It is teaching our families to understand the gospel of Jesus Christ. It is each family member keeping the commandments of God. It is husband and wife being worthy to receive a temple recommend, all family members receiving the ordinances of exaltation, and the family being sealed together for eternity. It is being free from excessive debt, with family members paying honest tithes and offerings.

Are our homes in order?

In a revelation given to President John Taylor, the Lord directed this message to the priesthood:

I call upon the heads of families to put their houses in order according to the law of God, . . . and to purify themselves before me, and to purge out iniquity from their households. And I will bless and be with you, saith the Lord, and ye shall gather together in your holy places wherein ye assemble to call upon me, and ye shall ask for such things as are right, and I will hear your prayers, and my Spirit and power shall be with you, and my blessing shall rest upon you, upon your families, your dwellings and your households, upon your flocks and herds and fields, your orchards and vineyards, and upon all that pertains to you. (Revelation given through President John Taylor at Salt Lake City, Utah Territory, October 13, 1882, Church Archives, pp. 2-3.)

Yes, these times require great things from fathers, and so does the Lord. Three requirements of fathers are: to create homes where love and the Spirit of the Lord may abide, to bring up their children in light and truth, and to set their homes in order.

As I travel throughout the Church and see faithful families, I say, "Thank God for exemplary fathers and mothers." As I see faithful young people and am proud of their accomplishments, I say, "Thank God for diligent fathers and mothers."

Fatherhood is not a matter of station or wealth; it is a matter of desire, diligence, and determination to see one's family exalted in the celestial kingdom. If that prize is lost, nothing else really matters.

I know of families who have as their goal that each member of the family and posterity will arrive in their heavenly home—the celestial kingdom—with no vacant chairs. They review this objective at every family reunion and mention it frequently as they mingle together between reunions.

God bless the fathers in Israel to do well the work within the walls of their own homes. With His help they shall succeed in this, their most important responsibility.

---
Notas:
[^1] From my youth I have searched the scriptures.
[^2] I have tried to honestly face the challenge or question presented with a sincere desire to solve it as Jesus would solve it.
