Ezra Taft Benson, Come unto Christ ( 1983)

Chapter Ten

The Kingdom of God Is among You

Behold, the kingdom of God is [among] you. (Luke 17:21)

Mormonism, as it is known to the world, has emerged as a worldwide church. The growth phenomenon alone (now over five million members) has focused attention on the Church. Indeed, one of our major challenges is to cope with growth. But generally speaking, people are not attracted to an organization or a church simply because it is growing. There must be other reasons that explain the appeal.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has a distinctive message. If our message is true—as we proclaim it is—it constitutes the most important message for mankind since the resurrection of our Lord.

Most are familiar with the fact that the major Protestant denominations came about as a protest movement against the dominant church. A few courageous men sought to reform the church internally, but this was met with resistance. Thus the great Reformation movement was born—and with it a multiplicity of sects, each emphasizing their peculiar interpretation of the Bible.

The reformers recognized error and attempted to correct it. Martin Luther said: "I have sought nothing beyond reforming the Church in conformity with the Holy Scriptures." Also, "Christianity has ceased to exist among those who should have preserved it."

After America was discovered, many emigrated to this promised land to avoid religious persecution in their own countries. Among these was the Smith family who settled in Vermont. In 1796 Joseph Smith married Lucy Mack, whose people came from New Hampshire. They were a typical New England family who read the Bible and had prayer but, like many others, affiliated with no church. On December 23, 1805, their third son was born. He was given the name of his father—Joseph.

Western New York at this time was frontier territory. For those willing to work, clear the land, and till the virgin soil, New York offered economic opportunities. Thousands migrated there to better their lot. The Smith family arrived in 1816 and settled in the town of Palmyra, a short distance from Rochester.

The year 1820 and the year just preceding were filled with religious excitement. Ministers from various denominations came with revival camp meetings to convert the new settlers. Joseph Smith, Jr., heard their preaching but remained uncommitted to any faith. The more he listened, the more distressed he became, because each denomination professed to be right. In the midst of a contentious competition for converts, young Joseph asked, "Who of all these parties are right; or, are they all wrong together? If any one of them be right, which is it, and how shall I know it?" (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith-History 1:10.)

Under these circumstances, he read one day these words in his Bible: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering." (James 1:5-6.)

He later wrote: "Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. . . . I reflected on it again and again. . . . I at length came to the determination to ask of God, concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture." (Joseph Smith-History 1:12-13.)

Joseph sought a secluded spot in a wooded area near his father's farm. Here is a description, in his own words, of what transpired:

After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction.

But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being—just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him! (Joseph Smith-History 1:15-17.)

Young Joseph was instructed to join none of the churches, because the Savior said their doctrines had been corrupted. He was told that a restoration of Christ's original church would follow and that he would be an instrument in His hands in effecting this restoration.

We do not look on the Reformers as being wrong—they recognized that the pure doctrine of Christ was corrupted. But a reformation was not sufficient to correct the apostasy. There had to be a restoration of authority and ordinances, and these had to come through revelation. Roger Williams, founder of the Baptist movement in America, acknowledged this truth when he said, "There is no regularly constituted church on earth, nor any person qualified to administer any church ordinances; nor can there be until new apostles are sent by the Great Head of the Church for whose coming I am seeking."

Joseph Smith was greatly surprised at the reaction of friends and acquaintances when he informed them of his communication from God. A Methodist minister said it was "of the devil." Others ridiculed him. Referring to this experience, he wrote:

I have thought since, that I felt much like Paul, when he made his defense before King Agrippa, and related the account of the vision he had when he saw a light, and heard a voice; but still there were but few who believed him; some said he was dishonest, others said he was mad; and he was ridiculed and reviled. But all this did not destroy the reality of his vision. . . .

So it was with me. I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation. (Joseph Smith-History 1:24-25.)

This message constitutes the heart and the foundation of the Church. If Joseph Smith's testimony of seeing God the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, is not true, then Mormonism represents a false system of belief. But if this vision was reality—and there are thousands who attest that it is by the verifying witness of God's Holy Spirit—then the Church of Jesus Christ was and is restored on earth again.

What then is the unique message that the Church proclaims to others? Why is there such an effort to make others aware of this message?

The most evident truth that emerged from the Prophet's experience in 1820 was the reality of God's existence and the fact that Jesus Christ was indeed resurrected. He saw them as separate, distinct, glorified Personages who spoke to him as one man speaks to another.

The Prophet later learned that all men are literally offspring of God and that mortal life was not the beginning of our life, nor is death the end of our progress.

All men and women were spiritually created by God before they were endowed with a mortal body. We lived with Him as intelligent beings. We were given freedom of choice. What God said to Jeremiah could be said to every man, woman, and child who has come to earth: "Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee." (Jeremiah 1:5; italics added.)

Coming to earth was part of God's plan for eternal progress. Mortality was intended by God to be a short duration in which men could prove themselves to see if they would do all that the Lord commanded. While here, we receive a body, experience trial, and learn to overcome weaknesses associated with our physical bodies. We are here to learn self-mastery. By learning to govern our natures, our appetites and passions, we draw closer to the divine nature of God, thereby fulfilling the mandate of the Master to "be . . . perfect, even as [our] Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matthew 5:48.)

But no man can come to a more godly nature by himself. Before the earth was even created, a Savior was provided to redeem all of us from Adam's fall, which is physical death and spiritual darkness.

Central to our message is the fact that Jesus Christ did come to this earth and that He experienced a unique birth. Though He had a mortal mother, He did not have a mortal father. An angel from God testified to the paternity of Jesus after Mary declared her virgin status to him: "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy [being] which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God." (Luke 1:35.)

Yes, God was the Father of Jesus' fleshly tabernacle, and Mary—a mortal woman and a virgin—was His mother. He is, therefore, the only person born who rightfully deserves the title "the Only Begotten Son of God."

Because His Father was God, Jesus Christ had power that no other human had before or since. He was God in the flesh—even the Son of God. He therefore, as scripture records, had power to do many miracles: raise the dead, cause the lame to walk and the blind to receive their sight, and cast out evil spirits.

He provided His gospel as a source of constant sustenance and nourishment to keep each individual's spirituality alive forever. His own testimony is: "Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life." (John 4:14; italics added.)

Because He was God—even the Son of God—He could carry the weight and burden of other men's sins on Himself. Isaiah prophesied of our Savior's willingness to do this in these words: "Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows. . . . He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed." (Isaiah 53:4-5.)

That holy, unselfish act of voluntarily taking upon Himself the sins of all, and doing so out of His infinite love for each of us, was accomplished in the Garden of Gethsemane and on Calvary. Through that excruciating ordeal, He took the cup and drank. He suffered the pains of all men so we would not have to suffer. He endured the humiliation and insults of His persecutors without complaint or retaliation. He bore the flogging and then the ignominy of the brutal execution—the cross.

Because He was God—even the Son of God—He alone had the power of resurrection. And so on the third day following His burial, He came forth from the tomb alive and showed Himself to many.

Because Jesus Christ lives, resurrection will come to all mankind, good and evil. But individual salvation is predicated on more than just acknowledging His atoning sacrifice. Essentially, there must be effort on the part of the individual and compliance with ordinances prescribed by God Himself.

These consist of:

But even this is not sufficient to save a soul. No man or woman may come into the presence of God except it be by His grace and power.

Salvation consists of all men coming forward in the resurrection to graded degrees of glory, which are determined on the basis of righteous living. The Church affirms, on the basis of revelation, that there is not just a heaven or a hell to which men are assigned, but degrees of glory. As said by the apostle Paul, "There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars. . . . So also is the resurrection of the dead." (1 Corinthians 15:41-42; italics added.) Salvation is thus an on-going process until one has merited God's reward.

Again I emphasize that we believe salvation does not come by mere intellectual assent to Jesus or by administration of Church sacraments. It comes only through the atoning blood of Christ, which is made effective for the individual as he subscribes to the laws and ordinances of salvation. Then, through the grace of God and by the power of the Holy Ghost, one may attain a standard of holiness to comfortably enjoy the presence of our Heavenly Father and His Son.

The ultimate joy that may be experienced beyond mortality is the continuation of family love—the love of a husband and wife and the love of parents and children. God's highest reward is reserved for those who are eternally sealed together as a family unit. We believe that "till death do you part" contracts apply only to marriages for time. But when a marriage covenant is solemnized by one who holds the keys of priesthood authority, that marriage may endure for eternity. Such marriages are solemnized in sacred edifices called temples.

In temples we also perform vicarious ordinances of salvation for those of our departed loved ones who did not have the opportunity to receive the gospel in this life. These ordinances become efficacious for those who have died when those individuals demonstrate faith in Christ, repent of their sins, and accept vicarious baptism for the remission of their sins. Thus, in our Father's mercy every soul has opportunity to accept or reject the gospel message, either in this life or in the spirit world.

Much of what I have explained comes not just from the Bible, which we fully accept as God's revealed word so far as it was correctly translated, but also through latter-day revelation. We also accept the Book of Mormon to be the word of God—a record of the ancient inhabitants of the Western Hemisphere who were privileged to have the resurrected Lord minister to them. Other revelations to Joseph Smith have been canonized in a book of revelations called the Doctrine and Covenants.

We declare that God has not left man to grope in darkness as to His mind and will. By succession and ordination, there stands on earth today a prophet of God, whom we sustain and revere as president of the Church—prophet, seer, and revelator—the same as Moses of ancient days.

This is our message. It is intended for all mankind. The Church proclaims that God spoke in times past through His prophets, has spoken again in this dispensation, and speaks now through His appointed servants.

We announce that the kingdom of God is among us. The kingdom of heaven is coming shortly, preceded by the glorious second coming of our Lord. For this most glorious event we are attempting to prepare all mankind.

In a revelation through Joseph Smith, in the early days of the restored Church, the Savior addressed all of His children both in and out of the Church and said this:

Hearken, O ye people of my church, saith the voice of him who dwells on high, and whose eyes are upon all men; yea, verily I say: Hearken ye people from afar; and ye that are upon the islands of the sea, listen together. . . .

The voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days.

And they shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them.

Behold, this is mine authority, and the authority of my servants, and my preface unto the book of my commandments, which I have given them to publish unto you, O inhabitants of the earth. . . .

Wherefore, I the Lord, knowing the calamity which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth, called upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and spake unto him from heaven, and gave him commandments;

And also gave commandments to others, that they should proclaim these things unto the world. . . .

And also those to whom these commandments were given, might have power to lay the foundation of this church, and to bring it forth out of obscurity and out of darkness, the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth, with which I, the Lord, am well pleased, speaking unto the church collectively, and not individually. (Doctrine and Covenants 1:4-6, 17-18, 30.)

These are the words of Jesus Christ to His prophet and to all the world. This is why we are under obligation to see that this message is brought to men everywhere and why we declare it to be the most important message in the world.
