Ezra Taft Benson, Come unto Christ ( 1983)

Chapter Eleven

The Miracle of the Mustard Seed

Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a grain of mustardseed, which a man took, and sowed in his field: Which indeed is the least of all seeds: but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof. (Matthew 13:31-32)

That the Church of Jesus Christ would have an inconspicuous beginning and then enjoy phenomenal growth was predicted. Jesus used the comparison of the small mustard seed to describe the early beginning of His church. But eventually, He declared, that insignificant seed would become a great tree, and many would find refuge in its branches.

April 6, 1830, in the state of New York, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints had its beginning in this dispensation, a beginning that went largely unnoticed by the world. A small number of men and women, including the Prophet Joseph Smith, gathered at the home of Peter Whitmer, Sr., to witness and participate in the official organization of the Church. Today there are over five million members of the Church in seventy-two countries.

The prophet Daniel described the beginning and remarkable growth of the Church as a small stone that would become a great mountain and fill the entire earth. (See Daniel 2:34-35.)

As men have attempted to assess the Church at a given period of time, in many instances they have not been able to see its forward movement and potential. The growth of the Church, like the growth of grass or trees, has been almost imperceptible to the eye, but little by little, line by line, precept by precept, the Church has matured.

Simultaneous with the early development of the Church was a spirit of opposition and persecution. Wherever the tiny "mustard seed" was planted, attempts were made to frustrate its growth. But notwithstanding all the efforts to destroy the work—even the murder of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother—the Church prospered and grew. There were those who thought the Church would fail with the deaths of the martyrs, Joseph and Hyrum, but they did not perceive, as Daniel foretold, that this latter-day kingdom should "never be destroyed." (Daniel 2:44.)

Just before the Prophet's death, Brigham Young said, "The kingdom is organized; and, although as yet no bigger than a grain of mustard seed, the little plant is in a flourishing condition." (History of the Church 6:354.)

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is, as Daniel prophesied, a spiritual kingdom "cut out of the mountain without hands," meaning that it was begun through the intervention of God. It is not just another human institution. What other organizations or churches ascribe their founding to the declaration that messengers have come from the God of heaven with authority and power to restore ordinances and keys lost by apostasy?

The Church has survived exile from four states, the harassment and persecution of its members, an extermination order from a governor, the execution of its prophet, disenfranchisement by the government, and continuous persecution of its leaders and people. That is what this church endured and survived in the first sixty years of its history—and it was through such adversity, persecution, and impoverishment that the Church gained strength and matured. By the time Joseph F. Smith, the son of the Prophet's brother Hyrum, became president of the Church, he could say, "We have passed through the stages of infancy, . . . and are indeed approaching manhood and womanhood." (Conference Report, April 1909, p. 2.)

Opposition to the Church did not subside with the twentieth century, but gradually people came to see us for what we stood for, rather than what our enemies said about us. Our Mormon boys fought in two world wars and were recognized for their standards and principles. During the Great Depression of the 1930s, the Church came to be known for independence, self-reliance, and care of its own. During this century, Latter-day Saints distinguished themselves in the fields of science, education, medicine, business, and other endeavors.

The missionary force brought a harvest of converts from all over the world. Seeds planted abroad as missions became stakes. Truly Zion had put on her beautiful garments; her borders had become enlarged. When Joseph Fielding Smith, son of President Joseph F. Smith, became president of the Church, he declared: "We are coming of age as a Church and as a people. We have attained the stature and strength that is enabling us to fulfill the commission given us by God through the Prophet Joseph Smith that we should carry the glad tidings of the restoration to every nation and to all people." (British Area Conference Report, August 27, 1971, p. 5.)

Two years later President Smith's successor, President Harold B. Lee, said: "Today we are witnessing the demonstration of the Lord's hand even in the midst of his saints, the members of the Church. Never in this dispensation, and perhaps never before in any single period, has there been such a feeling of urgency among members of this church as today. Her boundaries are being enlarged, her stakes are being strengthened. . . . No longer might this Church be thought of as the 'Utah Church,' or as an 'American church,' but the membership of the Church is now distributed over the earth." (Conference Report, April 1973.)

Then President Spencer W. Kimball later added: "Since we last met, . . . we have witnessed much growth and expansion of the Lord's kingdom. . . .

"We have established new missions covering almost all of the free world, and we are turning our attention more diligently now to one day sharing the gospel with our Father's children behind the so-called iron and bamboo curtains. We have need to prepare for that day. The urgency of that preparation weighs heavily upon us. That day may come with more swiftness than we realize.

"Every year now we are adding approximately a hundred new stakes. . . . I rejoice with you, my brothers and sisters, in these statistical evidences of the progress and growth throughout Zion." (Conference Report, April 1979, pp. 3-4.)

As we look back on the progress of the Church, we can rejoice that the progress has been marvelous and wonderful. We can thank the Lord for His merciful blessings. We must not hesitate to ascribe the success and progress of the Church to His omnipotent direction.

But now what of the future?

We assuredly expect additional progress, growth, and increased spirituality. We will see our missionaries cover the earth with the message of the restoration. We will see temples in every land where the gospel has penetrated, symbolizing the truth that families, living and deceased, may be joined together in love and eternal family associations. But we must also be reminded that there will be ever-present efforts to obstruct the work.

In 1845 the Quorum of the Twelve issued an epistle to the heads of state in the world. I quote from one paragraph: "As this work progresses in its onward course, and becomes more and more an object of political and religious interest and excitement, no king, ruler, or subject, no community or individual, will stand neutral. All will at length be influenced by one spirit or the other; and will take sides either for or against the kingdom of God." (James R. Clark, ed., Messages of the First Presidency, Bookcraft, 1965, 1:257.)

That day is now here. Opposition has been and will be the lot of the Saints of the kingdom in any age. The finger of scorn has been pointed at us in the past, and we may expect it in the future. We expect to see men in high places defend the Church; there will also be "pharaohs" who know neither Joseph nor his brethren. The seed, planted and watered in 1830, has now matured to a fully grown tree for all to see. Some will seek the refuge of its shade in the heat of the day, but none will be neutral in their appraisal of its fruit.

The Church will continue its opposition to error, falsehood, and immorality. The mission of the Church is to herald the message of salvation and make unmistakably clear the pathway to exaltation. Our mission is to prepare a people for the coming of the Lord. As the world drifts farther away from God and standards of virtue and honor, we may expect opposition to the work of the Church. We may expect to see the time, as the Book of Mormon forecasts, when "multitudes . . . among all the nations of the Gentiles, [gather] to fight the lamb of God." (1 Nephi 14:13.) The power of God and the righteousness of the Saints will be the means by which the Church is spared.

Never before in our history has there been greater need for faithfulness among our members. Now is the time for all who claim membership in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to stand firm and demonstrate their allegiance to the kingdom of God. It cannot be done as a critic or as an idle spectator on the sidelines. This is the time to answer the rally cry of our fathers:

Who's on the Lords side? Who? Now is the time to show; We ask it fearlessly; Who's on the Lord's side? Who? —Hymns, no. 175

Let us make President John Taylor's slogan our commitment: "The Kingdom of God or nothing!"

President Heber J. Grant and his counselors in the First Presidency gave this counsel to the Saints on the anniversary of the one-hundredth birthday of the Church:

Refrain from evil; do that which is good. Visit the sick, comfort those who are in sorrow, clothe the naked, feed the hungry, care for the widow and the fatherless. Observe the laws of health which the Lord has revealed, and keep yourselves unspotted from the sins of the world. Pay your tithes and offerings, and the Lord will open the windows of heaven and pour out blessings until there shall not be room to contain them. Be obedient to the laws of God and the civil laws of the country in which you reside, and uphold' and honor those who are chosen to administer them. (Improvement Era, May 1930, p. 458.)

This is timeless counsel for the Saints of God in any age.

This is the spiritual kingdom of God moving forward in its divine course to fill the earth, a truly marvelous work and a wonder! As we contemplate the miracle of the mustard seed, let us remember the prophecy of Joseph Smith, words that I testify are true:

"No unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing; persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done." (History of the Church 4:540.)
