Ezra Taft Benson, Come unto Christ ( 1983)

Chapter Thirteen

"Arise and Shine Forth"

For thus shall my church be called in the last days, even The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Verily I say unto you all: Arise and shine forth, that thy light may be a standard for the nations. (Doctrine and Covenants 115:4-5)

When I came into the Twelve in 1943, there were 937,000 members of the Church. Because of World War II, the missionary program was greatly retarded. Our sacrament meeting attendance was nineteen percent. Our priesthood attendance was thirty-one percent. There were no stakes outside the United States.

We usually traveled to conferences or to the missions of the Church by train, sometimes by boat, but seldom by plane. Travel to outlying stakes would take several days at best. After World War II, the great airplane manufacturing companies were converted to civilian production, and commercial airlines came into their own. Conferences were broadcast by radio; there was no television nor sophisticated satellite communication.

Since that time some forty years ago, we have seen the Church's phenomenal growth throughout the world, particularly in South America, Central America, Mexico, and the Far East. This growth has been nothing short of miraculous.

In 1857 Wilford Woodruff prophesied that the Lamanites would rise up in strength and that "a nation [would] be born in a day." (Journal of Discourses 4:231.) Have we not witnessed the fulfillment of that prophecy?

Since World War II, we have seen another prophecy fulfilled. This is the return of Judah to Jerusalem—another miracle before our eyes. These occurrences have taken place within the past forty years. What marvels await our eyes in the next decade or two!

To give some idea of the recent dramatic growth of the Church, let me give you some figures:

The Church was restored and organized in 1830. It took almost one hundred years for the Church to have one hundred stakes on the earth at the same time.

The 200th stake was not formed until 1952, only twenty-four years after the first hundred came into existence.

It took eight years (1952-1960) to form the 300th stake, four years for the 400th, and six years for the 500th. The 500th stake came into existence in 1970.

Only nine years later, the 1,000th stake was organized in Nauvoo, Illinois.

During President Spencer W. Kimball's administration, the number of stakes in the Church has more than doubled.

President Kimball and I came into the Twelve in 1943 when there were only 144 stakes. We have seen over 1,200 stakes created since we became General Authorities.

Here's another interesting fact: The Church did not organize its first stake outside the United States and Canada until 1958. That was in New Zealand. Since that time, over 400 stakes have been formed outside the USA and Canada.

These figures illustrate the recent phenomenal growth of the Church, particularly since the administration of President David O. McKay. Truly The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints today is a world church.

Nonmembers sometimes inquire, "What is a stake?" Members likewise inquire, "What is the significance of a stake? What does it mean to us as members?"

To nonmembers, a stake is similar to a diocese in other churches. A stake is a geographical area comprising a number of wards (local congregations) and presided over by a presidency.

To members, the term stake is a symbolic expression. Picture in your mind a great tent held up by cords extended to many stakes that are firmly secured in the ground. The prophets likened latter-day Zion to a great tent encompassing the earth. That tent was supported by cords fastened to stakes. Those stakes, of course, are various geographical organizations spread out over the earth. Presently Israel is being gathered to the various stakes of Zion.

In order to explain the purpose of a stake, let me cite a few passages of scripture. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read:

"Inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents. For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized." (68:25-26; italics added.)

Here you see one of the major purposes of stakes. They are organized to help parents "who have children in Zion" to teach them the gospel of Jesus Christ and administer the ordinances of salvation. Stakes are formed to perfect the Saints, and that development begins in the home with effective gospel instruction.

Only after a stake is organized may the full Church program be authorized for the benefit of the members. This means priesthood quorums for young men and adult males (high priests, seventies, and elders) and the auxiliary programs of the Church. These exist to assist the home in building and strengthening testimonies of the gospel and preparing for spiritual growth during our probation on earth.

In another revelation the Lord states: "For Zion must increase in beauty, and in holiness; her borders must be enlarged; her stakes must be strengthened; yea, verily I say unto you, Zion must arise and put on her beautiful garments." (Doctrine and Covenants 82:14.)

Here the Lord declares another great purpose of a stake: to be a beautiful emblem for all the world to see. The phrase "put on her beautiful garments" refers, of course, to the inner sanctity that must be attained by every member who calls himself or herself a Saint. Zion is "the pure in heart." (Doctrine and Covenants 97:21.)

Stakes of Zion are strengthened and Zion's borders enlarged as members reflect the standard of holiness that the Lord expects of His chosen people.

"Put on thy strength, O Zion" is an expression of prophets through the ages. This was interpreted by the Prophet Joseph Smith in this manner: "[This has] reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage." (Doctrine and Covenants 113:8.)

Yet another revelation from the Lord gives this explanation of the purpose of stakes: "'Verily I say unto you all: Arise and shine forth, that thy light may be a standard for the nations; and that the gathering together upon the land of Zion and upon her stakes, may be for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth." (Doctrine and Covenants 115:5-6.)

In this revelation is a command to let our light so shine that it becomes a standard for the nations. A standard is a rule of measure by which one determines exactness or perfection. The Saints are to be a standard of holiness for the world to see. That is the beauty of Zion.

The Lord then reveals that the stakes of Zion are to be "for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth." Stakes are a defense for the Saints from enemies both seen and unseen. The defense is direction provided through priesthood channels that strengthens testimony and promotes family solidarity and individual righteousness.

In His preface to His revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord warned: "The day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion." (1:35.)

Today, over 150 years after this revelation was given, we see the fulfillment of this prediction where Satan, in undiminished fury, is displaying power over "his own dominion"—the earth. Never has his influence been so great, and only those who have taken the Holy Spirit as their guide—and followed counsel from priesthood leaders—will be spared from the havoc of his evil influence.

The Lord also states in that prefatory revelation that He will have power over His Saints, "and shall reign in their midst." (1:36.) He does this as He works through His chosen servants and stake and ward authorities.

The Book of Mormon prophet Nephi foresaw the day when the Saints would be scattered in stakes all over the world. He saw the time when the Lord would extend His protection to them when menaced by storms of destruction that threatened their existence. Nephi prophesied: "And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld the power of the lamb of God that it descended upon the saints of the church of the Lamb and upon the covenant people of the Lord, who were scattered upon all the face of the earth; and they were armed with righteousness and with the power of God in great glory." (Book of Mormon, 1 Nephi 14:14.)

Through revelation we know that there will be perils, calamities, and persecution in the latter days, but through righteousness the Saints may be spared. The promise of the Lord in the Book of Mormon is sure: "He will preserve the righteous by his power." (1 Nephi 22:17.)

The Purposes of Stakes

From these revelations, we can see that a stake has at least four purposes:

We build temples only where we have stakes. The blessings and ordinances of the temple prepare one for exaltation. Of course, it is not possible for every stake to have a temple, but we are presently witnessing some remarkable, yes, miraculous developments, in the building of temples in different parts of the world. Such a program permits members of the Church to receive the full blessings of the Lord.

Our Duty as Latter-day Saints

With the purposes of stakes in mind, let us summarize our duty as Latter-day Saints.

Never has the Church had the opportunity it has today. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the most attractive religious body in the world. Its image has never been as good as it is today! We are known increasingly today for what we are and not for what our enemies have said about us.

It is possible to live in the world and not partake of the sins of the world. We are demonstrating that. That is what the Lord expects of us. This is the day when we should give it everything we have. We need to raise our sights and take advantage of the great and unprecedented opportunities that are ours as Latter-day Saints.

As we face an uncertain future in the free world, as we face the threat of the anti-Christ and its penetration into our free countries in almost every segment of our society, people are hungry for an anchor, for something that will give them inner peace and a feeling of security. They cannot find it among the churches of the world today. They cannot find it in our uncertain economic system.

In one sense, we live in the worst of times, because sin seems to be almost everywhere and is increasing. Never has the devil been so well organized, and never has he had so many emissaries working for him. His thrust seems to be at everything that is good and uplifting and character-building. Particularly his thrust is at the home and family and at our youth. The basic principles and ideals of the past are being challenged today as never before.

On the other hand, we live in the best of times. The gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored in its fullness, together with His holy priesthood, to bless our Father's children. Our message is a world message. The Church is a world organization—the most important organization, with the greatest message in all the world.

The Lord has commanded us to arise and shine and to be a light unto the world. Let us do so as individuals so that our example will prosper the work in all the earth. Yes, let us heed the words of the great Book of Mormon prophet Moroni: "Put on thy beautiful garments, O daughter of Zion; and strengthen thy stakes and enlarge thy borders forever, that thou mayest no more be confounded, that the covenants of the Eternal Father which he hath made unto thee, O house of Israel, may be fulfilled." (Moroni 10:31.)
