Ezra Taft Benson, Come unto Christ ( 1983)

Chapter Fourteen

Prepare for the Great Day of the Lord

He that feareth me shall be looking forth for the great day of the Lord to come, even for the signs of the coming of the Son of Man. (Doctrine and Covenants 45:39)

During the last week of our Lord's mortal life, He was privately approached on the Mount of Olives by His disciples. They asked Him two questions, the first of which was: "Tell us when shall these things be which thou hast said concerning the destruction of the temple, and the Jews?" (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:4.)

The basis for their earnest inquiry was a prophecy by Jesus that had left even the disciples stunned. While standing in the temple precincts, Jesus had declared: "There shall not be left here, upon this temple, one stone upon another that shall not be thrown down." (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:3.)

The temple in Jerusalem was a magnificent structure. It rested on the same site as the temple of Solomon, which had been largely destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, in the siege of Jerusalem. With the help of King Cyrus the Great, whom the Lord inspired, the Jews returned from the Babylonian captivity and erected a second temple, though much inferior to Solomon's.

Later Herod the Great became the leader and undertook to reconstruct the temple. He spared no expense or labor to restore that building to the beauty and magnificence of the days of Solomon. The project took about forty-six years to complete, six years longer than the Salt Lake Temple in pioneer days. According to Josephus, a Jewish historian, some of the stones used in the foundation were prodigious in size, measuring approximately sixty feet in length. Can you imagine how improbable it must have seemed to Jesus' disciples that one stone would not be left on another? Yet, thirty-seven years later, when the Romans invaded Jerusalem, that prophecy was literally fulfilled. It is said that after Roman soldiers burned the temple, they dug up the foundation stones in the hopes of finding a treasure buried there.

The Savior also prophesied concerning the fate of the Jewish nation: "This people shall be destroyed and scattered among all nations. . . . And it shall come to pass that this generation of Jews shall not pass away until every desolation which I have told you concerning them shall come to pass." (Doctrine and Covenants 45:19, 21.)

That desolation came as predicted. In A.D. 66, the Jews rebelled against the Romans. The Roman army invaded Judea, and in one of the most bloody and horrible sieges in history, Jerusalem was eventually overcome. The siege lasted for about four years. During that time, it was estimated that over one million Jews were killed and 97,000 were taken captive and sold as slaves.

Thus, in just four decades following the crucifixion, the nation, the city, and the temple were all destroyed! As one modern historian recorded, "The destruction of the temple marked the end . . . of the Jewish state. . . . Judea was almost shorn of Jews, and those that remained lived on the edge of starvation." (Will Durant, The Story of Civilization, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1944, 3:545.)

Later in the first century A.D., the Jews, under the leadership of a false messiah, again attempted to recover their homeland. The Romans also crushed that rebellion; Judea was laid waste; and the remaining Jews were scattered throughout the Empire. Again the historian chronicles the literal fulfillment of Jesus' prophecy: "No other people has ever known so long an exile, or so hard a fate. . . . Scattered into every province and beyond, condemned to poverty and humiliation, unbefriended even by philosophers and saints, they retired from public affairs into private study and worship." (Ibid., 3:549.)

The prophecy of Jesus was sure and certain: "This people shall be destroyed and scattered among all nations." A lesson drawn from the Jewish catastrophe, and applicable to our times, was given by the Lord Himself in modern revelation: "My words shall not pass away; but all shall be fulfilled." (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:35.)

The second question asked by the disciples on the Mount of Olives, and the one pertinent to our time, was: "What is the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world, or the destruction of the wicked, which is the end of the world?" (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:4.)

The Lord has designated these days in which we live as "the times of the Gentiles." The Gentile nations are essentially the so-called Christian nations—North and South America and the European nations from which we came. "The times of the Gentiles" refers to that period of time extending from when the gospel was restored to the world (1830) to when the gospel will again be preached to the Jews—after the Gentiles have rejected it. This is how the Lord explained it: "When the times of the Gentiles is come in, a light shall break forth among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel; but they receive it not; for they perceive not the light, and they turn their hearts from me because of the precepts of men. And in that generation shall the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled." (Doctrine and Covenants 45:28-30; italics added.)

We will know when the times of the Gentiles are approaching fulfillment by these signs:

"In that day shall be heard of wars and rumors of wars, and the whole earth shall be in commotion, and men's hearts shall fail them, and they shall say that Christ delayeth his coming until the end of the earth. And the love of men shall wax cold, and iniquity shall abound." (Doctrine and Covenants 45:26-27.)

"And again, this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come, or the destruction of the wicked." (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:31.)

Are we not witnessing the fulfillment of these signs today? The gospel is being extended to all nations that permit our missionaries to penetrate their countries. The Church is prospering and growing. Yet in undiminished fury, and with an anxiety that his time is short (and it is), Satan, that great adversary to all men, is attempting to destroy all that we hold dear.

We constantly hear or read of wars and rumors of wars. Atheism, agnosticism, immorality, and dishonesty are flaunted in our society. Desertion, cruelty, divorce, and infidelity have become commonplace, leading to a disintegration of the family. Truly we live in the times of which the Savior spoke, when "the love of men shall wax cold, and iniquity shall abound."

The rejection of the testimony of the servants of God by the nations of the world will bring the consequence of greater calamities, for the Lord Himself declared:

After your testimony cometh the testimony of earthquakes, that shall cause groanings in the midst of her, and men shall fall upon the ground and shall not be able to stand.

And also cometh the testimony of the voice of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds.

And all things shall be in commotion; and surely, men's hearts shall fail them; for fear shall come upon all people. (Doctrine and Covenants 88:89-91.)

And there shall be men standing in that generation, that shall not pass until they shall see an overflowing scourge; for a desolating sickness shall cover the land.

But my disciples shall stand in holy places, and shall not be moved; but among the wicked, men shall lift up their voices and curse God and die.

And there shall be earthquakes also in divers places, and many desolations; yet men will harden their hearts against me, and they will take up the sword, one against another, and they will kill one another. (Doctrine and Covenants 45:31-33.)

The world will present a scene of conflict such as has never before been experienced. Still, men's hearts will be hardened to the revelations from heaven. Even greater signs shall then be given to manifest the approaching great day of the Lord:

"And they shall see signs and wonders, for they shall be shown forth in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath. And they shall behold blood, and fire, and vapors of smoke. And before the day of the Lord shall come, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon be turned into blood, and the stars fall from heaven." (Doctrine and Covenants 45:40-42.)

I realize this is an unpleasant topic on which to dwell. I take no delight in its portrayal, nor do I look forward to the day when calamities shall come upon mankind. But these words are not my own; the Lord has spoken them. Knowing what we know as His servants, can we hesitate to raise a warning voice to all who will listen so that they may be prepared for the days ahead? Silence in the face of such calamity is sin!

But to an otherwise gloomy picture there is a bright side—the coming of our Lord in all His glory. His coming will be both glorious and terrible, depending on the spiritual condition of those who remain.

One appearance will be to the righteous saints who have gathered to the New Jerusalem here in America. In this place of refuge they will be safe from the wrath of the Lord, which will be poured out without measure on all nations. Modern revelation provides this description:

"And the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be called Zion. And it shall come to pass among the wicked, that every man that will not take his sword against his neighbor must needs flee unto Zion for safety. And there shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under heaven; and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another." (Doctrine and Covenants 45:67-69.)

Another appearance of the Lord will be to the Jews. To these beleaguered sons of Judah, surrounded by hostile Gentile armies, who again threaten to overrun Jerusalem, the Savior—their Messiah—will set His feet on the Mount of Olives, "and it shall cleave in twain, and the earth shall tremble, and reel to and fro, and the heavens also shall shake." (Doctrine and Covenants 45:48.)

The Lord Himself will then rout the Gentile armies, decimating their forces. (See Ezekiel 38-39.) Judah will be spared, no longer to be persecuted and scattered. The Jews will then approach their Deliverer and ask, "What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?" He will say to them: "These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God. And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king." (Doctrine and Covenants 45:51-53.)

What a touching drama this will be! Jesus—Prophet, Messiah, King—will be welcomed in His own country!

Jerusalem will become an eternal city of peace. The sons of Judah will see this promise fulfilled: "After their pain, [the tribe of Judah] shall be sanctified in holiness before the Lord, to dwell in his presence day and night, forever and ever." (Doctrine and Covenants 133:35.)

Yet another appearance of Christ will be to the rest of the world. Here is His description of His coming: "The Lord shall be red in his apparel, and his garments like him that treadeth in the wine-vat. And so great shall be the glory of his presence that the sun shall hide his face in shame, and the moon shall withhold its light, and the stars shall be hurled from their places." (Doctrine and Covenants 133:48-49.)

All nations will see Him "in the clouds of heaven, clothed with power and great glory; with all the holy angels. . . . And the Lord shall utter his voice, and all the ends of the earth shall hear it; and the nations of the earth shall mourn, and they that have laughed shall see their folly. And calamity shall cover the mocker, and the scorner shall be consumed; and they that have watched for iniquity shall be hewn down and cast into the fire." (Doctrine and Covenants 45:44, 49-50.)

When the Savior spoke of these signs and prophecies to His disciples in Jerusalem, they were apprehensive. He said to them, "Be not troubled, for, when all these things shall come to pass, ye may know that the promises which have been made unto you shall be fulfilled." (Doctrine and Covenants 45:35.)

Do we realize we are living in the days of the fulfillment of these signs and wonders? We are among those who will see many of these prophecies fulfilled. Just as certain as was the destruction of the temple at Jerusalem and the scattering of the Jews, so shall these words of the Savior be certain to our generation.

We know not the day nor the hour of His coming, but of this we may feel assured: We stand close to the great day of the Lord! In His words of modern revelation, He implores, "Seek the face of the Lord always." (Doctrine and Covenants 101:38.)

We will live in the midst of economic, political, and spiritual instability. When these signs are observed—unmistakable evidences that His coming is nigh—we need not be troubled, but "stand . . . in holy places, and be not moved, until the day of the Lord come." (Doctrine and Covenants 87:8.)

Holy men and women stand in holy places, and these holy places consist of our temples, our chapels, our homes, and the stakes of Zion, which are, as the Lord declares, "for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth." (Doctrine and Covenants 115:6.) We must heed the Lord's counsel to the Saints of this dispensation: "Prepare yourselves for the great day of the Lord." (Doctrine and Covenants 133:10.)

This preparation must consist of more than just casual membership in the Church. We must be guided by personal revelation and the counsel of the living prophet so we will not be deceived. Our Lord has indicated who, among Church members, will stand when He appears:

"At that day, when I shall come in my glory, shall the parable be fulfilled which I spake concerning the ten virgins.

"For they that are wise and have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived—verily I say unto you, they shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire, but shall abide the day.

"And the earth shall be given unto them for an inheritance; and they shall multiply and wax strong, and their children shall grow up without sin unto salvation.

"For the Lord shall be in their midst, and his glory shall be upon them, and he will be their king and their lawgiver." (Doctrine and Covenants 45:56-59; italics added.)

President Wilford Woodruff further prophesied in 1894: "Can you tell me where the people are who will be shielded and protected from these great calamities and judgments which are even now at our doors? I'll tell you. The priesthood of God who honor their priesthood and who are worthy of their blessings are the only ones who shall have this safety and protection. They are the only mortal beings. No other people have a right to be shielded from these judgments. They are at our doors; not even this people will escape them entirely." (Young Women's Journal 5 [August 1894]: 512.)

Will we be among those who are faithful to the end? Will we endure? Are we prepared? Can we live in the world and not partake of the sins of the world? Will we "arise and shine forth," as the Lord has commanded? Will we be a light and a "standard for the nations"?

Such is our challenge. Therefore, let us prepare for the great day of the Lord.
