# The Testimony of Mark

### The Testimony of Mark
Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)
 
 

4

THE TESTIMONY OF MARK

S. KENT BROWN

Few any longer doubt the pivotal place of the Gospel of Mark not only in inspiring the coming forth of the other records of Jesus' ministry but also in transmitting the essential message of Jesus' messiahship. Since the rise of the critical study of the Gospels, Mark's work has been singled out most frequently as the one record closest to the ministry of Jesus, both in time and in tone. And when we understand the reasons for this lofty assessment, we also quickly perceive the centrality of Mark for any serious study of the other three records that set out to encapsulate the Savior's earthly work.

Mark in the View of the Earliest Church

Any evaluation of the second Gospel must begin with the earliest assessment of Mark's record, which appeared in a work compiled by the second-century churchman Papias and is now preserved only in later quotations. The passage appeared in Eusebius's Ecclesiastical History:

This also the elder used to say. Mark, indeed, having been the interpreter of Peter, wrote accurately, howbeit not in order, all that he recalled of what was either said or done by the Lord. For he heard nothing of the Lord, nor was he a follower of his, but, at a later date (as I said) of Peter; who used to adapt his instructions to the needs [of the hearers], but not with a view to putting together the teachings of the Lord in orderly fashion: so that Mark did no wrong in thus writing some things as he recalled them. For he kept a single aim in view: not to omit anything of what he heard, nor to state anything therein falsely. 1

While the majority of modern commentators discredit the historical reliability of Papias's notice, the reasons advanced to disregard it appear seriously flawed upon close inspection. Papias, writing probably between A.D. 120 and 140, exhibits every evidence of having been a reliable recorder who drew on knowledge of Mark's activities, which reached back at least two generations before himself, that is, well into the first century, thus underscoring the tradition's age and reliability. 2 As he wrote it, his source for evaluating Mark was "the Elder" or "the Presbyter," usually thought to be a man named John from Asia Minor. 3 While Papias does not accept the Elder's story uncritically (since he makes it clear that he is relying on the Elder's accounting and not on his own judgment), we do learn how Mark's work was viewed in early Christian circles.

1. Mark was an interpreter of Peter. This should not surprise us, since Peter, who was a moving force in the mission to Gentiles as well as to Jews, would not have spoken Greek with fluency, coming as he did from the fishing colony along the shores of the Sea of Galilee. That Mark served as a companion to Peter is also attested by 1 Peter 5:13.

2. Mark "wrote accurately, although not in order, all that he recalled" of the Lord's words and deeds. Mark has frequently been characterized as a writer who imposed his own order on the events that he narrated. 4 Whatever discrepancies may have existed in the memories of early Christians regarding the order and completeness of Mark's account, the order of his narration must have derived ultimately from Peter, who, in his preaching, "used to adapt his instructions to the needs" of the moment.

3. Mark himself was not one of Jesus' disciples, an observation that makes perfect sense because it is certain that he was the John Mark whose mother's home in Jerusalem served as a meeting place for early disciples (Acts 12:12-17) and who later accompanied Paul and Barnabas on their missionary journey to Cyprus and Perga in Pamphylia (Acts 12:25-13:13). Thus, Mark grew up in Jerusalem, was doubtless young when Jesus came there before his crucifixion, and was therefore probably not among Jesus' Galilean disciples.

Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons in the late second century, had this to say about Mark and the other Gospel records: "Matthew composed his Gospel among the Hebrews in their own language, while Peter and Paul proclaimed the Gospel in Rome and founded the community. After their death Mark, the disciple and interpreter of Peter, transmitted his preaching to us in written form. And Luke, who was Paul's follower, set down in a book the gospel which he preached. Then John, the Lord's disciple who had reclined on his breast, himself produced the Gospel when he was staying at Ephesus, in the province of Asia." 5

Two items become clear immediately. First, Irenaeus was aware of Mark's relationship to Peter, which consisted in Mark's service as an interpreter and his dependence on Peter's preaching for the material in the text of his Gospel. Second, Irenaeus stated that Mark wrote his account after Peter's death, an idea not explicitly found in Papias's fragmentary narration. Since Irenaeus doubtless drew his information from Papias, the former correctly surmised that Mark wrote after Peter's death; otherwise, Irenaeus—and we—would have expected a notation about Peter's approval. 6 As a matter of fact, the internal evidence in the second Gospel points to a date of composition after Peter's death in Rome (about A.D. 64).

Interestingly, evidence suggests that in the early church there was a second tradition concerning the timing of Mark's composition: that he wrote it before the death of Peter, who then had opportunity to read it. In its earliest form, it appeared in book six of the Hypotyposes of Clement of Alexandria, who was active at the end of the second century and the beginning of the third. Incidental passages of this work are preserved only in quoted form in later works, and the relevant account is found in Eusebius. Clement of Alexandria wrote: "The Gospel according to Mark came into being in this manner: when Peter had publicly preached the word at Rome, and by the Spirit had proclaimed the Gospel, that those present, who were many, exhorted Mark as one who had followed him for a long time and remembered what he had spoken, to make a record of what was said; and that he did this, and distributed the 'Gospel' among those that asked him. And that when the matter came to Peter's knowledge he neither strongly forbade it nor urged it forward." 7

This information agrees with the notices of both Papias and Irenaeus concerning Mark's dependence on Peter's recollections of Jesus. Where it differs, of course, is in its insistence both that Mark wrote before Peter's death and that Peter had opportunity to review the entire work and did not object to its content. A question naturally arises concerning the validity of this tradition. Because it was repeated by Clement at least a century after Papias wrote, it should thus be viewed as secondary. 8 Further, later traditions that locate the origin of Mark's Gospel in Alexandria need not be taken seriously. 9

Evidence for Dating

While the evidence from early Christian sources points plainly both to Peter as the inspiration behind the second Gospel and to a date for its composition soon after A.D. 64, the likely date of Peter's death, we cannot fix the date more precisely without a careful review of the clues that lie within the Gospel itself, whereby, incidentally, we can buttress the case for rich ties to Peter.

Since it is extremely rare that a document written either in antiquity or in modern times does not leave any clues concerning the historical context in which it was composed or compiled, we are therefore justified in looking carefully at a text such as Mark's for indications that will tell us something of its date of composition. 10

In his extremely important work on Mark's Gospel, Martin Hengel has argued persuasively for a date of A.D. 69. 11 The linchpin of his view consists of chapter 13 of Mark. But before examining this segment, let us review other features to which Hengel points in his study.

Relation to Matthew and Luke: Most students of the New Testament are aware of the so-called "Synoptic Problem," which concerns the chronological and literary relationships between the first three Gospels. Because Irenaeus supposed that Matthew's Gospel had appeared before the others, the view generally held since antiquity saw Mark as the abridger of Matthew's longer work. But the nineteenth century saw the rise of a type of detailed investigation whose results called into question the chronological priority of the first Gospel. While the primacy of Matthew's work has continued to find modern proponents, 12 it has become increasingly plain to many scholars that the least complex and most convincing solution to the Synoptic Problem holds that Mark was not only the earliest Gospel written but also served as one of the sources for both Matthew and Luke. 13 In this light, we would have to conclude that Mark was written before the Gospels of Matthew and Luke, that is, long before the end of the first century.

Mark 9:1: Jesus is quoted as saying, "Truly, I say to you, there are some standing here who will not taste death before they see that the Kingdom of God has come with power." (RSV.) It is not without basis to urge that Mark was writing in a day when some—that is, some of Jesus' original followers—were still alive. Mark must have known such persons; otherwise, the words of Jesus quoted here would make little sense either for himself or for his first readers. In this connection, we are justified in looking at Paul's statement made in A.D. 53 or 54 in which he affirmed that of the more than five hundred men who had seen the risen Jesus on one occasion, most were "still alive, though some have fallen asleep." (RSV, 1 Cor. 15:6.) In the middle 50s, then, the majority of the first generation of disciples remained alive, but by the Mark's day, only some remained, pointing out that Mark wrote his Gospel well after Paul penned his first letter to the Corinthians but certainly within the lifetime of some first-generation Christians. 14

Mark 15:21: It is important to notice that Simon of Cyrene is identified by the names of his sons, not by his father as is customary. Why? One probable answer is that Simon's sons, Alexander and Rufus, were still known to Mark's readers. In this connection, Mark identified other prominent persons who interacted with Jesus in such a way that one must suppose Mark's audience was well acquainted with them and their roles. For instance, Mark calls Pilate simply by his name (15:1), without any note that his full name was Pontius Pilate or that he was the governor, appellations that Matthew and Luke apparently felt the need to add when introducing him to their readers. (Compare Luke 3:1; Matt. 27:2.) In a similar vein, Mark spoke simply of the high priest or chief priests without identifying anyone by name, a further indication that Mark's readers knew who they were. 15

Portrait of Judaism: "No New Testament author portrays the different groups in Jewish Palestine at the time of Jesus as accurately and as true to their time as Mark." So wrote Martin Hengel. I would have to agree. His portrayals of the scribes as a distinctive group, the scribes of the Pharisees as the leading intellectuals of the Pharisaic party, the Pharisees as a unit, the Sadducees who were absent from Galilee, the Herodians in the territory of Antipas, and the disciples of John the Baptist all reflect accurately the religious and political situation in Palestine before the Jewish War (A.D. 66-70). In a sketch of Jesus' ministry in Jerusalem, Mark identified the real opponents of the Savior as the chief priests, the elders, and the scribes, all prominent members of the Sanhedrin. 16 When we combine this observation with that of Mark's carefully consistent and detailed portrait of Jesus' disciples, we can only conclude that Mark wrote both before the drastic changes effected in Palestinian Judaism with the fall of the Jerusalem Temple in August A.D. 70 and in a manner that points to the early, solid character of his account. 17

Latinisms: While this issue is related to larger linguistic questions, 18 this unusual feature of Mark's record points to a place of origin in the western Roman Empire, doubtless at Rome, the location uniformly attested by the earliest accounts. Mark shows a penchant for employing not Greek, but Latin terms that were at home in Roman military, legal, and commercial enterprises. 19 What is more, Mark explained common Greek expressions twice by Latin terms: "two copper coins [lepta], which make a penny [quadrans]" (RSV 12:42), and "the hall, called Praetorium" (15:16). Related to this phenomenon is Mark's use of the Roman method of measuring time. For instance, he records four watches of the night and not the three that were customary among Jews (6:48; compare 13:35).

Mark, Chapter 13

Thus far, we have seen that both early Christian tradition and internal features of Mark's record point to an origin of his Gospel in Rome after Peter's death (A.D. 64) and before the final fall of the Jerusalem Temple (A.D. 70). Can the date of composition be delimited more precisely, and can the apparent place of composition (Rome) be buttressed more strongly? Hengel believes that a careful examination of chapter 13 will allow this. His observations are so compelling that a brief review is called for.

For most commentators, the events foretold in Mark 13:2-37 are to be understood not as prophesied occurrences but as events mentioned in retrospect. But Hengel speaks strongly against this common view. For him, the words "attributed" to Jesus must authentically go back to Jesus. For instance, Jesus' command to flee Judea when the "abomination of desolation" is seen (vv. 14-19) cannot have been invented by Mark or someone else after the destruction of Jerusalem, because it does not reflect the kind of detail expected when one looks back on that event. In the case of the siege of Jerusalem by the Romans, the land had been subdued by Titus's legions for miles around the city during the months before the first wall was breached and the assault on the temple courtyard was begun. By that point, there was no longer reason to flee. Thus, Jesus' warning here does not reflect in detail the situation in and around Jerusalem during the long, horrible months before the Roman army seized the temple and its grounds. Consequently, we can be assured that these words go back to Jesus and that Mark was unacquainted with the precise nature and order of events just before the city's fall and was thus writing both before the completion of the siege as well as at a distance from the scene. In a related vein, as soon as the Romans began to press toward Jerusalem from their long but victorious struggle in the Galilee area, the Christians living in and near Jerusalem fled to Pella, located across the Jordan and north of the city. 20 Why did Christians flee at the approach of the Romans? Why did they not flee into Jerusalem as others did? The most probable answer is that they had been warned to flee, and that warning went back to Jesus on the occasion described in Mark 13.

These observations lead necessarily to others. For Hengel, verse 14 is crucial to understand the meaning of chapter 13. First, the "abomination of desolation" is to be understood as coming suddenly to Jerusalem, a feature to which Jesus' warnings in the following verses point. In contrast, the three Roman legions first carefully constructed a circling wall around the city and then subdued the territory for miles around in order to rid the area of irregulars who might be tempted to launch occasional attacks at the Romans' backs. Following these actions, only then—and with difficulty—did Titus's armies fight their way into the city, through its several defenses, and finally to the temple's sanctuary after capturing its courtyard, a process of many months. There was nothing swift or sudden in the Roman action against Jerusalem. Second, the Greek participle that is translated by the English word standing in verse 14 is masculine in gender and also gives the clear sense of something or someone established permanently. By Mark's recounting, therefore, Jesus had prophesied that a person was to establish himself more or less permanently in the city. Of the possibilities, the most natural referent is the antichrist. One quickly thinks of Paul's words in 2 Thessalonians 2:1-4, written about A.D. 50, in which he maintained that the "man of sin . . . the son of perdition" was to appear "in the temple of god," that is, in Jerusalem, 21 before the Second Coming of Jesus occurred. Significantly, this theme of Jesus' delay is also present in Mark 13. For even after hearing of "wars and rumours of wars" and of serious natural disasters, Jesus' disciples were to know that the end was "not yet" (v. 7): "these are [only] the beginnings of sorrows" (v. 8). Much remained to happen. 22

It seems significant that Jesus is quoted three times within the first half of chapter 13 as giving the warning "Take heed" (vv. 5, 9, 23). The first instance is followed initially by a warning against false Christs who were to come to deceive (v. 6) and then by a notation of a dramatic intensifying of human and natural disasters. The second occurrence is followed by the prophecy that Christians were to be persecuted officially by both pagans and Jews (v. 9), to be betrayed by those closest to them (v. 12), and to be hated merely because they were his followers (v. 13). Jesus' last admonition was preceded by a second warning against false Christs, this time in company with false prophets (vv. 21-22). Significantly, in the middle of this section (vv. 5-23) stands Jesus' promise that "he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved" (v. 13). The question arises whether we should make anything of this. In my view, the answer is yes. Hengel persuasively argues that Mark wrote his Gospel in part to try to address a distressing situation among his fellow Christians. Other commentators have regularly noted the very high profile that Mark has granted to the theme of persecution and enduring it. 23 But if Hengel is right, the elements of this motif in Mark 13 may allow us to determine rather accurately when and where he wrote his Gospel.

The Emperor Nero committed suicide on June 9, A.D. 68. Until shortly before that moment, events had remained rather calm in the empire for several decades 24 except for three disruptions that affected either Nero or Christians or both: (1) The first systematic persecution broke out in A.D. 64 when Nero pointed an accusing finger at Christians for starting the fire that had burned for weeks in Rome, the result of which was to bring a storm of almost universal hatred against Christians 25 who stood largely leaderless after the loss of the Lord's brother James and of Paul in A.D. 62 and Peter in 64. (2) In the autumn of A.D. 66, the Jewish revolt began in Judea, with the surprising defeat of the sixth legion under Cestius Gallus by Jewish insurrectionists. (3) In March A.D. 68, Julius Vindex rose against Nero; this uprising was soon followed by Galba's revolt in Spain and Clodius's rebellion in Africa, which cut the supply of grain to Rome. While events brewing in and near Judea may not have sent serious ripples throughout the empire, certainly Christians, including Mark, hearing reports from the east, must have sensed a drama slowly enclosing Jerusalem that would fulfill Jesus' prophetic words. For the rest, Nero's death set off a civil war that cost the lives of three emperors in A.D. 69, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius. In addition, a serious famine in Italy was one of the first consequences of the civil war. If we add to that the three recorded earthquakes in Italy during A.D. 68, 26 we sense the almost final force in Mark 13:8: "For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and there shall be earthquakes in diverse places, and there shall be famines and troubles." Yet, we are reminded, "these are [only] the beginnings of sorrows."

What are we to make of these events, compacted within a period of less than five years, that correspond so strikingly to Jesus' warnings? Most students would have us believe that Mark either reshaped the tradition that came to him in order to fit it to the events of the age or that he simply invented the whole in order to reinforce among Christians the impression of Jesus' prophetic insight. But because it can be shown that Mark was remarkably faithful in recording what came to him from Peter, 27 and because Mark must have completed his work before the fall of Jerusalem in August of A.D. 70, as we have already seen, no impelling reason exists to see this chapter as anything other than a faithful recording of the words that go back to Jesus himself through Peter. In fact, it was because of the serious consequences of events that swept through Italy and Rome, and therefore affected Christians who lived there, that Mark took pen in hand to record the words and deeds of Jesus that would illustrate to beleaguered Christians that (1) Jesus knew beforehand what was to transpire ("behold, I have foretold you all things" [13:23]), and (2) they must be willing to suffer consequences—as Jesus had—made inevitable by spiteful, hateful fellowmen ("he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved" [13:13]). In one sense, then, Mark's work can be characterized as an effort to comfort Christians, who were victims of events more powerful than themselves but not more powerful than their Lord and Savior, who had fed five thousand and four thousand people on separate occasions and had also stilled the raging storm on the Sea of Galilee. 28

In summary, therefore, both tradition and the internal evidence of the second Gospel demonstrate that: (1) It was in Rome that Mark wrote his Gospel. (2) The Gospel depended heavily on the preaching of the recently departed Peter, certainly for its content if not for its form 29 and order. (3) The Gospel was written either shortly after or during the last stages of the civil turmoil that gripped the empire in A.D. 68-69 and before the fall of the temple in Jerusalem in August 70. (4) Mark's work, viewed from one angle, was designed to comfort fellow Christians—especially in Italy—who had suffered both a major loss of leadership and repeated blows of official and unofficial persecution.

Modern Study of Mark

As noted above, it was the rise of the critical study of the Gospels that has led to the general view of the chronological and literary priority of Mark among the Synoptics. The history of this process has been rehearsed often. I simply want to focus on two of its phases, form criticism and redaction criticism.

Just before World War II, three scholars, Karl Ludwig Schmidt, Martin Dibelius, and Rudolph Bultmann, published works in German that formed the foundation for the form-critical approach to the study of the Gospels. The avowed purpose of this avenue was to discover "what the original units of the Synoptics were, both sayings and stories, [and] to try to establish what the historical setting was." 30 Bultmann's study became the most influential of the three, even though they all reached similar results whose effect was to leave the Gospels in small pieces, being viewed as a series of separate incidents without proper order except for the literary glue with which Mark originally stuck the individual stories or pericopae together. In this view, Mark has been portrayed simply as a collector of the individual units of tradition that had been augmented and embellished while the stories were being handed on orally within the early church. The form critics sought to understand the two levels of the tradition as they saw it: first to learn what the situation in life (Sitz im Leben)—that is, the use to which the piece had been put in the Church's preaching—was before it was taken into the Gospels in written form, and then to determine, when possible, what the original sociological and religious setting had been for the incident during Jesus' earthly ministry. The Prophet Joseph Smith seemed to have been pursuing a similar goal when, in the Gospels of the Joseph Smith Translation, he added notations that served to clarify the occasions on which Jesus delivered a certain sermon, responded to a particular situation, or acted in a particular way. In light of this, I have found no personal objection to the aims of this enterprise, that is, to identify the original words and deeds of Jesus as they in fact occurred. However, we must appreciate the difference between the prophetic, revelatory approach taken by the Prophet and an attempt to determine the "sociological setting" of Jesus' sayings and actions by starting with the texts themselves and proceeding by comparing the Synoptics to each other.

A particular problem with the form-critical approach derives from the set of assumptions from which it starts. They are at once theological—based upon early twentieth-century Protestantism—and literary, presuming that a literature always comes together in the same way, especially the kind of literature represented in the Gospels. I should note here that Bultmann was deeply influenced by an essay written by Axel Olrik in 1909. 31 Olrik argued that folk stories or oral materials always developed in a certain way. Bultmann accepted the entire argument of this rather obscure essay, applied it unrelentingly to the Gospel materials, and, in my view, simply left the Synoptic Gospels in tatters. For me, it is important to ask: Can it all have arisen from such a mound of bits and fragments?

To my mind, the related question of oral traditions lying behind the Gospel accounts must remain an open issue. The existence of agrapha, sayings of Jesus that do not appear in the Gospels but are quoted in later Christian sources, points to a rather rich, ongoing oral recitation of the words and deeds of Jesus. And this should not surprise us, since we are informed by John that he was forced to select among those that he knew when he drew up his own narrative. (John 21:25.) But modern students must surely question the assumption that any accounts from oral sources must be viewed as both late and unreliable because of the certain presence of embellishments added during transmission. As we have seen, the evidence clearly points to a long and deep association between Mark and Peter. One of the consequences for this observation is that any oral tradition embedded within Mark's narrative comes largely from Peter's recollections, a source as reliable as we could hope to find. 32

Following the Second World War, a different approach to the Synoptic Gospels was advocated, also by European scholars. 33 Termed "redaction criticism" and built upon the form-critical results that seemed firm, this avenue looked at each of the Gospels as a whole and tried to understand them not as bits and pieces of tradition but as texts with their own integrity, an important recognition. In the view of redaction critics, the Gospel writers wrote for particular audiences who found themselves in particular circumstances. This led to choices on the part of the authors concerning the materials to be included and the emphases to be made in the story of the Savior. Because these choices were made largely for theological reasons, the Gospel writers were conceived to be theologians and therefore shapers of the accounts about Jesus rather than collectors who more or less stitched the individual stories together somewhat randomly, as the form critics had concluded. As a result, Mark and the other writers were understood to be composers or authors instead of mere collectors.

Thus far, this view possesses merit, for it is hard to deny that an author brings a point of view to the production of a literary work. 34 However, the radical view that Mark, having been the first to write, invented the literary form of his Gospel—often called a passion narrative with a biographical introduction—and that he was responsible for its order of events, its theological and ecclesiastical concerns, and its specific portrayal of Jesus places too much on his shoulders. It has recently been convincingly argued that Mark was repeating the story of Jesus just as it had been told from the earliest days following the Savior's death, certainly by Peter if not by others of the original disciples. Moreover, even though we might argue convincingly that Mark, as well as the other two synoptists, brought a point of view to his task, such an observation takes nothing away from the fidelity of the story repeated in the second Gospel. On the contrary, Mark is to be understood as a faithful recorder. 35

Geography in Mark's Gospel

One important question to settle is that of Mark's knowledge of the contemporary Holy Land, since this issue has precipitated wide debate with ramifications for both the identity and competence of the Gospel writer. The observations of critics have run as follows: (1) The geography of events narrated in and around Jerusalem is consistent with what is known about first-century Judea, a fact that must be attributed not to Mark but to the earlier tradition of Jesus' passion, doubtless the first segment of the story of his ministry to coalesce, since it formed its most important part. (2) In Mark, the geography of Jesus' Galilean ministry betrays the hand of one who does not know the regions of Palestine outside of Judea. Interestingly, the coupling of these two observations has led some students to suggest that the author of the second Gospel had never even visited ancient Palestine and, therefore, could not have been the John Mark mentioned in Acts 12:12 Acts 13:13 and known to have grown up in Jerusalem. The further implication is that the geographical notes supplied by the Gospel writer, excluding those that were already part of the stories that came into his possession, whether oral or written, show him to have invented the geography of Jesus' Galilean activities, apparently relying on a vague set of ideas about Palestine and its environs. He therefore could not have been a Palestinian Jew. 36

But having already affirmed the identity of the author to be John Mark, and having already seen that the Gospel was most probably authored in Rome, how shall we reply to these points? Do these geographical issues undercut seriously what we have so far concluded about Mark and his work? In my view, not at all. For one thing, the fact that the geography of Judea and Jerusalem, with one exception, 37 is faithfully represented by Mark fits with what we have concluded thus far. Whether the geographical elements were already embedded in the passion story before Mark wrote it down is quite beside the issue. It is just as plausible to argue that Mark, having lived in Jerusalem, would naturally have been able to write of such details with a confidence arising from first-hand knowledge and would have also been in a position to tidy up any inaccuracies in the information that came to him. In addition, when we consider that a typical person of antiquity, who was not able to travel much 38 and had no map, would probably have known almost nothing of areas more than fifty or so miles away, it is rather plain that Mark could write knowingly about Jerusalem but without much knowledge concerning Galilee, Samaria, and the Decapolis. As a matter of fact, the one road that Mark certainly traveled outside of Jerusalem in Palestine did not go north to Galilee but west to the Mediterranean Sea. 39 Thus, there exists no impelling evidence that Mark did not come from Jerusalem even though he apparently knew little of Galilee. 40

The Character of the Second Gospel

We should observe that Joseph Smith knew the Gospels as "testimonies." In their titles in the JST, all four are entitled "testimonies," clearly implying that such records constituted rather personal views of Jesus, just as our own testimonies are personal. Such an observation explains in part the differences in tone and detail that we see among the Synoptic Gospels. (See D&C 88:141.) But much more can be said, particularly concerning Mark's work, which has been called by others a "witness document," whose purpose is to bear witness of Jesus' divinity and atonement, much in the spirit of John 20:31: "These are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God: and that believing ye might have life through his name." Following are some significant points.

Mark 1:1, the opening: The tone for the entire text is set by its first line: "The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God." Mark comes directly to the point and, by doing so, brings his readers immediately to the dramatic thrust of his work: The gospel or good news has its origin with Jesus, the anointed Son of God. In what follows, the reader will be introduced to that significant moment when Jesus appeared unexpectedly, and thus almost mysteriously, in fulfillment of prophecy.

The major question concerning this passage has focused on the authenticity of the phrase "the Son of God," since some early manuscripts of the New Testament omit it. But the apparent difficulty can be handled directly. While the solution to this problem is of small consequence because it is apparent throughout Mark's work that he was demonstrating his conviction that Jesus is indeed the Son of God, 41 the issue retains its importance simply because of the forceful character of the Gospel's initial line, its incipit title, as it were.

In terms of evidence from manuscripts and early quotations of this passage, the vast majority of texts and citations include the disputed phrase, with two important exceptions, Codex Sinaiticus (fourth century) and the church father Origen (about 185-254). But these notable omissions should be seen as unintentional. This title appears six other times in the second Gospel, including at obviously key points in the text, namely in Peter's confession of Jesus' messiahship (8:29) and, complementing this, in the Gentile centurion's acknowledgment of Jesus' sonship (15:39). Consequently, "Son of God," as a title that points forward from the opening of the text to the recorded events of the Savior's ministry through which this central testimony is revealed, must be considered an integral part of the text of Mark 1:1. From the side of the early witnesses to the reading of this text, in the two principle sources for omitting the phrase, Origen and Codex Sinaiticus, we are probably dealing with one rather than two omissions, since the text of Codex Sinaiticus was probably based upon papyri that Origen took with him from Egypt to Palestine. Thus the case for an unintentional omission is strengthened when we reduce to a common source the two most important witnesses for that omission. For the rest, the texts are late or derivative. 42

Mark 1:1-13, the prologue: If the opening line has set the general tone for the story, the next twelve verses carry it through by introducing matters that further delineate what Jesus is and what stamp his ministry will bear. 43 First, verse 2 ties Jesus' actions directly to prophecy: "As it is written in the prophets . . ." For Mark and for Christians in general, Jesus' life had been lived in conformity to the voice of prophecy, be it written or be it currently alive, as in John's prediction about the one who was to come baptizing with the Holy Ghost (vv. 7-8). Further, the prophetic quotation called for events surrounding the Messiah to be played out in the wilderness. Interestingly, in the first few verses Mark employed the word wilderness three times, in quoting from Isaiah 40:3, in locating John the Baptist's ministry (v. 4), and in noting the place of Jesus' severe trial with Satan (v. 12). Thus, the first public acts of Jesus, the unveiling of the Messiah, so to speak, occurred in the desert. As a result, the symbolism of the Exodus is not to be missed in these events, especially because the passage quoted from Isaiah 40:3 was understood as the prophecy of the new Exodus. It was thus by the rich application of this single term, wilderness, that Mark established the initial revelation of Jesus as the Son of God to have occurred in the desert, much like Moses' call. 44 And as Moses emerged from the wilderness on the Lord's errand, so Jesus came out thence into Galilee bearing the divine mantle (v. 14).

The imagery of the Exodus is also present in the second unifying term, the Spirit, a word that occurs three times in the opening thirteen verses. First, John mentioned the one coming who was to be baptized with the Holy Ghost or Holy Spirit (v. 8). Next we read of the Spirit's descent upon Jesus after his baptism (v. 10). Finally, Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness, there to suffer temptations for forty days, this last a numerical recollection of Israel's forty years in the desert. Consequently, Mark made it clear that the unveiling and first messianic actions of the Son of God were directed by the Spirit of God, the only proper beginning to the work of the "beloved Son" (v. 11).

Underscored in this initial section, of course, is the notion of Jesus' divine sonship. Both Mark (v. 1) and the divine voice from heaven (v. 11) solemnly affirmed this important fact. What is more, John's reference to the "one mightier" than himself fits intrinsically with this theme. It was that special quality of Jesus that brought him into direct conflict with the unseen world of Satan (v. 13), initiating a combat that would continue throughout the Savior's earthly mission. Naturally, this initial set of conflicts experienced by Jesus would eventually harden into systematic persecutions that would hound first him and then his followers (13:9-12).

The messianic secret: In 1901, Wilhelm Wrede published his influential study, which highlighted the aspect of secrecy in Jesus' messiahship as related in the second Gospel. Since that time, students of the New Testament have consistently followed Wrede's insight, even when critical of certain of its points, and have usually urged that this feature was largely due to Mark's personal view of Jesus. According to this outlook, Mark has imparted to his work a fundamental unity by employing the literary technique of carefully affirming that during Jesus' ministry, the essence of his messianic authority and mission remained hidden from the disciples, and this by Jesus' conscious actions. The foundation of Wrede's views rested upon his observation that the Savior consistently sought to hide his messiahship from others. This was accomplished in various ways: (1) he silenced demons who knew who he was, not allowing them to reveal his divine identity (1:25, 34; 3:12); (2) he charged benefactors of his healing powers not to speak of what he had done (1:44; 5:43; 7:36; 8:26); (3) even the disciples remained afraid to ask him about his marvelous and mysterious teachings and deeds (4:41; 9:32; 10:33; compare 6:51); (4) he frequently allowed the disciples to remain without enlightenment (8:17-21; 9:32); (5) he even scolded the disciples for their lack of understanding, rather than revealing the source and nature of his marvelous powers (8:17-21); and (6) after the disciples finally comprehended who he was, to a degree, he did not allow them to discuss this insight with others outside their number (8:30). To be sure, because of his miracles, notice of Jesus' remarkable powers spread far and wide, even though he sought to hide such (1:28, 45; 7:36).

This portrayal of Jesus, however, is not as one-sided as Wrede and others would have us believe. For instance, Jesus took occasion to enlighten his disciples by conscientiously teaching them (4:10-20, 34). Moreover, when he healed the man possessed of the demonic legion, he did not silence the demons (5:7-10). Furthermore, Jesus performed many miracles in public, some of which Mark described in detail, in which he did not charge the benefactor or the crowd to remain quiet about the matter (see 2:11-12; 3:1-5; 5:19).

Such complications have led recent researchers to raise questions concerning the unity, extent, and significance of the so-called messianic secret. As a matter of fact, according to Hengel, this feature applies strictly to only two passages, the first consisting of Jesus' charge to his disciples after Peter's confession (8:30) and the second being his instruction to the three disciples after the Transfiguration (9:9). In these two instances, Jesus' charges clearly grew out of the concern to keep his divine mission hidden until after his death and resurrection. But his motives in all other cases were based on different considerations, whether to slow the growing popular fervor over his miraculous powers or to teach the disciples in stages by employing a technique of obliging them to figure out some things for themselves. And in the cases in which Jesus obliged his followers to keep quiet about what they knew (8:30; 9:9), his concern arose from "the tremendous fact that the Messiah and Son of God" was not to "reveal himself immediately in 'the glory of his Father with the Holy angels' (8:38)," but was to walk obediently along the path toward the cross and toward his redeeming death and resurrection. Moreover, if we agree with Wrede that Mark intended to portray the messianic secret with consistency, we would be hard pressed to explain why this motif disappears after the Transfiguration (9:2-13). In fact, it was the disciples who tried to silence the blind Bartimaeus during Jesus' trip through Jericho, whereas Jesus accepted the appellation "Son of David" as a true title of honor (10:46-52). And precisely because of these ambiguities in the text, we can only conclude that Mark was not trying to portray Jesus in a consistent, unifyingly literary way. Rather, the portrait must go back to Jesus' actions and words, which arose from different motives dictated by the varying circumstances of his ministry. 45

Theology versus biography: In recent decades, it has become fashionable to deny that any of the Gospel writers had any real interest in writing a biographical account of Jesus' life. In such a view, the main interests of the Gospel writers were theological, that is, they were centered on portraying Jesus in a particular manner that also conveyed certain messages about him to their readers. It was not history that Mark and the others sought to write, but theology. To a point, one must agree that the Gospel writers structured their accounts to bring about certain effects. We have already seen, for example, that Mark highlighted certain themes at his story's beginning in order to focus readers' attention on important elements in the message of his writing. But such a concept does not imply that his picture of Jesus was distorted so that it became nonbiographical, unhistorical. On the contrary, when we observe a life such as Jesus'—full of dramatic healings, conflicts with a growing number of opponents, and teaching that deeply impressed those who heard—we must admit that the course of his experiences lent itself to dramatic representation. As Martin Hengel has written: "One may say that Mark constructed his work as a dramatic narrative in several 'acts,' which might almost be said to correspond to the laws of ancient tragedy as worked out by Aristotle in his poetics." 46 This lofty evaluation is a far cry from Bultmann's view that the Gospel materials grew out of simple folk stories. Nevertheless, Hengel goes on, "the fatal error in the interpretation of the gospels in general and of Mark in particular has been that scholars have thought that they had to decide between preaching and historical narration, that here there could only be an either-or. In reality, the 'theological' contribution of the evangelist lies in the fact that he combines both these things inseparably: he preaches by narrating; he writes history and in so doing proclaims." 47 Such was Mark's achievement: while bearing witness to Jesus as Messiah and Son of God, he wrote an account faithful to the events and course of Jesus' earthly ministry. Strengthening this view is the observation made earlier that Mark's Gospel was closely tied to the recollections of Peter.

The Purpose of Mark

Much has already been said about the purpose of Mark in writing his Gospel. In summary, his purpose was to strengthen faith in Jesus as the Son of God, particularly in light of the persecution and attendant difficulties that had come upon Christians in and near Rome. And, as I have argued elsewhere, the second Gospel, as well as the others, is a "brink document" written both on the eve of the expected apostasy and in an effort to set the record straight before the falling away predicted by Paul and others. 48 Even so, Mark's primary intent was to portray Jesus as the Son of God. For him, like anyone else, the concern was how to succeed in sketching this portrait. In this connection, let us look at a few features of Mark's picture of Jesus that aided his purpose.

Abruptness of Mark's opening: Unlike the other three Gospels, which employ a good deal of introductory material before narrating Jesus' ministry, Mark comes directly to this later stage of the Savior's life. For him, it must have been central to focus attention on this period of time. The effect of this sudden, almost breath-taking introduction is to create a sense of awe, since the person introduced here is no less than the Son of God. Without explaining why John the Baptist was in the wilderness or why Jesus came to him, Mark let the two prophecies—the one an amalgam of Malachi 3:1 and Isaiah 40:3 (vv. 2-3) and the other from John himself (vv. 7-8)—set the stage for the activities of these two persons, whose contact at the Jordan River initiated the mission of God's Son. 49

Jesus as a person of dynamic action: Mark employed the Greek term for "immediately" forty times. 50 By comparison, Matthew used it in fifteen passages and Luke in eight. The impact was to portray Jesus as a person of strong action, always exhibiting a remarkable power that moved persons or events. For Mark, there was never any indecision on Jesus' part. This is not to say, however, that Mark glossed over events in an unnatural way, making the occurrences of Jesus' life subservient to a personal impression or conception. On the contrary, Mark was faithful to what he had learned. For example, he related the healing of a blind man in Bethsaida (8:22-26), according to whose account Jesus was required to bless the man twice before he regained his full sight, a feature Mark would hardly have preserved if he were streamlining this story to fit his own preconceptions.

Sense of wonder among Jesus' followers: In discussing the so-called messianic secret earlier, I made the point that Wrede and his followers have put their fingers on an important concept, although it does not work out as neatly as they have maintained. Their insight is that in Mark's Gospel, Jesus was regarded with wonder and awe, even mystery, by his closest associates. The confessions of the demons heightened this sense of unseen glory and splendor, characteristics made visible in Jesus' words and deeds but only occasionally explained by him. 51 The point is that we readers are brought to observe very clearly throughout the pages of Mark's Gospel the majesty of the One who moved, taught, healed, had compassion. 52

Suffering Son of Man: It becomes obvious early in Mark's text that Jesus is to be understood as the Son of Man of Jewish apocalyptic expectation who was to come on the clouds of heaven in order to deliver his people from their enemies and to usher in a reign of peace. But there was to be a twist. Instead of coming as the triumphal Son of Man, Jesus was to come as the suffering servant in fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy (52:13 - 53:12). It was this concept that offended the disciples when he first expressed it on the way to Caesarea Philippi (8:31-33). And this idea of the suffering Son of Man must go back to Jesus himself, since the concept is so deeply embedded in the fabric of the early tradition, appearing as it does three times on occasions when Jesus taught his disciples concerning discipleship. 53

Conclusions

Although our review has been brief, I am satisfied that we have established several characteristics concerning Mark's narrative. First, the book of Mark was probably the first Gospel written and was employed as a source by Matthew and Luke, undoubtedly because of its known association with Peter's teachings. Second, Mark served as Peter's interpreter, and, after Peter died, he set down an accurate record of what he had learned from the senior apostle. Third, Mark wrote his account in about A.D. 69, at the end of the furious persecution of Christians in Italy and Rome and before the fall of Jerusalem and its temple. Fourth, Mark is the John Mark of Acts 12:12 Acts 13:13 who grew up in Jerusalem but had little personal knowledge of Galilee, where the first part of Jesus' ministry was located. Fifth, Mark's major goal was to picture Jesus as the expected Messiah, the Son of God, who atoned for the sins of us all. 54

NOTES

S. Kent Brown is professor of ancient scripture and director of publications for the Religious Studies Center at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

 1. Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 3.39.15. The translation of this passage appears in Martin Hengel, Studies in the Gospel of Mark (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985), p. 47.

 2. Hengel, pp. 47-50, and William L. Lane, The Gospel According to Mark (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1974), pp. 7-9, both accept the authenticity of Papias's notice. For an opposite view, see Dennis E. Nineham, The Gospel of St. Mark (Baltimore: Pelican Books, 1963), pp. 26-27, and Werner Georg Kummel, Introduction to the New Testament (Nashville: Abingdon, 1966), pp. 43-44. These authors both find reason to mistrust Papias, but Hengel advances the more compelling arguments.

 3. Hengel, p. 150, note 55. See also Hugh J. Lawlor and John E. L. Oulton, trans., Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea: The Ecclesiastical History and the Martyrs of Palestine (London: SPCK, 1954), 2:114-15.

 4. Nineham, pp. 36-38; Kummel, pp. 63-64.

 5. Against Heresies 3.1.1. Translation is that of Hengel, p. 2.

 6. A point made by Hengel, p. 2; also p. 119, note 14.

 7. Ecclesiastical History 6.14.6-7. Translation is that of Lawlor and Oulton, vol. 1, p. 189.

 8. As Hengel has noted (p. 4), Clement's view buttressed his own high opinion of John's Gospel as compared to that of Mark.

 9. See Hengel, pp. 120-21, notes 24 and 27; p. 137, note 160.

 10. One must realize that a work is not written in a vacuum. It is a fact that even forgeries betray the circumstances under which they were created.

 11. Hengel, pp. 7-28.

 12. The latest and most serious was that of William R. Farmer, The Synoptic Problem (New York: Mercer University Press, 1964). See also Jesus and the Gospel (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1982).

 13. See the summary of the evidence in Kummel, pp. 35-60. To say that Luke and Matthew employed the Gospel of Mark as a source for their own works should not disturb us. If it was Peter's recollections that stand at the foundation of Mark's work, as I have already tried to show, this fact would have been known to Mark's readers. Such would have been reason enough to recommend Mark's Gospel to Matthew and Luke.

 14. Hengel, p. 8.

 15. Hengel, pp. 9 and 123, note 53.

 16. Hengel, pp. 9-10.

 17. This has been noted by many; see Hengel's summary, pp. 10-11.

 18. Such would include the question of an Aramaic source behind Mark's account as well as possible borrowings from collections of Jesus' sayings, as, say, those in the Gospel of Thomas and in the hypothetical "Q" source believed to have been used by Matthew and Luke.

 19. Lane, pp. 24-25; Hengel, p. 29; Kummel, p. 70.

 20. Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 3.5.3. Against those who discount the authenticity of this information, see the arguments of Hengel, pp. 130-31, note 111.

 21. An expectation grew up that Nero would appear alive again, coming from the East: "Nero redivivus," see Hengel, pp. 25-28. Lane takes a completely different tack, avoiding the difficulty posed by the masculine participle (pp. 465-69).

 22. Hengel, pp. 18-20.

 23. Lane, pp. 12-17; Nineham, p. 42; Hengel, pp. 21-25.

 24. For a review of this situation and the lament of Tacitus the historian about having little to report, see Hengel, pp. 22 and 132, note 125.

 25. Compare Mark 13:13. The damage caused by the fire is summarized by Lane, pp. 13-14; for the hatred directed against Christians, see Hengel, p. 133, note 133.

 26. For these events, see Hengel, pp. 22-23.

 27. Consult Hengel's long discussion on pp. 31-58, especially pp. 50-56.

 28. Mark 6:33-44, feeding the five thousand; 8:1-9, feeding the four thousand; 4:37-39, stilling the storm (compare 6:51).

 29. See Hengel's very intriguing remarks on the possibility that the distinctive literary form of the Gospel went ultimately back to Peter (pp. 54-56). Most have postulated that it was Mark who was to be credited with initially composing the type of literature that came to be known as Gospels; compare Nineham, pp. 28-29, and Kummel, pp. 31-33.

 30. Rudolph Bultmann, The History of the Synoptic Tradition, 2nd ed. (New York: Harper & Row, 1968), the quote coming from pp. 2-3. The other studies were Karl Ludwig Schmidt, Der Rahmen der Geschichte Jesu (Berlin: Trowitzsch & Son, 1919), and Martin Dibelius, From Tradition to Gospel (London: Ivor Nicholson and Watson, 1934).

 31. Axel Olrik, "Epische Gesetze der Volksdichtung," Zeitschrift fur deutsches Altertum und deutsche Literatur 51 (1909): 1-12.

 32. An entire school has grown up at Uppsala University in Sweden which studies the methods and achievements of oral transmission among ancient societies, generally concluding that the oral recitation of stories, poems, and sagas is more reliable than the written mode. As an example, see Birger Gerhardsson, Memory and Manuscript, 2nd ed. (Lund, Sweden: C. W. K. Gleerup, 1964). Concerning the rapidity with which legendary elements can replace sober, historical accounts, see Hengel's remarks on the rapid growth of fanciful stories about Alexander the Great (pp. 11 and 124-25, note 70).

 33. The three major studies, now in English translation, focused on the Synoptic Gospels: Gunther Bornkamm et al., Tradition and Interpretation in Matthew (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1963); Willi Marxsen, Mark the Evangelist. Studies on the Redaction History of the Gospel (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1969); Hans Conzelmann, The Theology of St. Luke (New York: Harper & Row, 1961).

 34. Consult the balanced and balancing view of Hengel, pp. 31-38.

 35. For the variety of views current more than thirty years ago, see the essay by Joachim Jeremias, "The Present Position in the Controversy Concerning the Problem of the Historical Jesus," Expository Times 69 (1954): 333-39. I personally follow Hengel's results (pp. 53-56).

 36. Proponents of this view include Kummel, pp. 64-65, and Nineham, pp. 40-41, who calls the Gospel writer "a Gentile author . . . without the formal education to express himself in better Greek."

 37. The issue concerns the sequence of "Bethphage and Bethany" as Jesus approached Jerusalem from Jericho (11:1). See Hengel's explanation on p. 148, note 51. For an opposite though less compelling view, see Nineham, pp. 294-95.

 38. Without maps, one would have necessarily relied on the descriptions of those who had visited distant places. One can also note the interesting fact that peasants in Ptolemaic Egypt were forbidden by law to travel from their villages of residence; see William W. Tarn, Hellenistic Civilization, 3rd ed. (New York: Meridian Books, 1961), p. 187, and Michael Grant, From Alexander to Cleopatra (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1982) pp. 41, 43.

 39. Before Mark accompanied Paul on his first missionary journey from Antioch, they must have approached Antioch by sea, descending from Jerusalem to Caesarea or to Joppa, where they would have boarded a ship traveling north (Acts 11:27-30; 12:25), the land route being hazardous and slow. Moreover, when Mark returned to Jerusalem from Perga in Pamphylia, he most assuredly traveled by boat to a coastal port in Palestine, whence he went east up to Jerusalem (13:13).

 40. Hengel, pp. 48 and 145-46.

 41. See Nineham, p. 60; Lane, p. 40.

 42. Consult the summary of textual evidence in Lane, p. 41, note 7.

 43. Lane provides an insightful summary (pp. 39-41); also Nineham, pp. 55-64.

 44. Concerning the connections to Moses made in Mark's work, see Hengel, pp. 56-58.

 45. The theme of the messianic secret has been widely reviewed. See Kummel, pp. 66-67; Hengel, pp. 41-45.

 46. Consult Hengel's enlightening remarks on pp. 34-36; the quotation is to be found on p. 34. See also Kummel, pp. 61-62.

 47. Hengel, p. 41; his fuller discussion which exhibits a high esteem of Mark's achievement appears on pp. 34-41.

 48. See my essay "The Four Gospels as Testimonies," The Eleventh Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium Papers (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1983), pp. 43-56. For a summary of the New Testament prophecies concerning the coming apostasy, consult Kent P. Jackson, "Early Signs of the Apostasy," Ensign, December 1984, pp. 8-16. The theme of the coming apostasy carries over into other early Christian documents; for a review of this feature in the Nag Hammadi materials, see my "The Nag Hammadi Library: A Mormon Perspective" in Apocryphal Writings and the Latter-day Saints, ed. C. Wilfred Griggs (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1986), pp. 255-83, especially 263-64.

 49. See Lane, p. 40.

 50. Besides "immediately," the term is also translated in the King James Version by "straightway" and "forthwith." In one passage (1:30), it is rendered "anon."

 51. Naturally, one can ask how many times Jesus needed to spell out to his disciples the significance of what he was doing. Presumably not many.

 52. The feature of wonder or awe naturally leads to the question of the ending of Mark's Gospel. Most commentators hold the view that the text originally ended with 16:8, the variant endings that on the one hand add one verse and on the other add twelve being considered later additions; so Lane, p. 583, note 6; Hengel, pp. 71-72 and 167-68, note 47; and Nineham, 449-52. Internally, the consistency of the message of the Gospel text is not seriously violated if one opts for the shorter ending. The awe inspired in others by the majestic Son of God is deeply underscored thereby and the abruptness of the opening is matched by the same sort of ending. Theologically, however, verses 9 to 20 do not seriously disrupt the Marcan flow as most have maintained. Textually, the longer ending appears principally in later texts and does not seem to be known by commentators until at least the end of the second century. But the textual evidence is not decisively clear either.

 53. The teachings of Jesus concerning discipleship appear in 8:34-38; 9:31-50; 10:33-45.

 54. Serious questions exist concerning both Pauline influences on Mark and whether or not Mark spelled out a clear doctrine of atonement. On these issues, see Hengel, pp. 37-38, 39-40, 45-46, 54.

 
 
© 1986 Deseret Book Company 

Printed from Gospelink.com
