# Jesus Is the Christ (John 7-11)

### Jesus Is the Christ (John 7-11)
Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)
 
 

22

JESUS IS THE CHRIST (John 7-11) 

LAMAR E. GARRARD

Chapters 7 through 11 in the Gospel of John cover that period in the life of Jesus when he was, for the most part, in Judea (Jerusalem or the near vicinity), testifying to the Jewish people and their religious leaders that he was their Christ or promised Messiah. Almost everything he said or did during this period is related to the fact that he is the Christ, the Lord God, the Savior or Redeemer of this world. The Jewish nation, as a whole, rejected his claim that he was the Christ, the promised Messiah. (John 1:11; 3 Ne. 9:16.) This was especially so in the vicinity of Jerusalem, where the temple and the hierarchy of the Jewish religion were located. 1 It was there that he encountered the most opposition, including threats on his life. In fact, orders had been given that he be taken prisoner, but he always managed to escape. Then, after he had finished his Judean ministry, he rode openly and triumphantly on a donkey at the head of a procession of followers into the city of Jerusalem, thus fulfilling a prophecy that he was their King and promised Messiah. 2 (Matt. 21:1-11.) He was crucified five days later.

Before his Judean ministry, Jesus spent most of his time in Galilee, preaching the gospel and healing the sick. During this Galilean ministry, he made several journeys to Jerusalem to attend the annual Passover feasts, staying only briefly each time. The last time he was in Jerusalem for the Passover feast, he healed a cripple on the Sabbath and was criticized for breaking the Sabbath. He answered his accusers, "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work." (John 5:17.) This caused the Jewish leaders to seek to kill him because they felt "he not only had broken the sabbath, but said also that God was his Father, making himself equal with God." (John 5:18.) Thereafter, he stayed mostly in Galilee, "for he would not walk in Jewry, because the Jews sought to kill him." (John 7:1.)

The end of Jesus' Galilean ministry came when his half-brothers—who had not yet accepted his divine status—asked him to go to Jerusalem with them for the Feast of Tabernacles and perform great works there as he had done in Galilee. He knew that if he did as they requested, it would bring about his death prematurely, for he said: "I go not up yet unto this feast; for my time is not yet full come." (John 7:1-8.) However, he later went down privately with his apostles. The time had now come for him to leave his beloved Galilee forever (except when he would return as a resurrected being, Matt. 28:16-18) to go to Jerusalem and bear testimony of his divine status and mission. 3 He knew that as a result of the testimonies, he would eventually be crucified. (Matt. 16:21; 20:17-19.) Yet this was part of God's plan to leave a final witness with the Jews that Jesus was the Christ, the promised Messiah, and at the same time provide for his great atonement. Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote:

Nearly three years have passed since our Lord's baptism and the commencement of his formal ministry; in another six months he will eat his last Passover with his disciples, be crucified, and received up into eternal glory with his Father. The final hours of his ministry before his final ascension into heaven are at hand. . . .

Jesus was leaving Galilee forever; his great Galilean ministry was ended. In Judea and Perea his voice would yet be heard, his mighty works seen. But the course of his life was toward the cross, and he was steadfast and immovable in his determination to follow this very course, one laid out for him by his Father. He had said of himself through the mouth of Isaiah, "I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed." (Isa. 50:7.) Clearly, there was to be no turning back. 4

The events in chapters 7 to 11 of John's Gospel, designated as the Judean ministry, took place in either Jerusalem or Bethany except for the following: (1) John 7:1-9, when he was still in Galilee preparing to journey to Jerusalem; (2) John 10:40-11:16, when he left Jerusalem and went east across the Jordan River into Perea because the Jews "sought again to take him: but he escaped out of their hand" (John 10:39); (3) John 11:54, when, after returning from Perea, he left Jerusalem again, and "walked no more openly among the Jews; but went thence unto a country near to the wilderness, into a city called Ephraim, and there continued with his disciples." After a short stay in Ephraim, he returned to Jerusalem to begin the Passion Week just six days prior to the Passover and his death.

When Jesus arrived in Jerusalem from Galilee, he accused the Jews of seeking to kill him because of the incident involving the healing of the cripple on the Sabbath. The people were confused because they did not at first know who he was. (John 7:19-26.) Once they knew his identity, though, "they sought to take him." (John 7:30.) During this part of his ministry, there are three references where he either avoided going to Jerusalem or left the vicinity to avoid the Jews; at least five references where they sought to take him prisoner in Jerusalem (John 7:30, 32, 44-46; 10:39; 11:57); two references where they attempted to stone him (John 8:58-59; 10:30-33); and finally, after he healed Lazarus, a reference to a plot to kill him (John 11:47-53).

Views Concerning Christ

When Jesus arrived in Jerusalem, there was no small stir concerning who he really was. Many "marvelled, saying, How knoweth this man letters, having never learned?" (John 7:15.) Others "believed on him, and said, When Christ cometh, will he do more miracles than these which this man hath done?" (John 7:31.) On the other hand, some said he had a devil when he accused them of breaking the law of Moses by seeking to kill him. (John 7:20.)

Many rejected Jesus as the Messiah because, according to their traditions, the coming of the Messiah would be hidden in mystery so that no one would know where he came from (see John 7:27); since Jesus' home in Nazareth was known and also his parents were known, they surmised that he could not be the promised Messiah (see Matt. 13:55; John 6:42). Still others rejected him as the Messiah because, as the seed of David, he should have come from Bethlehem rather than Galilee. At the Feast of Tabernacles, Jesus quoted certain Messianic prophecies and implied that they referred to him: "Many of the people therefore, when they heard this saying, said, Of a truth this is the Prophet. Others said, This is the Christ. But some said, Shall Christ come out of Galilee? Hath not the scripture said, That Christ cometh of the seed of David, and out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was? So there was a division among the people because of him." (John 7:40-43.) Because of their apostate condition, a tradition had arisen among some of the Jews that the prophet spoken of by Moses (Deut. 18:15-19) was different from the promised Messiah. They believed that Jesus fulfilled the role of this prophet rather than that of the Messiah or Christ.

As we read these accounts, it becomes readily apparent that the Jews lacked spiritual insight into and understanding of the scriptures as a result of disobedience and apostasy. (See John 8:43-45.) Their leaders, who claimed to be able to see and understand the scriptures, were actually blind as to their true meaning. They had changed the meaning of the scriptures, relying more on traditions of uninspired predecessors. 5 By contrast, many of the common people, humble persons who were considered spiritually blind by their leaders, were in fact able to see and understand the scriptures and Christ's role, once it was explained to them by an inspired teacher. Jesus pointed this out when he healed the blind man (who typified the common people), who was not only able to see physically but also to see spiritually once Jesus had healed him and testified to him. The Pharisees, who cast the man out of their synagogue, claimed to see spiritually but were actually spiritually blind:

Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when he had found him, he said unto him, Dost thou belive on the Son of God?

He answered and said, Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him?

And Jesus said unto him, Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee.

And he said, Lord, I believe. And he worshipped him.

And Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see not might see; and that they which see might be made blind.

And some of the Pharisees which were with him heard these words, and said unto him, Are we blind also?

Jesus said unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We see; therefore your sin remaineth. (John 9:35-41.)

It is difficult to tell from the New Testament record exactly how much the common people understood concerning the role and mission of Christ or the Messiah. However, the fact remains that whenever they felt he was implying by his words or actions that he was divine, many became angry at him:

Jesus walked in the temple in Solomon's porch.

Then came the Jews round about him, and said unto him, How long dost thou make us to doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly.

Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye believed not: the works that I do in my Father's name, they bear witness of me. But ye believe not. . . . I and my Father are one.

Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him.

Jesus answered them, Many good works have I shewed you from my Father; for which of those works do ye stone me?

The Jews answered him, saying, For a good work we stone thee not; but for blasphemy; and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God. (John 10:23-25, 30-33.)

The Roles of the Messiah

With only the New Testament record—which is often incomplete—it is sometimes difficult for us to understand just what Jesus was saying regarding his role as the Christ or Messiah. With the aid of modern scripture and prophets, however, we can gain a better understanding of the Messiah's role. (See 1 Ne. 13:34-41.) Modern scripture indicates that his role is twofold: he is the Lord God of this world, and he is the Savior and Redeemer of this world. He told John and Peter Whitmer that he was their Lord and their Redeemer. (See D&C 15:1;D&C 16:1.) Sometimes he identified himself to Joseph Smith and others as their Lord or God (see D&C 5:2; 18:33), and at other times as their Savior or Redeemer (see D&C 29:1; 43:34). Furthermore, the role of the Christ seems to be divided into two parts: Alma emphasized that Christ must be a God of justice (the Lord God) as well as a God of mercy (Savior or Redeemer). In fact, Alma explained that the role of Christ as a God of mercy cannot be overemphasized to the point that it detracts from or nullifies his role as a God of justice; if mercy robs justice, he said, then the works of justice are destroyed and God would cease to be God. (Alma 42:15-25.)

It should be noted that Moses was a prototype of Christ because he fulfilled two roles that were quite similar to the roles fulfilled by Christ: both were to be rulers, lawgivers, and judges, and both were to be deliverers and saviors to Israel. Moses prophesied to Israel that God would raise up a prophet "like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken." (Deut. 18:15.)

Lehi emphasized this dual role associated with the Christ by telling us that "the law which the Holy One hath given" has a punishment affixed if we do not obey it. (2 Ne. 2:10.) He also stated that this same Holy One "offereth himself a sacrifice for sin, to answer the ends of the law, unto all those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit." (2 Ne. 2:7.) In other words, Christ as our Deliverer, Savior, or Redeemer can save us from the very laws he gave to us as our ruler or Lord and God.

The words Messiah (from Hebrew) and Christ (from Greek) are synonymous. 6 In modern scriptures, Messiah often appears in the text where one would normally expect Christ to appear: John the Baptist bestowed the Aaronic Priesthood upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the name of the Messiah (D&C 13:1), Lehi referred to the fullness of the gospel of the Messiah (1 Ne. 15:13), and Joseph Smith prayed that scattered Israel would come to believe in the Messiah (D&C 109:67). Furthermore, in the Book of Mormon the title Messiah is used in conjunction with Christ's first role as the Lord God of the world, 7 as well as in conjunction with his second role as the Savior or Redeemer of the world. 8 The title Messiah appears over thirty times in the Book of Mormon in books written before Christ's birth but not once in any books written after his birth. 9 This would seem to indicate that the title was used primarily in reference to the future coming of Christ. 10 Furthermore, the Book of Mormon definitely identifies Jesus of Nazareth as this promised Messiah. (2 Ne. 25:19.)

In the original uncorrupted version of the Bible, the title Messiah appeared much more often than in our modern Bible, where it is found only four times. In the Book of Mormon the title was sometimes used to indicate the future coming of the Holy One who would save or deliver Israel from spiritual and temporal death (2 Ne. 3:5; 25:16, 18), 11 whereas among the apostate Jews the term had traditionally come to mean the advent of a great national Deliverer who would save Israel from their worldly enemies. 12

Jesus as the Lord God

In order to better understand Christ's words and works in John 7 through 11, it will be helpful to review, through modern as well as ancient scriptures, the first role associated with Jesus as the Christ: as the Lord God of this world.

All of us were born in premortality as spirit children of God the Father (D&C 76:24; Heb. 12:9), 13 Christ being the firstborn of all these spirits (D&C 93:21; Col. 1:15). Each spirit was given the opportunity to obey or disobey the words of God the Father, which came in the form of light and truth. 14 (D&C 93:29-33.) As we obeyed, our spirits received more light and truth, and as we disobeyed, we damned ourselves by not receiving further light and truth and thereby came under condemnation. 15 (Alma 12:9-13.) After a period of time in this premortal state, some spirits excelled above their fellow spirits because they possessed more light and truth or glory as a result of their obedience. 16 (Abr. 3:22-23.) Because he was so obedient and gained so much light and truth (glory), Christ became more intelligent than all the rest of these spirits. (Abr. 3:19; John 17:5; Heb. 1:9.) He attained the status of a God and was made the ruler over all the other spirits. 17 Acting under the direction of his Father, he was given the authority and power to create this earth and all things therein. (D&C 38:1-3; Heb. 1:2.) He became a Divine Monarch, or the Lord God, over this earth 18 and all the spirits who were to come here.

Although they never attained the status that Christ attained, some of the spirits in premortality were obedient enough to be called great and noble and were chosen by Christ to be his rulers. (Abr. 3:22-23; Jer. 1:5.) Abraham was one of these great spirits. He understood Christ's eminence in premortality and the importance of his mission on earth, so he looked forward to the future coming of Christ upon the earth and rejoiced. 19 The Jewish leaders, however, rejected Christ's testimony that he was the God of this world. They accused him of blasphemy for making such a statement and attempted to kill him by stoning; but since it was not yet time to die, he escaped from their midst. (See John 8:52-59.)

The Light of the World

The purpose of mortality was to prove us to see if we would continue to obey God's words and therefore obtain additional light and truth. (Abr. 3:24-26.) Mortality provides the opposition necessary for further refinement, bringing us toward a future goal of attaining a fullness of light and truth with a resurrected body. 20 Lucifer and his followers in the premortal state did not have a love for truth as did most of the other spirits. "A liar from the beginning" (D&C 93:25), "a murderer from the beginning" (John 8:44), he rebelled against God and persuaded one-third of the spirits to follow after him. As a result, they became subject to spiritual death, were cast out of the presence of God down to the earth, and became the devil and his angels. (Moses 4:1-4; D&C 29:36-37.) Here they continue their war against God's plans and purposes and attempt to persuade mortals to disobey Christ. (D&C 29:28-32; Moro. 7:12.)

In the treasury of the temple, Jesus bore witness to the Jews of his divinely appointed status. However, the Jewish leaders rejected not only his words but also the confirming testimony sent to them by God the Father through the Spirit of God.

Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.

The Pharisees therefore said unto him, Thou bearest record of thyself; thy record is not true.

Jesus answered and said unto them, Though I bear record of myself, yet my record is true: for I know whence I came, and whither I go; but ye cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go; Ye judge after the flesh. . . .

I am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent me beareth witness of me.

Then said they unto him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye neither know me, nor my Father: if ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also.

These words spake Jesus in the treasury, as he taught in the temple: and no man laid hands on him; for his hour was not yet come. (John 8:12-15, 18-20.)

Elder McConkie pointed out: "It appears to have been our Lord's deliberate design to dramatize the great truths relative to himself by associating them with the religious and social practices then prevailing." 21 He therefore chose an appropriate time during the Feast of Tabernacles to emphasize that he was the light of the world. As Elder McConkie explained:

And so now, apparently while the great golden lampstands in the temple were blazing forth their light as part of the festivities of the Feast of the Tabernacles, he took occasion to associate himself with the Messianic prophecies by announcing, "I am the light of the world."

His hearers well knew that their Messiah should stand as a light to all men; that is, they knew that he as the very source of light and truth, would stand forth as a light, an example, a dispenser of truth; they knew that his would be the mission to mark the course and light the way which all men should travel. (3 Ne. 15:9; 18:16, 24.) Messianic prophecies given to their fathers promised that he would be "a light to the Gentiles" (Isa. 49:6), a light piercing the darkness of error and unbelief (Isa. 60:1-3). Jesus' application of these prophecies to his own person was a clear proclamation of his own Messiahship. 22

The Good Shepherd

The scriptures indicate that the tendency to accept or reject Christ's voice in premortality carries over into this mortal life, for Christ has said that "whoso cometh not unto me is under the bondage of sin. And whoso receiveth not my voice is not acquainted with my voice, and is not of me." (D&C 84:51-52.) The only place we could have become acquainted with the voice of Christ, before we heard it in this mortal state, was in our premortal life. Referring to himself as the Good Shepherd, he said:

He that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out. And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of strangers. . . .

I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. . . .

But ye believed not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: And I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand. (John 10:2-5, 14, 26-29.)

This metaphor carries an even greater impression to the mind if one is acquainted with the relationship that existed between the shepherd and his sheep in ancient biblical times. One observer has noted:

By day and by night the shepherd is always with his sheep. . . . This was necessary on account of the exposed nature of the land, and the presence of danger from wild animals and robbers. One of the most familiar and beautiful sights of the East is that of the shepherd leading his sheep to the pasture. . . . He depends upon the sheep to follow, and they in turn expect him never to leave them. They run after him if he appears to be escaping from them, and are terrified when he is out of sight, or any stranger appears instead of him. He calls to them from time to time to let them know that he is at hand. The sheep listen and continue grazing, but if any one else tries to produce the same peculiar cries and gutteral sounds, they look around with a startled air and begin to scatter. . . .

As he is always with them, and so deeply interested in them, the shepherd comes to know his sheep very intimately. Many of them have pet names suggested either by the appearance or character of the particular sheep, or by some incident connected with it. . . . One day a missionary, meeting a shepherd on one of the wildest parts of the Lebanon, asked him various questions about his sheep, and among others if he counted them every night. On answering that he did not, he was asked how he knew if they were all there or not. His reply was, "Master, if you were to put a cloth over my eyes, and bring me any sheep and only let me put my hands on its face, I could tell in a moment if it was mine or not." Such is the fulness of meaning in the words of the good Shepherd, "I know mine own, and mine own know Me" (John 10:14). 23

Living Water

Those who continue to accept the promptings of the Spirit of Christ to the point where they accept and live the gospel (D&C 84:43-48) will overcome spiritual death by receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost, which is an even greater source of light and truth (2 Ne. 31:18; 32:5). 24 Since they now receive light and truth through the power of the Holy Ghost, they are able to influence others, by their example and words, to accept and live the gospel and thereby also receive light and truth. 25

"In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. (But this spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive; for the Holy Ghost was promised unto them who believe, after that Jesus was glorified.)" (JST, John 7:37-39.) Again, we see Jesus portraying himself as the Messiah or God of this world by using dramatic moments in Jewish worship at one of the annual feasts. Elder McConkie wrote:

In the majesty of his own eternal might, the Lord Jehovah had proclaimed to ancient Israel: "I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring." (Isa. 44:3.) "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters." (Isa. 55:1.)

Now the same Eternal One, tabernacled in the flesh, ministering as the Lord Jesus unto the seed and offspring of them of old, proclaimed his willingness to give the Holy Ghost to men so that floods of living water might be poured out upon them. His solemn invitation, "If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink," was a plain and open claim of Messiahship. In making it he identified himself as the very Jehovah who had promised drink to the thirsty through an outpouring of the Spirit. After such a pronouncement his hearers were faced with two choices: Either he was a blasphemer worthy of death, or he was in fact the God of Israel.

For the publicizing of such a sobering and transcendent doctrine Jesus chose one of the most solemn and dramatic moments of Jewish worship. On each of the eight days of the feast of Tabernacles, as most authorities agree, it was the custom, for the priest as part of the temple service, to take water in golden vessels from the stream of Siloam, which flowed under the temple-mountain, and pour it upon the altar. Then the words of Isaiah were sung: "With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation." (Isa. 12:3.) And it was at this very moment of religious climax that Jesus stepped forth and offered draughts of living refreshment which would satisfy the deepest spiritual cravings of the thirsty soul. 26

The Healing of the Blind Man

In addition to his verbal testimonies and use of metaphors, Christ performed miracles to testify to the Jews that he was the God of this world. (John 10:24-25.) Two great miracles were performed by him at this time in the environs of Jerusalem: the giving of sight to the man who was blind from birth (John 9:1-38) and the bringing of Lazarus back from the dead (John 11:1-45). The motive he gave for performing the first was "that the works of God should be made manifest in him" (John 9:3), and for the latter, "for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby" (John 11:4). Although the blind man, Lazarus, and others present benefited personally from these miracles, perhaps the primary reason Christ performed these miracles was to give irrefutable evidence to the Jews that he had divine powers, that he had control and power over the elements of this earth, and that he was indeed Christ, the Lord God of this world. 27

The man born blind did not ask to be healed. He received his sight only after he was noticed by Christ and then followed his instructions; later he testified that it was through Christ's power that he was healed.

As Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth. And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?

Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest in him. . . .

When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay, and said unto him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam. . . .

He went his way therefore, and washed, and came seeing. (John 9:1-3, 6-7.)

The question the disciples asked obviously referred to a sin committed in premortality. Christ's reply confirms that both he and other Jews believed in a premortality where one could disobey God. 28

The reality of the miracle became public because those who had known the blind man could now see that he was no more blind. (John 9:8-12.) The news soon reached the Jewish leaders, especially since the miracle was performed on the Sabbath day. They failed in their attempt to discredit it (John 19:13-25), but they did not want to admit that Jesus had divine powers. 29 Hence, they tried to escape the obvious by the fallacy of ad hominem: they accused the healed man of being a sinner and cast him out of the synagogue:

Then said they to him again, What did he to thee? how opened he thine eyes?

He answered them, I have told you already, and ye did not hear: wherefore would ye hear it again? will ye also be his disciples?

Then they reviled him, and said, Thou art his disciple; but we are Moses' disciples. We know that God spake unto Moses: as for this fellow, we know not from whence he is.

The man answered and said unto them, Why herein is a marvellous thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he hath opened mine eyes. Now we know that God heareth not sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of God, and doeth his will, him he heareth. Since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind. If this man were not of God, he could do nothing.

They answered and said unto him, Thou wast altogether born in sins, and dost thou teach us? And they cast him out. (John 9:26-34.)

Since the man did not ask to be healed, and since Christ stated that the man was born blind so that "the works of God should be manifest in him," it is obvious that the miracle was performed primarily as a witness to the Jews that Jesus was the Christ, the Lord God of this world.

The Raising of Lazarus

The bringing of Lazarus back from the dead seems to be an even greater witness of Christ's divine power over the elements. The body of Lazarus had been in the grave for four days, with the decomposition process well under way. (John 11:17.) To bring him back from the dead required not only that his spirit be brought back from the spirit world to be united again with his body, but also that the physical elements of the body be changed from a decomposed or unorganized state to their former or more organized state, thus seemingly defying laws of nature. 30

Jesus was in Perea when he learned that Lazarus was sick. Had he performed the miracle strictly out of compassion or love for Mary and Martha, he no doubt would have rushed to Bethany immediately. However, he apparently delayed his coming so that the incident would be more miraculous, thus demonstrating more vividly his divine powers:

Now a certain man was sick, named Lazarus, of Bethany, the town of Mary and her sister Martha. . . .

Therefore his sisters sent unto him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick.

When Jesus heard that, he said, This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby.

Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. When he had heard therefore that he was sick, he abode two days still in the same place where he was. Then after that saith he to his disciples, Let us go into Judaea again. (John 11:1, 3-7.)

Jesus used this incident to test Martha's faith. Because of her obedience to God, she was spiritually alive, having light and truth to be able to testify that Jesus was the Christ. Thus, she knew that he had the power to bring Lazarus back from the dead. She told him: "Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died. But I know, that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give it thee. . . . Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world." (John 11:21-22, 27.)

By the time Jesus arrived at Lazarus's tomb, a large crowd had gathered. Thus, when Lazarus came forth from the tomb, there were numerous witnesses to the great miracle, including many who had great faith; the raising of Lazarus confirmed their belief that Jesus was the Christ. (John 11:45.) However, when the news reached the ears of the chief priests and Pharisees, "they took counsel together for to put [Jesus] to death." (John 11:53.) The miracle performed two functions: it helped to confirm the faith of those who had already accepted the testimony of the Spirit of God and had believed, and it served as a further witness against those who fought against the testimony of the Spirit and hence disbelieved. (3 Ne. 29:5-7.)

In his role as the Lord God of this world, Christ is not only our law-giver but also our final judge as to how we have kept his law; in this respect he is a God of justice. He has stated that he "cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance" (D&C 1:31), and if we do not keep his laws, he must see to it that we are punished. His laws are given not only in the scriptures and through the prophets but also through the Holy Ghost. If we ask for revelation and he answers through one of these mediums, it becomes a law unto us. If we do not then obey that law, we "become transgressors; and justice and judgment are the penalty which is affixed unto [the] law." (D&C 82:4.) We will be punished by remaining spiritually dead, and eventually we will die in our sins. (2 Ne. 9:38; Moro. 10:26.)

Since the Jewish leaders were not seeking the truth, they did not accept Christ as their God or Lawgiver. As a result, they became and remained spiritually dead and would die in their sins:

Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sins. . . . Ye are from beneath; I am from above: ye are of this world; I am not of this world. I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your sins: for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins.

Then said they unto him, Who art thou? And Jesus saith unto them, Even the same that I said unto you from the beginning. (John 8:21, 23-25.)

Evidently these Jewish leaders loved their sins so much that they did not want to accept the truth and could not admit that they were wrong. (John 3:19-20.) They preferred to listen to the voice of the devil, who was a liar from the beginning (in premortality) and hates light and truth.

[Jesus said:] I know that ye are Abraham's seed; but ye seek to kill me, because my word hath no place in you. I speak that which I have seen with my Father: and ye do that which ye have seen with your father.

They answered and said unto him, Abraham is our father.

Jesus saith unto them, If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham. But ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth. . . . Ye do the deeds of your father. . . . Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear my word. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it. And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not. . . .

He that is of God heareth God's words: ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. (John 8:37-41, 43-45, 47.)

Jesus knew that the Jewish leaders would not accept him in mortality but would crucify him. (Matt. 20:17-19.) Then, after he had risen from the grave and they had risen from the grave, they would have to face him at the judgment bar. At that time they would know who he really was and would have to confess that he was the Christ, the Lord God of this world, and that they had trampled and broken his laws: 31 "Then said Jesus unto them, When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught me, I speak these things." (John 8:28.)

Jesus as the Savior or Redeemer

The second role associated with the title Christ was that of a Savior or Redeemer. In this role, he was to redeem or save mankind from the consequences of the very laws he had given in his first role as the Lord God of this world. (2 Ne. 2:9-10.) As a result of Adam's and Eve's transgression of God's law in the Garden of Eden, they, as well as all their posterity, became subject to temporal and spiritual death. (Moses 6:48; D&C 29:41.) This meant that after temporal or mortal death, the bodies of all mankind would remain in the grave to rot and crumble, never to rise again. At the same time, all the spirits of mankind would be cast out of the presence of God, doomed to dwell forever with Satan and his angels. (2 Ne. 9:7-9.) Therefore, an atonement was needed to overcome the effects of these two everlasting deaths: to resurrect all mankind from the grave to an immortal state and to bring all back after the resurrection, into the presence of God to be judged. (2 Ne. 9:10-15.)

Not only was an atonement needed to overcome Adam's transgression, but it was also needed to overcome the spiritual death people bring upon themselves in this mortal life through disobedience to God's laws. Because of the power Satan gained over the physical world (including our physical bodies as well as our environment) through the Fall, it is very difficult for persons in this fallen condition to resist the temptation of Satan without the help of God. 32 Consequently, all persons, after they reach the age of accountability, disobey Christ's laws at one time or another (some more than others) and become subject to spiritual death. (Alma 42:11, 14.) Although they are deprived of the presence of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost in this state of spiritual death, they can still receive the promptings of the Spirit of Christ directly or when they hear the prophets or read the scriptures here on earth. (Moro. 7:16-19; D&C 84:46.) Christ was the only person upon the earth who always obeyed his own laws as well as his Father's. Therefore, he was always spiritually alive.

Since it is impossible for people to relive their lives, Christ has provided a way, through the power of the Atonement, for us to become spiritually alive by going directly from spiritual death to spiritual life, providing we do the things he requires. (Alma 42:9-15.) First, he requires us to have godly sorrow for our sins and to confess that we have broken his laws. 33 (D&C 58:43.) Once we have a sincere desire to change our lives to be more in conformity with God's laws, then the power of the Atonement can be used to help us resist Satan's power and overcome the tendency to disobey God. 34 Once this change is made, we are then in a position to make restitution for past sins. 35 After we show further obedience by being baptized, God can use the power of the Atonement to wash away our sins so that we are clean and ready to receive the Holy Ghost. (2 Ne. 31:5-17.) When we receive the Holy Ghost, we are back in the presence of God and have overcome spiritual death. As long as we continue to feast upon the words of Christ and obey him, we will never again taste of spiritual death. 36

In a conversation with some of the Jews who had begun to believe on him as their Lord and God, Jesus said that if they would accept his word and obey it, then as their Savior or Redeemer he could free them from the bondage of sin and help them to overcome the tendency to sin so that they could overcome spiritual death. Furthermore, as long as they continued to obey, they would never again taste of spiritual death:

Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

They answered him, We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any man: how sayest thou, Ye shall be made free?

Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin. . . . If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. . . . If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death.

Then said the Jews unto him, Now we know that thou hast a devil. Abraham is dead, and the prophets; and thou sayest, If a man keep my saying, he shall never taste of death. Art thou greater than our father Abraham, which is dead? And the prophets are dead: whom makest thou thyself? (John 8:31-34, 36, 51-53.)

The obvious answer to their question was that Jesus was greater than Abraham or any of the other prophets. (John 8:58.) He was not just a teacher or preacher; his role as the Redeemer and Savior of the world far outshadowed his role as a teacher. 37 Many have preached and could preach the gospel, but one—and only one—person could be the Savior of the world. Only one person could free others from being servants of sin and release them from spiritual death. That person was the Christ, the Savior and Redeemer of the world. 38

Just what did Jesus have to be and to do in order to accomplish the Atonement? The scriptures indicate that he had to be born the Son of God the Father; he had to live a sinless life; he not only had to shed his blood but also to suffer so tremendously that he sweat blood from every pore, and he had to voluntarily sacrifice his life. (D&C 45:3-4.) At the time he gave up his life on the cross he said, "It is finished" (John 19:30), indicating that the requirements of the Atonement had been met (Heb. 9:12, 25-28; 10:14). He not only had the power to lay down his life voluntarily, but now he also had the power to take it up again, thereby bringing to pass his resurrection as well as the resurrection of all mankind. (2 Ne. 2:8.)

In raising Lazarus from the dead, Jesus performed a miracle to help teach the Jews his role as the Great Redeemer or Savior. (See our discussion earlier in this chapter.) Even though Lazarus was not resurrected at this time but was brought back to life as a mortal, this miracle was a foreshadowing of the resurrection from the dead. Jesus tested Martha's faith in his future ability to raise all mortals from the dead in the resurrection; then he confirmed that faith by bringing Lazarus back from the dead. He also used this incident to teach Martha his ability to raise people from spiritual death to spiritual life and keep them there until they gain eternal life, if they are willing to accept him as both their Lord God and their Redeemer and to obey his will:

Jesus saith unto her, Thy brother shall rise again.

Martha saith unto him, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day.

Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou this?

She saith unto him, Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world. (John 11:23-27.)

As odd as it may seem, God the Father even inspired Caiaphas, the high priest, to bear testimony that Jesus was the Great Redeemer who would die for his people, so that he could save them from spiritual and temporal death: "Caiaphas, being the high priest that same year, said unto them, Ye know nothing at all. Nor consider that it is expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not. And this spake he not of himself: but being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation; and not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad." (John 11:49-52.)

Summary

John 7 through 11 covers a very important part of the life of Jesus of Nazareth: He knew that he would be rejected and crucified by the Jewish nation, so he came to Jerusalem to bear a final witness that he was the promised Messiah. He bore that testimony in his conversations, through parables and metaphors, through performing miraculous healings, and by associating himself with various religious practices performed at the annual feasts. It is apparent that in these five chapters of John, Jesus emphasized both of his roles as the Christ: as the Lord God of this world and as the Savior or Redeemer of the world. To accept him as the Christ in either of these roles is necessary, but not sufficient to gain salvation. To accept him as the Christ in both of these roles is both necessary and sufficient for us to be saved from our sins and eventually gain eternal life.

NOTES

LaMar E. Garrard is professor of Church history and doctrine at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

 1. The city of Jerusalem and especially the temple typified the Jewish nation. When Jesus pronounced a judgment against Jerusalem (JST, Luke 13:34-36) and the temple (Mark 13:1-2), it was a pronouncement against both the people and their nation, for "with the passing of the temple the Jews, as a distinct nation, also ceased." See Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966-73), 1:636-37.

 2. It was at this time that "Jesus, as though to place the capstone on all the testimony of Messiahship which he had previously borne, arranged to fulfil in detail one of the great Messianic prophecies." (McConkie, 1:577.)

 3. Christ warned that those who would follow him and preach the same message would be persecuted and killed also. (Matt. 10:16-40.) Peter preached that Jesus was the Christ (Acts 2:22-36) as did Paul (Acts 26:1-24). Both men were persecuted and eventually killed for that testimony. The Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants bear testimony that Jesus is the Christ, and Joseph and Hyrum Smith were martyred as a result of that testimony. (D&C 136:36-39.) Modern-day elders are commanded to bear testimony of Christ (D&C 68:6) so that they will not be held accountable for the sins of their generation (D&C 88:81-88) and also so that the wicked—who do not accept that testimony—will be left without excuse when God visits them with his judgments (D&C 124:2-3, 7-10).

 4. McConkie, 1:439.

 5. Up until the days of John the Baptist, there had been no prophets among the Jews for approximately five hundred years. The last prophet, Malachi, had condemned the Jewish nation for tendencies toward apostasy. Uninspired scribes and Pharisees interpreted the scriptures to fit their own desires and needs, and from these false interpretations there arose false traditions that later Jewish leaders accepted as more binding than the scriptures. See James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1949), pp. 63-68.

 6. See Talmage, pp. 35-36. The premortal Christ was anointed the Lord God and the Savior over the human family. See Ps. 45:6-7.

 7. Abinadi referred to the coming of the Messiah: "God himself shall come down among the children of men, and redeem his people." (Mosiah 15:1.) Lehi spoke of the Messiah as the Holy One who had given the law "unto the inflicting of the punishment which is affixed." (2 Ne. 2:10.) He also referred to the Messiah in this same role, saying that "if the day shall come that they will reject the Holy One of Israel, the true Messiah, their Redeemer and their God, behold, the judgments of him that is just shall rest upon them." (2 Ne. 1:10.)

 8. Nephi spoke of the coming of the Messiah in terms of "the redemption of the world." (1 Ne. 1:19.) Lehi referred to him in one verse as a prophet who would be raised up among the Jews, "even a Messiah, or, in other words, a Savior of the world" and in the following verse as "this Messiah . . . or this Redeemer of the world." (1 Ne. 10:4-5.) Lehi also explained that "redemption cometh in and through the Holy Messiah. . . . He offereth himself a sacrifice for sin, to answer the ends of the law, unto all those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit." He elaborated: "No flesh . . . can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace, of the Holy Messiah, who layeth down his life according to the flesh." (2 Ne. 2:6-8.)

 9. The last reference to the Messiah is in Helaman 8:13, which was written between 23 and 20 B.C.

 10. 1 Nephi 1:19, 2 Nephi 25:19, Jarom 1:11, Mosiah 13:33, and Helaman 8:13 indicate how the title was used in an anticipatory sense.

 11. The Book of Mormon also teaches that the Messiah will save Israel in the latter days from temporal or worldly enemies. (2 Ne. 6:13-14.)

 12. Talmage, pp. 71-72.

 13. See also Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 48, 353. This premortal state is discussed in greater detail in the following articles: LaMar E. Garrard, "What Is Man?" in Hearken, O Ye People (Sandy, Utah: Randall Book Co., 1984), pp. 133-52, and LaMar E. Garrard, "The Origin and Destiny of Man" in Studies in Scriptures, Vol. 1: The Doctrine and Covenants (Sandy, Utah: Randall Book Co., 1984), pp. 365-78.

 14. Evidently, the voice or word of God comes to our spirits in the form of light and truth and through the power of the Spirit of God. (D&C 84:43-47.) This is sometimes referred to as testimony or promptings of the Spirit of God. (See Alma 32:28-35.)

 15. Individual spirits can accept or reject the promptings of the Spirit of God. When they reject the Spirit, either in premortality or mortality, it is because they love their sins and do not want to change their lives. The Spirit of God prompts them to believe in God and accept his laws and change their lives to be in accordance with these laws. (John 3:16-21.)

 16. Glory, light and truth, and intelligence are synonymous terms in this context: "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth." (D&C 93:36.) Those who are more obedient to God in this mortal life go into the next life with more intelligence. (D&C 130:18-19.) For God to be just, it seems that the same would apply to a spirit coming into this mortal life.

 17. Evidently he was chosen and anointed to this position of authority in premortality. (Ps. 45:6, 7; Heb. 1:8-12; 5:5-6; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 181, 265.) Sometimes he is known as Jehovah. (Abr. 1:16; Ex. 6:3.)

 18. Christ depicts himself as a Divine Monarch sitting upon his throne who rules over all things. (D&C 60:4; 88:12-13.)

 19. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 60; Hel. 8:17-18.

 20. For more detailed information on the purpose of the Fall and the role of opposition in life, see LaMar E. Garrard, "The Fall of Man," Principles of the Gospel in Practice (Sandy, Utah: Randall Book Co., 1985), pp. 39-70.

 21. McConkie, 1:452.

 22. Ibid., 1:452-53.

 23. George M. Mackie, Bible Manners and Customs (Beirut: Fleming H. Revell Co.), pp. 33-35.

 24. When we receive the Holy Ghost, we come back into the presence of God and overcome spiritual death. (Mosiah 27:24-27; McConkie, 1:141-42, 357, 469, 532.) A more detailed discussion on spiritual death and spiritual life is given in the following articles: LaMar E. Garrard, "Spiritual Death, Temporal Death, and the Atonement of Christ," The Eleventh Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium: The New Testament (Provo, Utah: Religious Education, Brigham Young University, 1983), pp. 57-72, and Garrard, "The Fall of Man," pp. 43-58.

 25. McConkie, 1:446.

 26. Ibid., 1:445-46.

 27. Ibid., 1:479, 531.

 28. Ibid., 1:480.

 29. Those who do not love the truth do not seek after truth because it would require them to change their lives to be in conformity with God's laws. Therefore, these Pharisees did not want to believe that Jesus was the God of this world, for that would require them to recognize that they were wrong, be sorry for their sins, confess them, and then forsake them. (D&C 56:14-15.)

 30. Natural law is merely a description of the way the elements obey God's commands. Since Jesus was the Lord God of this world, he could revoke a former commandment for a new one (D&C 56:4), which appears to mortals as a miracle. Those who refuse to acknowledge that he has this power take a naturalistic view of the world that eliminates God or his power over the elements. When people take this position, they may also deny God's laws over themselves. Hence, if there is no God, or a God with no power to enact laws, there is no need to repent for breaking these laws. (Alma 42:17-21.) Such persons resist the Spirit of God, the words of the prophets, and the scriptures because they love their sins. They prefer to listen to Satan rather than God. (Alma 30:50-53.) For further discussion on this subject of natural law, see Garrard, "What Is Man?," pp. 134-39.

 31. McConkie, 1:455. See also 2 Ne. 9:46.

 32. For further information on this subject, see Garrard, "The Fall of Man," pp. 39-70. Because of the power Satan gained over us through the Fall, we are commanded to call upon God for help in overcoming Satan's temptations. (D&C 29:39-40; 10:5.)

 33. There must be godly sorrow (a broken heart and contrite spirit), which is sorrow that we have offended God by breaking his laws, not just sorrow that we have offended a neighbor or that we were caught. Paul said that "godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of: but the sorrow of the world worketh death." (2 Cor. 7:10.)

 34. If we have free agency, then it is our desires that ultimately determine the choices we make (Alma 29:4-5; 2 Ne. 2:27-29), and consequently our actions or works (Alma 41:3-7).

 35. Once we desire to change our lives and humbly call upon God for help, as he has commanded us to do (Ether 3:2), then that help comes to us as the Holy Ghost fills our spirits (2 Ne. 12:6) and enlightens them (Alma 19:6; D&C 11:13). As we are born of God, we gain the power or strength (Philip. 4:13; Col. 1:9-11) to change our carnal natures and can eventually overcome the world (Mosiah 27:25; D&C 50:34-35). Restitution cannot be completed until we cease to do those things for which we are making restitution.

 36. The Holy Ghost will continue to guide and direct us (2 Ne. 31:19—32:3) as long as we do not turn against God and disobey him (Heb. 6:4-6).

 37. To characterize Jesus as just a great moral teacher of ethics would be to humanize him and destroy him in his role as the Redeemer and Savior. One of the requirements necessary to be Savior of this world was that he had to be the Son of God the Father.

 38. As the Son of God, Christ is the only one who could "not be a human sacrifice" but "an infinite and eternal sacrifice." (Alma 34:10.)

 
 
© 1986 Deseret Book Company 

Printed from Gospelink.com
