# The Farewell of Jesus (Matthew 26:20-35; Mark 14:17-25; Luke 22:1-38; John 13-17)

### The Farewell of Jesus (Matthew 26:20-35; Mark 14:17-25; Luke 22:1-38; John 13-17)
Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)
 
 

27

THE FAREWELL OF JESUS (Matthew 26:20-35; Mark 14:17-25; Luke 22:1-38; John 13-17) 

RODNEY TURNER

The public ministry was over. For three years Jesus had walked among the people bearing witness in word and deed of his divine calling. Although rejected by most (but not all) local and national Jewish leaders (John 3:1-2; 12:42), he was esteemed by many of the common people as a miracle worker, a great teacher, a prophet, and even among some as the long-sought Messiah (John 1:41; 7:40-43; 10:19-25).

But it may well be that no one comprehended that he was the Lord God Jehovah come to earth as the literal Son of God. 1 Although the Holy Scriptures described God in anthropomorphic terms, Judaism did not define him as a material being. Then too, Judaism was, and is, totally monotheistic; there is only one God. 2 Belief in a Godhead comprised of three deities (tritheism) was quite unthinkable. Equally absurd to them would have been the notion that God could have a literal Son. 3 Thus, references to God as "Father," or to his children (as in Ps. 82:6), were employed only metaphorically. 4 Jesus' disciples were raised in this centuries-old tradition. Only with the passage of time were they enlightened as to Jesus' real identity and God's true nature.

The awesome truth that Jesus was more than a mortal man—however spiritually empowered—first began to dawn upon his grieving, bewildered disciples with his appearance to them the night following his resurrection. 5 That his resurrection was totally unexpected is evident in the combined testimony of the Gospel writers. (Luke 24:6-12, 22-25; Matt. 28:17; Mark 16:9-11, 14; John 20:9-15, 24-29.) The claim of the women that Jesus had appeared to them was rejected by the apostles "as idle tales, and they believed them not." (Luke 24:11.) "For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from the dead." (John 20:9.) No one was more surprised to see the risen Christ than those who were called to be his special witnesses. Indeed, the chief priests and Pharisees paid more heed to Jesus' statement, "After three days I will rise again" (Matt. 27:63), than did his own disciples—hence the guard at the tomb (Matt. 27:62-66).

The Last Supper and the Sacrament

It is against this background of apostolic uncertainty concerning who and what Jesus really was that the solemn events associated with his farewell to the Twelve took place. The patience, the love, and the gentle instruction he manifested on that occasion must be seen in the context of his own terrible loneliness—to be at heart unknown and a stranger to those nearest and most precious to him. His loneliness was intensified beyond human comprehension in the greatest ordeal ever imposed upon any soul in all eternity. That ordeal was but hours away, as he ministered to his uncomprehending apostles for the last time in mortality.

The Savior's thirty-third birthday occurred just four days before he sat with the Twelve for the last time. 6 According to John's account, the week-long feast of unleavened bread would begin with the Passover meal the following evening. However, Jesus would not live to partake of it; the Last Supper was to be his last Passover as well. 7

The death of the Lamb of God at about the ninth hour (3 P.M.) the following afternoon officially ended the practice of animal sacrifice that had been instituted in the days of Adam. 8 It also rendered null and void the law of Moses, together with all of its ritual aspects. The death of Jesus was the legal death of the old covenant, even as his resurrection symbolized the rebirth of the new covenant—the law of Christ. (Jer. 31:31-34; Heb. 8:6-13.) Consequently, Jehovah, the God of Israel who gave the feast of the Passover (Ex. 12:1-11) was, with his apostles, the last to lawfully partake of that feast on this earth.

Washing of Feet

Only John recounts Jesus washing the feet of the Twelve. This lesson in humility was to be a graphic reminder to the apostles of the spirit that was to accompany all that they did as the Savior's special witnesses. No service was to be beneath them; no soul was unworthy of their ministrations.

In a way not now fully understood, the washing of feet also figured in Jewish ritual: "Now this was the custom of the Jews under their law; wherefore Jesus did this that the law might be fulfilled." (JST, John 13:10; see Ex. 30:19; 40:31.) That he did so demonstrates the exactness with which he observed every "jot and tittle" of the law that he himself had given ancient Israel. (See Matt. 5:18.)

Those who acted in the Savior's behalf were to be both physically and morally clean. "Be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord." (Isa. 52:11.) In modern times, any brother participating in the "School of the prophets" in Kirtland, Ohio, in 1833 was to be "clean from the blood of this generation; and he shall be received by the ordinance of the washing of feet, for unto this end was the ordinance of the washing of feet instituted." 9 (D&C 88:138-39.)

Peter's impulsive rejection of the ordinance, followed by his equally impulsive response to his Master's solemn rebuke—"If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me" (John 13:8)—obscured a far more terrible drama when the Son of Man, like any menial slave, knelt before Judas Iscariot and washed and dried his feet. What thoughts besieged the young apostle as he looked down upon the quiet Galilean? What emotions swept through him when his eyes met the eyes of his knowing Lord? What could Jesus have done more calculated to move the alienated disciple with compassion and swerve him from his dark intent than the simple act of kneeling before him in humblest of services? But it was to no avail. The Judean apostle had surrendered his will to another master. His course was fixed. He was committed to betrayal.

The Sacrament: A New Ordinance

John alone recorded the sermon on the bread of life (John 6:26-58) wherein Jesus alluded to the sacrament by saying, among other things, "He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him." (John 6:56.) It is, therefore, most strange that John failed to mention the institution of the sacrament at the Last Supper. 10 This vital information is found in the other three Gospels and in Paul's letter to the Corinthians. (1 Cor. 11:23-26.) 11

Jesus introduced the sacrament as a natural, foreordained extension of the Passover meal being eaten at the time. The blood of the paschal lamb—which had temporarily saved the firstborn of ancient Israel from physical death—was a sign of the blood of the Lamb of God, the Firstborn, which permanently delivered all mankind both from physical and (on conditions of repentance) spiritual death. By instituting the ordinance of the sacrament, Jesus used the bread and wine of the Passover. In doing so, the Passover meal, with its limited symbolism, was absorbed into the sacrament of the Lord's supper, with its universal symbolism. The lesser was swallowed up in the greater. Thus, the Passover was fulfilled in the sacrament, even as the Law of Moses was fulfilled in Christ.

The Savior broke and blessed unleavened bread and, giving it to the Twelve, said: "Take, eat; this is in remembrance of my body which I give a ransom for you." (JST, Matt. 26:22.) Mark adds: "For as oft as ye do this ye will remember this hour that I was with you." (JST, Mark 14:21.)

After expressing thanks, Jesus then passed a cup of wine, saying: "Drink ye all of it. For this is in remembrance of my blood of the new testament [the gospel covenant], which is shed for as many as shall believe on my name, for the remission of their sins." (JST, Matt. 26:23-24.) 12 Again Mark adds: "As oft as ye do this ordinance, ye will remember me in this hour that I was with you and drank with you of this cup, even the last time in my ministry." (JST, Mark 14:24.) Such was the common cup Jesus shared with his chosen witnesses, the cup that symbolized another cup he would drink alone—and to its dregs. (See D&C 19:18.)

Yet there would be still another cup, one overflowing with joy, that Jesus would share with the righteous in a glorious reaffirmation of his triumph over death and hell: "I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I shall come and drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom." (JST, Matt. 26:26.) "That day" refers to the millennial day; the setting is the millennial earth; and the partakers will be the first Twelve (less one) and all of the mighty prophets, seers, and revelators, together "with all those whom [the] Father hath given . . . out of the world" since time began. (D&C 27:5-14.) Thus, we partake of the sacramental emblems not only in remembrance of what Jesus has done, but also in testimony of what he will yet do: return as earth's only rightful King and Lawgiver. (D&C 45:59.) 13

The Traitor

The four Gospels contain a number of passages leading up to the Last Supper in which Jesus alluded to his death. 14 John, stressing Jesus' seership and foreknowledge, stated that Jesus "knew from the beginning who . . . should betray him." (John 6:64, 71; 13:11.) 15 However, although Jesus had explicitly foretold his death on at least three prior occasions to his uncomprehending disciples (Matt. 16:21-22; 17:22-23; 20:17-19), it was not until the Last Supper that he revealed the presence of a traitor among the Twelve (John 13:21).

The Synoptics tell of Judas Iscariot agreeing to inform the chief priests (Sadducees, who controlled the temple) of the most opportune time to arrest Jesus. (Luke 22:3-6.) 16 They also state that each of the apostles—not knowing the traitor's identity, and assuming that Jesus was speaking of some occasion in the distant future—wondered if he himself would be the guilty party: "Lord, is it I?" (Matt. 26:22.) 17 Only Matthew records that when Judas asked "Master, is it I?" Jesus answered, "Thou hast said"—meaning "Yes." (Matt. 26:25.) However, the identity of the traitor remained unknown to the other apostles. Nothing more is said in the Synoptics of the traitor. Nor, strangely, is there any reference to Judas ever leaving the group. And yet, it is obvious that he did so at some time that night, since he was with the arresting soldiers hours later.

According to John, it was following the washing of the apostles' feet that Jesus spoke of a traitor among the Twelve. This prompted Simon Peter to quietly ask John (always unnamed in his Gospel) to ask the Lord the traitor's identity. Jesus signified that it was Judas Iscariot by giving a him a sop (a morsel) from the common dish. John—and presumably Peter—then knew that the betrayer was their Judean brother. Evidently, this byplay went unnoticed by the other apostles. (John 13:21-30.)

Jesus then told Judas, "That thou doest, do quickly." Although heard by all, the Lord's words were understood by none save Judas himself: "Now no man at the table knew for what intent he spake this unto him." (John 13:27-28.) Consequently no one—including Peter and John, who then knew that Judas was the traitor—attached any sinister meaning to Judas's immediate departure. Had they suspected that his perfidy was but hours away, it is doubtful that they would have allowed Judas to leave; but the imminent betrayal and death of Jesus was simply inconceivable to his followers.

The receiving of the sop from the hand of Jesus became a dark sacrament between Satan and Judas. It signified the passage of the treacherous apostle's allegiance from the Son of God to the enemy of all righteousness. Having succumbed to the devil's suggestion that he betray the Master (John 13:2), Judas spurned the Spirit of the Lord and "Satan entered into him" (John 13:27). 18 He became a man possessed by the devil himself! Thus, in reality, the ultimate betrayer of Jesus was the one who despised him above all men—Lucifer, a son of the morning, the brother who became Perdition. (D&C 76:25-26.)

Still, satanic possession does not absolve Judas Iscariot. He epitomized the proverbial warning: "Pride goeth before destruction." (Prov. 16:18.) According to Joseph Smith, Judas would not accept chastisement from Jesus: "Judas was rebuked and immediately betrayed his Lord into the hands of His enemies, because Satan entered into him." 19 Doubtless his defection occurred over a period of time, as little by little he allowed himself to be overcome by that spirit of him who was "a murderer from the beginning." (John 8:44.) This unseen master made Judas the instrument of his evil will and, having used him, discarded the pathetic wretch to his own ignominious destruction. Of the Twelve the Father had given Jesus, "none of them is lost, but the son of perdition." 20 (John 17:6, 9, 12; compare John 18:9.)

The Last Discourse

As we now have it, John's version of the Last Supper is somewhat enigmatic, being characterized by metaphor, abstractions, and a degree of redundancy. 21 It is a scriptural symphony, the movements of which weave back and forth around the great central theme of the Savior's imminent death and resurrection. For purposes of clarity and emphasis, the discourse will be treated in terms of its major concepts.

Jesus was now alone with the faithful eleven apostles. The moment had come for his final words of instruction, admonition, and promise. Some of the things he would say would become clear only after his resurrection. Other things would be made known when these disciples were blessed with the enlightenment of the Holy Ghost. In the meantime, Jesus continued to patiently guide them through their apostolic apprenticeships.

But whatever their initial limitations, we must not forget that the Father had given his Son the Twelve (John 17:6), whom Jesus thereafter chose and ordained (John 15:16). Indeed, Joseph Smith taught that they had been ordained to their holy callings "in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was." 22 This provides added meaning to the Lord's statement to them: "Ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with me from the beginning." (John 15:27.)

"We Cannot Tell What He Saith"

Blinded by their misconceptions of the nature and mission of the Messiah, the apostles were perplexed by a number of the Lord's comments. Note their apparent lack of understanding in the following instances. 23

Responding to Jesus' announcement that he would soon go away and that the apostles could not then come with him, Simon Peter asked: "Lord, whither goest thou?" Again told that he could not come with Jesus at that time but would do so later, Peter persisted: "Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my life for thy sake." Peter's boast—so characteristic of those empty commitments we all make but do not expect to be obliged to honor—did not go unchallenged: "Wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, The cock shall not crow, till thou hast denied me thrice." (John 13:33, 36-38; Luke 22:31-34.) 24

When Jesus told the Twelve that they knew where he was going and "the way" he was taking to get there, Thomas asked: "Lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how can we know the way?" (John 14:5.) Jesus then explained that he himself was the "way" by which men came unto the Father.

Jesus words—"If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also: and from henceforth ye know him, and have seen him"—prompted Philip to ask: "Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us." (John 14:7-8.) Jesus then explained that he was the living revelation of the Father. To see and hear him was, in effect, to see and hear the Father.

Having promised the apostles that he would thereafter be seen by them but not by those of the world, Jesus was asked by Judas (Lebbaeus Thaddaeus): "Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?" (John 14:22.) Jesus replied that both he and his Father would appear to, and enter into communion with, those who proved faithful to his teachings. Thereafter, Jesus made another cryptic reference to his approaching death: "A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me, because I go to the Father." (John 16:16.) The apostles were baffled by his words: "What is this that he saith, A little while? we cannot tell what he saith." (John 16:18.) In other words, "We don't know what he is talking about!" Elaborating on his words, the Savior likened his death and resurrection to a mother's delivery pains, which are swallowed up in the joy of her newborn child.

Jesus acknowledged that he had spoken "in proverbs," or figuratively, but he promised to speak plainly thereafter. (John 16:25.) In evidence of this change, he told the disciples that he came into the world from the Father and would leave the world and return to the Father. They responded, "Lo, now speakest thou plainly, and speakest no proverb. Now we are sure that thou knowest all things, . . . by this we believe that thou camest forth from God." But Jesus knew that their belief was flawed: "Do ye now believe? Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave me alone." (John 16:28-32; compare Matt. 26:31.)

The question of the apostles' belief in Jesus was raised several times at the Last Supper. It seems that their Master was trying to prepare the apostles for the devastating events of the next eighteen hours. Consequently, he predicted his betrayal so that "when it is come to pass, ye may believe that I am he." (John 13:19.) He foretold his ascension to the Father so that "when it is come to pass, ye might believe." (John 14:29.) He prophesied their own martyrdoms so that "ye may remember that I told you of them." (John 16:4.)

Acknowledging their belief in God, Jesus asked the apostles to "believe also in me." (John 14:1.) His remark, "If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also" (John 14:7), prompted the request to show them the Father. Jesus then asked how he could have been with them so long a time without their knowing that he was the Father. Inasmuch as the Father—through the Holy Spirit—dwelt in Jesus, the two were effectively one and the same. (John 14:8-10.) However, if the apostles could not yet grasp that profound spiritual truth, Jesus asked them to "believe me for the very works' sake" (John 14:11)—meaning, have faith in me because of the things I have done. 25 He knew that when they were resurrected, these earnest men would comprehend the meaning of oneness: "Ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you." (John 14:20.) Possessing this precious knowledge for themselves, his special witnesses would then enjoy eternal life. (John 17:3.) But that greatest of all gifts lay far in the future. For now, Jesus was grateful for their belief in him, however unstable, as one with a mission and a message from God. (John 16:27, 31; 17:8.)

The Savior had lived with, and endured, the pattern of misconceptions—on the part of friends and enemies alike—revealed in the Gospels concerning himself. Insofar as being able to share the deep things of his Father even with his dearest companions, he was alone. "And yet," said he, "I am not alone, because the Father is with me." (John 16:32.) John stresses the great gulf that separated Christ and his true disciples from that unregenerated, human order called the world: "Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world." (1 Jn. 2:15-16; John 8:23.) 26 Yet the Father loved humanity enough to sacrifice the life of his Beloved Son "for the life of the world." (John 6:51; 3:16-17.) However, the world as such would not be saved because the world as such would not accept that divine offering. It rejected Christ "because [he] testif[ied] of it, that the works thereof are evil." (John 7:7.) His works of righteousness were in opposition to the evil works of the world.

Being the "light of the world," Christ exposed the depths of its moral and spiritual darkness. (John 8:12; 12:46.) In doing so, he made the choice between good and evil real, compelling, and inescapable: "If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloke for their sin. . . . If I had not done among them the works which none other man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both me and my Father . . . without a cause." (John 15:22-25; Ps. 35:19.) While men may not be faulted for failing to realize that God walked among them (see Acts 3:17), their guilt in mocking virtue and crucifying innocence is unquestionable. The world of Jesus was a microcosm of the universal world in all times and places that rejects God's works in favor of its own.

Jesus proved that it was possible to conquer the world and its accompanying sin because he had conquered them: "I have overcome the world," he said. (John 16:33.) His victory assured a like victory for those who love him. (1 Jn. 5:4-5.) Stripped of its excuses for sin, all mankind is subject to the Lord's righteous judgment against those who remain in sin. (John 12:31; 15:22-25). 27

The Savior's remarks to the Twelve concerning the world should be understood with the foregoing in mind. The apostles had been given to Jesus by the Father and had been chosen because they were "not of the world, even as [Jesus was] not of the world." (John 17:14, 16.) Consequently, like their Master, they would be hated, persecuted, and killed. (John 15:18-20; 16:1-4.) "In the world ye shall have tribulation," he told them. (John 16:33.) The Lord's intercessory prayer, which follows these words, is so called because it was offered in behalf of his apostles and those "which shall believe on me through their word" (John 17:20): "I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me" (John 17:9). Jesus knew that his servants would need his prayers as long as they lived, for following his ascension, the enemy he had vanquished would concentrate his fury upon his apostles—and they were vulnerable: "The prince of darkness, who is of the world, cometh, but hath no power over me, but he hath power over you." (JST, John 14:30.) However, the apostles would not be left powerless against that evil spirit; they would be armed with the Holy Ghost—the divine opposition to the prince of darkness.

The Two Comforters

There are two Comforters. The first is the Holy Ghost; the second is Jesus Christ. Both are spoken of in this discourse. Both are called "the Spirit of truth." (John 14:17; 15:26; 16:13; D&C 50:17-21.) Both were promised to the Twelve.

The first Comforter reveals, testifies, justifies, sanctifies, and otherwise manifests his spiritual powers and influence in behalf of the second comforter. It is through the Holy Ghost that the Lord dwells in and with the righteous, as, for example, when Paul wrote: "Christ liveth in me." (Gal. 2:20.) Thus, the gift of the Holy Ghost is the gift of the first Comforter, the Spirit of truth.

Unlike the influence of the first Comforter, which can be simultaneously enjoyed by every worthy Saint, the second Comforter can only be experienced in a given place, at a given time, by a given person or group. According to the Prophet Joseph Smith, it is "another Comforter" 28 spoken of in John 14:16-18, 21, and 23, and may be received after one's calling and election has been made sure: "Now what is this other Comforter? It is no more nor less than the Lord Jesus Christ Himself; and this is the sum and substance of the whole matter; that when any man obtains this last Comforter, he will have the personage of Jesus Christ to attend him, or appear unto him from time to time, and even He will manifest the Father unto him, and they will take up their abode with him, and the visions of the heavens will be opened unto him, and the Lord will teach him face to face." 29 Those so blessed enjoy the Lord's confidence to the extent that he shares his mysteries and hidden purposes with them. In that sense, the second comforter abides with them even when Christ is not personally present. (D&C 76:5-10, 116-118.)

John the Baptist was "filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mother's womb." (Luke 1:15; D&C 84:27.) Such must have been true of Jesus as well. However, this did not preclude the Holy Ghost descending upon Jesus "in bodily shape" following his baptism in water. 30 (JST, Luke 3:29.) Indeed, this unique manifestation of the Holy Spirit was the foreordained sign by which the Baptist was to identify the true Messiah, the Son of God: "He that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God." (John 1:33-34.)

Just as the Holy Ghost identified the true Son of God, so does it identify the true sons and daughters of God. Those who have been "born of water and of the Spirit" (John 3:5)—and they alone—are spiritually begotten or born again as "the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters" (Mosiah 5:7). Having "received the Spirit of adoption" (Rom. 8:15), they are the eternal children of God, both in spirit and in resurrected flesh. They are sanctified beings. They—and they alone—are "joint-heirs with Christ" (Rom. 8:17) in the riches of the Father's celestial kingdom.

Thus, the same Holy Spirit that empowers the Saints and the Church today was with the Savior throughout his ministry until the hour of his agony in Gethsemane when he trod the winepress of the wrath of God alone. (D&C 76:107; 133:50.) 31 The mortal perfection of Christ stems in part from his long association with the Holy Ghost. Said the Prophet Joseph Smith: "None ever were perfect but Jesus; and why was he perfect? Because He was the Son of God, and had the fullness of the Spirit, and greater power than any man." 32 All that Jesus said, and all that Jesus did, was said and done by virtue of the power of the Spirit within him.

Such was not the case with his apostles or any other disciples. 33 While the Twelve were doubtlessly baptized in water (see JST, John 4:1-4) and exercised a degree of priesthood power (Luke 10:17-20), the Holy Ghost did not descend upon them and remain with them as a constant companion until after Jesus' ascension (John 7:39; Luke 24:49; Acts 1:4-5, 8). 34 After the Last Supper, Jesus told them: "If I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you." (John 16:7.) Three nights later, the resurrected Savior appeared to the Twelve and "breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost." (John 20:22.)

Their long-held traditions, 35 combined with the absence of this vital gift, serve to explain not only the inability of the apostles to comprehend all that Jesus taught, but also their doubts, their dissensions, their flight when Jesus was arrested, Simon Peter's subsequent denials, and their rejection of the testimonies of the women who had seen the risen Lord.

Although it had been but a few months since Peter had testified that Jesus was the Messiah (Matt. 16:15-17), yet at the Last Supper Jesus instructed him, "When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren" (Luke 22:32). Plainly, a divine revelation, much less an intellectual conversion, is not the same as being spiritually born of God or experiencing that profound change of nature of which King Benjamin and Alma spoke. (Mosiah 3:19; Alma 5:14.) Not having been, as yet, baptized by the Holy Ghost, Peter and his fellow apostles had been "born of water" but not "of the Spirit." (John 3:5.) 36 That spiritual immersion would occur seven weeks later on Pentecost. (Acts 2:1-4.)

No one can give what he himself does not possess. Therefore, when the chief apostle—who had denied Jesus three times, and was later commanded three times, "Feed my sheep" (John 21:17)—was spiritually converted, he was prepared to fulfill his Master's commandment: "Strengthen thy brethren." And strengthen them he did! In the first recorded apostolic sermon ever delivered, the Simon Peter who had been too frightened to acknowledge publicly his discipleship in the predawn hours of history's most terrible night boldly testified: "God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ." (Acts 2:36.) Filled with the Spirit, Peter possessed great moral courage—the courage that enables men and women to stand in defense of the truth at the peril of their lives. Such courage is born of the strength that comes from knowing. That strength brought martyrdom to several, perhaps all but one, of the faithful Twelve. 37

Jesus declared himself the "true vine" from which comes all spiritual life and power. (John 15:1-8.) The apostles were to be extensions of their Lord and would be "pruned" by the things they suffered so that they might bring forth an even greater harvest. So it is with us all. It is, therefore, paradoxical that those bitter, humbling experiences that seem to indicate that the Lord has forsaken us may be the very experiences that prove that he has not. To be "pruned" by God is an evidence of his faith in us; we are spiritually alive. To be severed from the "true vine" is to be spiritually dead, for Jesus made it clear that without his Spirit, we can do nothing of lasting meaning.

The gift and powers of the Holy Ghost, the third member of the Godhead, are sent from the Father by the Son. (John 15:26.) To possess this gift is to partake of the very glory of the Father and the Son. (John 17:22.) It is to walk with Christ. In doing so, we come to know him. (See D&C 19:23.) For just as we come unto the Father through the Son, so do we come unto the Son through the Holy Ghost.

Jesus told his apostles: "I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now." (John 16:12.) Those mysteries would be revealed thereafter by the Holy Spirit: "He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you." (John 14:26; see also John 2:22; 12:16; D&C 76:12.) No longer would they be only servants, obeying without comprehending. Because of their obedience, and through the powers of the Spirit, the Twelve were to be elevated to the status of chosen friends and confidants of the Redeemer (John 15:15); he would share all that he had obtained from his Father with them. Receiving grace for grace, they would be glorified in the Son as he was glorified in the Father, thereby entering into the perfect union of the Father and the Son. (John 17:22-23; D&C 93:20.) This exalting process was not to be theirs alone; it was to be offered to all mankind "without money and without price." (2 Ne. 26:24-25.)

Through the apostles and their associates, the Comforter would bear a binding witness of the Son of Man, thereby convicting the world of its guilt in rejecting his sacrifice. It would testify of Jesus' holiness as shown by his ascension to the Father. It would expose the darkness of Satan and his works before all mankind. (John 16:8-11.) And, in spite of all that they were to endure, the Comforter would bless the Lord's faithful witnesses with that promised peace and joy which is forever unknown and unknowable to this alien world. (John 14:27; 15:11; 16:20-22.)

Whereas Jesus' ministry was limited to the house of Israel, his servants were to carry the gospel message to all peoples via the Holy Ghost, the Lord's minister to the Gentiles. (3 Ne. 15:23.) Perhaps this is why Jesus told the Twelve: "It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you." (John 16:7.) Apparently the ministry of Christ had to end before the ministry of the Twelve could begin. Following the Lord's ascension, the Spirit descended upon the Twelve, enveloping them in "cloven tongues" of fire: "They were all filled with the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2:3-4.) So endowed, the Lord's special witnesses were prepared to be what he had called them to be: a light unto the world and the saviors of men. (Matt. 5:14; D&C 86:11.)

A New Commandment

No sooner had Judas Iscariot left on his malevolent mission than Jesus announced: "Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him." (John 13:31.) Significantly, this reference to his death is immediately followed by: "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another." (John 13:34; 15:12, 17.) The Son of Man was a pure prism through which the Father's love had been reflected upon the Twelve. His juxtaposition of the principles of sacrifice and love was not accidental. The truest, purest expression of love is sacrifice. In willingly laying down his life, the Son testified to all the world of his love for his Father. (John 14:31.) By that same act, Jesus demonstrated the supernal affection he felt toward those he called friends. (John 15:13.)

Seemingly, no one could manifest a greater love for others than to surrender his own mortal existence in their behalf. But the Savior did more. He not only laid down his mortal life, but he also surrendered his very soul for friend and enemy alike. The one perfectly obedient, perfectly sinless man voluntarily subjected himself to the fullness of the wrath of God. He did this so that the Father might be glorified through the salvation of his children. Little wonder that the Father loved his beloved and chosen Son from all eternity! (John 17:24; Moses 4:2.)

The Savior was the first, and thus far the only, one to drink the bitter cup of divine justice to its dregs. He descended into the very depths of hell so that others might attain the heights of heaven. (See D&C 19:15-19; 88:6.) The prophet Abinadi said: "God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people." (Mosiah 3:7; Alma 7:11-12.) "God is love." (1 John 4:8.) Therefore, "love" sweat blood in Gethsemane. "Love" was crucified on Golgotha. "Love" atoned for the sins of mankind. "Love" broke the bands of temporal and spiritual death. "Love" overcame the world, the flesh, and the devil. "Love" ascended into the heaven of heavens. This love—the pure love of Christ—was the "new commandment" that Jesus gave the Twelve at the Last Supper. It would motivate them, the greatest of men, to become the servants of the least of men. It would require the sacrifice of their lives even as, in but a matter of hours, it would take the life of their Lord and Master.

To love one another as Jesus loved them was to rise above those imperfect expressions of love characteristic of mankind. Fallen man possesses fallen attributes. Although these attributes originate in God, they cannot be wholly perfected in the untabernacled spirit; the physical body must participate in the final process. Yet, paradoxically, these attributes become vitiated to the extent that the spirit is temporarily weakened by its union with corrupt, mortal flesh. Therefore, human love—compounded as it is with our needs, desires, passions, and fears (as well as with our nobler, altruistic qualities)—is, regardless of how or to whom it is expressed, unavoidably tainted with a greater or lesser degree of selfishness, pride, lust, inconstancy, and change. Lacking ultimate integrity, it is relatively unsanctified. Being, at best, a reflection of the pure love of Christ, human love is to divine love as the moon is to the sun. Only as we permit the Spirit of God to magnify our capacity for acquiring and internalizing divine attributes do we overcome the negative aspects of our fallen nature and grow toward perfect love. Hence, the new commandment.

And it was a new commandment. The command to love God and one's neighbor was not new; Israel had been so instructed by Moses himself. (Deut. 6:5; Lev. 19:18.) In his ministry, Jesus simply reconfirmed these foundation principles upon which all else was predicated (Mark 12:28-34.) But before departing, he gave his apostles the "new commandment" because they needed to know love as he knew it: edifying, holy, changeless, all-encompassing, and filled with intelligence. Indeed, a critical factor that sets divine love apart from its earthly counterparts is that it is permeated with light and truth—intelligence—the glory of God.

The Savior's supreme desire for his apostles, reiterated at the close of the intercessory prayer that concluded his farewell discourse, was that they might rise to the summits of love's glory and "be loved of [the] Father" (John 14:21): "The love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them" (John 17:26). Since divine love cannot be manifest beyond one's capacity to receive it, to eventually experience the fullness of the Father's celestial love required that the apostles eventually keep every commandment: "If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love." (John 15:10.) Knowing the love of the Son, the apostles were, in time, to know the Father's love as well. The fruits of that love are summed up in one word—exaltation.

Where the Lord is concerned, love and obedience are inseparable. Jesus stressed this point again and again: "If you love me, keep my commandments. . . . He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me. . . . If a man love me, he will keep my words. . . . He that loveth me not keepeth not my sayings." (John 14:15, 21, 23-24.) Clearly, one's love for the Lord is directly proportionate to one's obedience to his commandments. To love him is to obey him. To obey him is to know him. To know him is to be one with him and to possess eternal life. (John 17:3.) Such is the formula for exaltation.

However, a formula is one thing, the ability to follow it another. Jesus knew that if his disciples were to love as he loved, they would need to be filled with the Spirit as he was filled with the Spirit: they needed the justifying, sanctifying influence of the Holy Ghost. 38 The new commandment was, therefore, accompanied by the promise of the means to obey it: the Comforter. The Comforter is the bestower of all spiritual gifts, the greatest of which is charity, the pure love of Christ. (1 Cor. 13; Moro. 8:26.) Mormon admonished: "Pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons of God." (Moro. 7:48.) To be filled with perfect love is to possess God: "If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us." (1 Jn. 4:12.)

It has become popular to preach that God loves everyone unconditionally. This idea suggests much about God's character but little about our own. Further, it tends to promote a dangerous complacency. For while God may love his children unconditionally, he does not bless them unconditionally. (D&C 130:20-21.) Love is one thing; being able to express it, or receive it, another. Where love's rewards are concerned, there is no such thing as literal equality: "Behold, the Lord esteemeth all flesh in one; he that is righteous is favored of God." (1 Ne. 17:35.) The future degrees of glory reflect the broad continuum over which divine love is appropriately expressed by the three members of the Godhead. 39 Therefore, the fruits of God's love are as diverse as the men and women partaking of them. In the last analysis, it is obedience, motivated by divine love, that assures us the blessings of heaven.

As with other statements, the apostles did not at first comprehend the Savior's sealing promise: "In my Father's house [kingdom] are many mansions [glories]. . . . I go to prepare a place for you . . . that where I am, there ye may be also." (John 14:2-3. See also 17:24.) With these words, the calling and election of the first quorum of the Twelve was virtually made sure and confirmed by the more sure word of prophecy of Christ himself. (D&C 131:5.) Years later Peter testified: "We have therefore a more sure knowledge of the word of prophecy, to which word of prophecy ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light which shineth in a dark place, until the day-dawn, and the day-star arise in your hearts." (JST, 2 Pet. 1:19; emphasis added.)

Joseph Smith made it clear that our testimony of Jesus Christ is but a means to an end—Christ's testimony of us: "Though they might hear the voice of God and know that Jesus was the Son of God [as did Peter, James, and John], this would be no evidence that their election and calling was made sure, that they had part with Christ, and were joint heirs with Him. They then would want that more sure word of prophecy, that they were sealed in the heavens and had the promise of eternal life in the kingdom of God." 40 "It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance" (D&C 131:6), meaning, we cannot be saved in ignorance of the knowledge that we are saved. In the end, this is the most vital knowledge we can possess.

The Aftermath

The Redeemer's intercessory prayer in behalf of his disciples (John 17) brought to an end the solemn events in the upper room. In the washing of feet, in introducing the sacrament, in giving the new commandment, in promising the Comforters, and in all else that transpired that evening, Jesus had sought to prepare the Twelve—and perhaps himself—for the tragic and triumphant events that lay ahead. Never before or since have the words of Alma been more true: "By small and simple things are great things brought to pass." (Alma 37:6.) A series of incidents of no apparent importance was about to transpire: a man from an obscure Galilean village would kneel alone in agonized prayer and would then be betrayed, arrested, condemned, and crucified while the world at large went on about its business. Yet all eternity was poised in anticipation of his victorious ordeal.

Jesus and his eleven friends left the upper room, walked down the now dark and empty streets of Jerusalem, passed through the golden gate facing the Mount of Olives, and descended to the garden of Gethsemane. The first incident was about to begin.

NOTES

Rodney Turner is professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

 1. It is generally assumed that the apostles regarded Jesus as being the literal offspring of God. Simon Peter's testimony, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God" (Matt. 16:16), is cited in support of this view. However, the phrase "Son of the living God" does not appear in the parallel accounts in Mark and Luke. (Joseph Smith added this phrase to these two Gospels in his own translation.) Messiah (Christ) and Son of God were considered virtual synonyms by many Jews. (Matt. 26:63.) But more to the point is the fact that among the Jews of that day, such titles were somewhat ambiguous, having no precise denotation. We are prone to impose our own ex post facto definitions on them. The Holy Scriptures referred to certain men or supposed angels as "sons of God." (Gen. 6:2, 4; Job 1:6; 38:7.) These "sons" were immortal or spiritual beings of some kind, but their actual relationship to God is never explained. Daniel described the fourth man in the fiery furnace as "like the Son of God." (Dan. 3:25.) Jesus stated that Psalm 82:6 ("Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High") applied to all "unto whom the word of God came" and asked why he was guilty of blasphemy for saying, "I am the Son of God." (John 10:34-36.) In identifying his own sonship with that of all men, Jesus obscured his divine paternity, thereby making his claim to sonship acceptable to the Jewish mind. Following his resurrection, his sonship took on a new and profoundly significant meaning for his disciples. The ambiguous "son of God" of Jewish thought and the precise "Son of God" of the apostolic church were two very different things.

 2. Israel's ancient creed was: "Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord." (Deut. 6:4.) Jesus quoted this creed with apparent approval. (Mark 12:29.)

 3. Certain Jews were prepared to stone Jesus for blasphemy. They said, "Thou, being a man, makest thyself God." (John 10:33.) However, Jesus was never quoted as saying that he was God. Indeed, he drew a clear distinction between himself and God, his Father. (John 14:28; 20:17; Matt. 27:46.) He did declare himself to be the Son of God (John 10:36), but left it to his hearers to interpret what he meant by that claim.

 4. It was characteristic of pious Jews to refer to God as 'abi father).

 5. Although his disciples were amazed by Jesus' miracles (Matt. 8:27), these works did not establish his divinity. Said Brigham Young: "Did he convince, and prove to twelve men that he was the Christ, by the miracles he performed? He did not. He did not convince them by one or all of the acts, which were called miracles, that he performed upon the earth." (Journal of Discourses 3:205). As Paul stated, the thing that set Jesus apart from all other men as the unique Son of God was his resurrection from the dead. (Rom. 1:3-4.)

 6. According to 3 Nephi 8:5, the destructions in America that accompanied Jesus' death began on the fourth day of the thirty-fourth year following his birth. (See 3 Ne. 2:7-8.) The supper Mary and Martha prepared for him the night preceding his Messianic entry into Jerusalem may have been in honor of his birthday. (John 12:2.)

 7. The synoptic tradition is that Jesus ate the Passover meal (the seder) at the same time as the Jews did. (Mark 14:12-16.) However, the Gospel of John maintains that the Jews observed the Passover the evening of the day of Jesus' death and burial. Despite all efforts, this apparent contradiction has yet to be satisfactorily resolved. Note the following points in John: The Last Supper occurred "before the feast of the passover." (John 13:1.) Some of the apostles assumed that the purpose of Judas Iscariot's sudden departure after supper may have been to purchase things "against the feast." (John 13:29.) The high priest and his associates refused to enter Pilate's hall of judgment (the Praetorium) so that they might remain ceremonially undefiled and "eat the passover." (John 18:28.) Finally, Jesus was tried and crucified on the day of "preparation"—the day on which the paschal lamb was slain and the Passover meal prepared for consumption that evening. (John 19:14, 31, 42.) It seems, therefore, that if the last supper was a Passover meal (as the Synoptics declare), Jesus celebrated it one day ahead of its observance by the Jewish people.

 8. See Moses 5:5-7; Alma 34:10; 3 Ne. 9:19; and Heb. 10:10-18. According to Joseph Smith, the pre-Mosaic practice of animal sacrifice will be reinstituted in connection with the restitution of all things "when the Temple of the Lord shall be built, and the sons of Levi be purified." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 173.)

 9. The washing of feet was observed by the Presidency of the Church and the Twelve in the Nauvoo Temple as well as on subsequent occasions.

 10. Whether John deliberately omitted reference to the sacrament—perhaps because of its sacred nature—or whether his reference was somehow deleted from all extant manuscripts (which is unlikely) is unknown.

 11. If, as many scholars believe, Paul's letters antedate the four Gospels, his is the oldest account of the institution of the sacrament and one possible source of the accounts found in the Synoptics.

 12. Note that the Joseph Smith Translation, unlike the King James, makes it clear that the bread and wine were in remembrance of the Savior's flesh and blood, and not, in fact, his flesh and blood.

 13. Journal of Discourses 9:315-16.

 14. See John 3:14; 5:25; 7:33-34; 8:21-22, 28; 10:11, 15, 18; 12:7, 23-28, 32-36. Allusions by Jesus to his death in the Synoptics are Matt. 9:15; 12:40; 21:37-39; 26:12; Luke 9:22; 20:13-15. However, if the texts faithfully convey Jesus' actual teachings, we can only conclude that his disciples either failed to grasp their import or chose to ignore or relegate them to some far distant time. Mark 9:32 and Luke 9:45 and 18:34 state that Jesus' predictions of his approaching betrayal and death were incomprehensible to his apostles. This is evident in the exchange between Jesus and Peter on the matter. (Matt. 16:21-23; Mark 8:31-33.) The apostles entertained the common notion that the Messiah would be a mighty, but mortal, spiritual and temporal leader whom God would raise up to deliver the Jews from their oppressors and reestablish the Davidic kingdom. (Acts 1:6.) Thus, in their minds, the destiny of the Messiah was not a cross but a crown, not death but dominion. He would rule forever. (John 12:34.) The very practical ambition of the apostles concerning the Messianic kingdom is shown in their arguments as to who among them should be the greatest or the most prominent (Luke 9:46), and by the request of James and John for chief positions in the kingdom—a request that angered the other apostles (Mark 10:35-41). Luke wrote that the apostles, believing that Jesus was about to set up an earthly government, even quarreled at the Last Supper over their future positions therein. (Luke 22:24.) The limited understanding of the disciples as to Jesus' true mission is indicated by John. (John 2:22; 12:16; 20:9.) It is also evident in several post-resurrection passages. (Luke 24:13-27, 45; Mark 16:14.)

 15. John indicates that Jesus' seeric powers and foreknowledge enabled him to anticipate and control every situation. See John 1:42, 48-51; 2:24-25; 4:16-19; 6:6, 64; 13:1, 21.

 16. Contrary to the arguments of some writers, Judas Iscariot's motivation for betraying Jesus was malevolent, not benevolent. Apparently chastised by Jesus for something he had said or done, the defensive young apostle refused to confess his error and sought revenge. The Prophet Joseph Smith revealed: "Judas was rebuked and immediately betrayed his Lord into the hands of His enemies, because Satan entered into him." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 67.) It was a day or two before the Last Supper that Judas committed himself to the betrayal. (Matt. 26:14-16.)

 17. This is a further evidence that the apostles were unmindful of any imminent danger to their Master or themselves.

 18. Judas Iscariot is a classic example of the parable of the empty house wherein a soul once cleansed of all evil becomes, as a result of subsequent blasphemy, the habitation of devils. (JST, Matt. 12:38-39.) Said Joseph Smith: "There is a superior intelligence bestowed upon such as obey the Gospel with full purpose of heart, which, if sinned against, the apostate is left naked and destitute of the Spirit of God, and he is, in truth, nigh unto cursing, and his end is to be burned. . . . And they, Judas like, seek the destruction of those who were their greatest benefactors. What nearer friend on earth, or in heaven, had Judas than the Savior? And his first object was to destroy Him." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 67.)

 19. Ibid.

 20. According to Matthew, the distraught Judas sought to undo his crime by returning the thirty pieces of silver. He then committed suicide by hanging. (Matt. 27:3-5.) Luke, probably reflecting John's less charitable view of Judas, describes his death as resulting from an accidental fall on property he had purchased with the bribery money. (Acts 1:16-20.) JST, Matt. 27:6 combines the two accounts. Satan is called perdition. (D&C 76:26.) Therefore, all who yield to his enticings and die in their sins are sons (or daughters) of perdition and will have to suffer in hell for a given length of time. (Moses 7:37-39.) The risen Christ compared Nephite apostates to Judas: "For they are led away captive by him [Satan] even as was the son of perdition; for they will sell me for silver." (3 Ne. 27:32.) Those Gentiles who deny Christ "shall become like unto the son of perdition, for whom there was no mercy." (3 Ne. 29:7.) "No mercy" means they must bear the full weight of divine justice (the wrath of God or hell) before being saved. They are temporary sons or daughters of perdition as opposed to those who, failing to ever repent, are termed the "filthy still" (D&C 88:35, 102) and are consigned to the fullness of the second death (D&C 29:27-30, 41). Likening Nephite and Gentile sinners to Judas suggests that there is hope for him as well. Consequently, whether or not Judas committed the unpardonable sin and is, in fact, a son of perdition in the direst sense of the term is debatable. Although an apostle, he had received neither the baptism nor the gift of the Holy Ghost. Like Peter, he was not yet converted. (Luke 22:32.) Then too, if, as Matthew suggests, he attempted to repent—something a totally lost son of perdition would not do (D&C 29:44)—he may yet obtain some measure of salvation. This issue has had proponents among Church leaders on both sides of the question.

 21. Many biblical critics regard John's account of the Last Supper as a product of later reconstruction or redaction on the part of unknown editors. While it is not unlikely that some editing has occurred (see John 21:24b), modern revelation confirms and supports the essential character and doctrinal content of this scripture.

 22. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 365.

 23. It is characteristic of John's Gospel to employ what has been called a foil technique in which the literal questions or statements of men serve as bases for the Lord's spiritual pronouncements. The exchange between Jesus and Nicodemus (John 3:1-6) is a good example of this technique. The responses of the apostles in John 13-16 may, therefore, be somewhat contrived since they serve to justify lengthy commentary by Jesus.

 24. Matthew and Mark recorded that all of the apostles joined Peter in promising loyalty to the death. (Matt. 26:35; Mark 14:31.)

 25. John emphasized that the Lord's miracles, his works, were sufficient for men to believe in him—at least as a man of God. (John 3:2; 10:38; 15:24.)

 26. The term world is used in a double sense, sometimes referring to the earth, but more often to human society. Both senses are present in John 1:10.

 27. The fifth Lecture on Faith states that in spite of the fact that Christ "suffered greater sufferings, and was exposed to more powerful contradictions than any man can be, . . . He kept the law of God, and remained without sin, showing thereby that it is in the power of man to keep the law and remain also without sin." Therefore, willful sinners "may be justly condemned by the law, and have no excuse for their sins."

 28. The phrase "another Comforter" is also applied to the Holy Ghost or Holy Spirit of promise in D&C 88:3-4, where it is defined as the promise of eternal life or celestial glory. (See 2 Cor. 1:22; 5:5; Eph. 1:13-14.) Elder Marion G. Romney equated this Comforter with the more sure word of prophecy. (Conference Report, April 1977, p. 62.)

 29. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 150-51. Commenting on John 14:23, Doctrine and Covenants 130:3 states: "The appearing of the Father and the Son, in that verse, is a personal appearance; and the idea that the Father and the Son dwell in a man's heart is an old sectarian notion, and is false."

 30. The presence of a dove at Jesus' baptism signified the presence of the Holy Ghost. "The Holy Ghost cannot be transformed into a dove, but the sign of a dove was given to John to signify the truth of the deed." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 276.) That the Holy Ghost descended upon Jesus "in bodily shape" suggests that Jesus was literally enveloped in the very person of the third member of the Godhead rather than merely in the spiritual influence he controls. The Doctrine and Covenants states that one reason the Holy Ghost "is a personage of Spirit," as opposed to one with flesh and bones, is so that he might "dwell in us. A man may receive the Holy Ghost, and it may descend upon him and not tarry with him." (D&C 130:22-23.) In Jesus' case, the Holy Ghost descended upon him and remained with him. (John 1:33.)

 31. Journal of Discourses 3:206.

 32. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 187-88. See also John 3:34; D&C 93:15-17.

 33. However, John the Baptist was filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb. (Luke 1:15; D&C 84:27.)

 34. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 149. Simon Peter's testimony that Jesus was the Messiah (Matt. 16:15-16) was based upon the witness, not the gift of the Holy Ghost.

 35. Brigham Young noted: "Though he [Jesus] was diligent in teaching his disciples, their traditions were such that, after he had been with them a long time, there were many points that they did not fully understand." (Journal of Discourses 7:7.)

 36. The first modern Quorum of the Twelve was organized in February 1835. However, two years later members of that body also were in need of a more profound conversion: "If they harden not their hearts, and stiffen not their necks against me, they shall be converted, and I will heal them." (D&C 112:13.)

 37. John requested that his life be lengthened so that he might continue to serve the Lord in this world. He became a translated being. (John 21:21-23; D&C 7.)

 38. It was subsequent to the Nephite Twelve being "filled with the Holy Ghost and with fire" (3 Ne. 19:13) that Jesus told them, "Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am" (3 Ne. 27:27).

 39. The three members of the Godhead may be thought of as bestowing three different measures of God's manifest love. The telestial order partakes of that love via the Holy Spirit, the terrestrial via the Son. Only heirs of the celestial kingdom receive a fullness of the Father's love as it is made manifest in terms of thrones, kingdoms, principalities, powers, glories, and so forth. (D&C 76:71, 77, 86, 92-94.)

 40. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 298. Compare pp. 299, 301, 303-6. A number of righteous men have received the more sure word of prophecy pertaining to their own salvation. See D&C 132:49; 2 Ne. 33:6; Moro. 10:34; Moses 7:59.

 
 
© 1986 Deseret Book Company 

Printed from Gospelink.com
