Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

PioneersSmith, Job28FATHER BUNDY AND HIS ALL WOOD WAGON

28By JOB SMITH

28(The faith of the Pioneers inspired them to accomplish almost unheard of tasks. Think of Father Bundy attempting a thirteen hundred mile journey in an all-wood wagon. But he arrived at his destination.—P. N.)

28AFTER the authorities of the Church and many of its members had left Nauvoo, in 1846, for their journey across the plains, the mobs became active again, not only against Nauvoo, but they threatened the small 'Mormon' settlements in the vicinity. Father Bundy lived about five miles from Nauvoo in a small settlement of English converts. No actual mob violence was offered them, but a cool threat was made that if they were not moved out before a certain day, they would be burned out as had been some others, more distant from Nauvoo.

Most of the families in this settlement had teams of some sort; but Father Bundy had none—no team nor wagon nor money to purchase these things. Even his little home could not be sold or traded—it simply had to be abandoned if he did not wish to be 'burned out.' There remained only three weeks before they would have to go. Renounce 'Mormonism' and they could stay, and all would be well; but no such thought could, of course, be entertained; they had taken hold of the Gospel plow and could not look back, come what may. God was relied upon for help, and help came.

29A man by the name of Brownlee, across the river in Iowa, wanted some ditching done and he would give for the work a pair of three-year-old steers. Two hundred rods of ditch, to be made with sod bank, were the terms, which were gladly accepted. The time being short, Brother Smith, then a boy of seventeen, and a Brother Harris offered to help him. They crossed the river and walked twenty miles to the place where the work was to be done. In about ten days, half of it was finished. Having gained consent of the owner, the steers were brought back across the river to help fetch the family away, with the understanding that the men were to stop on their way westward and finish the ditching.

Only one more week of the allotted time remained, and still Father Bundy had no wagon. But a report came that a man named Slater (the same after whom Slaterville in Weber County, Utah, is named) had an old wagon that had no tires upon it, and which the owner did not think at all available for an emigrant wagon. It was an only hope. The family was small, only Father and Mother Bundy, the boy, Job, and his younger sister. It might carry them some distance, at least away from the immediate vicinity of the threatening mobs. So Father Bundy and Job, taking the steers with them, went to inspect the vehicle. Surely enough, it had no tires, the felloes were clumsy looking and already considerably worn by use, hickory pins for bolts, a split pole for a tongue pinned to the axle, no body—and the price was three dollars. Brother Bundy did not have three dollars, so Brother Slater kindly accepted a vest pattern and some other small articles to pay for the wagon. The steers were hitched to this contrivance and they drew it back home.

30The remaining time was spent in building a wagon-box out of lumber from the soon-to-be-deserted home. They split and shaved hickory wagon-bows for the covering; and so with bed sheets for a wagon cover, they were ready for the start. A sack or two of corn meal, a few tools, all their clothing, cooking utensils, and all other worldly possessions (excepting furniture, farm tools and home) were carefully packed into the wagon, and they were ready to start with the other members of the settlement on the day appointed. Crossing the river, they reached Mr. Brownlee's where they remained and finished the ditching until the steers were paid for.

The westward journey was now commenced. Of course, there was very little riding for the travelers. The all-wood wagon held up remarkably well, and they arrived in due time at Winter Quarters, where they in common with hundreds of others passed a hard winter. I need not tell you of the suffering they endured there, for it is the story of the wagon I am now telling.

31In the spring of 1848, Father Bundy and his little company prepared for the journey farther on across the plains to the Valley. And now the wagon question again came to the front. It was thought impossible to take an all-wood wagon over this thousand-mile route. No effort of the family was equal to the task of securing either a new or second-hand wagon, ironed in the usual manner; neither had they the means to purchase iron to bind the wheels of their old friend. So nothing was left but to mend up the old wagon and try it again. A big-hearted mechanic took the job of repairs in hand and made every part as 'good as new,' except, of course, the wear and tear of the wheels and axles; so once more all the wordly goods of the family were stored therein, together with the required quantity of a year and a half's bread-stuff for the members of the family.

Father Bundy and his wife started in Zera Pulsipher's company for Salt Lake Valley. The road, the first five hundred miles, lay chiefly along the Platte and other river bottoms; and though new, rough and lumpy, was not rocky or gravelly, so the felloes, having been made of the best white oak and about double the width of the common two-horse-wagon felloes, suffered but little wear that far. The spokes also were large, and were said to have been driven in hot rosin into the ample hubs. The latter half of the journey, being over hills and mountains, where rocks and gravel formed the principal roadbed, the abrasion of the felloes began gradually to become serious, so that the expedient of using buffalo rawhide to wrap around them became necessary, and was used with considerable success. But the hard condition of the roads toward the latter part of the journey reduced at last the straight-grained part of each felloe to such thickness that in the last canyon one of them is said to have broken, but the wheel held out to convey its load safely to the place of destination—Salt Lake Valley.
