Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

38THIS IS THE PLACE

38By ERASTUS SNOW

38(We are fortunate indeed in having from Erastus Snow, one of the first of the Pioneers to enter Salt Lake valley, an account of his interesting experiences. Erastus Snow and Orson Pratt viewed the valley three days before the arrival of President Brigham Young.—P. N.)

WHILE in Echo canyon, President Young being unable to travel, and as the season was advancing, he felt moved upon to direct Elder Orson Pratt to take that portion of the camp, or most of them, that were able to travel and labor with their axes, picks, and shovels, to make roads and bridges, to commence the work of cutting their way through the mountains and canyons into this valley. By the time they had succeeded in reaching what is called the Big Mountain, most of the rest of the company started in their trail, still leaving President Young and a few to nurse and care for him, and also a few feeble individuals to follow as soon as they were able. I well remember, as we called at the wagon to bid the President good-bye, Brother Willard Richards, who had charge of those about to leave, asking if he had any counsel to give to guide our movements after we should emerge from the mountains into the open country on the west. He was barely able to support his head with his elbow resting on the pillow, and his head in his hand while he spoke feebly, in a low tone: "My impressions are," said he, "that when you emerge from the mountains into the open country, you bear to the northward and stop at the first convenient place for putting in your seeds." Some of the seeds we had brought with us should by this time have been put in the ground, such as the potatoes and other vegetables. This last suggestion from President Young controlled our movements.

39It fell to the lot of Elder Orson Pratt and myself to penetrate through the thickets and emerge into this valley and get a view of the Great Salt Lake, as was said yesterday by Brother Woodruff, on the 21st day of July. The thicket down through the Narrows, at the mouth of the canyon, was so dense that we could not penetrate through it. I crawled for some distance on my hands and knees through this thicket, until I was compelled to return, admonished, too, by the rattle of a snake which lay coiled up a little under my nose, having almost put my hand on him; but as he gave me the friendly warning, I thanked him and retreated. And I will here say that from that day to this, I have never waged war upon the serpent when he has kindly given me notice of his presence. We raised on to a high point of the Narrows, where we got a view of the Great Salt Lake and this valley and each of us, without saying a word to the other, instinctively as if by inspiration, raised our hats from our heads and then swinging our hats shouted, "Hosanna to God and the Lamb!"

40We could see the canes down in the valley on what is now called Mill Creek, south of the lower grist mill, which looked like inviting grain; and thitherward we directed our course. But when we reached it and ascertained what it really was, and remembering then the injunction of President Young, we turned northward and crossed Mill Creek on to City Creek, which appeared to us the point of our destination as indicated by the President. From this point we turned back and crossed the bench on the north side of Canyon Creek, going in on the side of the mountains, and made our way back to our working party, who by this time—ten o'clock at night—had come over the Little Mountain and formed camp near its western base. The next day our working party cut their way through the underbrush down to Mill Creek, south of the present mill, and camped at night. At noon on the 23rd we made our camp on Emigration Street, or the street where the street railroad runs east from the Clift House, and just below that on the old channel of the creek; the creek divided just below this Temple Block, one branch running west and the other south. It was on the south branch of the creek we formed our camp on the noon of the 23rd; and here we bowed ourselves down in humble prayer to Almighty God with hearts full of thanksgiving to Him, and dedicated this land unto Him for the dwelling place of His people.

And then we organized various working parties to get out the plows and other implements and tools, appointing some to go and plow the lands, and others to turn the water on the land to irrigate it. We found the land so dry that to plow it was impossible, and in attempting to do so some of the plows were broken. We therefore had to distribute the water over the land before it could be worked; this being done, the ground was got ready by the following day, when President Young arrived and, as Brother Woodruff told you yesterday, he was able to plant the potatoes he had in his wagon. The 24th of July of that year was on a Saturday, and President Young arrived at about 2 p.m. of that day; and on that Saturday night we had about six acres of potatoes and other vegetables planted, the field extending southward from about where the City Hall now stands. This was thirty-three years ago, yesterday.

On the Sunday all work was suspended as usual, for we always observed the Sabbath day in all our journeyings. We held our meeting and offered up our thanksgiving and prayers and sacraments before the Lord; and President Young for the first time was able to get out of his wagon, and sit in his rocking chair, and requested that we organize ourselves into exploring parties and explore the country north, south and west; "for," said he, "It is necessary that we should learn the facilities of the country and be able to report to our brethren whose eyes are turned toward us." "But," he said, "I can tell you,"—this was after we had organized three exploring parties and made every necessary preparation to start out on the morning following,—"but I can tell you before you start, you will find many good places and many facilities for settlement all around us, and you will all return feeling satisfied that this is the most suitable place and THE place for us to make our commencement. And here is the place to build our city." And I may add, that from that time not only did these three exploring parties bring back word confirming what the President had said with regard to this place, but I believe it has been the universal judgment of all the people of the mountains that this was the place, and that around here were the greatest facilities, when climate, soil, timber, water and everything are taken into consideration, that it was the most suitable for our central location. Brother Woodruff informed the people yesterday how President Young, as he emerged from the mouth of Emigration Canyon, lifted himself up in his bed and peered out of his wagon, which overlooked the valley, the cotton-woods on the creek, and the camp on the east side of the creek in fair view, and as Brother Woodruff told you yesterday, that President Young said then, and afterwards to all the camp, that this was the place he had seen long since in vision; it was here he had seen the tent settling down from heaven and resting, and a voice said unto him, "Here is the place where my people Israel shall pitch their tents." The same Providence that directed the Pioneers, led by our late honored president, has encouraged and directed the labors of the people from that time to the present.
