Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

52A REMARKABLE EXPERIENCE

52By MARRINER W. MERRILL

52(The following story of a pioneer experience was told by one of the great men of the Church—M. W. Merrill. For many years he was a resident of Richmond, Cache County. He presided over the Logan Temple and served as a member of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles. The compiler of this book once heard Brother Merrill relate this story.—P. N.)

IN the winter of 1855, I worked in what was then called North Mill Creek canyon. The only team I had at that time was one yoke of oxen; with this I kept myself busy during the latter part of the fall of 1854 and the beginning of the winter of 1855, in hauling wood from the canyon to Salt Lake City, where I sold it for what I could. In January, 1855, the snow in the mountains was so deep that I was unable to procure firewood; and I decided to haul some pine house and stable logs. Myself and some brethren therefore shoveled and broke the road to a small red pine patch of timber on the side mountain, and when this road was completed, for two days we together hauled logs and timber to the city. Just at this time the weather became extremely cold and a dense winter fog hung over the valley, but high up in the mountains one could overlook the cloud of fog. This condition prevailed for several days, but exactly how cold it was I cannot say, as thermometers were very scarce in those days. It was during one of the early days of this cold spell that the following incident occurred: I left home very early in the morning to obtain a load of logs. My wife remonstrated with me and tried to prevail upon me not to go, as the weather was so very cold. I did not, however, heed her kind entreaties, but started upon my journey; and on arriving at the timber, was surprised to find that I was the only one who had come for a load. I worked very rapidly for two reasons: one was that I might keep warm, and the other that I might return home early. I cut, trimmed and prepared five nice, red pine logs, about thirty feet long and ten inches thick at the butt-end, and about six inches at the top. These I succeeded in getting down to the place where I had left my bobsled and camp outfit, about a half mile distant. The place of loading was very slippery, it being rather on a side hill. I had my five logs arranged side by side below the sled, my oxen being chained to a stump where they were quietly eating their hay. I proceeded to load the logs, designing to place three on the bottom and two on the top of the three, which was my usual way of hauling timber of that kind. I succeeded in getting the first log on the sled without much difficulty. The bunk (canyon men will know what a bunk is, especially if they were born in New Brunswick) being icy, it was with some difficulty that I could make the log stay where I had placed it on the sled; but I finally succeeded in blocking it up, and thought it secure. Then I turned around to load the second log, and as I did so, the blocking gave way and the first log slid rapidly from the sled, catching me in the hollow of my legs and throwing me forward on my face across the logs lying there. In falling the hand-spike in my hand which I had been using in loading the logs, fell far from my reach; and I was thus pinioned completely across the timber. The log that had slipped from the sled lay across my legs, which were on the hard ice, and my body was lying across the four logs. I began to think that I was thus doomed to perish in the canyon. I struggled desperately to release myself, but every effort seemed to bind me the more firmly beneath the terrible load which seemed crushing my very bones. While thus struggling for relief I also prayed earnestly to the Lord for assistance, and while doing so I lost consciousness. When I next regained my senses I was a half a mile down the canyon from the place where I began to load, and was seated upon the logs, which were loaded in the exact position that I had designed to put them—three on the bottom and two on the top of the three. All were nicely bound in chains; I was sitting upon my sheepskin with the woolly side up; my whip was placed on the load carefully so it could not lose; my overcoat, homemade jeans, lay across the load in front of me, but within my reach. As I aroused from my stupor, I spoke to my oxen and they stopped; and I viewed my surroundings with feelings that cannot be described. I quickly took my bearings, as I was familiar with every point in the canyon. Being quite cold, I essayed to jump from the load, and put on my overcoat; but to my surprise my limbs refused to do my bidding, they were so sore and my body was so badly bruised. I sat there and reflected for a few moments upon my peculiar situation; looked around my load and found everything in place just as I would have put things myself: my ax was firmly bedded in the butt-end of one of the logs, and everything else was in first-class condition. After making another unsuccessful effort to get from the load, I reached my coat, put it on as best I could in a sitting posture, and started my oxen for home. I arrived safely about an hour later than my usual time. My wife was very uneasy about me on account of the lateness of my arrival, and because of the fear ever present with her during the whole day, that something would happen to my injury. She met me at the corral and carried me in her arms to the house, which she was then quite able to do, I weighing but a little over a hundred pounds. I was placed in a comfortable position on the bed, and she then cared for my team. For some days she carefully nursed me before I was able to move around the house. I have hesitated to narrate this incident because of the skepticism which is so common at the present day, even among some who profess to be Saints, concerning things somewhat supernatural; but I can truthfully testify in all soberness, that some power which I did not see assisted me from the position which doubtless would have speedily cost me my life. As I was preserved for some purpose known to my Heavenly Father, so do I also believe that God will bless and preserve the lives of His faithful children, just as long as it is necessary for them to live to accomplish their missions upon the earth.
