Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

PioneersHamblin, Jacob57JACOB HAMBLIN AND THE INDIANS

57As Told by HIMSELF

57(In 1855, Jacob Hamblin, a remarkable and pious man was sent to teach the Gospel to the Indians in Southern Utah. He was promised by President Brigham Young that he would never die by the hand of an Indian if he did not seek his blood. There is no more thrilling chapter in our pioneer history than the narrative of Jacob Hamblin.—P. N.)

57IN the autumn of 1855, I returned to Tooele Valley, and removed my family to the Santa Clara. My brother Oscar, also Brother Dudley Leavitt and their families, accompanied me.

57In the winter of 1855-6, we were instructed to build a fort for our protection. There were at that time on the Santa Clara ten missionaries, and four stonemasons from Cedar City. We employed Indian help, and everything we put our hands to prospered, so that in less than ten days, we built a fort one hundred feet square, of hammer-faced rock, the wall two feet thick and twelve feet high. It was afterwards said by President Young to be the best fort then in the Territory.

We invited the Indians to assist us to construct a strong, high dam to take the water out of the Santa Clara to a choice piece of land. For this purpose they gathered into the settlement to the number of about thirty lodges, but rather reluctantly, for they believed that the "Tonaquint," their name for Santa Clara, would dry up the coming season, as there was but little snow in the mountains.

58With much hard labor we completed our dam, and watered our crops once in the spring of 1856. The water then failed, and our growing crops began to wither. The Indians then came to me and said, "You promised us water if we would help build a dam and plant corn. What about the promise, now the creek is dry? What will we do for something to eat next winter?"

58The chief saw that I was troubled in my mind over the matter, and said, "We have one medicine man; I will send him to the great mountain to make rain medicine, and you do the best you can, and maybe the rain will come; but it will take strong medicine, as I never knew it to rain this moon." I went up the creek, and found it dry for twelve miles.

58The following morning at daylight, I saw the smoke of the medicine man ascending from the side of the Big Mountain, as the Indians called what is now known as the Pine Valley Mountain. Being among some Indians, I went aside by myself, and prayed to the God of Abraham to forgive me if I had been unwise in promising the Indians water for their crops if they would plant; and that the heavens might give rain, that we might not lose the influence we had over them.

59It was a clear, cloudless morning, but, while still on my knees, heavy drops of rain fell on my back for about three seconds. I knew it to be a sign that my prayers were answered. I told the Indians that the rain would come. When I returned to the settlement, I told the brethren that we would have all the water we wanted.

59The next morning, a gentle rain commenced falling. The water rose to its ordinary stage in the creek, and, what was unusual, it was clear. We watered our crops all that we wished, and both whites and Indians acknowledged the event to be a special providence.

59I think more corn and squash were grown that year by us, than I ever saw before or since, on the same number of acres. The Indians gathered and stored up a large amount of corn, beans and dried squash.

59From that time they began to look upon us as having great influence with the clouds. They also believed that we could cause sickness to come upon any of them if we wished. We labored to have them understand these things in their true light, but this was difficult on account of their ignorance and superstitions.

About this time an Indian came in from another small band east of the Santa Clara. The Indians who worked with us told him how matters were going with them. He ridiculed them for their faith in us and what we taught them, and told them that they were fools for living without meat, when there was plenty of cattle in sight. To more fully exemplify his views and set an example of self-assurance, he killed one of our oxen.

60Four or five of the brethren went to him, armed. I felt impressed that a peaceful policy would be the best, and, for that reason, I requested them to let me manage the matter. I went into his lodge and sat down by him. I told him that he had done a great wrong, for we were working to do the Indians good. He talked insultingly, and wanted to know if I wished to kill him, or if I could make medicine strong enough to kill him. I told him that he had made his own medicine, and that some evil would befall him before he got home.

60About this time, the president of the mission received a letter from President Brigham Young, requiring us to say to the Indians that if they would live cleanly and observe certain things pertaining to the gospel, they should grow and increase in the land. Also, that we should require them to wash the sick before we administered to them. An Indian wished us to administer to his sick boy. We required him to wash his child; he refused to do so, and the boy died. The man burnt his lodge, went to the mountains, and called on others to follow him. Some did so, and before leaving, burned a log storehouse which they had filled with supplies. The angry man's name was Ag-ara-poots.

The chief of the band came to me and said, "Old Ag-ara-poots will never be satisfied until he has killed you or someone who is with you. You know that he has killed two Piutes since you came here. The Piutes are all afraid of him. I am going away." I asked him if he would not go to Ag-ara-poots with me. "No," he replied, "he thinks that you let his boy die, and he will never be satisfied until he has blood. There are many with him, and you must not go where he is."

61As I felt like seeing him, I invited all the missionary brethren, one by one, to go with me, but they all refused except Brother Thales Haskell. One of the brethren remarked that he would as soon go into a den of grizzly bears.

61When I went to the house of Brother Haskell and opened the door, he said, "I know what you want. You wish me to go with you to see Ag-ara-poots. I am just the man you want." The difference between me and my brethren in this instance did not arise from superior personal courage in myself, but in the fact that I have mentioned before; that I had received from the Lord an assurance that I should never fall by the hands of the Indians, if I did not thirst for their blood. That assurance has been, and is still with me, in all my intercourse with them.

61Brother Haskell seemed inspired to go with me on this occasion. We started in the morning, and followed the trail of Ag-ara-poots until afternoon, when we found him and his band.

His face was blackened, and he sat with his head down, apparently in rather a surly mood. I told him I had heard that he intended to kill me the first opportunity. Said he: "Who told you that I wanted to kill you?" I answered that the Piutes had told me so. He declared that it was a lie; but he had been mad and was then, because I had let his boy die.

62I told him that he let his boy die, because he did not think enough of him to wash him so that the Lord would heal him, and now he was mad at someone else.

62I told him we were hungry, and were going to eat with a man who was not mad, and that he had better go with us. As we left his lodge, he arose to go with us, but trembled and sat down in the sand.

62All the Indians but Ag-ara-poots gathered around us. We told them they had been foolish in burning up their food, going into the mountains, and leaving their friends; that the women and children had better go back to the settlement where there was something to eat, and let the men who wished to hunt, remain. The most of them started for the settlement the same night.

62The following day Titse-gavats, the chief, came to me and said, "The band have all come on to the Clara except Ag-ara-poots, and he came on to the bluff in sight of it, and his heart hardened. You cannot soften his heart again. He has gone off alone. You had better pray for him to die, then there will be no bloodshed. Do not tell him what I have said to you."

I did ask the Lord that, if it would be for the glory of His name, Ag-ara-poots might not have strength to shed the blood of any of us. In a few days the Piutes told me that he was not able to walk nor help himself to a drink of water. He lingered until spring and died.
