Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

PioneersJohnson, D.C.69AN INDIAN SCARE

69By D. C. JOHNSON

69(This thrilling adventure of two pioneer boys is interestingly told by D. C. Johnson. It was first published in one of the early issues of the "Contributor."—P. N.)

EARLY in the autumn of 1855, two boys were sitting alone by a roaring campfire, in a wild, wooded canyon, leading out of Utah Valley, in Utah Territory. They had left their home in the valley, fifteen miles distant, that morning, for the purpose of procuring a load of wood for fuel. Getting firewood was an arduous task at that early day in Utah. No timber grew in the valley, but only in the wild mountain canyons, where roads had to be constructed at great cost, by digging dugways on the mountain sides, blasting rock, and bridging the wild streams that dashed and foamed down their rocky channels. Added to the natural difficulties of wood getting, additional dangers attended the pioneer. The Indians were on the warpath, necessitating extra precautions. Large wood parties, going to the canyons three times every week, were obliged to go well armed, and keep a strict watch at night, that they might not be surprised by their savage foes. Our little boys, at the lonely campfire, we will call Karl and Billy; the former twelve, the latter eight years old. They had been sent to the canyon that morning by their father, for a load of wood. It was their first trip alone. They were to have joined the regular wood party at the mouth of the canyon and have proceeded with them to the timber; but by some misunderstanding, they had taken the wrong road, thus missing the camp, and being compelled to camp alone in the dismal forest, surrounded by wild and ferocious beasts, and still more savage red men. When the veil of darkness began lowering over the camp, the oxen were driven up, chained to the wagon wheel, and fed for the night. A large fire had been kindled, which lighted their surroundings to a considerable distance; but the darkness, which stood up like a wall in the distance, seemed only more dark and gloomy. Old "Dick and Bally" stood at some distance eating their provender, blinking at the fire, affording our little campers no slight companionship. Billy proposed that their bed be made by the side of the oxen, thinking that a greater place of safety. Karl objected, fearing that the oxen might tread on them in the darkness. More wood was heaped on the fire, and the flames shot twenty feet in the air. Supper was at length spread on the blankets and partaken of in gloomy silence, each young bosom being filled with vague forebodings of coming harm. Eight o'clock had come. The sky was obscured by clouds, making the darkness more intense, and the melancholy howl of the coyote on the hillside did not add to their feelings of security. The forest was filled with strange sounds to which their ears were unaccustomed.

71The hooting of the night birds; the melancholy sighing of the wind; the cracking of the dry twigs, as some nocturnal animal made its way through the wood; the rush of the water over its pebbly way—all combined to fill the minds of the lonely campers with a secret dread of coming harm. After a painful silence of some minutes' duration, Billy said: "Karl, don't you wish pa was with us?" "Don't I though?" was the reply. "Do you think there are any bears up this fork?" asked Billy, after a slight pause, and Karl added reassuringly, "No, I think not," though he hardly felt the truth of his reply.

71"Do you think we could kill a bear if one should come to our camp?" "Yes, I think we could," was the reply, inspired no doubt by the thought that they were well armed, with a Colt's rifle, firing six shots, and an old pair of horse pistols in a holster; though Karl really hoped they would have no occasion to try their battery on so formidable an animal. "I wish that wolf would stop howling, it makes me so lonesome," again ventured the younger boy, as a howl of unusual dolefulness was borne to their ears on the night wind. "Oh, never mind that; the coyotes are too cowardly to hurt anyone," said Karl in a tone of assumed boldness. "Yes, but I don't like to hear it," persisted Billy, petulantly—"It makes me feel so lonely." "Well, I guess we'll have to listen to it, or go to sleep," was all the consolation the older brother could offer.

As they were preparing for bed, Billy again broke the silence; "Do you think pa will pray for us tonight, and ask God to keep us from harm?" "Of course, he will," said Karl.

72"Do you think the Lord would hear us, if we were to ask him?"

72"Yes, I believe He would."

72"Then let's do it," said Billy, with a look of childlike confidence beaming from his eyes.

72"All right," Karl rejoined—"But who shall ask Him?"

72"Let's both do so; you say what you can think of, then I'll begin," proposed Billy. And there in the wild mountains with darkness and danger surrounding them, the little pioneers knelt in faith, asking protection of their heavenly Father, who, they had been taught would guard and protect His children, if they would only rely on Him. After the final amen, all fear and awe had subsided; and in a few minutes they were in the sound, refreshing slumber of childhood, entirely oblivious to the approaching danger awaiting them.

After some hours, Karl was suddenly awakened by the rattling of chains, and the snorting of the oxen. The first objects that met his startled gaze, were the towering forms of two stalwart Indians in full war-paint. The frightened boy reached instinctively for his gun, but found it had been removed. By this time Billy was fairly aroused, and began to cry; whereupon one of the warriors drew an arrow to its head on the little fellow, and said in harsh guttural: "Papoose shut up, or kill 'um." This savage admonition had the desired effect. The frightened lad subsided—only stifled sobs being now heard. "Get up, heap quick, pappoose go to Injuns' wick-i-up; no try to get away, or me kill'um sure." These words were accompanied by a cruel leer, and a significant motion of drawing his hunting knife across the throat. Karl, who had read something of Indian character, concluded to comply at once with his captor's demands, trusting to the future for chance of escape. It appeared that captivity, and not death, was to be their immediate fate, and Karl tried the best he could to make his frightened, sobbing brother understand the situation. In the meantime, the marauders were gathering up the plunder, preparatory for a departure. One of the stalwarts went up to unfasten the oxen, when old Dick, who evidently didn't like the smell of war-paint, and had been manifesting decided feelings of hostility, suddenly sprang toward the approaching native, and would have undoubtedly thrust the copper skinned rascal through with his horns, but for the chain being too short; as it was, the animal was thrown around, and in its struggle and kicking, struck the painted heathen in the stomach, sending him sprawling on the ground. The discomfitted savage sprang to his feet, drew an arrow to its full head, with the evident intention of ending Dick's usefulness there and then; but probably realizing that he would lose a good beef, he paused and finally put his arrow away. The boys could hardly restrain their mirth, when they saw the way in which their favorite had sent the red man to the ground. The crestfallen brave savagely commanded Karl to "tie ox loose d—quick," which was done, after pacifying the old bovine with a few kind words. Then the oxen were headed up the canyon, the boys following, and the warriors bringing up the rear with the plunder from the camp. Silently and swiftly they followed the old Indian trail, winding tortuously up toward the divide, the path growing narrower and steeper as they neared the summit.

It was about 1 a.m. when they left their camp, and as they toiled painfully up the steep trail, their hearts almost sank within their bosoms, as they realized that each step took them farther and farther into the mountains and increased the distance from home. As the trail got narrower they traveled in file; the oxen ahead, an Indian following, the boys next, and the other savage bringing up the rear. The oxen gave the thieves considerable trouble by attempting to run back on the mountain side, but all their maneuvers were frustrated by the agile hunters, who headed them off by swinging their blankets, throwing large stones, and whooping at them. Thus they trudged on for several miles; the boys stumbling frequently over the fallen trees which encumbered the rocky way. Several times Billy had fallen in the darkness, and had been brutally kicked to a standing position by the heartless rear guard. The hurried march at last so exhausted the poor boy that he could hardly keep his feet, and the warrior behind became more fierce, threatening several times to "kill papoose" if he didn't hurry up. Karl being fearful that the threat would be carried out, took his little brother by the hand, though he was himself almost exhausted. At this juncture, the storm which had been brooding on the mountain peaks for hours, broke upon the lonely trail with great fury. The flashing lightning illuminated the surrounding peaks; the thunder filled the defiles with strange reverberations; the rain descended in a flood, rushing and roaring down the gullies like an avalanche. It was the most terrible, yet sublime picture, the frightened boys had even witnessed, but their awe, at the elemental warfare, was subdued by their greater fear of their savage captors. The party reached the summit just at sunrise, when a halt was made, and after some difficulty a fire started. Breakfast was prepared from their own supplies, brought from home. They were thirty miles from home, on what is now known as the "Strawberry Ridge," and the beautiful "Strawberry Valley," filled with the golden beams of the morning sun, spread out before them. After eating, the boys were permitted to fall asleep, and remained in that blissful state for two or three hours, when they were rudely awakened from dreams of home by a kick, from the moccasined foot of an Indian. The sun was over three hours high, when they again took the trail, leading down the opposite side of the mountain through a deep ravine, following a little stream for ten miles where a short halt was made for one of the redmen to fix his moccasin. The boys went out on the green where the oxen were cropping the grass, some rods from their captors; and sat down. Karl in a subdued voice told his brother that if they were not tied up very securely on the following night, it might be possible for them to steal quietly away, take the back trail, and encounter some party, that would surely be in search of them. The plan of escape must be put into execution on the following night; for if they traveled much farther into the mountains, the immediate chance for their escape would be lessened; and even should they succeed, later, in eluding their captors, they would never be able to find their way back, but get lost in the interminable winding of the mountain passes, and starve or perhaps, worse, be devoured by wild beasts.

Though Billy hardly understood what was desired, he had the greatest confidence in his brother's sagacity, and he determined to do all that lay in his power to further their plan of escape. The party was soon again in motion, old Dick and Billy in the lead, proceeding without further halt until after dark. At a place where the canyon widened out into a grassy plot, a halt was made for the night, a campfire started, some "jerked" meat eaten for supper, and preparation made for passing the night. Karl's wrists were tied behind his back with a short lasso, made of tanned deer skin, one end of which was fastened to one of the Indian's ankles. Billy was left at liberty. After some time spent by the Indians in smoking, and gutteral chat, they wrapped their blankets about their heads and bodies, then laying down with their feet to the fire, were to all appearances soon fast asleep. The gun and pistols had been deposited near their heads, and were covered with a piece of deerskin to keep them from dampness. Now came a period of dreadful suspense to Karl. He was fearful that Billy, fatigued as he was, would fall asleep, in which case their hope of an immediate escape was at an end. Billy was a sound sleeper, and should he doze off, he would never awaken before morning. Karl tugged away quietly at his fastenings, but only succeeded in drawing them tighter; and his wrists were already swelling and becoming quite painful. He constantly made signs to his brother to keep him awake.

77Another hour of dreadful suspense passed. Billy stuggled manfully to keep awake. Several times his head drooped, causing Karl's heart to stand still in very terror; but the little head would come up again, and the blue eyes open wide with a look which said, "I'll not go to sleep, never you fear." The time had now come for action. Karl, who had the utmost faith in the efficacy of prayer, breathed a silent but soulful appeal to the Almighty Father, for the success of their undertaking.

Billy, who had been on the alert, saw his brother's signal, crept quietly to his side, and was told in a breath to unfasten the cruel thongs. Fortunately, Billy was in possession of an old razor blade, which he had found some weeks previously, and carried in his pocket ever since, which was now the speedy means of their deliverance. Silently and well the bonds were cut and Karl's hands freed. He arose rubbing his wrists to restore the circulation, at the same time gazing upon the sleeping foe, trying to decide what was best to do. Should they awake within four hours, the superior strength of the enemy would enable them to overtake and capture the boys, in which case they would probably be cruelly murdered. Karl decided to attempt the removal of the fire arms, and should the sleepers awake while doing so, shoot them on the spot; and should the removal be successful, and they be pursued and overtaken, sell his life as dearly as possible. Crawling stealthily near the coveted rifle, it was removed without alarming the enemy and handed to Billy. The pistols were removed in the same manner, and the boys stole like spectres away, not looking back until they were one hundred yards distant. Here the oxen were encountered, lying down for the night. The boys decided at once to drive their old servants back with them, although fully realizing the extreme danger in the attempt to get the oxen upon their feet. Billy was instructed, in case the Indians should be alarmed, to use the horse pistols with telling effect, waiting until the enemy should come close, then giving them a "centre shot!" The boys had both been used to firearms ever since they were able to shoulder a gun. Old "Dick" was patted on the neck and told cautiously to "get up;" but the old fellow was down for the night and Karl had to employ the old ruse of twisting his tail, before he could bring him up standing. His fellow by the same proceeding was brought to a traveling position and each boy, fully realizing the force of the old saying, "a tail hold is a good hold," seized a tail firmly with the left hand, and were soon a mile from that terrible camp-fire, and not hearing any hostile demonstration from that quarter, their courage returned; but the oxen were kept on a brisk walk, maintaining this gait for two hours. Billy now began to complain sorely of fatigue, and the thought now occurred to Karl that they could ride old "Dick," as they had done hundreds of times before. Billy was helped upon his back, the holsters hung across his neck, and after handing Billy the rifle, Karl climbed up behind and on they pressed. It was now beyond the midnight hour and the old ox still plodded on. Billy commenced nodding, and presently laid down on the animal's neck, and was soon asleep, being held in place by his brother. Karl urged the faithful animal to his best gait, but after a couple of hours more, the ox, being loaded, began to go more slowly. Karl began to get painfully sleepy, napping and very nearly falling off several times. He could only keep awake by the greatest exertion. The hours dragged wearily on; old "Dick's" step became more labored; the boys more tired and sleepy. Finally he dropped over on his brother and was lost in profound slumber.

80The boys were awakened by a violent concussion. Opening their startled eyes, they found themselves in a heap on the ground. They had fallen off as the old ox jumped over a fallen tree. It was broad daylight.

They glanced fearfully back on the trail, expecting to see their pursuers upon their track. They concluded they were within about five miles of the summit, where the first halt was made after their capture, and all of thirty-five miles from home. Realizing that there was no time to lose, each secured a "tail hold," and the journey continued. The oxen could hardly be urged forward, stopping continually to crop the luxuriant grass beside the trail. Just after sunrise, when they had proceeded up the trail not more than a half mile from where they had fallen off, their blood was almost curdled by hearing from back upon the trail, the exultant yell of their savage pursuers, who had evidently just discovered the boys' tracks. Boy-like, their first impulse was to run; but after a few steps this plan was abandoned, realizing that they would soon be overtaken. Looking hurriedly about they saw near by an overhanging cliff, with some large pieces of rock that had split off and stood two or three feet high in front, making a natural breastwork. "Quick Billy, here's our place!" said Karl. "We'll get behind these rocks and shoot them when they come in sight!" "But they'll kill us if we stop," objected Billy. "Well, they will soon catch us if we run! We may just as well be killed here as farther on!" Billy was quickly forced behind the barricade where they crouched down and waited with fluttering hearts for the appearance of the Indians. Both pistols were cocked, one in Billy's hand, the other on a rock just in front. The rifle was cocked and both were ready to pour a broadside upon the advancing foe.

81"Now Billy, just as soon as the Indians come in sight, around that big tree, point straight at the head one and pull the trigger. Remember they haven't any guns—only bows and arrows." This fact made the boys feel quite confident of their ability to withstand their red foemen. The anxious watchers had not long to wait, for the enemy was soon in sight, within fifty paces of the breast-work; their tufted heads bent low, carefully scrutinizing the ground. They were within thirty steps of the masked battery when the command came in quick aspirate: "Now let them have it Billy—fire!" Two shots rang out, and one of the trailers came to the ground, the other bounding nimbly into the thicket.

81"Keep your head down, Billy, or the Indian will shoot you with his arrow," said Karl, as Billy peeped over anxiously waiting for further development.

"Where's the one we hit?" excitedly whispered Billy. "He's crawled off out of sight," was the reply. "Look out!" said Karl, as an arrow whizzed within a few inches of Billy's head, which he had cautiously elevated above the rock. Bang! rang out the rifle in Karl's hand, as he caught a glimpse of an Indian crest above the brush, which helped the sable warrior to beat a hasty retreat. After another interval Karl peeped over the works, when instantly an arrow struck the rock very near him, coming from the vicinity of the wounded brave. Billy seized the remaining pistol and fired point blank into the brush, the only result being a rustling of the bushes as the wounded Indian crawled away.

"I can't shoot any more," said Billy, "for my pistols are empty, and the Indians have our powder and balls. I wish we had the cannon here they shoot off on the Fourth of July, I'd make that Indian hop!" The beleaguered boys lay very close for an hour, when faintly they heard from toward the summit, the tramping of horses' feet. Nearer and nearer they came; when suddenly there burst into view a band of horsemen, and foremost among them rode their father. A glad shout burst from the exhausted boys and they were soon in their father's arms. The surrounding thicket was searched for the wounded Indian, but no trace of him was found, excepting a pool of blood where he had fallen. The story is soon closed. The boys, not returning in proper time, their father rode up the canyon to their camp, and finding it plundered, rode quickly home, where the alarm was spread and a party organized, with the result above narrated. Two years afterwards, when peace had been restored, a party of natives came to the town, and among them were the two Indians who had captured our boys at the lonely camp-fire. The recognition was mutual. One of the Indians still limped from the effects of the shot received at the rocky fort. He came up to the boys and patting them on the head, said in a tone of admiration: "Brave boys, heap brave!"
