Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

84EARLY DAYS IN CACHE VALLEY

84By CHARLES W. NIBLEY

84(Charles W. Nibley was the son of a poor Scotch coal miner, who, with his family, emigrated to Utah in 1860 and settled at Wellsville, in Cache Valley. In this delightful account of his youthful experiences President Nibley has left a clear picture of the trials and tribulations of his family in establishing themselves at Wellsville.—P. N.)

84ON Monday, September 3rd, 1860, we came out of Emigration canyon and onto the bench near Fort Douglas, and I can very well remember with what joy and pleasure each one of our company, and even I, myself, looked upon the little growing city in the wilderness. We felt that all of our troubles and trials were practically at an end, when, as a matter of fact, they had only begun. For all the changing vicissitudes of pioneer life had to be undertaken and gone through with. Many things were difficult to learn and carry on.

84We camped in the city on what was later the Eighth Ward Square, where the City and County Building now stands. My parents had known and had ministered to many of the traveling Elders in the old country, and some of them like Robert L. Campbell, the father of Rob Campbell, came and hunted us up, took us to their homes, gave us food to eat, and looked after us as well as they could.

85The great question now was, where shall we go? What shall we do? There were no mills or factories where the family could secure work such as they had been accustomed to in the east. Neither was there any coal mining, which my father would have been glad to work at. An entirely new mode of working and living had to be undertaken. But where to locate? That was the question. On inquiring concerning different Scotch families that had preceded us to this country, we were told that among others, the Stoddard family who had joined the Church and lived near our folks in the old country, had just recently gone to a new pioneer valley called Cache Valley. Of course we did not know whether Cache Valley was east or west or north or south. We did not know the elevation of the country or whether it would raise anything or raise nothing, or whether the land was all alkali or was good land, but we were told there was land and water to be had in abundance, and that timber and wood to burn could be had in the mountains nearby. And as the Stoddards and others had gone to Cache why should not we go? We only knew that it was about another one hundred miles' travel which would take us five days. So after we had rested two or three days in the city we hooked up our three oxen and two cows and were off for Cache Valley.

The lake was very low that year and the wagon road from Salt Lake City to Farmington was considerably west of any green fields, right out on the alkali lake bottom, as dry as a bone. The road was so level and easily traveled that we made the twenty miles to Farmington in a very short day. We camped for the night at Hector Haight's place and our oxen broke into his field and ate up some of his melons. I remember that in the morning he demanded pay for the damage done, which, of course, he was rightly entitled to. I have no recollection of any other camping place until we arrived at Wellsville. I remember going down Box Elder Canyon, before we came to Wellsville, that the road was full of stumps and was not much of a road at all, just a trail cut through the brush and not very many wagons had gone up and down that road. It was so rough that it impressed me. I recollect that part of the trip distinctly, but have no recollection of Ogden or Brigham City or other settlements.

When we got to Wellsville, which was a village of perhaps 20 or 25 log houses, we drove at once to Granny Stoddard's dugout. She had been baking her bread in a skillet and in the fire under the skillet she had a lot of the finest kind of large new potatoes, for it was now about the 11th of September. She was very hospitable to us, gave us everything she had in the way of something to eat, but I recollect that those fine baked potatoes and the fresh buttermilk which she had churned that morning was about the finest combination of food that I had ever tasted. We were all so hungry for vegetables, having had scarcely a taste of anything in the line of vegetables all the way across the plains. It makes my mouth water yet to think of Granny Stoddard's potatoes and buttermilk.

87The Bishop of the ward was William H. Maughan, a young man of about twenty-five years, a son of Peter Maughan who was the President of the organizations of the Church in Cache Valley. He was very kind to us in helping us to get located, advising us how to proceed to get some logs out of the canyons and build some kind of shelter for the winter, both for ourselves and for our cattle. We had money enough to buy some wheat which we had made into flour at Hill's mill, at which there was no way of separating the smut and chaff from the wheat, but was all ground together and made a black or brown bread.

87We located at the end of what was called the new fort, for the town was not laid out as it is now, but was merely a fort of houses all huddled together for the protection from Indian raids. It was a new and hard experience getting out logs from the canyons and getting out our winter's wood. And also securing hay from the hay fields down below Mendon, with which to feed our cattle for the winter. All these new experiences were difficult and of the worst kind, but we did manage to get a dugout roofed in and a little yard made with quaking aspen poles and a shed covered with hay where we could keep our cattle for the winter.

I recollect that the very first day after we arrived and got our camp permanently pitched, my mother, with her characteristic energy, started out and took me with her into the adjoining field to glean wheat. That was my very first work in Utah—gleaning wheat. And walking in the wheat stubble gleaning wheat all day, barefooted, was not altogether a picnic, but we would gather up the heads of wheat, tie them in little bundles and carry them to our camp. We two gleaned close to one-half bushel of wheat a day. We would take the little bundles of heads and use a washboard which we had brought with us to rub out the heads of wheat or thresh them out as we would say. Then we would put this wheat in a pile on our wagon cover and I would have to take a plate or something of that kind and throw the wheat up in the air to let the chaff and smut and straw blow away with the wind, and keep on so throwing it in the air until the wheat was as clean as we could get it, ready for the gristmill. If we bought a load of wheat, which we did once or twice, in bundles from the field, we would take and lay those bundles in our wagon cover on the ground and drive a yoke of oxen around and around over the bundles until the oxen had tramped out the wheat. This, of course, was done where there was no threshing machine, and I don't think there was a threshing machine in all Cache Valley that fall. Wellsville was the oldest and largest town in the valley at that time. Logan had merely started with about half the number of houses that Wellsville had, and a little start was being made at Hyrum, Millville, Smithfield, Richmond and Franklin; but Wellsville and Logan were the two prominent places.

After we were through gleaning wheat I had to look after the two cows and see that they were brought in from the range every night. In fact, I was expected to herd them during the day and bring them home at night. Our breakfasts were of the scantiest kind, a little wheat porridge without much milk and a little of the brown or black bread without butter. In the morning I was furnished a piece of bread for my dinner, as I would start off on the hills with the cows, but my dinner was devoured before I got half a mile away from our camp and I had to go hungry until evening. About the only clothing I had at that time was a pair of pants made from the tent which we used in crossing the plains, and which had grown so stiff and hard, being weather-beaten in so many storms, and a shirt made of the same material, that when it touched my back or sides, nearly took the skin off, but it was the best I had and all I had. A rope tied around my waist to hold my pants up and my shirt down. I can remember that when I was very hungry at dinner time, about the only thing I could do to help my stomach was to tighten my rope.

It was probably about the middle of November, or a little later when we completed a little one-room, part dugout and part log house. We dug a square hole in the ground about 3 feet deep and then built logs around that hole, 3 logs high. We built up the two gables with logs then put a center roof log and one on each side of that, half way down to the wall. On top of these logs we laid small quaking aspen poles not any larger than my wrist. On the top of these we put straw and then covered that with a thick coat of dirt. My father built a cobble stone chimney in the opposite end from the entrance or door. The chimney was simply built of cobble stones and mud for plaster, as we had no lime or any other kind of plaster that would hold. The chimney never knew enough to draw the smoke up but spewed it out and filled the room. We had many a sorry time of it with that chimney.

90What cooking was done we did on that fire for we had sold our stove to John Stoddard, who was the father of George Stoddard, for a piece of land over in the east field. I can remember that one day Brother James A. Leishman (who at this date, 1915, is still living) asked me if we had sold our stove and for what. I told him and he intimated that we had rather been imposed upon in the deal as he said he would not give that stove for the whole of the east field. That east field land is now worth more than $100.00 an acre.

There was no window of any kind whatever in our house. Neither was there a door. My mother hung up an old quilt or piece of an old quilt, which served as a door for the first winter. This was our bedroom, our parlor, our sitting room, our kitchen, our sleeping room, everything in this room of about 12 x 16. How in the world we all got along in it I do not in the least remember, but we did manage somehow. Of course when you mention comfort or anything like comfort, there could have been none of it there, but I do recollect that my dear old mother has stated on many occasions that no queen who ever entered her palace was ever more happy or proud of shelter and the blessings of the Lord than she was when she entered that completed dugout.

91We completed about the same time a little stockyard or corral with a small shed that would protect our cattle from the storm. And we succeeded in getting up a few loads of hay from the bottoms north and east of Wellsville, that our cattle might subsist on for the winter. It was a long dreary winter. That winter and the winter following we still lived in the dugout. It was a scramble of the severest kind for a mere existence. How to begin at the very beginning of things and make the earth produce you food and shelter was such a new experience and such a severe one that the older folks never forgot it.

91Somehow we managed to trade for some wheat and we built a little bin with some boards in one corner of the dugout and put our wheat in this bin and on the wheat made our beds. Wheat is about the hardest stuff to sleep on that I have ever experienced.

After we had been in Wellsville about thirty days and I had been gleaning wheat and herding cows during that time, old Brother John H. Bankhead hired me to herd his sheep on the hills southeast of Wellsville. We did not dare to go very far from the fort as there was too much danger from the Indians during the first settlement of the valley and indeed we did not need to go far because feed was abundant. This was my second job of work in Wellsville.

92Winter came on, however, soon, and put an end to that. My mother used to go out and do a day's washing here and there and take flour for her pay. Usually 12 pounds of flour was payment in full for a hard day's washing. Poor old mother, how she struggled and worked and slaved to bring us all up. She did more or less washing for the Bankheads all that winter as I remember. It helped to keep us eating and that was the main struggle just at that time—to get something to eat. I had an old pair of homemade shoes that winter, but how I got them I do not in the least remember. It was years after before I ever had a coat. I think I was 16 years old when I had my first coat. Previous to that I had had nothing but a shirt and a pair of pants or overalls. My sisters, Mary and Margaret, hired out to different people in the village and got their board and very little else beside.

Brother James A. Leishman taught school in the log meeting house that stood in the street not far north of where Bishop Maughan's old home stands, (where Aunt Margaret lives at this time). The only books I had were a Webster spelling book and a Greenleaf arithmetic, which we had brought from the states. Our reading lessons were from the Book of Mormon and I had to borrow the privilege of reading from one of the boys of the class or school. I could spell the whole school down when we had spelling bees and somehow I could work examples, or sums, as we used to call them, which Brother Leishman himself could not quite master.

93We did not have sufficient hay to feed all our cattle so we sent one yoke with a herd of cattle that was going onto the promontory. It seemed like bad luck was determined to follow us, for in bringing the cattle home from the promontory in the spring, there was one ox drowned in Bear River and out of all the big herd of cattle that happened to be our ox. That same winter one of our cows had laid down in her little narrow stall and although she was securely tied with a rope by the horns, yet somehow she had got her neck twisted so that her head was under her body in some shape and there she died. So that by spring we were considerably poorer than we were when we landed in the fall. But we were gaining experience and were a little more able to hold our own and wrest from the earth some kind of a scanty livelihood.

The long winter nights and without any amusement and without books to read, made life seem quite dreary. There was, however, some kind of amusements going on, chiefly dances in the log meeting house. There was a brother who could play the fiddle a little bit (Samuel Ames) and he was kept pretty busy furnishing music for the dances. Then there would be little gatherings at this hut or house, or the other, a few families called in to spend the evening which would help to while away the time.

94But I can remember how, long before daylight would come, my father was up, tired of lying on his hard bed and moving the quilt to one side, peering out into the darkness, I have heard him exclaim, "It's eternal darkness here."

That winter everybody in Wellsville had the itch. Of course, we were included in the number. There were no vegetables except potatoes; there were no lemons or acids to counteract the acid in the blood, so it broke out in hives or itch. Old Davy Moffat who crossed the plains in the handcart company that same summer that we came, left his home in Salt Lake and somehow or other landed in Wellsville as he had no work to do, merely came up to visit us. We entertained him of course the best we could in our dugout—fancy entertaining anybody in a place like that—and while we did not have any Christmas present to give him, we did manage to give him the itch. He went home after a short visit and a little later Johnny McCarty was making a trip to Salt Lake for something or other and I begged the privilege of going with him and seeing if I could not get work. We got to Salt Lake City in due time and I went down and stayed at Moffats, down in the Third Ward. I remember going to Walker Brothers Store and asking one of the Walker brothers if they would not hire a boy to help do chores or help do clerking in the store, but they said they were not in need of any help just at that time. At Moffats in the evening old Davy would be scratching his back, and I remember very well him saying to me, "Mon, when you gang hame tell your faather (and this while he was scratching away at his back) tell your faather to send me down a muckle hawthorne stick."

95I do not recall how I worked my way back home to Wellsville. The second winter we spent in our dugout was much like the first, although there were many more settlers in the village the second year. The first year there were the Stoddards, Leishmans and Williamsons and one or two other Scotch families, and the second year there were added the Murrays and Kerrs and Jardines and others, so that Wellsville was really the Scotch town of the north country.

95As soon as spring came we were busily engaged trying to plow some ground and plant a field of wheat. This was in the spring of 1861. Lincoln had been elected in November, 1860, and in the spring of 1861 all the news we got from the states was of the coming great war between the north and the south. We had no newspapers of any kind. Indeed during the first year or perhaps two, of our existence in Wellsville, I don't remember that we ever received or wrote a single letter. There were no mail routes established during that first season and letters were carried by anybody going or coming.

I got a job doing chores at Bankheads. It gave me my board and I suppose I must have earned a little flour or perhaps I was able to earn a couple of head of sheep, which he paid me for my work. I was engaged in helping milk the cows, churn the butter, keep the calves herded or away from the cows and helping to look after the sheep. Bankheads were the rich family of the valley at that time. Among other property, they owned two men negroes, Nate and Sam. It seems like harking a long way back to the days of slavery, but negro slavery was actually the law of the land and practiced to a small extent in 1860 and 1861 and 1862 in Cache Valley. I felt quite elated when I could sleep with big Nate, the big black negro that Bankhead owned. Old Sam used to ask me if I had read any news of "de wah," and I can remember very well him saying at one time, "My God, I hope de Souf get licked."

96Only once did I see Brother Bankhead get angry at his slaves, and at that time he tore around pretty lively and threatened to horsewhip them to death if they didn't mend their ways. Once I was careless enough to let the calves, a dozen or so of them, get out of their pens and into the yard with the cows, and of course they got all the milk. And milk was money in those days. The old gentleman Bankhead was so wrathy at me that, "If this should ever happen again," he said, "I am damned if I don't want you to leave the plantation."

Along in July in 1861 we began to get some new potatoes and green peas in the little garden that my father had, which was well cultivated. It seemed like I never could get enough of green peas. I would lie out in the patch on the ground and eat peas until I nearly burst.

97During that summer we were engaged at work more or less on the Hyrum and Wellsville Canal that brings the water from the Muddy or little Bear River onto the Wellsville east field, which the country road runs through. The man who could shovel out the most dirt or cut the most hay or grain, or bring the largest load of logs or wood from the canyon was the hero of the community in those times. It was not brain or intellect or any great attainments, it was just who could do the most work. At 12 years of age, as I was then, I was small even for my age and was not equal to hard work. But I can remember working on that water ditch and being a good mimic I had all the men rolling with laughter at my mimicry of this man or the other who would brag about the amount of shoveling he could do. I was better at mimicking that I was at working.

97By this time we began to gather around us a few chickens and a pig or two. Eggs and butter were the chief currency of the country. There was no such thing as money. I don't think we saw a dollar in money in the first two years we were in Cache Valley. Wheat was $2.00 a bushel and it was considered that a bushel of wheat was payment for a good day's work.

We traded around and got some hay land and we had the farm land from Stoddard so that we were just beginning to understand what it took to get a livelihood right from the very elements. It was a good experience all that, even if it was hard. There was not much butter for us to eat, and rarely indeed did we ever have an egg to eat. Mother was extra thrifty and the eggs and most of what little butter was made, had to be kept to exchange for a little thread or a little calico or perhaps a pair of shoes when some peddler wagon should come along.
