Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

109SAVED FROM DROWNING

109By W. W. CLUFF

109(President Lorenzo Snow was one of the great men of the Church. In this instance his life was saved by a miraculous and divine power for a purpose. He lived to become the fifth President of the Church.—P. N.)

109PRESIDENT LORENZO SNOW went on a mission to the Hawaiian Islands in March, 1864. It was while trying to land by means of a small boat on the island of Maui that the following accident and rescue took place. Elder W. W. Cluff, one of the party tells the story:

109The entrance to the harbor is a very narrow passage between coral reefs, and when the sea is rough, it is very dangerous, on account of the breakers.

As we approached the reef it was evident to me that the surf was running higher than we anticipated. I called the captain's attention to the fact. We were running quartering against the waves, and I suggested that we change our course so as to run at right angles with them. He replied that he did not think there was any danger, and our course was not changed. We went but a little farther, when a heavy swell struck the boat and carried it before us for about fifty yards. When the swell passed, it left us in a trough between two huge waves. It was too late to retrieve our error, and we must run our chances. When the second swell struck the boat, it raised the stern so high that the steersman's oar was out of the water, and he lost control of the boat. It rode on the swell a short distance and swung around just as the wave began to break up. We were almost instantly capsized into the dashing, foaming sea.

110I felt no concern about myself about drowning, for on my former mission I had learned to swim and sport in the surf of those shores.

110The last I remember of Brother Snow, as the boat was going over, I saw him seize the upper edge of it with both hands. Fearing that the upper edge of the boat, or the barrels of it might hit and injure me, as the boat was going over, I plunged foremost into the water. After swimming a short distance, I came to the surface without being strangled or injured.

110The boat was bottom upward, and barrels, hats and umbrellas were floating in every direction. I swam to the boat, and as there was nothing to cling to on the bottom, I reached under and seized the edge of it.

About the same time Brother Benson came up near me and readily got hold of the boat. Brother Alma L. Smith came up on the other side of the boat from Brother Benson and myself. He was consider ably strangled, but succeeded in securing a hold on the boat.

111A short time afterward the captain was discovered about fifty yards from us. Two sailors, one on each side, succeeded in keeping him on the surface, although life was apparently extinct.

111Nothing yet had been seen of Brother Snow, although the natives had been swimming and diving in every direction in search of him. We were only about one-fourth of a mile from shore. The people, as soon as they discovered our circumstances, manned a life boat and hurried to our rescue. We were taken into the boat, when the crew wanted to row for the shore and pick up the captain on the way. We told them that one of our friends was still missing, and we did not want to leave. We discovered that a second boat had left the shore, and could reach the captain as soon as the one we were in. Seeing this, the crew of our boat consented to remain and assist us.

111The captain was brought to shore, and by working over him some time, was brought to life. Probably his life would not have been much endangered but for a sack of four or five hundred silver dollars which he held in his hand, the weight of which took him at once to the bottom. The natives dove and brought him up, still clinging to the sack. When his vitality was restored, the first thing he inquired about was the money, intimating to the natives, with peculiar emphasis, that it would not have been healthy for them to have lost it.

112Brother Snow had not yet been discovered, and the anxiety was intense. The natives were, evidently, doing all in their power.

112Finally, one of them, in edging himself around the capsized boat, must have felt Brother Snow with his feet, and pulled him, at least, partly from under it, as the first I saw of Brother Snow was his hair floating upon the water around one end of the capsized boat. As soon as we got him into our boat, we told the boatman to pull for the shore with all possible speed. His body was stiff, and life apparently extinct.

112Brother A. L. Smith and I were sitting side by side. We laid Brother Snow across our laps, and, on the way to shore, we quietly administered to him, and asked the Lord to spare his life, that he might return to his family and home.

112On reaching the shore, we carried him a little way to some large empty barrels that were lying on the sandy beach. We laid him face downward on one of them, and rolled him back and forth until we succeeded in getting the water he had swallowed out of him.

112During this time a number of persons came down from the town; among them were Mr. E. P. Adams, a merchant. All were willing to do what they could. We washed Brother Snow's face with camphor, furnished by Mr. Adams. We did not only what was customary in such cases, but also what the Spirit whispered to us.

After we had been working over him for some time without any indications of returning life, the bystanders said that nothing more could be done with him. But we did not feel like giving him up, and still prayed and worked over him, with an assurance that the Lord would hear and answer our prayers.

113Finally, we were impressed to place our mouth over his, and make an effort to inflate his lungs, alternately blowing in and drawing out the air, imitating, as far as possible the natural process of breathing. This we persevered in until we succeeded in inflating his lungs. After a little, we perceived very faint indications of returning life. A slight wink of the eye, which until then, had been open and deathlike, and a faint rattle in the throat, were the first symptoms of returning vitality. These grew more and more distinct, until consciousness was fully restored.

113When this result was reached, it must have been fully one hour after the upsetting of the boat. Brother Snow was taken to a nearby house to rest, and he soon regained his strength.

113On awakening to consciousness, and realizing what had happened, Brother Snow asked, "Are you brethren all safe?"

113"Yes, Brother Snow, we are all safe," was the reply.

113That answer, Brother Snow said when telling about the experience, awakened in his bosom an emotion which "will remain with me as long as life continues."
