Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

PioneersKimball, Solomon F.114BRIGHAM YOUNG'S FIRST TRIP TO BEAR LAKE VALLEY

114By SOLOMON F. KIMBALL

114(As we roll along the smooth highways of Utah and Idaho, in closed automobiles, we think or know little of the difficulties experienced by the early pioneers who "broke" and made the first roads through these canyons and valleys. In the following story Solomon F. Kimball gives us an excellent account of the manner in which the Pioneers traveled eighty years ago.—P. N.)

114THE rising generation know but little of the hardships endured in early days by the leading men of this Church, while they were helping the poor Saints to establish themselves in these valleys. In order to make plain to them at least one phase of this subject it will only be necessary to give a brief account of President Young and party's first visit to the Bear Lake country.

On Monday morning, May 16, 1864, at 8:30 o'clock, this little company drove out of Salt Lake City on its journey. It consisted of six light vehicles and a baggage wagon, occupied by the following persons: Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, John Taylor, Geo. A. Smith, Wilford Woodruff, Joseph Young, Jesse W. Fox, Utah's surveyor, Professor Thomas Ellerbeck, George D. Watt, reporter, and seven teamsters. They reached Franklin, Idaho, on the afternoon of the third day, and by that time had increased their number to one hundred and fifty-three men, eighty-six of whom were riding in vehicles, the balance being picked men, mounted on good horses for assisting the company on the way. There were no houses between Franklin and Paris, Idaho, consequently the program was to drive directly through to Paris in one day if possible.

115The fourth morning they got an early start, and drove almost to Mink Creek without accident. Here Brother George A. Smith's carriage broke down, but as good luck would have it, the brethren from Cache Valley had brought a light wagon along in case of such an emergency. The company was soon on the way again, as though nothing had happened.

115They reached the foot of the big mountain which divides Cache Valley from Bear Lake Valley, and here is where the tug of war began. The mountain was so steep that all were compelled to walk except Apostle Smith who was so heavy that it would have been dangerous for him to undertake it, as he weighed not less than three hundred pounds. The mounted men soon had extra horses harnessed and hitched to singletrees, and President Young and others, who were too heavy to help themselves, took hold of these singletrees with both hands and were helped up the mountain in this way.

Apostle Charles C. Rich and others, who had settled in the Bear Lake Valley the fall before, came to their assistance with all the ox teams that could be mustered. Several yokes were hitched to Brother George A. Smith's wagon, and he was hauled up the mountain, but before he reached the summit his wagon was so badly broken that he was compelled to abandon it. Everybody had a good laugh over the incident, it being the second vehicle broken down under his weight that day. With careful management under the supervision of President Young and council, the brethren managed to get him onto the largest saddle horse that could be found, and another start was made.

116The company descended the mountain on the Bear Lake side and soon reached the head of Pioneer Canyon, where they struck mud, mud, mud, and then some more mud. It had been raining all day and everybody was wet through to the skin, except those who were riding in covered vehicles. Four horses were hitched to President Young's carriage, and several yoke of oxen to the baggage wagon. The majority of those who were riding in vehicles were compelled to walk on account of the trail being in such a fearful condition; and to see that presidential procession waddling through the deep mud was enough to make any living thing smile. It was the muddiest outfit ever seen in that part of the country.

Professor Ellerbeck undertook to cross the creek on a pole, and slipped off into the mud and water, and was a sad looking sight after he had been pulled out. Many others passed through a similar experience that day. It was a case of every fellow for himself, some going one way and some another, the majority of them taking to the sidehills. Several times President Young's horses mired down to their sides, but with careful driving they got through all right.

117President Kimball, who was handling his own team this afternoon, undertook to drive around one of these bad places, and had not gone far when his horses struck a soft spot and sank almost out of sight in the mud. Here is where the mounted men were of service again. They soon had Brother Kimball's horses unhitched from the carriage, and long ropes fastened around their necks. Then about thirty men got hold of the ropes and pulled the horses out bodily, dragging them several rods before they could get upon their feet. The carriage was then pulled out.

117President Young, who was in the lead, made another start, and had not gone far when one of the horsemen brought word that Brother George A. Smith's horse had given out, and that they were obliged to build a scaffold in order to get him onto another one. This amusing story caused the authorities to have another laughing spell at Brother Smith's expense.

This canyon is about four miles long, and it was a mud hole from beginning to end. The party reached the mouth of it at nine o'clock at night, and remained there long enough to rest and feed their animals. It was a cold night and the men made bonfires to keep themselves warm and dry their clothing.

118About ten o'clock the company continued their journey. They drove down in the valley until they came to a small stream called Canal Creek. It was so narrow and deep that they had to jump their horses across it, and then get their vehicles over the best way they could.

118They reached the city of Paris at 3 o'clock the next morning, but were unable to see it until they had reached the top of a small hill in the center of town. It consisted of thirty-four log huts with dirt roofs, but they looked good just the same.

118The Bear Lakers had caught a wagon load of beautiful trout in honor of the occasion, and had plenty of good fresh butter to fry them in; and what a feast the brethren did have after living on hope and mud for twenty-four hours! Sister Stocks and daughter did the cooking for the authorities, and it kept them busy as long as the party remained there.

The next twenty-four hours were spent in resting, as everybody was worn out; although Professor Ellerbeck took some scientific observations that day, probably the first that had ever been taken in the valley. The next day the company drove over to the lake, and spent several hours at a point where Fish Haven is now located. They returned to Paris that evening. The next day, being Sunday, they held an outdoor meeting in the forenoon. The speakers were President Young, Elders Kimball, John Taylor and Geo. A. Smith.

119Considerable merriment was afterwards had over the question of whether Brother Smith should return home with the company or remain at Paris until the mud had dried up. However, the decision was that he return home with the company on condition that Brother Rich furnish ox teams to haul him through the mud, and to the summit of the mountain. This Elder Rich, who was the pioneer of Bear Lake Valley, consented to do, and at 3 p.m. the presidential party started for home. In the meantime, Canal Creek had been bridged over, and good time was made through the valley. They reached the mouth of Pioneer Canyon at dark, and camped for the night.

The next morning at 5 o'clock they continued their journey homeward. Brother Rich had more than kept his promise. He furnished two yoke of oxen for President Young's carriage, and four yoke for the baggage wagon, the latter being solely occupied by Brother George A. Smith, who had a smile on his countenance that made all who beheld it feel good through and through. These were the only vehicles drawn by ox teams. They followed the road through the mud, while the lighter vehicles, drawn by horses, hugged the side hills, which were so steep that the brethren had to lash poles to the carriage beds, and bear down on the upper end of the poles to prevent the carriages from tipping over. This plan worked like a charm, and by nine o'clock the company had reached the summit of the mountain. Notwithstanding it rained hard all that day, the party reached Franklin about five o'clock that evening, and three days later they arrived home. They had been absent from home eleven days, and within that time had traveled four hundred miles, besides holding meetings at all the principal settlements along the route, both going and coming. They also selected several townsites.
