Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

PioneersIvins, Anthony W.128THE PIONEER TRAIL

128By ANTHONY W. IVINS

128(Anthony W. Ivins was the prince of story tellers among the pioneers who came to the valleys. As a youth of nine years he went with his parents to St. George, among the first settlers, and there he grew to manhood, amidst the wild, romantic grandeur of the Southland. His well told stories have given us an imperishable picture of many of the stirring events of pioneer days. I shall reproduce a number of them in this volume.—P. N.)

128THE Pioneer Trail, from the Wyoming border to the Salt Lake Valley, will never be forgotten. Each year people travel it, and say, "Over this trail passed the men who laid the foundation of a western empire. Here they struggled up the mountain; here, crossed the stream; here they cut away the trees and removed the rocks to make possible passage through the canyon, and on this spot they established camp after a weary day's journey."

128Other trails, trodden by the feet of men and women as devoted as those who first entered the Salt Lake Valley, are forgotten. No monuments will ever be built to mark their course. The trails are obliterated. The men who made them have passed away. Lest the children forget the sacrifices of the fathers, come and travel with me over some of these forgotten trails.

129Since the events here chronicled took place, more than fifty years ago, conditions, social, religious, political and industrial, have so changed that if met by the younger generation of today, they would be scarcely recognizable. Journeys made by mule and ox trains, which required months to accomplish, are now made in a day. The conveniences and comforts of home-life were meager, compared with the present. Communication between settlements was difficult and slow, agricultural, industrial and commercial pursuits were prosecuted under the most disadvantageous circumstances; and, worst of all, the pioneers who blazed the way and established outlying settlements were constantly exposed to the danger of attack by roving bands of Indians who opposed the invasion of their country by the white men.

129Eternal vigilance was the price of safety; constant industry and rigid economy the price of substance.

129In the fall of 1861, the writer passed his ninth birthday. He resided, at the time, with his parents, in the Fifteenth Ward, Salt Lake City. On the same block lived John M. Moody and family, consisting of his wife, Margaret, and her children, Robert, Samuel, William and Mary, the three first being the sons of a former husband whose name was McIntire. They had identified themselves with the Church in Texas; and, like many others, had gathered to Utah to participate in its activities, and share its destinies.

James M. Whitmore and family were also Texas people who had gathered with the Church, and were friends and neighbors of the Moodys. They were people of refinement, and had brought with them to the Valley property which, by comparison at that time, entitled them to be regarded as possessed of wealth.

130One afternoon in October, 1861, the writer was at the home of John M. Moody, playing with other children, when a messenger came with the announcement that the Moody family had been called by the presiding authorities of the Church, to go to Dixie to raise cotton and develop the resources of that part of the territory. Frightened by the thought of such a move, he ran through the block to the home of his parents, and bursting into the house exclaimed to his mother and sister, who were in the room,

130"Brother Moody is called to go to Dixie."

130"So are we," said his sister, between sobs.

130His mother said nothing, but tears filled her eyes as she thought of leaving a good home and comfortable surroundings, and of facing the hardships and dangers of frontier life, in the barren country known as Utah's Dixie.

130Several hundred families had been so called to go upon this mission. It was the manner in which the affairs of the Church were conducted, at that time—one of the forgotten trails.

Some offered excuses. Some were too poor to go, some were too rich. Some would send substitutes, but the great majority, with that devotion which has characterized the members of the Church from the beginning, silently but resolutely made preparations for the accomplishment of the task assigned them.

131Valuable homes were disposed of for but a small part of their real value. Farms were exchanged for teams or live stock which could be driven through to their destination; and the late fall and early winter of 1861 found hundreds of teams on the rough and dreary road to the South, among them the families of John M. Moody and James M. Whitmore.

131The road from Salt Lake to the Rio Virgin passed through the country of the Ute, or Utah Indians, a powerful tribe whose territory was bounded on the north by the Shoshones and Cheyennes; on the east by the Cheyennes, Arrapahos and Comanches; and the west by the Pah-utes, who occupied a strip of country lying between the Rio Virgin, Santa Clara, and Colorado rivers, extending as far east as the San Juan, and separating the Utes proper from the Navajos, Apaches, and Moquis, on the south.

While Wah-ker, Arapeen, Black Hawk and Kanosh were recognized, each in his time, as chief of the Utes, the Pah-utes, in the south, were broken up into fragmentary bands, each with its own chief, but recognizing no general leadership. The Moapas, occupying the Muddy Valley and lower Rio Virgin, were led by To-sho; the Tonaquint and Pa-rusche Indians, on the Santa Clara and Upper Virgin, by Tutse-gavit; the Kaibab (Mountain That Lies Down) Indians, by the father of Kanab Frank, whose name the writer has forgotten, while a branch of this same tribe, which extended to the San Juan river, and across the Colorado to the borders of the Navajos, was led by the renegade Ute Pah-nish, a bad man, who was responsible for a great part of the trouble which later developed between the settlers of Southern Utah and the Navajos and their Pah-ute neighbors.

In an article published by one of the Salt Lake dailies at the time of the recent uprising of the Indians in San Juan County, which resulted from the attempt to arrest Tse-nah-gaht (The Mountain Sheep), who was accused of the murder of a Mexican, it stated that the word Pah-ute meant renegade, and that it had been applied to the tribe occupying the country between the Utes and Navajos, because of their bad character. The Indians themselves say this is not the case. All they know is that it is the name by which they have always been known, and is applied to all of their people. Pah, in the Indian language, is water, and is frequently used by them in the names applied to places and things, for example: Pah-ra-gon, the Indian word for Parowan, means a lake or long body of shallow water, the Little Salt Lake. We have Anglicised it, and call it Parowan, while we apply the Indian word, Pah-ra-gon, to Paragoona which, in the Indian tongue, is Uncoppa, or Red—Red Creek; Pah-rusche, Water That Tastes of Salt, (the Rio Virgin); Pah-reah, Elk Water; Pah-rah-shont, Much Water; Pah-coon, Water Which Keeps Boiling Up. Following this rule, Pah-ute would be Water Ute, or the Utes living along the rivers which constituted the southern boundaries of the tribe.

133These Pah-utes intermarried with the tribes adjacent to them until they became a kind of mongrel race, recognized neither by the Utes on the north, or the Navajos and Apaches on the south. They were greatly inferior to their neighbors in intelligence.

133The trail of the Dixie pioneers passed, as stated, through the country of the Utes, and into the country of the Pah-utes. While peaceful relations existed between the whites and Indians at this time, the latter were jealous and suspicious, and it was only by careful diplomacy, and following the wise course outlined by Brigham Young, that it was cheaper to feed than to fight them, that peaceful relations were maintained.

133The Whitmore and Moody families, with others, located at St. George, and immediately applied their means and energy to the development of the resources of the country.

In order to provide grazing facilities for his herds of cattle, bands of horses and flocks of sheep, which were noted for their excellent quality, James M. Whitmore located and improved the Pipe Springs ranch, which lies about fifty-five miles east from St. George, and twenty miles west from Kanab. At this ranch, Whitmore passed a portion of his time, and had employed Robert McIntire to assist him in caring for his flocks and herds.

134One evening, about the 10th of January, 1866, the people of St. George were gathered at the Social Hall, where a party was to be given. The Whitmore and Moody families were there, with the exception of the head of the former and Robert McIntire, who were at the ranch. The cotillions had been formed, the musicians were tuning their instruments, the people were in a happy mood, when they were unexpectedly called to order. What had occurred to mar the pleasure of the occasion? The writer well remembers the death-like silence which ensued, the suppressed excitement, the deep apprehension manifested by the merry-makers. The manager announced that a messenger had just arrived with dispatches stating that a traveler, passing Pipe Springs, had observed that there was no one at the ranch house, and that signs indicating the recent presence of Indians were plainly visible.

A call was made for men, armed and equipped, to start at once for Pipe Springs. Silently, hurriedly, the people went to their homes. The remainder of the night was spent in preparation, and the following morning a company of sixty men, a part of the local militia, was ready to start on one of the most trying expeditions ever undertaken by men. They were armed and mounted, that was indispensable, but there were no shelter-tents. The equipment was primitive and inadequate, the commissary scanty. At least one man now living, at the time a mere boy, was mounted on a mule without a saddle, and had no coat. With a few quilts which served as saddle, cloak and bed, in his shirt sleeves, he did a soldier's full duty on the trying campaign.

135As stated, the expedition was made up of a part of the local militia, and was commanded by Colonel Daniel D. McArthur, Lieutenant Colonel Angus M. Cannon, Major John D. L. Pierce, and Captains James Andrus and David H. Cannon. Of these men David H. Cannon is the only survivor.

135The weather was intensely cold. Snow had fallen, and on the high plateau, at Pipe Springs, it was three feet deep, with the mercury below zero. When Pipe Springs was reached no trace could be found of either the ranchers or Indians. Tracks and signs which ordinarily guide the scout were obliterated by the heavy fall of snow. Finally, after several days of scouting, James Andrus found two Indians, an elderly man and a boy, engaged in dressing a beef which they had killed, and brought them to camp. They refused to talk until the following morning, when they admitted that Whitmore and McIntire had been shot by Navajo and Pah-ute Indians, and offered to conduct the soldiers to the place where the bodies were, and to the camp of the hostiles.

Dividing into two companies, one under command of Colonel McArthur, and the other under command of Captain Andrus, the troops left camp, the older Indian leading Colonel McArthur out of the plains, east of Pipe Springs, the boy leading Captain Andrus in a southerly direction to the vicinity of the Kanab Gulch. Captain Andrus encountered the hostiles in their camp, and nine Indians were killed. While the cavalry rode over the plain, searching for the murdered men, a horse's hoof brushed away the snow exposing the hand of a man. It was the body of Whitmore!

136"Is it the man with a beard, or the one without?" asked the Indian.

136"The one with a beard," was the answer.

136The Indian walked some distance and, pointing, said,

136"The other is there."

136The snow was removed, and the body of McIntire found, as stated. Each man had been shot with bullets and arrows, the body of McIntire having received many wounds, the Indian said, because he had carried a pistol, and had fought desperately for his life.

136The remains of the two men were packed in snow and taken to St. George, where impressive funeral services were held.

The details of the tragedy were never known. The Indians admitted that they had attacked the men while they were riding on the range, and had killed them after a short fight. A large number of horses and sheep were driven off by the Navajos, the Pah-utes retaining the personal effects of the murdered men. It was the first depredation in the Dixie country in which white men lost their lives, but they were not the victims of the long war waged by the Navajos and Pah-utes against the white settlers of southern Utah.

137James M. Whitmore was the father of Hon. George C. Whitmore of Nephi, James M. Whitmore of Price, and Brigham Whitmore of Davis county; and Robert McIntire was the elder brother of our former fellow townsmen, Samuel and William McIntire.
