Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

PioneersIvins, Anthony W.175NAVAJO DEPREDATIONS IN SOUTHERN UTAH

175By ANTHONY W. IVINS

175(Following in succession are five stories by President A. W. Ivins; all in his clear and interesting style.—P.N.)

175AMONG the many spots which are to be found in the mountains of Utah there is none which surpasses Pine Valley, in Washington County.

175Situated in a basin, in the very tops of the Pine Valley mountains, the extreme southern end of the Wasatch range, surrounded by timber covered peaks, one who, on an autumn day, looks down upon its fields of ripening grain, meadows of red top and timothy, with the stream, the head waters of the Santa Clara, winding through the valley, and the village of comfortable homes in the center, never forgets nature's canvas which is spread out before him.

About three miles southwest from the town, on a high plateau, near the base of the mountain, where the ground is covered with great granite boulders, which have rolled down from the mountain above, there is a place called the Mahoganies, because of the heavy growth of these trees with which the mesa is covered. Running off to the north there is a depression known as Indian Hollow. The name is suggestive, and an "old settler" if asked why this spot of ground is so named would relate the following incident:

176On the afternoon of December 27, 1866, Cyrus Hancock, a young man of 27 years, and a resident of Pine Valley, saddled his little mare Nell and rode out to the Mahoganies to look for a horse which was ranging in that neighborhood. He reached the flat, and was riding among the boulders, many of which are of immense size, and heavy growth of trees, when he was suddenly confronted by three Indians. The latter were on foot, but had chosen positions which made his escape on his slow, tender footed mare, impossible. He spoke to them, and they replied with signs of friendship, made him understand that they wanted tobacco. He showed them that he had none. One of the Indians, under pretense of looking for tobacco, searched him, and discovering that he had no arms became insolent. One of them took hold of his bridle, another stood in the trail which led in the direction in which he was going, while a third stood by the side of his horse with an arrow fixed to his bow. The man who appeared to be the spokesman gave him to understand that it was the intention to kill him, take his horse, and cover his body with dry leaves which were piled in the hollow.

Finally the chief spoke to the young man who stood on the side, and the latter, aiming his arrow at Hancock, drew his bow, but when the man made a gesture, and shouted to him to desist, he lowered his weapon. An angry command from the chief and the boy again drew his bow, this time to the head of the arrow. As the bowstring twanged, Hancock threw himself from the saddle, and the arrow passed over him. Dashing into the underbrush, the man ran toward Pine Valley, the Indians in hot pursuit, and sending a shower of arrows after him, one of which passed through his arm, above the wrist, and another through his beard. A full mile the race continued, when the Indians, as they approached the wagon road, upon which a team could be seen, gave up the chase.

177Exhausted and suffering from his wound, Hancock reached the road, the arrow still in his arm. Fearing that it was poisoned he tried to draw it out, but only succeeded in breaking it off. At the road he met a Mr. Coachee with an ox team which was hurried on to Pine Valley with the wounded man, where through the efforts of a strong man with a pair of bullet moulds, the arrow was extracted, and under the primitive treatment which those early days afforded, the wound soon healed.

In 1866 there were no telegraph or telephone lines, no railroads, the quickest way to transmit a message was by an expressman, mounted on a good horse. Soon after the return of Hancock to his home such a messenger started for St. George, and the following day there was a great activity among the local militia. Captain Copeland hurriedly mobilized a small force to take up and follow the trail of the marauders, while Captain Freeman, with a detachment of men from Washington hurried on to Virgin City, on the upper Rio Virgin, to join Captain James Andrus, who had collected a force at the latter place, the combined strength of the two detachments numbering about eighty men.

178This force hurried forward hoping to cut off the retreat of the Navajos toward their own country, and night found them camped on the Cedar Ridge, about eight miles west from Pipe Springs, where J. M. Whitmore and Robert McIntire had previously been killed, with Ammon M. Tenney standing the last guard. About 4 o'clock a.m., Tenney saw, away off across the plains, near Bull Rush, on the west side of the Kanab Gulch, a light which he thought was reflected from a fire. He awoke Sixtus E. Johnson, the corporal of the guard, and after consultation they called captain Andrus. The latter unhesitating declared that the light was reflected from a fire and that there were Indians, he could smell them.

178Orders were immediately issued, and in a few minutes the men were mounted and moving noiselessly toward the light which shone in the darkness, several miles away. A convenient wash, or gully, made it possible for the militia to approach to within one hundred and fifty yards of the unsuspecting Navajos, who were busily occupied with their breakfast of broiled beef.

Dismounting his men, Captain Andrus, to whom the direct command had been entrusted, left a detail to hold the horses and with the remainder of his force attacked the camp. At the first fire the Navajos scattered, but as the commands of their chief rang out they came together and faced their assailants, notwithstanding the great odds arrayed against them. Slowly they retreated to the top of a neighboring ridge, where they made a stand, returning shot for shot. Captain Andrus now ordered his men to remount and take the position which the Indians were holding, by assault. Charging straight up the bluff the captain rode, leading his men. As he rushed up the slope toward the rocks above, Ammon Tenney, who was at a different angle saw an Indian on the crest of the ridge, one knee on the ground, his bow bent to the arrow head, waiting for the captain to appear. Frantically Tenney shouted—"Look out, Captain, that Indian will kill you—." Instantly Captain Andrus reined his horse, a high spirited animal, which threw up its head and received the arrow intended for the rider in its forehead. The arrow head was so deeply imbedded in the skull of the horse that it could not be removed until the settlements were reached, when it was extracted with a pair of blacksmith's shoeing pincers.

179As Charley Hilton, from Virgin City, dashed between Tenney and the Indians, the latter shouted—"Charley, dismount and take shelter under your mare—" Hilton instantly threw himself from his horse, and as he did so an arrow struck, quivering in the saddle.

The battle was soon over. The Indians were either killed or scattered, and when Captain Andrus called his men together only three were missing, notwithstanding the stubborn resistance of the enemy, and many hairbreadth escapes.

180What shall we say of the Indians? At the time that treaties were made with them at a later date, it was learned that thirteen Navajos participated in the battle, against sixty well armed militia. Thirteen against sixty, and they fought until but one man remained to carry the sad news of the battle back to his home and people.
