Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

PioneersIvins, Anthony W.192THE OLD TIME ROUND-UP

192By ANTHONYW.IVINS

192ONLY by contrast can the great changes which have occurred in human affairs during the lives of men now living be appreciated.

192I well remember that my father mowed with a scythe the grass which grew on his meadow; cut the grain which grew in his field, with a cradle, and threshed it with a flail. I have worn clothing made by my mother from cotton and wool which she carded, spun and wove, and have studied by the light of a tallow dip, or a pine knot, because there was nothing better to be obtained.

192A man now sits on a machine and cuts ten acres of grass with less fatigue than he formerly mowed one; at one operation he cuts, threshes, and sacks his grain. The cards, spinning-wheel, and loom have disappeared, and when one needs light, he presses a button, and the electric current does the rest.

192In nothing is this contrast more sharply drawn than between the old-time round-up and the new. The word is derived from the Spanish verb rodear, to collect together, rodeo signifying the time and place where flocks and herds are to be gathered, in order that they may be inspected, classified, and counted.

Notice is given that a new round-up is to be held at Logan, or Provo, that trains arrive and depart every two hours, that hotel accommodation is ample, charges reasonable, and the admission fee to the lectures only one dollar. We arrive with a rattling of car wheels, blowing of locomotive whistles, and the ringing of bells. The reception committee bids us welcome, while the band plays, "It's a long long way to Tipperary." We go to our hotel, brush the dust from our clothing, put on a clean collar; and, taking from our grip the equipment which we have brought, a note book and several newly sharpened lead pencils, take our place in the lecture room, where a spectacled professor tells us how to make our land produce greater crops of potatoes, corn and wheat; which are the best breeds of cattle, horses and swine; how to cure roup in chickens, and prevent scabbies in sheep. In the evening, we attend a grand ball. It is storming outside, but we do not mind it, for within the ballroom it is dry and warm.

The place designated for the old-time round-up was at some spring, on the plains, or on the bank of a mountain stream. There was no rattling of car wheels nor screeching of whistles, no reception committee, no brass band. The gathering of the clans was heralded by the neighing of horses, the champing of bits, the jingle of spurs, and the shouting of orders, as the round-up boss assigned to each contingent its proper camping place. The boots and clothing were strong and serviceable. A linen collar, or spectacles, would have created a sensation greater than a sombrero, chaps, and jingling spurs would at Logan, and the wearer would have taken the chance of rough but good natured handling by his companions.

194The evening was spent in adjusting equipment. A good horse, a strong saddle; instead of a note book, a lariat; for sharpened pencils, sharpened spurs. These were the indispensables. If it rained, we got wet; and after the storm was over, we dried ourselves by the fire. Each man or party of men carried his own commissary and cooked his own food—not always according to the latest methods taught in domestic science. After the horses had been hobbled and turned out to graze, the camp was soon asleep, with the possible exception of a cowboy who drummed a jews-harp, played a harmonica or hummed Annie Rooney, to the accompaniment of the mocking-bird which sang from the top of a nearby tree, or to the distant howl of a coyote. Not many audible prayers were said. The old-time cowboy was not a Pharisee who prayed on the corners to be heard of men, but many silent petitions went up to the Throne of Grace in thanksgiving for favors received and blessings desired. The cowboy told the Lord he'd never lived where churches grow. He loved creation better as it stood on the day He finished it, so long ago, and looked upon His work and called it good. He knew that others found the Lord in light that's sifted down through tinted window panes, and that he, too, had often found Him near in the dim, quiet starlight on the plains.

195He thanked the Lord that he'd been placed so well, that he had made his freedom so complete, that he was not a slave of whistle, clock or bell, or weakeyed prisoner in a walled up street. He prayed that he might live his life as he'd begun, that work be given open to the sky, that he might be a pardner of the wind and sun, and he'd not ask a place that's soft or high; to make him square and generous with all; he knew that he was careless sometimes, when in town, but never let them call him mean or small. He asked the Lord to make him big and open, like the plains on which he rode, to make him honest, like the horse he loved so well; clean like the wind which blows behind the rain, free as the hawk that circles down the breeze. He prayed to be forgiven when sometimes he forgot; the Lord knew the reasons which were hid; he knew about the things that gall and fret, he knew him better than his mother did. "Just keep an eye on all that's done and said," he prayed, "just right me always when I turn aside, and guide me on the long, dim trail ahead, which stretches upward toward the Great Divide."

195Such was the old-time cowboy. Not all alike, there were good and bad among them, as there are among merchants and bankers, doctors and lawyers, preachers and politicians.

We were camped at Green Spring, on a high, volcanic plateau covered with thick forests of cedar and scattering pine trees. Our plans for the following day included a drive from Pen's Pockets and Kelly's Spring, which would take us to the rim of the Grand Canyon of the Colorado. We knew that it would be a day of action, for the cattle were wild and the country rough. The boys were my own employees, as trustworthy, brave and competent as ever rode the range. Al, Eph, Andrew, Jimmie, Johnnie, George, Dave, Jode, Charley and Henry, each one a worker and an expert in his line.

196The morning star was still shining, the first streaks of day showed in the east, when Charley called, "Chuck." Soon after, Jode and Johnnie came in with the horses, and by the time it was fairly light we were mounted on the trail. The country was covered with grass, and appeared comparatively smooth, but we knew that underneath the grass were treacherous reefs of volcanic rocks, which made fast riding dangerous, and in some places impossible.

196Below Pen's Pockets we came out on one of those open parks, so common in the mountains, covered with grass and a few scattering trees, and bordered by a heavy growth of cedars. As we entered it, a herd of wild cattle broke from the timber and went thundering down the slope. We knew them well, the old white cow and her red companion, neither of which had ever been marked nor branded, and each with several generations of her own offspring, as wild as the antelope of the plains. With heads down and tails flying they dashed down the flat, while we, separating into two parties, started in pursuit.

A dozen quirts were flying, a dozen horses, each as eager as his rider to be the first to cut those cattle off from the timber, swept down the park. I was riding on the east side, and by me rode Jode, on Sorrel Johnnie, one of my best horses. As he gradually drew away from me, Jode smiled; he would be the first to head the herd, but just then I saw one of those hidden piles of rocks in the grass, and reined my horse to the left. Jode saw it, Johnnie saw it, but too late. With a mighty bound he tried to clear it, but failed; his horse stumbled and fell with such force that his neck was broken as his head struck the rocks. Jode, with the dexterity characteristic of the real cowboy, freed himself from the saddle and was but slightly hurt. I called to him to return to camp and get another horse, and rode on.

197As we neared the herd, ropes were untied from the forks of saddles, and loops prepared. Dave, who was mounted on Mark, dashed before the onrushing herd, and the red cow, with a vicious lunge, drove her horn into the horse's shoulder. As Henry, on Chug, rode in from the opposite side, his horse fell in a pile of rocks, rolling him a number of yards, fortunately in the direction of a small tree, for the white cow, with horns set, was after him, and he only avoided her by scrambling behind the cedar.

By this time we were all there. Ropes hissed through the air and settled with unerring accuracy over the heads and feet of the leaders of the herd. In less time than it has taken to tell the story, the worst of the cattle were hog-tied on the ground, and the remainder running in a circle on the flat.

198Henry, looking from behind the Cedar tree, said: "Boss, if you don't knock that white cow's horns off before you let her up, I want my time; I'm going home."

198One horse killed, two injured, two men somewhat damaged, but still on the job, a number of wild cattle tied down, and the remainder of the herd under control, the boys declared it to have been twenty minutes of life worth living.

198That was the real, old-time round-up.

198It is gone forever. The evolution of the age has brought other conditions; we have learned better ways of accomplishing the things we have to do. The Shorthorn and Hereford have taken the place of the Longhorn; the Saddler, of the Cow Pony. The homesteader and dry-farmer have driven the big cattle man from the ranges, and the college graduate has taken the place of the picturesque, old-time cow-boy, but we must admit that the cattleman and cow-boy, with the old-time round-up, had their place with honor!
