Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

PioneersIvins, Anthony W.211A DESERT TRAGEDY

211By ANTHONY W. IVINS

211ATTACK by hostile Indians was not the only danger which confronted the early pioneers of Southern Utah and southeastern Nevada. The country which they were sent to reclaim was a desert, roads were well nigh impassable, and feed for live stock and teams was exceedingly scarce. Medicine and proper medical attention were not obtainable and consequently many lives were lost from accident and disease which, under present conditions, might have been saved.

211In no part of the south did this condition prevail to a greater extent than in the Muddy valley. It was a country of rocks and sand, ninety miles from St. George, the nearest settlement, and that only an outpost of civilization, and could be reached only over one of the most difficult roads on the continent.

The southern route to California bore southwest from Cedar City to the Mountain Meadows and from there six miles southeast to Cane Springs, from which point it passed on to the Magotsa and Santa Clara, which it followed to the present site of the copper smelter at Shem, where it turned south to Camp Spring, the only water between the Santa Clara and Beaver Dams, on the Rio Virgin, twenty-five miles away. From the Beaver Dams the road followed the Rio Virgin, sixty miles to the present site of St. Thomas on the Muddy, crossing the river as many as forty times.

212It was a dangerous road, and often impassable, because of the treacherous quicksands which prevailed in the river bed. To reach the Muddy Valley by any other than the river route, it was necessary to leave the main road twelve miles north of the Beaver Dams and strike off to the west, over a desert country, to the Upper Muddy, at West Point, a distance of sixty miles without water, except at certain seasons of the year when the scant rain fall filled shallow pockets in the rocks, at the To-quop (Tobacco) Wash, about half way across the desert.

212In order to avoid the difficult river route, and make the desert road passable, Erastus Snow, who was in charge of the southern settlements at the time, sent men to sink a well at a point on the Beaver Dam Wash, which would reduce the distance between water to fifty miles, over a desert where, in the summer, the heat was almost unbearable.

Among the people who went from Salt Lake to assist in the reclamation of the Muddy valley, and who located at St Thomas, at the junction of the Muddy with the Rio Virgin, were James Davidson, his wife, daughter Maggie, and son, a boy twelve years of age. They were from Scotland, without experience in pioneer life, but with that faith which characterized the members of the Chruch in those early days of its history, willingly undertook the task assigned them.

213On the 9th of June, 1869, James Davidson, his wife and son, left St. Thomas, in company with other travelers, to go to St. George. Their conveyance consisted of a light spring wagon, drawn by a single horse. The vehicle was so shrunken by the arid atmosphere that before the family reached St. Joseph, twelve miles up the valley, a tire "ran off" one of the wheels; and they were obliged to stop until it could be reset. This was done by their son-in-law, B. F. Paddock, and they started to overtake their traveling companions, who had left them and gone on. Paddock, who was an experienced frontiersman, warned them not to attempt to cross the desert alone, but to return home, or wait at St. Joseph for other company, unless they overtook the party in advance. They did not reach St. Joseph until the following day, and remained there Thursday night, one day behind the people with whom they had expected to travel. On Friday morning, heedless of the warning received, they started on alone.

In June and July, the heat on the deserts of Nevada and Arizona is almost unbearable. During the day the sand and rocks, exposed as they are to the scorching sun, become so hot that the heat can be seen rising in waves. Nor does the night bring relief. The unfortunate traveler who is caught in one of these desert wastes without water has little chance to survive. With the exception of an occasional lizard, which scuttles over the burning sand from one cactus bush to another, there is no sign of living thing. The birds, even the crow and coyote, those scavengers of the desert, seek the few water courses in order to sustain life.

214During the night, on the 12th of June, a horse, famishing for water, came staggering in to camp on the Beaver Dam Wash, where a party of men were at work on the well referred to. He was watered and fed by the men at the camp, and the following morning William Webb, one of the well-diggers, went back on the road, in the direction from which the horse had come, and there, only half a mile from the camp, with a canteen and one gallon keg lying near, found the body of a boy, so swollen and distorted by the heat that recognition was impossible. A grave was dug, and there on the desert the body was interred, a headboard, without inscription, marking the spot.

The following Thursday morning, four days after the interment of the body, Lorenzo Young, traveling from St. George to the Muddy, arrived at the well, and hearing the story of the boy and horse, pressed on over the desert road, his knowledge of frontier life suggesting that a tragedy had been enacted. Upon arriving at the rock pockets he found that the boy had passed near them, but being ignorant of their existence had gone on toward the well. Five miles farther west, he found the bodies of the parents, lying together on a bed they had made under a desert palm, over which a blanket had been spread to shield them from the sun which had slowly burned out their lives. To Lorenzo Young the whole tragedy was revealed. Leaving St. Joseph alone, they had traveled to within five miles of water where the tire had again "run off" the wheel which had then broken down. Helpless, alone, with their meager supply of water exhausted, the boy had mounted the horse, and with the keg and canteen, gone to seek a fresh supply; he had missed the water in the pockets, and had heroically struggled on to fall exhausted within sight of his goal.

215The suffering from thirst, the anguish of the parents for the welfare of their son, the despair of the boy as he struggled on, knowing that the lives of his parents depended upon his effort, will never be told.

215No beast or bird had disturbed the bodies, but their condition precluded the possibility of their removal with the means at hand, so men were sent out to bury them where they died.

215The road is never traveled now; it is one of the forgotten trails, but the two graves, on opposite sides of the desert, one covering the remains of the parents, the other the boy, are mute witnesses of the dangers to which the pioneers of the Muddy valley were constantly exposed.
