Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

PioneersDobson, Will216A VICTORY FOR PEACE

216By WILL DOBSON

216(This well written story appeared in one of the early issues of the "Improvement Era."—P.N.)

216THE Navajo is the Arab of the Painted Desert. He roams from oasis to oasis as the need for new pasturage or his hunger for new sights and sounds may urge. Like the Arab, too, the Navajo used to raid his more peaceful neighbors, the Hopi, the Moqui and the Piute. In Pioneer days the white settler suffered, too. Bands of these restless robbers often ventured across the Colorado river and gathered up for themselves the cattle and horses belonging to the scattered "Mormon" settlements of southern Utah.

This custom caused the killing of many men, both red and white and fostered a hatred between "Mormon" and Navajo that grew from year to year. Finally Jacob Hamblin was sent by his chief, Brigham Young, to make a treaty of peace with the Navajo chiefs. Jacob Hamblin's plea for peace and friendship was the first sincere offer of fellowship the Navajo leaders had ever heard from a white man, and its simple, honest earnestness so appealed to Barbenceta, the principal chief, that tears came to his eyes and he came forward and put his arm around Hamblin, saying: 'My friend and brother, I will do all I can to bring about what you have advised."

217This visit put an end to the raiding, and "Mormon" and Navajo mingled and traded in mutual trust and friendship as the days went by. There came a day, however, when it seemed that this peace would be destroyed. The Navajo nation declared war on the "Mormon" people, and gathered their scattered bands to move against the "Mormon" settlements. This, is the story of the tragedy that roused their anger, and of the calm courage that averted the impending slaughter.

217Late in the fall of 1874, four young Navajo braves, two of them nephews of a subchief of the tribe, brought north a band of wiry Spanish ponies loaded with blankets to trade with the Utes for other ponies. These were all lank, graceful fellows who stood in their beaded moccasins erect as young pines and walked with the fearless grace of untamed lions. The trail was new to them and the trip was taken eagerly as a great adventure.

217With what pride their fathers watched them sweep away through the desert silence to disappear in the gorge of the Little Colorado, we can only imagine. What maiden hearts were made desolate by their absence, we can only guess. White or red, in palace or in camp, man is man and woman is woman, and wherever young hearts beat there will be magic in the air.

Emerging at last from the depths of the Little Colorado, they turned eastward across the broken mesa and made their way down another rugged canyon to the Crossing of the Fathers. Swimming the ponies across, they coaxed them up a steep trail to the Escalante bench, following still the trail Escalante had taken nearly one hundred years before.

218From the headwaters of Escalante creek they made their way into the valley of the Sevier, and in the green meadows of Grass Valley found the Ute camp they sought.

218A week of bartering found the Utes well supplied with the warm and brilliant blankets of the desert, while the young visitors rejoiced in the care of such a band of ponies as would make their clan rich. Storm threatening, the Utes broke camp to move to winter quarters.

218Perhaps the boys would have taken warning from the clouds had not the plentiful deer centered their minds on hunting. Perhaps, being from the desert, they did not realize what winter meant in these altitudes. At any rate, they lingered among the aspens, firs and spruce of the East Fork mountain to load their ponies with meat, until snow blocked all the divides.

218Three days the snow fell, and when the clouds finally broke camp and began their drift northeast, five feet of snow held the Navajos and their horses prisoners.

The strange whiteness, absolutely new to their lives, dazed and confused them. They could not decide what to do. The ponies were starving and helpless. Their fire had been quenched in the storm and they could not start it again. Like all trapped creatures, they began a struggle to get out, anywhere to get away from the sight of their freezing starving stock. Leaving meat and all, they wallowed their way to the stream, thence down stream a few miles to a deserted ranch. Here they found wood dry enough to make a fire, and a calf which they killed to satisfy their hunger. Feeling secure in the land of their friends, the "Mormons," they waited here until the snow should see fit to set them free again.

219This ranch, however, belonged, not to a "Mormon," but to a non-"Mormon" named McCarty. As soon as the snow crusted sufficiently he made his way from a nearby settlement to his ranch to see how his stock had stood the storm. Seeing the Indian occupants of his cabin from a distance, he turned, panicstricken, and hurried back for help to drive the supposed raiders away. Gathering a posse of men like himself, he hurried them to the ranch, where they met the friendly arm-waving of the young braves with a volley of lead that killed three in their tracks and ripped open the right arm of the fourth from elbow to shoulder-blade.

Swiftwind, the wounded boy, dropped as did his murdered mates. But while the enemy was hesitating to watch for more Indians, he crawled to cover and made his way over the crusted snow into the more friendly forest. The whites, finally taking possession of the ranch, and seeing Swiftwind's bloody trail, were satisfied to hope the cold would do for the Indian what the bullet failed to do. They were not especially cruel, only afraid of all Indians and determined to teach them a lesson that would put an end of raiding.

220How this bleeding redskin with the chill of winter in his marrow made his way afoot out of that bewildering forest and worked his fever-scorched body a few miles a day into the southland; how, coming to the Colorado, he lashed himself to a log and let it carry him downstream over rapids and through whirlpools for miles before an eddy finally drew the log to the other side and lodged it, is not for me to tell. The fact remains that late spring brought home to the waiting and wondering Navajos a skeleton that claimed the name of Swiftwind, that bared to them a mangled and meatless remnant of an arm and with eyes that flashed blackest hatred told them of the fate of their boys in the land of the "Mormons."

220This sight and this story aroused a storm of fury against the "Mormons" that swept over the nation like a forest fire. Swiftwind went from camp to camp demanding vengeance for his comrades who lay dead on "Mormon" soil, and reparation for his own sufferings. In their bitterness at what they deemed "Mormon" treachery, the chiefs vowed to smear the blood of the "Mormons" over the desert rocks. Their bitterness was especially strong against Jacob Hamblin, on whose word they had relied in sending their traders across the Colorado.

221When Piutes brought word of the preparations of the aroused Navajos to destroy the settlements, there began a hurried gathering of scattered settlers to bigger towns. A messenger rode night and day using relays of ponies to carry the fateful news to President Young. The President commissioned Jacob Hamblin to meet with the chiefs, explain the facts of the killing of their young men, and persuade them from their bloody determination.

221Bishop Stewart of Kanab, in delivering the President's message to Hamblin, told him not to attempt the mission as President Young would not have asked it of him had he known of the Navajo threats against his life. But Hamblin felt that a command from his loved chief was the will of God, and that in fulfilling it he would be protected from harm.

221So he set out at once, against the earnest protests of his neighbors and the tearful entreaties of his family. Fifteen miles from Kanab, Hamblin's son, Joseph, overtook him with a note from Bishop Stewart, this time ordering him to return. This had no effect on his determination. At Mawabby, he found two brothers named Smith preparing to defend the place until soldiers could be brought from Fort Defiance. These men were not "Mormons," but they were so impressed with the steadfast purpose of Hamblin to meet the chiefs that they gave up trying to persuade him to go back, and went along to pilot him to the hostile camps.

222Arriving at the Navajo camp after sundown, they found great bands of horses and many herds of sheep and goats. Two or three grey-haired men came out to meet them, giving them a cold, dignified welcome devoid of either friendship or hate. When the young men appeared, their scowls, fierce mutterings and open threats gave the white men a most discouraging welcome. Only the most stern rebukes of the older heads restrained the others from killing the visitors at once. They were kept prisoners until messengers could gather all the chiefs for a council. The old men present refused to listen to Jacob Hamblin's story, saying they were not ready.

222The night passed, and it was noon of the next day before the gathering was ready to hear the "Mormon" messenger. Then the white prisoners were escorted to another, larger lodge and seated in the end farthest from the door. The lodge was built of posts fitted together at the top in the shape of a great cone, then covered with bark and earth. The fire in the center helped make the stale air almost overpowering.

A champion for the wounded buck opened the crude court with a fiery speech against Jacob Hamblin, condemning him as a man who spoke with "a forked tongue," and blaming him as having caused the death of their sons by advising them to cross the great river and trade with the "Mormons." As a result, he declared, three of their finest young men lay in the land of the "Mormons," for the wolves to eat and another came home after many days of suffering without a blanket and with a wasted, useless arm. Turning dramatically to the whites, he announced that Jacob Hamblin need not think of going home, but that his American friends might if they would start immediately. As soon as the Piute interpreter translated this for Hamblin he asked the Smith brothers to leave, as he did not want to cause them to lose their lives. But they refused to go without Hamblin, whose courage they so admired.

223The Smith boys carried revolvers, but Jacob Hamblin would not wear his as he wanted the chiefs to understand that he was not afraid. The Navajos talked among themselves some time, then told Hamblin his turn had come. In his slow, quiet way, which always inspired awe and admiration among Indians, he told them of all his years of effort to keep peace between the red men and his people. He told them the facts of the killing of their braves, emphasizing the fact that the "Mormons" had no part in it. He appealed to them not to kill him and his brethren for a crime they had not committed. This speech, in a voice calm and frank, seemed to influence the grey heads in his favor. Seeing this, the young men were roused to greater efforts to enrage their elders.

A fierce young orator, in full war regalia, led in the wounded boy and with burning words that stirred the Indian nature to its very depths, bared the blasted arm and repeated the bloody story of the shooting. His words, backed by the sight of the sullen cripple, brought the council to its feet with a glare of silent menace on every swarthy face. The tense silence was disturbed only by the hushed movements of the Smiths freeing their guns from their scabbards. At this Hamblin commanded them, still in that calm, fearless voice to "Hold still: do not make the first move, and there will be no move made."

224He then began an answer to the Piute interpreter, but fear made the fellow dumb. He could speak neither to Hamblin nor the Navajos. He was a sort of slave to one of the chiefs, and when their slaves displeased them the Navajos did not hesitate to put them to death. Another Piute was brought in, but after a few words fear made him as dumb as the first. This delay helped to ease the strain of the situation, and by the time a Navajo interpreter could be found the crisis had passed. After listening to more talk from the white man, they felt more forgiving, and in lieu of blood they offered to take cattle and horses for the injury done them. They demanded a promissory note for the payment of one hundred head of cattle for each of the dead braves and fifty head for the wounded lad.

This left the peacemaker in as difficult a position as at first. By signing he could go free. But he had no such herd of cattle, nor any authority to bind the "Mormon" Church to pay such an indemnity. Besides which, payment would be a tacit admission that he had lied to them and that the "Mormons" were guilty after all. He had to answer that he would not sign such a promise. At this refusal of what they considered a generous concession, their wrath blazed up again. With deadly menace in eye and voice a stern old warrior pointed to the heap of live coals in their midst and asserted: "You will, by the time you have been stretched over that bed of coals awhile." But Hamblin's firm answer was that he had never lied to them, and that he would not pay for the wrong another had committed. "Let the guilty men pay for their own mischief, I will not sign for one hoof."

225In the wrathful hush of this deadlock, a Piute chief asked Hamblin if he were not afraid.

225"What is there to scare me?" was the reply.

225"The Navajos."

225"I am not afraid of my friends," was the staunch answer.

225"Friends!" the Piute exclaimed, "you have not one friend in all the Navajo nation. Navajo blood has been spilled on your land. You have caused a whole nation to mourn. Your friend, Kechine, who gave you meat when you were hungry, and blankets when you were cold, has gone to mourn for his murdered sons. You have caused the bread he eats to be like coals of fire in his mouth, and the water he drinks like hot ashes. Are you not afraid?"

225"No," Hamblin assured him, "my heart never knew fear."

The Navajos were curious and questioned the Piute. He repeated the talk to them. This fearlessness appealed to their ideals of manliness, and roused anew the admiration they had always felt for Hamblin. A long discussion among themselves followed, Hamblin finally having opportunity to propose that the chiefs send Hasteyl, a chief whom all trusted to the scene of the killing with a party of warriors and an interpreter, to find out the actual facts of the crime. Further discussion ensued, when Hamblin was rejoiced to hear from the interpreter:

226"They are talking good about you now."

226It was then agreed that Hamblin should come to Mawabby after twenty-five days, meet the chief's party, and escort them through the "Mormon" country to the McCarty ranch. So ended well what seemed likely to be a bloody war.
