Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

227JACOB HAMBLIN—A MISSIONARY AMONG THE INDIANS

227By HIMSELF

227(There is some overlapping in this story and the one preceding, but I have thought it best to let Jacob Hamblin, that remarkable missionary to the Indians, tell the story of this stirring event in his own sincere and humble way.—P. N.)

227THE Navajoes carried on a peaceful trade with our people, until the winter of 1874-75, when a circumstance occurred which greatly endangered our peaceful relations with that people.

227A party of four young Navajoes went to the east fork of the Sevier River, to trade with some Utes in the neighborhood. In Grass Valley, they encountered a severe snowstorm, which lasted for three days. They found shelter in a vacant house belonging to one McCarty. He did not belong to the Church, and had that animosity towards Indians, to savages, as they are called, on the most trifling pretenses.

The Navajoes, becoming hungry during the delay, killed a small animal belonging to Mr. McCarty. In some way he learned of the presence of the party on his ranch, gathered up some men of like spirit with himself, came suddenly upon the Navajoes, and without giving them an opportunity of explaining their circumstances, killed three of them and wounded the fourth.

228The wounded man, after enduring excessive hardships, made his way across the river, and arrived among his own people.

228Telling the story of his wrongs, it aroused all the bitter spirit of retaliation so characteristic of the Indians from tradition and custom. The affair taking place in the "Mormon" country, where the Navajoes naturally supposed they were among friends, and not distinguishing McCarty as an outsider, the murder was laid to the "Mormons."

228The outrage created considerable excitement among both whites and Indians. When President Young heard of it, he requested me to visit the Navajoes, and satisfy them that our people were not concerned in it.

228Feeling that the affair, without great care might bring on a war, I started at once for their country to fill my mission.

228I left Kanab alone. My son Joseph overtook me about fifteen miles out, with a note from Bishop Levi Stewart, advising my return, as he had learned from the Piutes that the Navajoes were much exasperated and threatened to retaliate the first opportunity.

I had been appointed to a mission by the highest authority of God on the earth. My life was of but small moment compared with the lives of the Saints and the interests of the kingdom of God. I determined to trust in the Lord and go on. I directed my son to return to Kanab, and tell Bishop Stewart that I could not make up my mind to return.

229Arriving at the settlement of Pahreah, I found Lehi Smithson and another man preparing to start for Mowabby. We remained over night to procure animals for the journey. That night, my son Joseph came to me again with a note from Bishop Stewart, advising my return, and stating that if I went on I would surely be killed by the Navajoes.

229When we arrived at the Mowabby, we found that the store house of two rooms which had been built there, had been fitted up in the best possible manner for defense. This had been done by three or four miners who had remained there, on account of the excitement, for which there appeared to be considerable reason.

229I feel that I had no time to lose. It was important to get an interview with the Navajoes before the outbreak.

229My horse was jaded, and wishing to go to Moencoppy, ten or twelve miles farther, that night, two brothers by the name of Smith brought in three of their riding horses, offered me one, and they mounted the others to accompany me.

At Moencoppy I hoped to find some Oribas who could give me correct information about the temper of the Navajoes. Arriving there, we found only a Piute family and one Oriba woman. From them I learned that the young relatives of the Navajoes killed in Grass Valley were much exasperated, but the older men expressed a desire to see me before anything was done or anyone hurt.

230This news was encouraging to me. It being now evening, we lay down and slept until morning.

230Tuba had been living at Moencoppy, and had left on account of the excitement. Some of his effects were lying around in a way that indicated that he left in a hurry.

230I was informed that Mush-ah, a Navajo with whom I was somewhat acquainted, and in whom I had some confidence, was camped at a watering place twelve miles east of Moencoppy. I hoped to be able to see and have a talk with him, and get up a conciliatory feeling without exposing myself too much to the ire of the Indians.

230Arriving at the water where we expected to find Mush-ah, we were disappointed. The place was vacated. We met a Navajo messenger, riding fast on his way to Mowabby, to learn of affairs at that place. He appeared much pleased to see me.

230After a little talk, he pointed in the distance to a high mesa, and said the Navajoes were camped at that point, and wished to see me.

230We arrived at the lodges after sundown; in the neighborhood were gathered a large number of horses, sheep and goats.

Two or three gray-headed men came out to meet us good-naturedly, but did not appear as friendly as they had formerly. I told them my business. Soon afterwards some young men put in an appearance, whose looks bespoke no good.

231There being a good moon, a messenger was soon on his way to inform those at a distance of my arrival.

231I inquired for Hastele, who had been shown to me by the principal chief in our final peace talk, three years before, and for whom I was directed to inquire in case of difficulty.

231I got no answer, which indicated to me that they did not wish for his assistance. I communiciated to the old men the circumstances connected with the killing of the Navajoes in Grass Valley, as I understood them. They replied that they were not ready for a talk or council, and said, "When the relatives are all in we will talk."

231My spirit was weighed down with gloomy forebodings, and I would gladly have left the place could I have felt justified in doing so. Unless the Lord was with us, what were we to do with all these against us?

231The night passed, and a part of the forenoon of the following day, when the Navajoes who had been sent for began to gather in.

231About noon, they informed me they were ready for talk. A lodge had been emptied of its contents for a council room. It was about twenty feet long by twelve feet wide. It was constructed of logs, with one end set in the ground, and the top ends leaning to the center of the lodge, and fitted together. The logs were covered with about six inches of dirt.

232A fire occupied the center of the lodge, the smoke escaping through a hole in the roof. There was but one entrance, and that was in the end.

232Into this lodge were crowded some twenty-four Navajoes, four of whom were councilors of the nation. A few Indians were gathered about the entrance.

232The two Smiths and I were at the farther end from the entrance with apparently not one chance in a hundred of reaching the outside, should it be necessary to make an effort to save our lives.

232The council opened by the Navajo spokesman asserting that what I had said about the murder of their relatives was false. He stated that I had advised their people to cross the great river and trade with my people, and in doing so they had lost three good young men, who lay on our land for the wolves to eat. The fourth, he said, came home with a bullet hole through him, and without a blanket, and he had been thirteen days in that situation, cold and hungry.

232He also stated that I need not think of going home, but my American friends might if they would start immediately.

232I informed the two Smiths of the intention of the Navajoes concerning the disposal of myself. I told them they had been obliging to me, and I would not deceive them; the way was open for them to go if they desired to do so.

232They replied that they would not go until I went.

Our three revolvers were hanging over my head. It was desirable to have them as well in hand as possible. I took hold of them, at the same time saying to our Piute interpreter, "These are in my way; what shall I do with them?"

233As I spoke I passed them behind me to the Smiths, not wishing to give any cause for suspicion that I had any fears, or expected to use the weapons. I told the Smiths not to make any move until we were obliged to.

233The Navajoes continued to talk for some time, when I was given to understand that my turn had come.

233I told them of my long acquaintance with their people, and of my labors to maintain peace. I hoped they would not think of killing me for a wrong with which neither myself nor my people had anything to do; and that strangers had done the deed.

233I discovered that what I had said the day before had some influence with the gray haired men. None but gray haired men belonged to the council, but others were allowed to speak.

233The young men evidently feared that the council would oppose their desire for revenge. They evinced great intensity of feeling. The wounded man was brought in, his wounds exposed to the council, and a stirring appeal was made for retaliation by a young warrior. It stirred up the Indian blood from its very depths. He closed by asserting that they could do no less than put me to death.

For a few minutes I felt that if I was ever permitted to see friends and home again, I should appreciate the privilege. I thought I felt one of the Smiths at my back grip his revolver. I said to him quietly, "Hold still! Do not make the first move, and there will be no move made. They never will get ready to do anything."

234This assurance came by the whisperings of the Spirit within me.

234When the excitement had died away a little, I spoke to the Piute interpreter. He either could not or would not answer me, neither would he answer the Navajoes, but sat trembling, apparently with fear.

234The Navajoes brought in another Piute, and recommended him as a man of much courage, and said he would not falter; but he was soon in the same dilemma as the other.

234After some further conversation they appeared a little modified, and in lieu of blood revenge, they proposed to take cattle and horses for the injury done them. They required me to give them a writing, obligating me to pay one hundred head of cattle for each of the three Navajoes killed, and fifty for the wounded one.

This was a close place for me. I could go home by simply putting my name to the obligation. I reflected: Shall I acknowledge by my act, that my people are guilty of a crime of which I know they are innocent; and neutralize all the good results of our labors among this people for fifteen years? Shall I obligate the Church to pay three hundred and fifty head of cattle for a crime committed by others? It is perhaps more than I should be able to earn the rest of my life.

235The sacrifice looked to me more than my life was worth. I replied that I would not sign the obligation.

235One of them remarked that he thought I would by the time I had been stretched over that bed of coals awhile, pointing to the fire in the middle of the lodge.

235I answered that I had never lied to them, and that I would not pay for the wrong that other people had done. "Let the Americans pay for their own mischief, I will not sign a writing to pay you one hoof."

235Here the new Piute interpreter would not say anything more.

235A Piute chief standing in the door of the lodge, spoke to him in an angry tone, and accused him of having a very small heart and little courage.

235The chief then asked if I was not scared.

235I asked, "What is there to scare me?"

235He replied, "The Navajoes."

235I told him I was not afraid of my friends.

235"Friends!" said he, "You have not a friend in the Navajo nation. Navajo blood has been spilled on your land. You have caused a whole nation to mourn. Your friend Ketche-ne, that used to give you meat when you were hungry, and blankets when you were cold, has gone to mourn for his murdered sons. You have caused the bread he eats to be like coals of fire in his mouth, and the water he drinks like hot ashes. Are you not afraid?"

236"No;" I replied, "my heart never knew fear."

236The Navajoes wished to know what the Piute chief and myself were talking about. The Piute repeated the conversation in their language. They then conversed among themselves; at times they manifested considerable warmth. I was asked if I knew Hastele.

236Replying in the affirmative, they asked, "What do you know about him?"

236I answered, "I know that Barben-ce-ta and others of your leading me said, at the great peace talk, that he was an honest man, and that all important difficulties between you and our people should be settled before him. I knew this affair should be settled before him, and have known it all the time we have been talking. I came here on a peace mission. If you will send Hastele into our country to learn the truth concerning what I have told you, let as many more come along as you like. I wish you would send the best interpreter you have along with him."

236"It is no use to ask me about pay. In the meantime your people can trade among the 'Mormons' in safety. They will be glad to see you if you will come in the daytime, as our people come into your country—not to prowl around your lodges to steal and kill. I came to do as I agreed to at the good talk at Fort Defiance."

236I felt that the last I said had the desired effect. Their feeling began to soften.

After some further conversation among themselves, the interpreter said, "They are talking good about you now."

237I replied, "I am glad; it is time they talked good. What have they said about me?"

237"They say you have a good heart. They think they will wait and see their greater chiefs, and believed that the matter will be settled before Hastele."

237It was then agreed that I should come to Mowabby, in twenty-five days, and they would see if it was not advisable to send someone over, and satisfy themselves of the truth of my statement. Twenty-five notches were cut in a stick, and when they were all gone by cutting off one notch each morning, I was to be at Mowabby.

237The history of my intercourse with the Indians on the east side of the Colorado, for fifteen years, had all been talked over. In fact, I had been on trial before them for all my sayings and doings that had come within their knowledge. I was able to answer all their questions, and give good reasons for all my acts.

237My mind had been taxed to the utmost all this time. I had been in the farther end of a crowded lodge, with no reasonable probability of getting out of it if I wished to, and without the privilege of inhaling a breath of fresh air.

237Some roasted mutton was brought in and presented to me to take the first rib.

The sight of the roasted meat, the sudden change of affairs, together with the recollection of the threats of a very different roast to the one I had on hand, turned my stomach. I said to those around me, "I am sick."

238I went to the door of the lodge. It was refreshing to breathe in the open air, and look out into the glorious moonlight. I thought it was midnight; if so, the council had lasted about twelve hours.

238A woman's heart seems kindlier than man's among all people. A Navajo woman, seeming to comprehend my situation, came to me and asked me if she could not get me something I would like to eat.

238She mentioned several varieties of food she had on hand, none of which I desired. She said she had been at my house in Kanab, and she saw I liked milk, and she would get me some. With a dish in her hand she went about among the goats stripping them by moonlight.

238She brought me about a pint of milk, which I drank, went into the lodge, and lay down and slept until some of the party said it was light enough to see to get our horses.

238I asked the Navajoes to bring up our horses. I felt it was safer for me to remain in the lodge, than to be out hunting horses, and liable to meet some of the angry spirits who had been about the council.

238The horses were brought, and the Smiths and I were soon in our saddles, and leaving behind us the locality of the trying scenes of the past night.

239Again was the promise verified, which was given me by the Spirit many years before, that if I would not thirst for the blood of the Lamanites, I should never die by their hands.
