Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

PioneersSnow, LeRoi C.240THE WILY CHIEF

240By LE ROI C. SNOW

240(The author of this story is a son of President Lorenzo Snow, and now an employee of the Church Historian's Office. He is well known for his historical writings.—P.N.)

240THE first work done by the Church in Arizona was among the Indians. Jacob Hamblin, Ammon M. Tenny, Ira Hatch, Thales Haskell, Andrew R. Gibbons, John S. Brown, George Adair, Samuel U. Adair, Fred Hamblin, and James Pierce, were among the early missionaries to the Lamanites. The first crossing of the Colorado river was El Vado de los Padres, (The Crossing of the Fathers) in 1858. Soon thereafter, they visited all the Hopi and Moqui Indian villages, including the noted "Seven cities of Sebola." Moenkopi was made missionary headquarters.

Moenkopi is an ancient Indian village, built in a mesa above the Moenkopi wash. In the spring of 1876 a large number of missionaries, some with their wives and families, were located here. One day late in May, 1876, they were greatly aroused by an Indian runner who came with the news that a "Mormon" party had met disaster by the overturn of a ferry boat while crossing the Colorado river at the mouth of the Paria, and that the "great 'Mormon' Chief" was drowned. At first it was feared that this might have been President Brigham Young, and there was much anxiety for several weeks, when finally definite news was received of the drowning of Lorenzo W. Roundy, of the Daniel H. Wells party.

A few weeks later elaborate preparations were made for proper celebration of the 24th of July, Utah's Pioneer Day. On the morning of the 24th, all the women folks were busily engaged preparing the great feast. Most of the men were working in the gardens, down in the wash below the mesa. Sister Elvira Martineau Johnson called attention to a cloud of dust many miles out in the sandy desert. The women were fearful of danger and asked Brother James S. Brown if it might be a band of Indians. At first Brother Brown said it was perhaps simply a wind storm out in the desert. Sister Johnson was not satisfied with the answer, and approached Brother Brown and asked, "Is it not a band of Indians? Tell us, we shall try to keep calm, but we want to know whether it is Indians or not." Brother Brown then answered that he feared it was Indians, but he hoped they might be friendly. He then went to the edge of the mesa and called the brethren from the gardens below. The people were all gathered in Moenkopi, when a large band of hostile Navajos came up. They were led by Chief Piecon, who dramatically thrust forth a youth, saying, "Here he is, take him and do as you please." Brother Brown was astonished, as were the others, and asked, "What do you mean? What has the boy done?" "Punish him," replied the Indian chief, "be as severe as you wish, although he is my son, he deserves severe punishment, and we wish you to use him as an example, even though it may mean his death." "But," asked Brother Brown, "What has the boy done?" It was then explained that the boy had stolen and killed three cattle belonging to the Saints at the settlement of Sunset on the little Colorado river, that there had been considerable stealing and killing of cattle. The Indian wanted the practice stopped and thought the case serious enough for most drastic punishment.

Brother Brown explained that the act was not so serious, that he would accompany the chief and his party to the Sunset settlement where he believed adjustment could be made by the Indians paying for the three cattle or replacing them. He thought the Saints would require no more. The band of Navajos was accompanied by a band of Piutes, who usually did the dirty work for the Navajos. They were armed with bows and arrows, painted and bedecked with war paraphernalia. They strutted about, drawing their bows and threatening the people. They were seeking trouble. Just at this time, word was given that the big feast was ready. The chief and others of the Indians were invited to the tables, while food was distributed among all others of both bands. The great feast was enjoyed by all, especially the Indians, for whom it was a great treat. After the meal all felt much better, and the council was resumed. It was then that the truth was made known by Chief Piecon, who explained that it was not his boy who had killed steers belonging to the Sunset people, but that the "Mormon" settlers of Sunset had killed three animals belonging to the Indians, and the wily Chief had hoped to have Brother Brown pronounce punishment on his son, which he in turn would mete out upon the "Mormon" people. Brother Brown expressed regret that the "Mormons" had been guilty of killing the cattle, and at his suggestion a visit was made to Sunset where it was learned that the almost starving settlers had run across the stray cattle on the range and not believing that they would be claimed, killed them for food. The Saints were very willing to make reparation for the damage, and the Indians returned to their home perfectly satisfied with the adjustment. This incident undoubtedly proved to the Lamanites the honesty and good intentions of the "Mormon" people, and welded the friendship that was growing between them.
