Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

263AN EXPERIENCE ON LONG'S PEAK

263By S. DILWORTH YOUNG

263(The fact that he was the grandson of a pioneer gave the writer of this story courage to face a difficult situation.—P. N.)

263LONG'S Peak rears it's craggy head 14,256 feet into the heavens. One of the highest peaks in the Colorado Rockies, for years it has challenged the skill and fortitude of even the most experienced mountain climbers. Only in recent years has a practicable trail been marked to its summit, and even then, the last five hundred feet is like climbing up a steep shingled roof. Small wonder then that our excitement grew hourly, as our party camped for the night in the timber at its magnificent base.

That night we lay in our sleeping bags and debated the rigors of the climb of the morrow. We were glad that we had Vanguard Packs to carry, for that would insure us perfect balance under heavy load when climbing on some rock needle, or over a dizzy precipice. We looked up at the peak. There it stood massive, aloof in the moonlight. Facing us was a three hundred foot cliff, part of a great glacial cirque. We knew that on three sides the peak had sheer walls rising for thousands of feet, but on the fourth side, there could be made an ascent. It was that side on which we proposed to make our attack.

264I shall skip over the details of the climb, our trip up the seven miles of easy trail, our walk across the boulder field, our climb to the keyhole, and our skirting of the precipices which we had seen from far below. A false step and we might have dashed into a thousand pieces, but we took no false steps. Our greatest difficulty was breathing. Four steps and we would have to stop to catch our breath. Our legs were numb and felt like lead. Such are the effects of altitude. Gradually we overcame these obstacles and, with a last push over a jutting ledge, carefully climbed the shingle-like dome and gained the summit.

264What magnificent distances met our gaze as we looked in all directions. This granite dome was the mightiest of peaks around. Far to the south Pike's Peak reared its head, but Long's peak was even higher than Pike's.

Somewhere in one of Enos A. Mills' books I had read of his experience descending the precipice on the east face of the mountain. We had gazed at the east face the night before the climb, and had marveled that he had ever lived to tell the tale. It did look easy however, to go down by way of the north face. And then, to succeed in a trip down the north face would save hours of dizzy trails in the descent. An idea struck me—why not return by way of the north face? No sooner said than done. Deaf to the protests of my companions, I started down.

265Two of the great cirques on opposite sides of the mountain curved together on the north side and met in a saddle which looked to be about three feet wide. This saddle led to a ridge descent of which would insure arrival at the boulder field—the homeward trail. It all looked easy from the top.

265Going down was easy. The north face for one thousand feet was broken into an irregular granite staircase, rather steeper than normal, the steps of which were huge granite blocks varying in height from two to seven feet. I was down over that thousand feet in less than fifteen minutes. Just ahead another thousand feet, I could see the saddle for which I was heading. These cirques were now within two hundred feet on either side. Ten more minutes and I experienced a slight thrill—my foot slipped. Panic stricken, I looked close to see what had caused this dangerous act. Imagine my consternation to discover that I had let myself down into a field of ice. Every rock as far as I could see was covered with a scum—a coat—not more than a half inch thick of ice from a sleet storm the night before. I don't know why I hadn't slipped when I first struck the ice, but I had descended nearly five hundred feet without realizing I was walking on ice.

I had in my last one thousand feet descent, got down nearly to the saddle. Here the walls of the two cirques came together. Their sheer sides were thousands of feet high. With ice on the rocks it would be impossible to crawl across the saddle to the ridge beyond. Carefully I crawled to the edge of the precipice and looked over. The sight sickened me. Three thousand feet below I could dimly see in the afternoon twilight the rocky floor of the boulder field.

266I lay back against a large boulder and thought of my predicament. I was in the midst of ice covered rocks; I could not go down; I doubted very much if I could climb again that two thousand feet to the top. I looked along the cliff to the west. Could I believe my eyes? There, not a half mile away, was the keyhole, through which I had climbed earlier in the day. I would carefully crawl over to it. What if it did take an hour, I was safe if I could reach it. I crawled at a snail's pace over the ice covered rocks. Finally I reached the keyhole and looked through. Consternation! Continuing for another mile was a larger cirque and higher cliffs with greater depths, while dancing before my eyes, on the far side of the valley, two miles away, was the real keyhole, inaccessible, mocking. Dimly I could make out the figures of the rest of the party I had left, as they crawled down from the keyhole. I had been deceived by a break which resembled the real keyhole.

I got hysterical—I started to laugh, then to cry. Caught twelve thousand feet high on the north side of a mountain, with icy rocks all around, three thousand feet of precipice below, and night coming on. The night would be cold—September was always cold.

267Suddenly I thought of my grandfather, one of the sturdy old Pioneers; he had been in many a pinch. He hadn't quit. Well, I wouldn't quit! I'd live true to my blood and training. I prayed for strength.

267I turned, gritted my teeth, and started to climb. Step by step, over ice I toiled. Three hundred feet! Five hundred feet! Hurrah! I reached the end of the ice field. Now I could go slowly to the top. But no. The mountain had played another trick. In my traverse toward the keyhole, I had passed under a jutting cliff. Now I looked up to one hundred feet of sheer granite.

267I could scale the cliff, or I could retrace a half mile of ice to the place where I descended. I chose to scale the cliff. A few hand holds helped me. Ten more feet, and I'd be over, and then the mountain laughed. Eight feet three inches above me was the next projection, a ledge ten feet long and sloping back. Oh, if I could only make that ledge! But try as I might, one foot on a rock knob and the other in space; I could reach only eight feet. Three inches—lives are often won or lost by that margin. I decided to jump. I did jump. The fingers of one hand caught the projecting ledge. Then the other hand grabbed and held. I pulled myself up, hooked one leg over the edge and "inched" the rest of my body over. I lay there too exhausted to move for several minutes.

268From there the ascent was not difficult, and just as the sun went down, I crawled over the last granite block onto the top of Long's Peak. Thirty minutes later, I donned my Vanguard Pack and followed my friends down the mountain by the regular trail.
