Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

269TREED BY A BEAR

269By H. ALLAN CLARK

269(This interesting story first appeared in one of the early numbers of the "Juvenile Instructor."—P. N.)

269BUD FRASER, Lew Blevins and I, had been hunting near the head of Beaver Creek for a week before the adventure I am about to relate, which came within a hair's breadth of cutting short my hunting forever.

269We three were prospectors, and we were not hunting for the fun of the thing, but to procure a stock of meat to jerk for the winter. Deer were abundant in the hills, antelope were equally numerous on the plains below us; and the "jerking" lines, stretched from tree to tree of the little grove in which our camp was pitched, already bore witness to our skill as marksmen.

269"Three or four more days of this kind of luck, boys, and we'll have as much meat as the horses can pack," said Lew, as we sat around the camp-fire one evening.

269"Yes, we've done pretty well," I responded; "but there's one kind of game we haven't got yet, and I think I'll make a trial for it in the morning."

270"What kind of game do you mean?" asked Fraser.

270"Mutton."

270"Mutton! I'd like to know where you'd get any mutton around here?"

270"Big-horns—mountain sheep," Lew tersely explained.

270"Isn't that what you mean, Frank?"

270"Yes. I came across some fresh 'signs' this afternoon, and I don't think it will be a hard matter to locate the bunch that made it."

270"You're a darn sight more likely to locate a bunch of grizzly bears or silver tips," Fraser remarked. "If you run up against some of those ugly customers that I saw the tracks of up in the hills yesterday, they'll be mighty apt to make mutton out of you."

270"Mutton goes!" I replied, with a careless laugh. "That Winchester express of mine is just as good for a bear as for deer."

270"Did either of you fellows ever hear of that fight between a grizzly and the Lone Star Gulch mail-carrier?" said Lew.

270"I haven't. Tell us about it," I replied, settling into a comfortable position by the fire.

270"Well, there ain't much to tell, except that he got chewed up, after fighting that grizzly at long range with all the cartridges he had in his magazine.

"You see, it was this way. Cy was hired to carry the mail between the gulch and the railroad, and he made the round trip once a week. The road, or trail, rather, was too rough and narrow for a buckboard, so he always went horseback, carrying the one mailsack tied behind his saddle.

271"There was one place in particular, where the trail ran through a narrow canyon that was awful bad to pass. The path, which was just wide enough for a horse to walk on, ran along the base of a perpendicular bluff, and on the other hand there was a 'jump-off' of about twenty feet into a sandy creek bottom.

271"Well, sir, Cy was going up to the gulch one day, and he met a grizzly right in the narrowest part of the trail. There was no room to turn his horse. The grizzly sat up on his hind legs and showed fight, and Cy made up his mind that he had some minutes of a rough time ahead of him. He thought a good deal of the horse, however, and he determined that that grizzly shouldn't chew him up, if he could help it.

271"Slipping out of the saddle on the side next to the bluff, he got around in front of the horse and commenced to pump lead into the bear, which wasn't more than fifty feet away. Cy carried a forty-four 'Winchester,' and he might as well have attempted to stop that bear by throwing rocks at him. He had eleven cartridges in the magazine when he commenced to shoot, and every bullet told, but the grizzley just shook his head and growled, and came on as though the lead pills agreed with him.

"Cy threw down his gun when the magazine was empty, and he pulled his knife just as the bear reared up and struck at him, and drove the long blade clean to the hilt in the grizzly's side. Then they clinched, wrestled a minute, lost their footing and rolled twenty feet, down to the bed of the creek.

272"Cy don't remember what happened after the fall; but the horse came galloping into town about sundown, and we made up a party to go out and investigate. Three hours' hard riding brought us to the scene of the fight, where we found Cy and the bear lying side by side—the bear dead, and the man wasn't in much better fix.

272"We made a stretcher with a couple of saplings and some saddle-blankets, and we carried Cy to town. It took three doctors six months to fix him up so he could get out of bed, and even then he was a cripple for life. The bear had chewed and clawed the muscles of his left arm and leg so badly that he has never been able to use them since. So that's what a man gets for insulting a grizzly by shooting at him with a forty-four Winchester."

272"That was a rough deal, sure; but my gun throws a pretty heavy ball, and I'm not going to let the chance of my meeting with a grizzly bluff me out of an attempt to get a big horn," I said.

272"There's very small chance that you'll meet a grizzly," Lew concluded, "but if you do, and he wants the road, give it to him, and climb a tree till he gets out of sight. A grizzly's like a good many folks I've run across—the only way to get along with him is to keep him at a distance."

273We were up with the dawn next morning, and after a hearty breakfast of venison steaks and flap jacks, I shouldered my riflle and struck out for the place where I had seen the "sign" of mountain sheep the day before. My two companions had agreed to hunt down the creek in company, leaving me to "go it alone," though they strongly urged me to give up my attempt on the big-horns and accompany them.

273A spur of the Big Horn Mountains lay about five miles to the west of our camp, and it was there that I intended to seek my game. My way lay up a wide, grassy valley, dotted with rambling thickets of wild plum-bushes and compact clumps of mountain pines. At intervals a jack-rabbit sprang up before me and scurried off in a zigzag fashion, with long, uneven leaps calculated to disturb the aim of an expert rifleman; and once, a noble buck leaped from his couch in the thicket, gave one quick glance of startled surprise and bounded away, jerking his stumpy white tail at me in a derisive way that strongly tempted me to take a shot at him.

273Three hours later found me cautiously crawling among the rocky pinnacles of the mountain spur, in an eager pursuit of a small bunch of big-horns—doubtless the ones whose tracks I had seen—which I had the good fortune to locate a short time after reaching the hills. They were extremely wary, but the wind was in my favor and I felt convinced a proper amount of caution would finally place me within range of them.

274An hour more of snake-like progress on my part, and several annoying changes of position on the part of the game, and I at last peered around the corner of a sheltering boulder to find a patriarchal-looking ram standing upon a point of rock within easy rifle range and gazing straight at my position.

274I would have preferred mutton a little more tender than what he gave promise of, but he was evidently suspicious of danger and I might not get another chance for a shot. Tough chops were better than no chops at all, so I worked my rifle cautiously to a level and tumbled him over with a bullet through his head.

A few minutes sufficed to dress the carcass, and throwing it over my shoulder, I started back to camp. It was rather rough ground over which to travel with a load of mutton, but I managed to scramble safely down the steep hillsides, indulging the while in a series of audible smiles at the prospective surprise of my comrades when they should learn that I had concluded a successful hunt for mountain sheep before dinner. A tramp of an hour brought me out of the mountains and into a valley running parallel with the one up which I had passed some hours before. I was beginning to feel a little tired by this time, and I deposited my burden at the foot of a tall pine and stretched myself on the ground for a rest. The sun was quite warm for October, my previous exertions had made me somewhat drowsy, and I soon dropped into a doze. I could not have slept more than ten minutes when I was recalled to a sense of things mundane by a succession of peculiar sounds, somewhat resembling that of a hog when frightened or suddenly startled. Springing to my feet I looked in the direction from which the noise came, and the first glance set my hair to lifting under my hat and raised little pimples of apprehension all over me. I have omitted to state that the pine trees under which I had been taking my siesta grew twenty feet or so from the edge of a "bullberry" thicket, whose crimson fruit, slightly withered from an early frost, hung in thick clusters from the slender shrubs.

275Near the border of this berry patch, and not more than forty feet from where I stood, an enormous bear sat upreared on his haunches, and I caught his glance of questioning enmity the moment I turned. He was slowly turning his wicked-looking head from side to side, sniffing the air with every movement, and the hair rose into a perfect ridge along his back and short ears as he at last caught my scent.

275For the next twenty seconds I stood as though I had taken root. I found myself unable to do anything but stare at him in an idiotic way and wonder what he was going to do.

Bruin broke the spell by curling back his lips from his long, white teeth, and emitting a snarling growl that sounded like a note from hades. Fight was clearly to be the order of the day, and, without taking my eyes off him, I stooped quickly down and picked up my gun.

276The next moment he dropped on all fours and rushed at me with open mouth and a growling roar that jarred every nerve in me. I had no time to take sight, and my hands shook so that I could not have kept the muzzle of the gun in line with any one spot an instant.

276I took one wild shot at his head, threw down the gun and commenced to climb the tree with the expedition of a wildcat evading a pack of hounds. As I grasped a substantial branch and swung myself onto it, Bruin reared up, flashed one armed paw through the air and almost raked the moccasin from my right foot. In a moment more I was six feet higher and out of his reach for the present.

276My enemy's next move was an endeavor to climb up the tree; but the grizzly is not a climbing bear, as I well knew. Had it been otherwise, I would have fought it out on the ground.

276Finding my retreat impregnable, Bruin solaced himself by emitting a volley of hoarse growls and taking up a recumbent position at the foot of the tree, where he lay watching me for the better part of an hour, occasionally getting up and encircling my refuge with inquisitive glances, as though he thought there might be some means of ascent that he had overlooked.

Feeling temporarily secure on my lofty perch, I tried to show him how much I despised him by breaking off the ends of dried branches within my reach and throwing them at his head.

277At first he merely snapped at the ones that struck him, but when a particularly heavy piece finally saluted him in the region of the eye, his rage was frightful to see. He made a desperate attempt to climb the tree, and almost succeeded in reaching the lower branches.

277Three or four hours passed without any change in the situation. The sun had crept well over into the west, and it began to look as though I was destined to spend at least one night of my life on a roost. Bruin had strolled over to the bull-berry patch two or three times, but a slight movement on my part served to bring him charging back.

277The gun was still lying at the foot of the tree, where I had dropped it, and I looked at it longingly a hundred times without being able to devise a feasible plan for getting possession of it. Still cogitating, I stuck my hands in the pockets of my overalls, as though I expected to find a solution of the problem at the bottom of those useful receptacles—and I did.

Some weeks before I had picked up and dropped into my pocket a harness-snap with a broken spring, and a bright idea flashed through my mind the moment my fingers touched it. Balancing myself astride of a limb, I drew off my buckskin shirt and commenced to cut the garment into long strips with my hunting-knife. Knotting the pieces together into a rope of sufficient length, I tied the harness-snap to one end, and was ready to fish for my gun.

278While not a devotee of the rod and line, I have in my time angled for most of the worldly prizes on which the average man is wont to find his heart set; but that was the most exasperating fishing I ever undertook. It was my purpose to catch the lever of the Winchester with the hook in such a way that I could draw it up to me. For two hours I labored, and perspired, and indulged in adjectives not recognized in polite society, before a lucky cast finally put me in possession of my heart's desire.

278As the gun rose swiftly into the air, Bruin made a wild dash for it, voicing his indignation at the ruse in a roar that almost shook me off my perch. His hour had come, however, in the shape of a three-hundred grain bullet, which I planted between his eyes a minute later as he rose on his hind legs and made another vain attempt to claw me down.

Lowering the gun with my impromptu elevator, I descended to the ground, and, ignoring the fragments of the bighorn, with which the grizzly had tried to assuage his angry mood by scattering it over a half-acre of ground, I took the shortest route to camp. My companions had already returned, and when I explained matters, they readily undertook to help me skin the bear. The meat we had no particular relish for, seeing that the grizzly is carnivorous; but since that adventure I have passed many a cold night in the mountains snugly wrapped in the robe for which I sacrificed my old hunting shirt.
