Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

285FROM ALFALFA TO VENISON

285By DR. THOMAS C. ROMNEY

285(This story, and the one following, are taken from Dr. Romney's excellent book, "The Mormon Colonies in Mexico." It seems to us that venison meat was a real improvement over alfalfa greens.—P. N.)

285THE year had been a hard one. The crops had practically failed and there was little work to be had. Our family was an unusually large one and to feed and clothe them was a problem not easy to solve. My father was a hard worker and possessed considerable financial ability, and all members of the family had been trained to industry and economy, otherwise our lot would have been a pitiable one. Under the most favorable conditions possible, the living was scant, consisting merely of the bare necessities and at times it was a matter of deep concern lest the supply of food would not be sufficient to go around.

The different branches of the family were considerably scattered. My mother and her children were located in the tops of the Sierras at a picturesque spot bearing the designation "Cliff Ranch." Our only means of sustenance was a small patch of irrigable land and a few head of range cattle. The other branches of the family were having a similar struggle in the Casas Grandes Valley forty miles below.

For months not a pound of white flour had been known to enter our door. Our only bread was made from the corn, home grown and ground into meal on a hand mill in the house. In the summer time when the rain was abundant our food supply was measurably increased by the luxurious growth of red roots and pig weeds that sprang up as if by magic on every hand. These made delicious greens and served to break the monotony of our simple and meager diet. When the weeds became toughened with age rendering them unfit for use and the meal in the bin was running low, mother cast about for something to supplement the decreasing store of food. Her woman's instinct finally suggested to mother that the tender alfalfa plant must be nutritious since animals and fowls thrive on it, and so, for the next meal, we had as the principal article of our menu, alfalfa greens. Truly, mother was forty years ahead of her time for in those days who ever heard of alfalfa being good for man? But today the best authorities in the field of dietetics have confirmed my mother's judgment as evidenced in the fact that alfalfa is recommended as being one of the best salads. I had always been fond of red roots and pig weeds, but to my dying day I shall never forget that mess of alfalfa greens. In an effort to please mother, I struggled hard to gulp them down but each attempt proved futile. Finally in desperation I blurted out that I had no objection to competing with pigs in the consumption of weeds, but in the eating of alfalfa I must draw the line. I regretted greatly this expletive when I later glanced across the table and saw the pained look in my mother's face. My ingratitude had nearly broken her heart and no more alfalfa greens were ever seen on our table while I was present.

287A short time after this painful incident mother approached my brother and me about going hunting for wild game. Strange we hadn't thought of it before for the mountains were full of wild animal life of nearly all varieties. Likely we had not considered hunting before because of our youthfulness. I was but twelve years old and my brother only a year and five months my senior, and as I recall, neither of us had ever so much as fired a gun. Under these conditions I am certain mother would never have suggested such a thing were not starvation right at our door. With light hearts and filled with the spirit of adventure, we set out in quest of food.

It was a matter of small moment which direction we should take, for game was as likely to be found in one place as another, but we had chosen to try our luck up Spring Creek, a rugged canyon that entered Cliff Ranch from the north. Having but one gun, a 44 Winchester rifle, the question must be decided relative to the order of firing, and since George was my senior, we agreed that he should have the first opportunity to shoot and that I should have the second shot. As a mere lad I recall vividly the feeling of exaltation experienced as we made our way up the winding canyon lined with jagged cliffs and forest of pine and other varieties of timber. At each turn in the canyon our emotions would soar in anticipation of seeing something to shoot at, but each time we were disappointed until we had branched off into the north fork of Spring Creek, distant from home about three miles. At this point as we emerged into a fairly open space among the pines we sighted a large buck deer standing broadside to us and not more than seventy-five yards away. Feverish with excitement, my brother drew the bead on the animal and pulled the trigger, but with no apparent results but a loud report that echoed and reechoed far up and down the canyon. The animal did not budge but stood looking at us after a quizzical fashion as if trying to discover what the racket was all about. It was my turn to shoot but George pleaded so hard to be given an opportunity to retrieve his ill fortune that I finally consented to let him try again. The second shot took effect, the bullet centering the forehead between the eyes and the giant of the forest, as he appeared to us, came down in a heap. I have always felt that Providence guided that bullet to its destination or that the killing was accidental, for my brother undoubtedly would not have taken chances on losing the deer by shooting at its head when its whole body was exposed to his view. As I recall, however, the matter did not come up for debate. Perhaps it was because I felt it would be unethical to argue such a delicate question with an older brother. Be that as it may, both of us thrilled at the sight before us and down deep in our hearts was a feeling of deep gratitude, for we had a happy vision of changing our diet from alfalfa to venison.

We rushed to the deer lest he recover from the shock and escape in the forest of pines, but when we reached him he was dead. Imagine our feelings when we reached for a knife to sever his jugular and remembered we had left it at home. A moment's consultation and it was decided that George should run home for the knife which would leave me to stand guard over the deer. My job would not have been a disagreeable one but for the fact that the day was cold and the gray clouds overhead portended a snow storm, and there I was with feet as bare as they were the day I was born. Soon the snow began to fall in great flakes and my feet would have frozen had I not kept them in motion. Presently over my head I heard the flutter of wings and looking up I saw a big flock of wild turkeys winging their way across the canyon. When they hit the ground they were within fifty yards of me. Full of excitement, I leveled my gun on a huge gobbler, but before I could pull the trigger he had disappeared behind a bush. I tried it on another and still another but each time with the same results. Not a shot did I get and when finally the flock had disappeared and I was left alone with my emotions and the deer, I fell down in a heap and literally bawled. How long my brother was gone I had no way of knowing but to me the time seemed almost interminable. When he did arrive he was accompanied by my mother and a younger brother who had come to assist in transporting the buck to our home. When the animal had been prepared each of us seized a leg and began our homeward journey, but our progress was slow as it was all some of us could do to manage our load. With difficulty we would carry it a few rods when some one would call time out. We were all but exhausted when to our joy we were met by our neighbor, Helaman Pratt, who, having heard of our success, had come with his pack mule to give us a lift.

290That evening there was a happy group of children while mother was preparing the evening meal as they inhaled the odor from the frying venison and a still happier group when they sat down to the table and had a real fill of the sweetest meat any of us had ever eaten. Once or twice during the repast I thought I saw a tear drop glistening in her eyes and once I fancied I heard her mutter a praise to God for his bounteous gift.
