Preston Nibley, Pioneer Stories ( 1940)

296A SUMMER OUTING AND WHAT CAME OF IT

296By ANTHONY W. IVINS

296(The final story in this volume is a delightful and interesting account of a trip taken by Frank Anderson and George Reasoner into the Sierra Madre Mountains of Old Mexico. It is easy to see that George Reasoner is none other than the author himself, Anthony W. Ivins. In this story President Ivins is at his best. He found complete relaxation and enjoyment in a trip to the mountains; in the wild life and the plant growth as nature formed them.—P. N.)

296IT was the first week in September. In the southland, at this season of the year, nature is at her best; just a tinge of autumn in the leaves, the flowers passing from perfection of bloom to seed, the gathering of nature's harvest.

296Preparations for the outing were completed, and Frank Anderson and George Reasoner were ready to start into the mountains.

The outfit consisted of the usual personal effects, food, clothing, etc., two folding cots, with warm blankets, for it will be cold in the Sierra, a small tent of ten-ounce duck, two 30-30 Winchester rifles, a shot gun, plenty of ammunition, split bamboo fishing rods, automatic reels, silk lines, leaders, and a large assortment of artificial flies; hobbles and bells for the horses, chains for the dogs, pick, shovel and ax; cooking utensils, dishes, and an assortment of books.

297All of this was loaded on a white top to which a medium span of horses was hitched, while a third horse, with a saddle on, was tied behind, and an extra saddle was lashed on the pack, to be used on one of the team horses, when the two men wished to ride together.

297Three dogs watched every movement while preparations for the start were being made: Fleete, a liver and white pointer, eager, alert, her finely chiseled head and symmetrical body, the product of generations of careful breeding, showed great animation; Trailer, a spotted hound, with grave face and halfclosed eyes, appeared to pay little attention to his surroundings, but a close observer would note that nothing escaped him; it was dignity and not indifference which restrained him. The third dog was entirely different from his companions: they were both spotted, he was brown with regular white markings on his neck and breast; their hair was short and smooth, his long and shaggy; their heads were long with massive jaws and square nose, his broad between the ears and pointed at the nose; their ears were long and broad, his erect, with the ends slightly pendant. He was Laddie, the Scotch collie. Intelligent, alert, docile, but would never assume that which is not his own nor fail you in an emergency.

The first five miles of the journey, across the comparatively level plains, was devoid of interest. The mountain, as Frank had said, was just a blue mass of rocks and earth. As they drew nearer its aspect gradually changed; new forms appeared, the smooth outline became rugged, and what in the distance appeared to have been small bushes gradually developed into forests of pine and cedar.

298The face of the mountain was rough, with no place where ascent appeared to be possible, but the road suddenly turned into a canyon, entirely invisible from the distance, and the long climb toward the summit began. Up, up they went, the road winding along the canyon side, here crossing a narrow culvert over a ravine, there cut through solid rock around a perpendicular cliff, with barely room for the wagon to pass, and again through the backbone of an obtrusive ridge, but always up, up.

298At intervals the road had been widened making it possible for two wagons to pass. On one of these, George turned out and stopped. As he did so a team came round a bend above them and slowly down the road. Three span of horses were attached to two wagons on which four thousand feet of lumber was piled. The driver, a mere boy, sat upon the front load, which was the larger, carefully manipulating both the lines and brake, as the wagons rocked and swayed over the dangerous road. A cheery "hello" greeted the friends as the wagons rattled on down the canyon, two single teams, with lighter loads, following after.

"I would not have thought it possible," said Frank, "for loaded teams to pass over these roads either up or down, but those boys appeared to be quite at home."

299"Yes, they are mountain boys," replied his companion, "accustomed to the dangers and hardships of frontier life, they do not know what fear is, you will become better acquainted with them before we return."

299"How magnificent!" exclaimed Frank. They were nearing the summit and the sides of the mountain were covered with giant pines. On the South, perpendicular cliffs shot their pinnacles heavenward, great boulders were scattered over the mountain side, in the shade of which beds of vari-colored flowers blended with the eternal green of the trees, among the leaves of which a tint of yellow was beginning to show, harbinger of the autumn frost which was soon to come.

299After reaching the summit, the descent to the west was gradual. They had proceeded but a short distance when the sound of a steam whistle roused Frank from his reverie. "What is it?" he asked. "I did not expect to find a steam engine in this remote region."

299"It is at the saw mill which supplies the settlers in the valleys below with lumber," replied his companion.

As they neared the mill, a four-horse team came out from a side canyon, drawing a wagon unlike any that Frank had ever before seen. The wheels were low and massive, and there were no standards on the heavy bolsters, but notwithstanding this fact, a tremendous log rode steadily on them, the driver sitting on its top.

300"How did they manage to get that log on the wagon?" exclaimed Frank. "It must weigh tons."

300"It does," said George, "and was loaded by the man who drives the team, you will see him unload it when we reach the mill. He is a logger by occupation, and handles these mammoth trees with as much ease as the teamster who furnishes you your coal does his scoop and chutes. The logs, after being cut, are sawed into the desired lengths, the logger drives his team to where they lie, on the mountain side, adjusts skids to his wagon, which is called a logging truck, attaches a chain, which has been wound around the log, to the reach, and to the other end of the chain hitches his team; as the horses pull, the log is rolled slowly up the skids onto the truck, where it is held in place by blocks placed on the bolsters. In this way a single man will load the largest log in the forest."

300The mill was in full operation. On the sloping side of the hill a great pile of logs was constantly being added to by teams which came with loads, and after having deposited them, moved slowly back up the slopes and canyons for others.

A single man, with a cant-hook, moved the huge tree trunks to the carriage, they were quickly placed in position, the sawyer stood at his post, the ratchet tender moved the ratchet to the desired width and thickness, with a bewildering whir-r-r the saw passed through the log, and off-bearers rolled away the planks and boards as they fell upon the truck, and what a few moments before had been but an unwieldy tree trunk, was ready to go into the habitation of man, the frame of a ship, or to support the bands of steel which bear the commerce of nations.

301It was all new to Frank; he had never before been in a lumbering camp, and was intensely interested in what he saw.

301The whistle blew, the mill stopped, the logging teams were fed grain and turned out to graze until morning, and the men gathered for the evening meal, of which the visitors were invited to partake.

301They were a stalwart lot, those men of the woods; rough in appearance and garb, but companionable, modest and sensitive, unobtrusive, but surprisingly well informed when engaged in conversation, obviously men to whom the world and its affairs were not strangers.

301The beds had been made up for the night, the moon shone brightly, the rare atmosphere was laden with that peculiar aroma of balsam and pine which pervades the saw mill. Frank Anderson was to pass his first night on a camp-bed in the Sierra.

"It has been a delightful day," he said. "The canyon, the cliffs, the trees, the flowers, but more than all the boy on that load of lumber, and these men here at the mill, they have all impressed me deeply. Do you know, before I left home I had thought of the people who live away from the great centers of trade and commerce as of very little consequence. The great cities have been my world; their captains of industry, my ideal. I am astonished that these men discuss with intelligence, not only the things which belong to their own environment, but with a perfect understanding, the commerce, politics, and religion of the world. My ideals are already beginning to be shattered."

"They are all worthy of our admiration, provided each is true to the trust reposed in him," replied George. "Governments must exist for the protection of society. There must be legislators to frame the laws, and capable men to execute them. Great financiers are necessary to transact the world's business, but you must not overlook the fact that these men of the mountains and plains, these men who toil, who take the rough elements as they are found in nature and convert them into that which man requires—these men from the workshops, the mills, and the farms, have in them the elements for the making of legislators, executors of the law, and financiers. They do the world's work, they fight the world's battles; so long as we have them with us we are safe. Is it not possible that it was the backwoods which gave Lincoln the character that made him the greatest man of his time? The struggles of early life which gave us Garfield? Life on the farm which laid the foundation for the conquests of Grant? And the part he took in the winning of the West which made Roosevelt loved and trusted by the American People? Goldsmith was right when he said:

303"Princes or kings may flourish or may fade, A breath may make them, as a breath hath made, But a bold peasantry, a country's pride, If once destroyed can never be supplied."

303The dogs barked, the belated cows came lowing home to their calves, the fire gradually died out, the sound of human voices ceased, the camp was asleep; and as he slept, Frank Anderson dreamed of other pine clad hills, of lowing herds and bleating flocks, of peculiar ships, on whose decks were crowded ranks of fair-haired, bearded men with the lust of conquest in their hearts. Unconsciously, environment had awakened within him the spirit of the past. The voice of his ancestors was calling; there was something within him which responded to the call; he had been born to a new life.

II

"Forests were ever the cradles of men; Manhood is born of a kinship with trees. Whence shall come brave hearts and strong, When woods have made way for our cities of ease?"

With the first apearance of light in the east, the lumber camp was awake and active. Breakfast was eaten before sunrise, the logging teams toiled up the slopes, the whistle called the mill men to their places, and the work of another busy day began.

304Frank Anderson arose, refreshed by a delightful night's repose, and packed up the load, while George brought in the horses. Breakfast was eaten with the mill hands, and after hearty handshakes and wishes of good luck and pleasure, the friends drove down the canyon toward their destination.

304Everywhere there were pines. Pines near them on the hillsides, pines on the most remote ridges and peaks, pines in the bottom of the canyons. The road wound around through the timber, here following a ridge, there, the side of a canyon; and again along the bank of a mountain stream. In the canyons the luxurious growth of vegetation showed greater variety. There were trees of ash, oak, sycamore, beautiful cedars, and an occasional quaking asp or maple, the leaves of the latter showing the first tints of autumn.

Grass and flowers grew in profusion everywhere. As they proceeded, the variety of flowers became greater. Rounding a point in the canyon the dogs startled a flock of wild turkeys, which were scratching on the creek bottom. They scrambled up the rocky mountain-side and disappeared over the crest of a ridge. Frank wanted to stop the team and follow them, but George explained that because of the character of the country it would be useless. "The wild turkey," he said, "is a wary bird, and once disturbed in a place like this, is not easily approached. When they reach the top of the ridge there, they will fly across that canyon which you see, and would thus leave us far behind, with a very rough country intervening."

305"What are those?" asked Frank, as a great flock of birds flew from a grove of oaks near the road.

305"They are wild pigeons," replied his companion, "the American Band-Tailed Pigeon; there are great numbers of them in the Sierra, and they afford rare sport to the hunter. They are fully as large as the tame pigeon, and excellent in flavor."

305A flock of birds passed over the heads of the travelers, high in the air, and keeping up a constant chatter as they flew.

305"Those are parrots," said George. "They are lighting in the tops of the pines there. Observe closely, as we pass, and you will see that they are very beautiful birds. It is difficult to see them while they are in the trees, the green of their bodies is so much like the green of the pines. They eat the seeds from the pine cones, and are rarely seen on the ground."

305As they drew near, Frank's admiration was unbounded. The green bodies of the birds were plainly visible, and the splashes of red and yellow were reflected by the morning sun, like burnished gold. As the buckboard rattled under the trees where they were feeding, away they went, with a great chattering and flapping of wings.

"I have seen parrots before," said Frank, "but always in captivity. How glorious to see them here, without restraint, at home with the environment for which they were created."

306"You will discover, before we return," replied his friend, "that to appreciate the works of the Creator they must be seen in their natural state, unchanged by the hand of man."

306The dogs were in their element. Trailer frequently left the road, as his sensitive nose detected the trail of a deer which had crossed during the night, but a word from George restrained him; a little later, however, when a doe and two fawns dashed across the road and up the mountain side, he broke from all restraint and followed them, the cliffs echoing to his musical cry.

306"What will become of him?" exclaimed Frank.

306"He will not follow far," replied his companion. "The instinct of his race prompts him to take the trail, and never leave it so long as he has strength to follow, but I have trained him to understand that he must not follow far unless I am with him."

306A little farther down the canyon, Fleete became greatly excited. "Watch her," said George, as he handed the lines to his companion, and taking his gun from the case put it together. "The cartridges are in the case, on the seat by you; hand me two, No. 8."

The dog was coursing rapidly about a hundred yards from the road. Suddenly she turned to windward, bounded forward a short distance, stopped, then advanced cautiously toward a bunch of willows, where she stood immovable as a statue, her neck extended, tail rigid, her whole body quivering.

307"What will become of her?" exclaimed Frank.

307"There is a flock of quails in that bunch of willows. The dog does not see them, but her keen nose tells her they are there, and instinct and training tell her that it is not safe to approach nearer until her master comes, with his gun.

307"Dogs have been known to stand, pointing a bird for hours, without moving. Here, take the gun, and as they rise bring down a pair; we need them for dinner."

307"No," replied Frank, "I have never fired a gun except in a shooting gallery. I fear we shall go hungry if you depend on me to keep the larder supplied."

307George got off the buckboard, walked to where the dog stood, and in a low voice told her to go on. She approached the willows cautiously, there was a confusing whir-r-r-r of wings; bang! bang! went the gun, a wisp of feathers floated off in the air, and two brown objects, from a confusion of others which moved rapidly away, came down into the grass with a thud.

307The dog did not move until told to do so, then she ran forward, picked the birds up, and brought them, one by one to her master.

"We call them fool hens," said George. "They belong to the quail family, are larger than the ordinary quail, and the quality of their flesh is unsurpassed."

308The road led from the canyon and wound up towards the top of a steep mountain ridge. Near the top two birds flew from a juniper tree near the road, and lit on the top of a nearby oak.

308"Those are very rare birds," said George. "They are always found in pairs, and are rarely seen in the mountains. Their color is green, as you see, and their long tails, and the crest upon their heads are very much like the bird of paradise."

308It was noon when the top of the ridge was reached, and turning out the horses to graze, George prepared the noon-day meal. The quails were dressed and fried, potatoes sliced and stewed, bottled fruit, with condensed cream, bread and butter. It was a bill of fare to please an epicure.

308The meal was finished, the load re-packed, the horses fed a little grain, and hitched up, and the journey resumed.

308Just as they were starting, Trailer came in, tired and footsore, glad to eat the dinner which Frank had reserved for him, and jump into the buckboard and ride when asked to do so.

308The topography of the country gradually changed. There were fewer canyons, the ridges were not so high, occasionally small valleys were passed, treeless, but covered with grass and skirted with pines.

There were flowers everywhere; acres of blue, purple, pink, crimson, yellow and variegated, all in one indiscriminate mass, but with a remarkably harmonious blending of colors, nature's flower garden, untouched by the hand of man.

309"I have been trying to classify these flowers," said Frank. "What is that beautiful one there by that dead log? We have passed several of them since noon; it looks like a tulip, but the stalk is different."

309"It is a native of the Sierra," George replied. "We call it a tiger lily, and regard it as one of the most beautiful flowers of the mountains."

309"This afternoon," said Frank, "we have passed rare specimens of begonias, columbines, dahlias, four-o'clocks, honeysuckles, a flower which greatly resembles our calla, verbena, larkspurs, some beautiful Canterbury bells, and look at that bleeding heart, and those poppies!"

309"If you were here in the morning," said George, "you would find the country covered with morning glories; there are many other varieties of flowers which have already gone to seed."

The road suddenly brought them out into a mountain valley in which nestled a group of houses. A stream of water flowed through the valley to the north. Following this for about two miles it dropped into a deep canyon. There was no road and the descent was steep and rough, but by careful driving they reached the bottom in safety, at a point where the canyon widened out and two streams came together. In the forks of these creeks, on a high spot of ground, covered with grass, and shaded by scattering pine trees, camp was established. The stream was fringed with willows, and there were meadows on either side upon which cattle were grazing, while the mountain sides were covered with grass and flowers. The horses were unhitched, bells and hobbles put on them, and they were turned out to graze. The tent was pitched, some wood gathered, a fire started, and by the time darkness set in, they were ready for the night.

It was a beautiful night. The full moon arose over the ridges to the east, and looked down through the pines like a great search-light, illuminating the canyon until it was almost as light as day. The night air, laden with the fragrance of spruce, cedar and wild flowers, was like the boudoir of a princess. Trout splashed in the stream, frogs croaked and crickets chirped incessantly. Night hawks drummed as they passed swiftly through the air in pursuit of the insects on which they feed. From a branch of a giant dead pine, which stood just across the creek, a horned owl hooted, and away off on the mountain side a coyote howled dismally. Myriads of insects fluttered round the camp fire, many of them to be caught in the flames and destroyed. From the top of a juniper tree, near the camp, a mocking-bird sang as only a mocking-bird sings on a moonlight night. Changing rapidly he imitated all of the notes peculiar to his feathered companions, and many known only to himself, his song was like a medley of old melodies. A whippoorwill called from the bushes, near camp, and was answered by another, farther away, while from down the canyon they heard the bark of a gray wolf.

311"Tonight," said Frank, "in the great cities, the electric lights are converting night into day, as the moon is doing in the canyon here. There is music, beauty, happiness and innocence there, as there is here. The human moths are there, fluttering round the light, as they are here, many of them to be caught in the flames and destroyed. The human beasts of prey are there, too, and steal out from their hiding place in the darkness, seeking whom they may devour. How alike we are, after all, how like man nature is, and man like nature, with this exception, that there, in the great city, it is all the result of studied design; while here, in the wilds it is the spontaneous response of every living thing to the call of nature."

III

"There's nothing that builds up a toil-weary soul Like a day on a stream Out there where the greed and the strife are forgot, To revel once more in the depths of a joy That's as real as it seems."

The following morning the two friends were early astir. Before the sun had risen, rods were unpacked, jointed together, and reels placed in position. A fine, transparent leader was attached to each line, and then the fly books were opened.

312"There are a great many different kinds of flies here," said Frank. "Which do you use, and how are they attached to the leader?"

312"It is difficult to determine which fly the trout will best rise to," replied George. "We must experiment. It all depends upon the class of food which is most abundant in the neighborhood, at this season of the year; the trout will rise best to an artificial fly resembling that which he is now eating. Here, this is a Silver Doctor. You observe that the end of the snell to which the hook is attached has a loop in it, also that there is a loop on the leader; put the loop on the snell over the one on the leader, then run the hook through the latter, draw the two tightly together and the fly will be properly attached. Now take this other fly, it is a Royal Coachman, and fasten it on in the same way, to the other loop, higher up on your leader. We will try two flies to begin with. Cast your line into the creek there and look out for the result."

312"I have never caught a fish," said Frank. "You will have to show me how to make the cast."

"It is simple," explained George. "Flies, as they attempt to cross the streams, frequently fall into the water. They immediately strike out for the shore. Their struggles attract the trout, which take them from the surface of the water. To be a successful angler your fly should drop upon the water naturally, and be drawn along the surface so that it will resemble, as nearly as possible, a living fly, in this way," and with a dexterous movement of the wrist he threw out his line, the fly dropping on the water several yards away.

313A few trials, and Frank found that it was not difficult to make a cast.

313The two men walked down the stream a short distance to where a willow grew from the bank, near the roots of which the still water indicated a deep pool.

313"Cast there," said George, "in the still water under that willow."

313The cast was made without result.

313"Try again, a little nearer the bank."

313The fly fell true, there was a commotion, a silvery streak shot above the surface of the water, the reel clicked as the line was drawn out, and a moment later a beautiful trout was lying on the pebbly shore, to be eagerly secured, and after comments as to weight placed in the creel.

So they fished down the stream, taking a trout from a riffle here, from behind a rock there, or under a willow yonder, until reminded by their appetites that it was time for breakfast. And what a breakfast it was! Hot bread of their own making, with butter from the near-by town, postum with condensed cream, trout fresh from the stream, rolled in flour and fried in butter, potatoes hashed and fried, and with it all that mountain water of which it seemed impossible to drink enough.

314After the breakfast things had been cleared away and dishes washed, the two friends walked up the creek a short distance above the camp to a small juniper tree upon which a mocking-bird was perched, occasionally breaking forth in song. Carefully separating the inner branches, they found a nest with the mother bird upon it; she did not fly until almost touched, and then only to a branch of the dead pine, just across the creek, from which she scolded them for their intrusion. There were five bluish-brown eggs in the nest, and upon one of them there was just the suspicion of a crack.

314"The eggs are about to hatch," said George. "We must retire and permit the bird to return." This they did, and the mother bird at once came back to the nest, while the male, from his perch on the dead pine, sang as if his throat would split.

314The middle of the day was spent in reading and rest. There is something in the mountain atmosphere, in the stillness, which invites repose and brings refreshing sleep.

314In the afternoon, after taking some pictures with the kodak, the rods and reels were again taken up, and the two friends fished down the creek until a sufficient number of trout had been taken for immediate use.

The sun was setting as they returned to camp, its rays throwing great shadows across their path, from the peaks and pines above. How enchanting the view as they neared their camp. The stream fringed with willows, the meadows, the horses fed a little grain, and after an hour spent in recounting the incidents of the day the men retired for the night.

315There were four young mocking-birds in the nest the following morning, little fuzzy things, with big heads and wide open mouths. The male bird was busily pursuing butterflies and grasshoppers. He was the head of a family now and must provide for it. There was no more singing during the day, but when night came he sang more joyously than ever, happy that there was work to do for those he loved.

315As they fished down the creek that morning the dogs, as usual, were interested spectators, watching every cast, and manifesting as much pleasure when a trout was landed as the anglers themselves. On a spot of open ground Fleete suddenly stopped and turned toward a small bush which grew among the grass. She pointed, approached, and retreated as if in doubt, then moved forward again and carefully extended her paw. The act was fatal. Like a flash a dark body shot out from the bush, and the fangs of a rattlesnake were fastened in her foot. With a cry of pain and fear, as if thoroughly comprehending the danger, she limped away.

315Such simple remedies as were available were applied, but without effect. In half an hour she was dead.

A grave was dug at the foot of a pine-tree, near camp, and the dog buried. A mound of large stones was formed, and on one side of the tree, which was blazed, the word Fleete was marked by driving nails into the trunk, the heads only being visible.

316The conversation around the camp fire that night was serious. George and the dog had been companions for years, and he deeply mourned her loss. Frank admitted that he had not thought it possible to become so attached to anything not human as he had to the dogs and horses.

316It was the first favorable opportunity to introduce the subject of religion, and George took advantage of it. Earnestly he expounded the great plan of human redemption and the assurance which had come to him that there was a life beyond the grave, that all men would be redeemed and brought back into the presence of the Lord, through faith in the redemption wrought out by Jesus Christ.

316"I know," he said, "that I cannot prove the truth of what I have said by external evidence which would satisfy you, and I do not expect that my conviction will be sufficient for one who is not conscious of the invisible force by which I have reached these conclusions, but I assure you that any man who will do the will of the Father shall know that these doctrines are true. Ask God, who hears all who appeal to him, and you shall receive. That was the key which unlocked this gospel dispensation.

The following morning they fished with such satisfactory results that in the afternoon George suggested that they go for a ride through the timber, and possibly get a deer or turkey.

317The horses were saddled, the dogs unchained, the two 30-30 rifles placed in the cases which were attached to the saddles, a new roll of films placed in the kodak, and with the dogs eagerly leading the way, the party was off.

317They rode up the stream to where a side canyon came in from the west, which was followed to the head, where it came out on a mesa above. There was so much to admire and discuss that little attention was paid to the dogs until Laddie's shrill bark startled them. There, not more than a hundred yards away, was a large flock of wild turkeys, running swiftly down the mesa, with Laddie and Trailer in full pursuit.

317As Laddie dashed among them the great birds rose, with a tremendous flapping of wings, and took refuge in a pine tree. Their attention was so completely absorbed in watching the dogs, which were barking at the foot of the tree, that they did not notice the approaching men.

317"Now," said George, "is your opportunity to bring down one of the greatest of all game birds. The turkeys are watching the dogs, and knowing that they have nothing to fear from them while in the tree, will permit us to approach within easy range."

The men dismounted and advanced to within fifty yards of the tree where the birds had taken refuge. "There," said George, "you see that gobbler at the right, on one of the lower branches of the tree; take him."

318Frank raised his rifle and fired. The bird did not move.

318"You fired too hurriedly," said George, "and overshot; a very common error. Be more careful and hold a little lower."

318Another cartridge was thrown into the barrel, the aim was more deliberate, and with a flutter of wings the turkey fell to the ground, the remainder of the flock soaring away into an adjacent canyon.

318"What a magnificent bird!" said Frank. "He is equal in size to any tame turkey I have ever seen."

318"Yes," said George, "they are fully equal to the tame turkey, both in size and quality, and they abound in the mountains, notwithstanding the fact that they have many natural enemies. They build their nests on the ground, and are consequently an easy prey to wild animals, many are also destroyed by forest fires which sweep through the mountains."

318"Why did you not fire at them?" asked Frank.

318"I felt certain that you would get this fellow," replied his companion, "and one is all we shall be able to use. It would be unsportsmanlike to kill more."

As they rounded a rocky point, on the return to camp, looking across a box canyon, several hundred yards away, they saw a bear climbing clumsily up the side hill. In a moment George was down from his horse and rapidly firing shot after shot as the bear scrambled up the slope. The dogs were in full pursuit, but before they reached the opposite side of the canyon a well-directed shot had done its work, and the ungainly beast came rolling down the mountain-side. The skin, an unusually fine one, was removed, and the men proceeded on to camp.

319"Each day is more interesting than the preceding one," said Frank, as preparations were made for the night. "The fishing this morning, the delightful ride through the timber, the turkeys and the bear, why, I never before knew what real life is. Tell me, are these bears dangerous? Do they ever attack man?"

319"I have never known an instance," replied George, "where a bear has deliberately and without provocation attacked a man, but when surprised, or wounded, or in defense of their young, bears are formidable foes."

IV

"Cheek that is tanned to the wind of the north, Limbs that are eager and strong to go forth Strength of the forests and health of the plains, Yearly to hark to the listening oaks— These are the splendors the hunter invokes."

319The morning was beautiful; the sun rose warm and radiant; there was not a cloud in the sky. The mocking-birds sang as they flew to and fro, carrying food to their young. The trout took the fly as they had never done before.

320As they fished down the stream, the friends disturbed a wild turkey hen and her brood which were scratching on the river bottom, and they went scurrying up the mountain side, and took refuge in the rocks. A little farther on a flock of parrots flew from where they were feeding on the cones, in the top of a pine tree, and were away with a great chattering and flapping of wings. A doe and two fawns ran out from the willows, and stopping on the mountain side looked back, their great hazel eyes staring in wonder at the intruders.

320As the day advanced the heat became oppressive. The trout ceased to bite, the birds to sing. The cattle left the river bottom and hastily trailed off into the side canyons. A flock of crows passed silently overhead and took refuge under a projecting cliff on the mountain side. All nature had suddenly become hushed and oppressed.

320"What does it all mean?" asked Frank.

320'It is the calm which precedes the summer storm," replied George. "We must hurry back to camp and prepare for it. See, there is the proof of what I say!"

320As they turned back toward camp, clouds were rolling up from behind the ridges to the south, like great piles of popcorn, and a breeze was blowing from that direction.

When they reached camp the horses were already there, backed up on the windward side of a grove of trees. They were hastily tied, and blankets thrown on them. The dogs whined and crept into the tent. The male mocking bird flew from his perch on the juniper tree and took refuge under a shelving rock near by. There was hardly time to collect the camp equipage, put it in the tent, and securely tie the door, when the storm broke in all its fury. The wind had increased to a gale, the clouds were black and ominous; the lightning flashed, the thunder rolled; rain came down in torrents; great hailstones fell, beating down the grass and flowers, and tearing the tender branches from the trees; a shaft of lightning struck the giant dead pine across the creek and tore it into a thousand pieces, scattering them all around the tent, and leaving the trunk, which was strongly impregnated with pitch, burning brightly as the storm raged.

321The creek, which a few moments before had been a clear mountain stream, was a raging torrent. Trees, torn up by the roots, floated past, and great boulders, loosened from the mountain sides by the rivulets which flowed everywhere came rolling down into the canyon, with a sound like thunder.

321Fortunately the storm was of short duration. It passed as unexpectedly as it had come. The clouds rolled away, the sun came out and looked complacently down upon the havoc wrought as if it had been an uneventful autumn day.

As the two friends stepped out into the sunshine the mocking-bird flew from his shelter under the projecting rock and hopped among the branches of the juniper tree, uttering notes of alarm. The men approached the tree, and George carefully drew back the branches. There, upon the nest, was the mother bird—dead! True to the instinct of all flesh, she had protected her young while the storm beat out her life. The little birds were safe. They took the tiny body and, digging a grave near where Fleete rested, carefully buried it. The friends then returned sorrowfully to the camp to discuss this last tragedy of the woods, so much like the sorrows which come to human kind.

322On several occasions, as they fished down the creek, deer had been seen on the mountain slopes, feeding, or, startled from their beds in the willows, had dashed away as the men approached.

322Frank had waited impatiently for the promised hunt and was up early on the morning when it had been arranged to take it.

322The horses were saddled, cartridge belts and hunting knives buckled on, the dogs unchained, and, mounting, they started down the canyon.

322"We will kill a buck today," said George. "There are plenty of deer; it will not be necessary to shoot at a doe or fawn should we see one."

322His companion urged that the chance of failure was too great if one confined his shooting to buck alone; besides he had never killed a deer, and was not inclined to discriminate.

Trees grew along the river bottom. The ground was soft and covered with grass, and the feet of the horses made scarcely a sound. As they passed through a thicket two deer came out, into an open space below and walked directly toward them. "It is a doe and fawn," whispered George, "watch them." The deer came on, stopping occasionally to crop the tender grass which grew along the shore of the stream. They were conscious of danger, but could not tell where it was. They sniffed the air, stamped their front feet, listened, with their long ears erect and necks extended, but continued to come on until they were only a few yards from where the men sat on their horses, when one of the horses shook his head, the bridle rattled, and away the deer went up the mountain side, where they stopped and looked back at the men below. It was a splendid chance for a shot, and Frank wanted to take it, but his companion restrained him.

323"We shall find others, soon," he said; "besides, it would seem cruel to shoot them under such circumstances. I have never known a deer to approach so near a man before. You will observe that there is a breeze blowing up the canyon; were it not for this, they would have smelled us and gone before we had even seen them. The nose of the deer is exceedingly sensitive. He usually scents an enemy before he sees him."

323They climbed out from the canyon and started up a long ridge which terminated in the highest peaks in the neighborhood.

323As they neared the summit off to the right, on the side of another ridge, a deer arose from the grass and stood looking at them.

323"What a beauty," said Frank, as he hurriedly dismounted and raised his gun to fire.

324"Remember," remonstrated his companion, "no does today; she is a beauty, but we must not shoot her."

324"But," urged Frank, "the day is far advanced and we are not likely to get another such chance. I do not want to return without a deer. Let me try her."

324As he spoke, just below the doe, and a little to the right, another deer got up from the grass. His great horns appeared, and then his entire body, as he stood broadside, looking across the canyon.

324"Now you can shoot," said George. "Hold behind the shoulder and be steady."

324The rifle cracked, and both deer bounded off up the mountain.

324"As usual, you shot too high," said George. "Go on, you can get in several shots before he reaches the top of the ridge."

324Bang! bang! bang! went the Winchester, but the deer did not stop.

324"Do not hurry," said George. "Wait until he reaches the top of the ridge. He will stop a moment before passing out of sight to see what it is all about."

324With rifle raised, Frank waited. When the deer reached the top of the ridge he stopped, broadside on, and looked back. Frank fired, the deer lurched forward and disappeared, the doe bounded over the ridge.

324"A splendid shot," said George. "He was fully three hundred yards away."

324"But he has gone," said Frank. "I missed him again."

325"No, you hit him, and hit him hard. He will not go far," said George.

325They found him near where he had stood, a magnificent specimen of his kind. The deer was dressed, tied behind one of the saddles, and the men rode on.

325The following day was Sunday, and the friends had planned to visit the people at the settlement. George knew that a fat deer was always a welcome present, so the hunt was continued. There was no danger that the larder would be overstocked.

325They were nearly back to camp, and the sun was just setting when they saw a lone deer feeding upon the mountain side to their right. It was a long shot, but at the crack of George's rifle he came down and was carried on to camp.

325Both men and horses were tired when camp was reached, and after supper, which consisted of deer's liver and bacon, fried trout, potatoes, a little cheese placed on a tin plate and fried over the coals, with canned peaches and cream for desert, they retired early to bed.

325It was the first Sunday in October, and the last the friends would spend together in the mountains.

Through the devoted care of the male bird the young mocking-birds were grown. They hopped among the branches of the juniper, and tried their wings by short flights from tree to tree. Silently the old bird looked on. He had fed them by day, and kept them warm at night, but there had been no more singing; he had done his duty with a heavy heart, and would soon lead his brood away to their winter home in the south, where he would perhaps find another mate to take the place of her who had given her life that his offspring might live. As the friends said: "How alike we are. The joys and sorrows and tragedies of life come to the wild things of the woods as they do to us. How much they sense and suffer by them, who can tell?"

326The drive to the settlement, past the fields of harvested hay and grain, was delightful. As they entered the town and saw troops of children, in their plain but neat attire, hurrying toward the meeting house, Frank Anderson thought of his own childhood, how solicitous his mother had been, when Sunday came, that he should attend Sunday School, and how she tried to impress him with the truth of the things taught there.

326As the two friends drove up to the building where the people were congregating, the children crowded around George, delighted to see and greet him, as were the older people who were present.

326An old couple from Scandinavia were particularly pleased to meet Frank. They had known his parents, in fact his father had been the means of bringing them into the Church, and the pleasure they manifested at meeting his son was delightful in its earnestness and simplicity.

326The interval between Sunday School and Sacrament meeting was spent at the home of this old couple, after which all returned to the Church.

The afternoon service was simple, but impressive. The Sacrament was administered, the entire congregation partaking. Fellowship was universal in the settlement. Brief remarks were made by many of those present, both men and women, each of whom bore testimony to the truth of the doctrines of the gospel and the divinity of the mission of the youthful prophet who had been instrumental in its re-establishment.

327Frank Anderson was an interested listener, and when the old Scandinavian arose and bore testimony to the sterling qualities of his parents, and recounted the circumstances under which they were converted to the truth, and their devotion to it, he was visibly affected.

327The services were about to close. There was a pause, a few moments of unoccupied time, the stillness was oppressive when Frank Anderson arose and began to speak.

He referred to his parents with deep emotion, how they had taught him, when a boy, the doctrines of the gospel and he had believed. As he grew older, close application to business, constant contact with men, many of them not over-scrupulous in their business methods, had almost destroyed his faith; he had sought pleasure in the cities among men of like tastes, until he had become an unbeliever. Then came this trip to the mountains, to a new world, to meet new people, to be in an environment which he had never dreamed existed. He had gone into many churches, had visited the cathedrals of the old world, had hoped to find there the fraternal love and fellowship which he felt should exist among people professing faith in Christ, but had never found it, until he met these simple people of the mountains. Never had he felt near to the Lord until that night at the saw mill.
