Results of last chapter in relation to our Lord’s experience in Gethsemane and on the Cross — not refuted but illustrated, Original attitude of the disciples to the words of Jesus, The Resurrection: the intercourse of the Risen Christ with the disciples according to the New Testament — critical problems,

The great commission: Matthew 28: 18ff., Mark 16: 15f., Luke 24: 47f. and John 20: 21f., Refers either

(a) to Baptism or

(b) to Forgiveness.

In the New Testament these are inter-related and related to the death of Jesus, Importance of this for the unity of the New Testament.

The opening chapters of Acts:

Critical problems again, Primitive character of the Christology, Prominence of the Resurrection — why? Refutation of the idea that the death of the Messiah is only an offense which the Resurrection enables the disciples to overcome, How the earliest Christian preaching made the death of Christ intelligible, Its connection

(1) with a divine purpose, (2) with the prophecy of the Servant of the Lord, (3) with the forgiveness of sins, The Sacraments in Acts, and their significance in this connection.

The First Epistle of St. Peter:

Its ‘Pauline’ features, A ‘witness’ to the sufferings of Christ, The important passages: (1) The salutation, 1: 1f. — the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ — relation to Exodus 24, (2) ‘Redeemed from a vain conversation, ’ 1: 18f. — originality of this idea — what it leaves unexplained, (3) ‘Who Himself bore our sins, ’ 2: 20ff. — mingling of prophecy and testimony — Christ’s sufferings exemplary, yet more — what it is to bear sin — sin-bearing and substitution-the purpose of Christ in bearing our sins, (4) ‘Who died for sins once, the just for the unjust’ — aim of this: to conduct us to God Imitation of Christ conditioned by the consciousness of redemption, The Second Epistle ascribed to Peter.

Chapter 3: The Epistles of St. Paul

Preliminary considerations affecting the estimate of St. Paul’s whole treatment of this subject:

(1) The assurance with which he preaches a gospel in which Christ’s death is fundamental — his ‘intolerance, ’

(2) The relation of his doctrine to the common Christian tradition,

(3) Alleged development in his teaching, and inferences from such development

(4) ‘Experimental’ and ‘apologetic’ elements in it — ‘testimony’ and ‘theology’ — ‘fact’ and ‘theory’: these distinctions criticized,

(5) Connection in St. Paul’s mind of Christ’s death and resurrection.

Relations in which St. Paul defines Christ’s death: (1) To the love of God (2) To the love of Christ (3) To the sons of men. Connection of sin and death as He conceived it — death must be interpreted through the conscience — Menegoz on an alleged incoherence of the apostle.

The witness of the epistles on these points:

1 Thessalonians 5: 10, ‘Who died for us that whether we wake or sleep we should live together with Him.

1 Corinthians — general references — ‘the word of the Cross’ — ‘bought with a price’ — the passages on the Sacraments in ch. 10 and ch. 11. — extreme importance of these — Christ our Passover.

2 Corinthians — ‘the sufferings of Christ’ and ‘the dying of Jesus’ in ch. 1 and ch. 4, The locus classicus in 5: 14ff. — professedly contains a theory: Christ died our death. Meaning of katallagh> (Reconciliation) in St. Paul — Christ’s finished work — necessity for evangelizing that there should be such a work, Christ made sin for us: meaning and purpose of this, Religious and ethical theological and psychological, expressions of the same idea: how they support each other,

Galatians — exclusively occupied with this subject — Christianity asserted as the sum of the effects produced by Christ’s death, and by that alone, Rationale of this as St. Paul’s experience: how Christ’s death is conceived and preached so as to have the power which produces such effects, Conception of Christ ‘under the law’: what it means, The law (a) as expressing God’s will for men, (b) as expressing God’s judgment on men. The last is necessary to explain Galatians 3: 13, and to make it intelligible that Christ’s death is a demonstration of love to the sinful,

Evasions of this argument (1) Only the ceremonial laws in question in Galatians, (2) Only the Jews are in question, (3) Curse is only equivalent to Cross, The ethical passages in Galatians 5: 24 and 6: 14.

Romans — the Righteousness of God demonstrated at the Cross, 3: 21 ff., The Righteousness of God includes: (1) the fact that He is Himself righteous, (2) that He justifies (or holds as righteous) him who believes in Jesus.

Jesus Christ set forth in propitiatory power in His blood is the demonstration of this righteousness in both its elements

Attempts to obliterate the distinction: (1) Those which do not see the problem with which the apostle is dealing, (2) Those which profess to find the key to St. Paul in 2 Isaiah and the Psalms — Ritschl’s idea that the righteousness of God always has its correlate in the righteousness of His people, (3) Seeberg’s view, that God to be righteous is bound to provide for fellowship between Himself and men, and is pleased to do it in this way,

To understand St. Paul, we must discern Law and Necessity in the relation of Christ’s death to sin, Manner in which St. Paul deduces all Christianity from Christ set forth in His blood as a propitiation,

Criticism of the current idea that he has two doctrines of reconciliation, a ‘juridical’ and an ‘ethico-mystical’ one: views of Weiss, Ritschl, Holtzmann,

True relation of Romans 6 to Romans 3, Faith in Christ Who died includes in it a death: (1) to sin, (2) to the flesh, (3) to law, Place of the Spirit in St. Paul’s teaching in this connection, The Epistles of the Imprisonment — reconciliation extended from man to the universe, Spiritual beings whose fortunes are bound up with those of men: the Scripture support for such an idea, An imaginative expression for the absoluteness of the Christian religion, Reconciliation of men to each other as a fruit of Christ’s death, The Pastoral Epistles.

Chapter 4: The Epistle to the Hebrews

Various affinities of this epistle: primitive Christianity, Paulinism, Alexandrian thought,

The most theological writing of the New Testament: its use of aijw>niov

Relations of Christ’s Person and work in it according as we start from:

(a) the Incarnation — Westcott,

(b) the Priesthood — Seeberg,

Christ’s death defined by relation to God and His love: (a) directly, 2: 9, (b) indirectly by allusion (1) to His commission, (2) to His obedience, Christ’s death defined by relation to sin (1: 4 and passim): it is everywhere a sacrificial death, Sacrifice in this epistle to be interpreted in connection with Priesthood, Priesthood represents, embodies, and makes possible a fellowship of God and man, A priest is necessary in religion to deal with sin by way of sacrifice, Ways of interpreting this:

(1) Nature of the relation between Christ’s death and sin deduced from the effect on man ascribed to the death — meaning ofaJgia>zein, teleiou~n and kaqari>zein in Hebrews,

(2) The effect on man deduced from the conception of Christ’s sacrificial death as a finished work.

What gives Christ’s death its propitiatory power? Examination of ch. 9: 14: ‘He offered Himself through eternal spirit, ’ The author held the common Christian view of the relation of death and sin, Examination of the passage in 10: 1-10 ‘to do Thy will, O God, ’ In what sense obedience is the principle of the Atonement, Connection between the work of Christ and man’s salvation by it: the relation of the ideas expressed by Substitute and Representative, Place and meaning of faith in this epistle.
