Critical considerations,

The doxology in 1: 5f.: what inspires the Christian praise of Christ, The Lamb as it had been slain (5: 6-14), The Blood of the Lamb (7: 14, 12: 11) — connecting links in thought, The Lamb’s Book of Life.

General representation: redemption through revelation rather than revelation through redemption — current contrasts of St. Paul and St. John criticized, Place of Christ’s death in the gospel often underestimated, Examination of explicit references:

(1) 1: 29: Behold the Lamb of God, etc., (2) 2: 19: Destroy this Temple, (3) 3: 14, 8: 28, 12: 32: The ‘lifting up’ of the Son of Man death as glorifying, (4) 6: 51f.: ‘My flesh for the life of the world, ’ (5) 10: 11f. The Good Shepherd, (6) 11: 49: The prophecy of Caiaphas, (7) 12: 24, 27: The corn of wheat, etc., (8) 12: 38: The quotation of Isaiah 53., (9) 15: 13: ‘Greater love hath no man than this, ’ (10) 17: 19: ‘For their sakes I sanctify Myself, ’ (11) 18-19: The story of the Passion, All this interpreted in relation to the love of God and the necessity of men as sinners liable to die in their sins in comparison with St. Paul.

Comparison and contrast with the Gospel,

(1) It defines Christ’s death more explicitly by relation to sin, 1: 7; 2: 1f.; 3: 5; 4: 10. Criticism of Westcott’s interpretation of ‘the blood of Christ, ’.(2) Conception of Christ as iJlasmo>v — the correlatives of iJlasmo>v are sacrifice, intercession, and law, (3) Propitiation and the love of God definable only through each other, Place of the Sacraments in the Gospel and First Epistle of St. John — examination of 1 John 5: 6f., Relation of the historical and the spiritual in Christianity generally, The death of Christ in St. John as a victory over Satan.

Chapter 6: The Importance of the Death of Christ in Preaching and in Theology

No abstract distinction to be drawn between theology and preaching Considerations in relation to preaching:

(1) No gospel without Atonement The sense of debt to Christ in the New Testament. The characteristics of the Atonement must be reflected in the gospel:

(a) Perfection — ‘full salvation now, ’ (b) Assurance — Romish and Protestant tendencies (c) Finality — what justification means.

(2) There may be various ways of approaching this central truth of the Christian faith — our Lord’s method with His disciples, Kierkegaard on the sense in which the Father comes before the Son, though no man comes to the Father but through the Son, Relation in Christ of Example and Reconciler — what is our point of contact with Christ?

(3) St. Paul’s meaning in delivering ‘first of all’ that Christ died for our sins

(4) Sense of sin in relation to the Atonement (a) as the condition of accepting or understanding it; (b) as its fruit,

(5) The issues of this gospel — life or death,

Theological considerations:

(1) The Atonement is the key to the unity and therefore to the inspiration of Scripture. The inspiration of Scripture and its unity are correlative terms,

(2) The Atonement is the proper evangelical foundation for a doctrine of the Person of Christ. Harnack’s attempt to dispense with Christology — why it is impracticable,

(3) The Incarnation not intelligible or credible, except when defined by relation to the Atonement — speculative, ethical, and dogmatic reasons alleged against this — view of Westcott carried to its logical issue by Archdeacon Wilson. Grounds for rejecting this view:

(a) It shifts the center of gravity in the New Testament, (b) It puts metaphysical questions in the place of moral ones, (c) It displaces passion by sentimentalism,

(4) The Atonement is the basis for all adequate doctrine of God — sense in which the New Testament teaches that God is love — sin as that which is proof against such love,

(5) The Atonement at the foundation of Christian ethics as of Christian life — Law glorified in the Passion and made an irresistible, ethical impulses.

Chapter 7: The Atonement and the Modern Mind

Sense in which the Atonement and the Christian religion are equivalent, Sympathy and antipathy of the mind in relation to Christianity, The Atonement historically revealed, The modern mind and ‘authority, ’ Simplest expression for the Atonement: its basis in experience, The appeal against it to the Prodigal Son, Characteristics of the modern mind affecting its attitude to atonement, Those induced by the influence of physical and particularly of biological study — some favorable, some the reverse — Relation to the consciousness of sin, Those induced by the idealist movement in philosophy — disinclination or inability to take Christ at His own estimate, Those induced by the historical method of study — relativity of all things— no revelation of the eternal in time — this temper within the Church — significance of the Johannine books,

Two just requirements of the modern mind’

(1) Everything must be based on experience,

(2) Everything in religion must be ethically construed.

Chapter 8: Sin and the Divine Reaction against it

The situation to which the Atonement is related: that of sinful men, The relations of God and men are personal, But they are also ethical, i. e., determined by something of universal import — by law, This does not mean that they are ‘forensic’ or ‘legal’, St. Paul’s view on this point, The ethical relations of God and man have been disordered by sin, No theory of the origin of sin needed evolution and a fall universal experiences,

The reaction against sin:

(a) in conscience,

(b) in nature,

Ultimate unity of the natural and the moral order presupposed in the Scripture view of sin and atonement, Many arguments against atonement based on unreal separation of the natural and the moral order, Biblical Doctrine of Sin and Death: its real meaning, Not refuted by insensibility to death, Nor even by the ethical transformation of death into martyrdom.

Chapter 9: Christ and Man in the Atonement

Possible ideas about sin and forgiveness:

(1) Forgiveness is impossible,

(2) It may be taken for granted,

The Christian doctrine: it is mediated through atonement, The divine necessity for the Atonement — Athanasius and Anselm give imperfect expression to it — Paul on the e]ndeixiv th dikaiosu>nhv tou~ qeou~ in the propitiation, The human necessity for it — regenerative repentance the fruit of the Atonement,

Relation of the divine and the human necessity to each other, Definition of Christ’s relation to man in the Atonement, The conceptions of substitution and representation, The true relation of these two conceptions, Analogies to Christ’s Atonement, and their limits, Sense in which Christ’s life is absorbed in His death, Significance of the Resurrection in a true appreciation of the Atonement, Wrong inferences from Colossians 1: 24: Christ never ceases to be Redeemer, nor believers to be the redeemed.
