B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XL

THE SETTLEMENT OF THE CHURCH IN ILLINOIS—UNCERTAINTY—COMMERCE—NAUVOO

THERE is nothing in our church annals which indicates the objective point to which the saints intended to move when they began their flight from Missouri. Was it the intention of the main body of the church to move back to northern Ohio that led them eastward? The temple was there, and some still had claims upon lands in that vicinity. Others had come from points still further east, and from Canada. Was it their intention to return to their former homes, and was the church, if not on the eve of disintegration, at least upon the eve of seeing its membership scattered and the attempt to live together as a community for the exemplification of those principles for which the church stood, abandoned? There was much in the unsettled circumstances of the people to justify such a thought. It would seem also that as late as the 25th of March, 1839, President Joseph Smith had no definite plan to suggest as to a location for the people, then fleeing from Missouri, and taking temporary refuge in western Illinois. Under the date given the Prophet wrote from Liberty prison:

"Now brethren, concerning the places for the location of the saints, we cannot counsel you as we could if we were present with you; and as to the things that were written heretofore, we did not consider them anything very binding, therefore we now say once for all, that we think it most proper that the general affairs of the church, which are necessary to be considered, while your humble servant remains in bondage, should be transacted by a general conference of the most faithful and the most respectable of the authorities of the church, and a minute of those transactions may be kept, and forwarded from time to time, to your humble servant; and if there should be any corrections by the word of the Lord, they shall be freely transmitted, and your humble servant will approve all things whatsoever is acceptable unto God." [^1]

THE PROPHET UNDAUNTED

Yet it is clear that the Prophet's mind was undaunted, and that he was still determined to hold his people together as a community, and resume the work where it had been halted by the calamities that had befallen the church in Missouri. "I would suggest," said he in the communication above alluded to, "for the consideration of the conference, its being carefully and wisely understood by the council or conference that our brethren scattered abroad, who understand the spirit of the gathering, that they fall into the places and refuge of safety that God shall open unto them, between Kirtland and Far West. Those from the east and from the west, and from the far countries, let them fall in somewhere between those two boundaries, in the most safe and quiet places they can find; and let this be the present understanding, until God shall open a more effectual door for us for further considerations." [^2]

The Prophet further suggested for the consideration of the conference "that there be no organization of large bodies upon common stock principles in property, or of large companies or firms, until the Lord shall signify it in a proper manner, as it opens such a dreadful field for the avaricious, the indolent, and the corrupt-hearted to prey upon the innocent and virtuous, and honest." [^3]

This was all in the way of plans for settlement that had been devised.

QUINCY, ILLINOIS—KINDLY RECEPTION OF THE SAINTS

The principal point of exodus from Missouri was Quincy, Illinois. This place was chosen, doubtless, because it was in the direct line of the movement eastward, and also because of its ferriage facilities. Quincy is located on the east bank of the Mississippi on a limestone bluff, one hundred and twenty-five feet above low water mark. Quincy bay is an arm of the river and affords a natural harbor for river craft. Three years after the arrival of the first white settlers, 1825, it was laid out a town. It was not made a town, however, until 1834; in 1839 it became an incorporated city.

A kind reception was given to the exiled saints by the people of Quincy and vicinity. [^4] The spectacle of a people in free, America being driven from their homes and expelled from one of the states of the American union on account of their religion, might well arouse the indignation and excite the sympathy of the people of other states. The Democratic Association of Quincy was especially active in the interests of the exiles. In the month of February a meeting was called by this association to inquire into the situation of the "Mormon" exiles. [^5] At this first meeting all that was done was to pass a resolution, to the effect that the people called the Latter-day Saints were in a situation requiring the aid of the people of Quincy. A committee of eight was appointed to call a general meeting of both citizens and "Mormons," and to receive a statement from the latter of their condition, with a view to having their necessities relieved. The second meeting was held in the courthouse, and the special committee appointed at the first meeting reported its labors. The committee had received statements from Sidney Rigdon and others in relation to the expulsion of the Latter-day Saints from Missouri, and suggested a series of resolutions setting forth that the exiled strangers were entitled to the sympathy and aid of the people of Quincy; that a numerous committee, composed of individuals from every part of the town, be appointed to allay the prejudices of the misguided citizens of Quincy, and explain that it was not the design of the exiles to lower the wages of the laboring classes, but to secure something to save them from starvation; that a standing committed be appointed to relieve, so far as in their power, the wants of the destitute and homeless; and to use their utmost endeavors to procure employment for those who were able and willing to labor. The report closed by saying:

"We recommend to all the citizens of Quincy that in all their intercourse with the strangers, they use and observe a becoming decorum and delicacy, and be particularly careful not to indulge in any conversation or expression calculated to wound their feelings, or in any way to reflect upon those who, by every law of humanity, are entitled to our sympathy and commiseration."

This good work begun by the Democratic Association was continued by them for some time, and substantial assistance was given to the suffering exiles through these exertions. At a subsequent meeting of the association the following resolutions were adopted:

THE RIGHTS OF CONSCIENCE EXPOUNDED

"That we regard the right of conscience as natural and inalienable, and the most sacredly guaranteed by the Constitution of our free government;

That we regard the acts of all mobs in violation of law; and those who compose them individually responsible, both to the laws of God and man, for every depredation committed upon the property, rights, or life of any citizen;

That the inhabitants upon the western frontier of the state of Missouri, in their late persecution of the people denominated 'Mormons,' have violated the sacred rights of conscience and every law of justice and humanity;

That the governor of Missouri, in refusing protection to this class of people, when pressed upon by a heartless mob, and turning upon them a band of unprincipled militia, with orders encouraging their extermination, has brought a lasting disgrace upon the state over which he presides."

Thus with expressions of sympathy and material aid did the people of Quincy assist the exiles and bid them hope for better days. Nor was this kindly feeling confined to the people of Quincy and vicinity; it extended throughout the state; and especially was it exhibited by some of the leading men thereof, including Governor Carlin, Stephen A. Douglas, Dr. Isaac Galland and others.

A DOOR OPENED IN IOWA

While the great body of the church made its exit from Missouri via Quincy, all did not do so. Some went northward into the then territory of Iowa. Among these was a brother Israel Barlow, who, taking a northeasterly course from Far West, struck the Des Moines river a short distance above its mouth. He was without food and destitute of clothing. Making his wants known to the people living in that locality, they kindly supplied him with food and raiment. To them he related the story of the persecution of the Latter-day Saints in Missouri, and how his people, poor and destitute as himself, were fleeing from the state en mass. His relation of the sufferings of the saints, and the cruelties heaped upon them by their heartless persecutors, enlisted the sympathies of his hearers, and they gave him letters of introduction to several gentlemen, among which was one to Dr. Isaac Galland, a gentleman of some influence, living at Commerce, a small settlement on the banks of the Mississippi, in Illinois.

Dr. Galland owned considerable land in Commerce and vicinity; also he had claims upon an immense tract of land in Iowa called the "half-breed land." [^6] He wrote the saints located in Quincy that several farms could doubtless be rented in his locality, and that perhaps some fifty families could be accommodated at Commerce. In addition to this offer of lands made to the church, another and a previous one had been made of twenty thousand acres, between the Des Moines and the Mississippi rivers, (the half-breed tract). This tract could have been purchased at two dollars per acre, to be paid in twenty annual payments without interest. A conference was convened at Quincy in February, and the advisability of making the purchase and settling the saints in a body came up for consideration. It was decided by the conference that it was not advisable to locate lands at that time.

Subsequently, however, on the ninth day of March, the saints having received further offers of land in Illinois and Iowa, called another public meeting and appointed a committee to go and examine the lands offered. In Iowa the people and officers of the territory expressed a kindly feeling toward the exiles. The governor of Iowa—Robert Lucas—had known many of the saints in Ohio, and testified to Dr. Galland that the "Mormon" people, when they were in Ohio, were good citizens, and he respected them as such now, and would treat them accordingly, should they, or any part of them, decide to settle in Iowa. The governor's statement is made in answer to a letter of inquiry on the subject of the "Mormons" settling in Iowa. He wrote to Dr. Isaac Galland as follows:

GOVERNOR ROBERT LUCAS (IOWA) TO DR. ISAAC GALLAND (COMMERCE)

"Executive Office, Iowa, Burlington, March, 1839.

Dear Sir:—On my return to this city, after a few weeks absence in the interior of the territory, I received your letter of the 25th ultimo, in which you give a short account of the suffering of the people called 'Mormons,' and ask 'whether they could be permitted to purchase lands, and settle upon them, in the territory of Iowa, and there worship Almighty God according to the dictates of their own consciences, secure from oppression,' etc.

In answer to your inquiry, I would say, that I know of no authority that can constitutionally deprive them of this right. They are citizens of the United States, and are entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens. The 2nd section of the 4th article of the Constitution of the United States (which all are solemnly bound to support), declares that the 'citizens of each state shall be entitled to all the privileges and immunities of citizens of the several states.' This privilege extends in full force to the territories of the United States. The first amendment to the Constitution of the United States declares that congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.'

The ordinance of congress of the 13th of July, 1787, for the government of the territory northwest of the river Ohio, secures to the citizens of said territory, and the citizens of the states thereafter to be formed therein, certain privileges which were, by the late act of congress organizing the territory of Iowa, extended to the citizens of this territory.

The first fundamental article in that ordinance, which is declared to be forever unalterable, except by common consent, reads as follows, to wit: 'No person demeaning himself in a peaceable and orderly manner, shall ever be molested on account of his mode of worship, or religious sentiments in said territory.'

These principles, I trust, will ever be adhered to in the territory of Iowa. They make no distinction between religious sects. They extend equal privileges and protection to all; each must rest upon its own merits, and will prosper in proportion to the purity of its principles, and the fruit of holiness and piety produced thereby.

With regard to the peculiar people mentioned in your letter, I know but little. They had a community in the northern part of Ohio for several years; and I have no recollection of ever having heard in that state of any complaints against them from violating the laws of the country. Their religious opinions, I consider have nothing to do with our political transactions. They are citizens of the United States, and are entitled to the same political rights and legal protection that other citizens are entitled to.

The foregoing are briefly my views on the subject of your inquiries. With sincere respect,

I am your obedient servant,

To Isaac Galland, Esq. [Signed] "Robert Lucas."

Commerce, Illinois."

This communication Dr. Galland sent to the Quincy Argus, accompanied by the following note.

"Commerce, Illinois, April 12, 1839.

Messrs. Editors:—

Enclosed I send you a communication from Governor Lucas of Iowa territory. If you think the publication thereof will in any way promote the cause of justice, by vindicating the slandered reputation of the people called 'Mormons,' from the ridiculous falsehoods which the malice, cupidity and envy of their murderers in Missouri have endeavored to heap upon them, you are respectfully solicited to publish it in the Argus. The testimony of Governor Lucas as to the good moral character of these people, I think will have its deserved influence upon the people of Illinois, in encouraging our citizens in their humane and benevolent exertions to relieve this distressed people, who are now wandering in our neighborhood without comfortable food, raiment, or a shelter from the pelting storm.

I am, gentlemen, very respectfully,

Your obedient servant,

[Signed] "Isaac Galland."

In conversation with Dr. Galland, Isaac Van Allen, Esq., attorney general for Iowa, gave him to understand that he would, so far as within his power, protect the "Mormon" people from insult and injury. It was these assurances of sympathy and protection which led to a reconsideration of the conclusion of the former conference, and the appointment of a committee to examine the lands offered. But little or nothing was ever done by this committee.

INITIAL PURCHASE OF LANDS AT COMMERCE

As before stated, [^7] Joseph Smith arrived in Quincy on the 22nd of April. The day following he spent in greeting his friends, and receiving visits from the brethren, but on the twenty-fourth he called and presided over a conference, at which, in connection with Bishop Knight and Alanson Ripley, he was appointed to go to Iowa to select a place for the gathering of the exiled saints. The conference also advised the brethren, who could do so, to go to Commerce and locate in Dr. Galland's neighborhood.

On the first of May the committee purchased from Hugh White, a farm of one hundred and thirty-five acres, for which they agreed to pay five thousand dollars; also another and a larger farm of Dr. Galland for nine thousand dollars. This was the first purchase of lands made in Commerce. The place is thus described by the Prophet: "When I made the purchase of White and Galland, there was one stone house, three frame houses, and two block houses, which constituted the whole city of Commerce."

This small collection of houses was immediately on the banks of the river, and scattered between them and what afterwards became the south part of the city of Nauvoo, were one stone and three log houses. Back some distance from the river, however, were other dwellings scattered over the country, one of which was the home of Daniel H. Wells, a justice of the peace for the district of Commerce, and who afterwards became a prominent church leader, one of the counselors, in fact, in the first presidency of the church.

Later, when referring to the purchase of lands about Commerce, the Prophet Joseph said:

"The place was literally a wilderness. The land was mostly covered with trees and bushes, and much of it was so wet that it was with the utmost difficulty that a footman could get through, and totally impossible for teams. Commerce was unhealthy, very few could live there; but believing that it might become a healthy place by the blessing of heaven to the saints, and no more eligible place presenting itself, I considered it wisdom to make an attempt to build up a city."

SUBSEQUENT PURCHASES OF LANDS

Having spoken of the first purchase of lands at Commerce, it may not be amiss here to say that subsequently more extensive purchases were made of Dr. Galland and Messrs. Hubbard, Wells, Hotchkiss, Hiram Kimball, and others. Considerable difficulty and embarrassment to President Smith personally and to the church in general arose over misunderstandings about the Hotchkiss land purchase. Hotchkiss sold to Joseph Smith for the church upwards of five hundred acres of land in Commerce, for which he was to receive fifty-three thousand five hundred dollars, half to be paid in ten years, and the remainder in twenty years. This amount was secured to Hotchkiss Company by two notes, one payable in ten years and the other in twenty, signed by Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith and Sidney Rigdon. The difficulty connected with this extensive land purchase arose from some exchanges that were made of property in the east by some of the saints, for its equivalent in value in land out of the Hotchkiss purchase in Commerce; the matter, however, was finally amicably settled.

DR. ISAAC GALLAND: GENEROSITY OF TO THE SAINTS

The terms on which Dr. Galland let the church have lands were extremely advantageous to the saints. He sold at a reasonable rate, and on long credit, that the people might not be distressed in paying for the inheritance they purchased. In addition to the first purchase, he exchanged lands with the saints in the vicinity of Commerce for lands in Missouri, to the value of eighty thousand dollars. And he gave them a good title to the same. He is described as a man of literary attainments and extensive information and influence. All of which he used for the good of the exiles in giving them a standing among his friends. Finally he joined the church (July 3rd, 1839), thus casting in his lot with the exiled people he had so materially assisted. [^8]

In addition to these land purchases the church made others; some of them even more extensive than those already mentioned. The village of Nashville, in Lee county, Iowa, and twenty thousand acres of land adjoining, was bought. Another purchase also in Iowa was made by Bishop Knight, and a settlement was started there called Zarahemla, which was opposite to Nauvoo on the Iowa side of the Mississippi river. This place was organized into a stake of Zion, but in January, 1842, the stake organization was discontinued, though Zarahemla continued as an organized branch of the church.

Stakes of Zion in the following year were organized at Lima, in Illinois; also at Quincy, in Adams county, for the benefit of the saints who continued there. Another stake was organized at Columbus, in Adams county, Illinois, known as Mount Hope stake; besides these stakes, branches of the church were organized in various parts of Lee county, Iowa, and Adams and Hancock counties, Illinois. But as Nauvoo rose from the swamps and underbrush of Commerce, and, under the industry and enterprise of the saints, and the blessings of God developed into a healthy, beautiful and prosperous commercial and manufacturing city, these stake organizations in the surrounding country were discontinued and Nauvoo became the one great gathering place.

NAUVOO—COMMERCE TRANSFORMED INTO

The name "Commerce" by which the little cluster of houses on the banks of the Mississippi was called, was early changed by Joseph Smith to "Nauvoo." The word Nauvoo comes from the Hebrew, and signifies beautiful location; "carrying with it also," says Joseph Smith, "the idea of rest." And indeed, the location of the city is beautiful. It stands on a bold point around which sweeps the placid, but majestic "Father of Waters"—the Mississippi. The city is nearly half encircled by that noble stream. From its banks the ground rises gradually for at least a mile where it reaches the common level of the prairie that stretches out to the eastward, farther than the eye can reach, in a beautifully undulating surface, once covered by a luxuriant growth of natural grasses and wild flowers, with here and there patches of timber; but now chequered with an endless succession of meadows and cultivated fields.

Opposite Nauvoo, on the west bank of the river, the bluffs rise rather abruptly, almost from the water's edge, and were covered at the time of the advent of the saints in Illinois, with a fine growth of timber. Nestling at the foot of one of the highest of these bluffs, and immediately on the bank of the river, is the little village of Montrose, and back of these bluffs before mentioned, rolled off the alternate prairie and woodlands of Iowa. Between Montrose and Nauvoo, and perhaps two-thirds of the distance across the river from the Illinois side, is an island, from three-fourths of a mile to a mile in length, and from fifty to one or two hundred yards in width, having its greatest extent north and south.

Nauvoo is situated just at the head of what are called the Des Moines Rapids, about one hundred and ninety miles above St. Louis. These rapids were a serious obstacle to the navigation of the Mississippi at this point, as in the season of low water they could not be passed by the steamboats playing the river. This difficulty, however, was later obviated by the general government building a fine canal, running parallel with the west bank of the river, from Keokuk to Montrose, a distance of twelve or fifteen miles, at a cost of several millions of dollars.

Such is the location of Nauvoo; such its immediate surroundings.

NOTES

(a) ECONOMIC CONTRIBUTIONS: Much has been made of the kind reception given to the exiled saints by the people of Quincy and of western Illinois quite generally. Far be it from me to detract one iota from the kindness of those who extended the helping hand to the saints in the hour of their distress. Many were the acts of disinterested kindness extended to them by the people of Quincy and western Illinois; and every such act I am sure was and is remembered both by those who were the direct recipients of such acts of kindness and by their grateful descendants. But speaking of this reception of the saints en mass, by Illinois, and leaving out of consideration for the moment—since they have already been acknowledged—the individual acts of kindness bestowed upon the exiles, was this reception of the saints by Illinois wholly disinterested? Were there no benefits which the saints could bestow upon the state in return for the heartiness of the reception given? Would it not have been, under all the circumstances, the gravest of blunders for Illinois to have refused asylum to these exiles? Is it to be presumed that the public men of western Illinois were so blind to their own interests as not to see in these twelve or fifteen thousand people a mighty advantage to the state? It is true they were poor in this world's goods; but they were rich in labor power, and their reputation for habits of sobriety and of industry had preceded them. Here were thousands of husbandmen seeking lands. Illinois had thousands of acres of unoccupied lands awaiting husbandmen. How shortsighted and unstatesman-like it would have been for the men of Illinois not to have welcomed these settlers into their state? With half an eye it is easy to see that the benefits of this reception of the exiled "Mormons" by Illinois is not by any means a one-sided affair; and it would be doing an injustice to the intelligence of the people of that state to suppose they were blind to these advantages. This will more fully appear when other conditions are taken into account. Illinois has an area of 56,650 square miles; and at the time of the advent of the saints in that state a white population of less than four hundred thousand, as against a present population of more than five and a half millions. [^9] It will be seen then, that in 1839, the year of the advent of the saints into that state, Illinois was very sparsely settled, and needed above all things for her development and prosperity, people to subdue her wilderness and cultivate her rich lands, especially people desirous of making homes, and becoming permanent citizens. Moreover, Illinois had recently launched an extensive system of internal improvements by state aid. This system included the construction of 1,300 miles of railroads in the state, besides provisions for the improvement of the navigation of the Kaskaskia, Illinois, Great and Little Wabash, and Rock rivers. Also the construction of a canal from Lake Michigan to the navigable waters of the Illinois river, a distance of more than one hundred miles (from Chicago to Peru). To carry out this system of internal improvements the state legislature of 1836-7 had appropriated the sum of $12,000,000; and to raise the money, state bonds were placed on the stock markets of the eastern states and in England. It is not my province here even to note the wisdom or unwisdom of this policy of wholesale state aid for these internal improvements; let the wisdom or unwisdom be what it may, these conditions emphasized Illinois' demand for population, and again makes it evident that it would have been the height of folly for the people of that state to do other than give hearty welcome to this body of population so rich in labor power; so potent in wealth-producing energy.

(b) POLITICAL CONSIDERATIONS: Another thing to be noted is the fact that about the time of the advent of the saints into Illinois, political parties were just taking form in the state, and it is within the record of the facts in the case, as well as of great likelihood, that a desire for obtaining political advantage was at least in the background of motives prompting the heartiness of the reception to the saints. [^10]

Illinois was admitted into the Union in 1818, but it is a matter of common knowledge that in the early years of her history as a state, her officers were elected not on any well defined political party principles, but chiefly on the strength of the personality of the candidates and the special things for which they individually stood. Indeed, it was not until 1830 that anything like party lines were drawn in the state, and that it became a battle ground for the two great national parties, Whigs and Democrats. It was a committee from a Democratic party organization in Quincy, Illinois, that took the initiative in welcoming the saints into the state, and strive how one may, it is difficult to think there was not some political advantage sought through this action. On the other hand, the Whigs were not slow to urge upon the incoming exiles that it was a Democratic state and a Democratic administration in that state which had not only permitted, but had really ordered their expulsion from Missouri, and that doubtless the injustice they had suffered was owing to Democratic ideas of the administration of government. Joseph Smith, the Prophet, found it necessary to reprove some of his people who were rapidly making the question of their expulsion from Missouri a political party question in Illinois. This effort to win the saints to one political party or the other, continued to be a factor in their affairs so long as they remained at Nauvoo.

Footnotes

"Accordingly, we find that in February, 1839, the Democratic Association of Quincy, at a public meeting in the courthouse, received a report from a committee previously appointed, strongly in favor of the refugees, and adopted resolutions condemning the treatment of the Mormons by the people and officers of Missouri. The Quincy Argus declared that, because of this treatment, Missouri was now so fallen that we could wish her star stricken out from the bright constellation of the Union. In April, 1839, Rigdon wrote to the 'saints in prison' that Governor Carlin of Illinois and his wife 'enter with all the enthusiasm of their nature' into his plan to have the governor of each state present to congress the unconstitutional course of Missouri toward the Mormons, with a view to federal relief. * * * The business reason for the welcome of the Mormons in Illinois and Iowa was the natural ambition to secure an increase of population. In all of Hancock county there were in 1830 only 483 inhabitants, as compared with 32,215 in 1900." (Story of the Mormons, Linn, p. 221).

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxiv.
[^2] Ante, this History, ch. xli.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxiv.
[^4] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, p. 331.
[^5] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 12; cf, Malachi iv, 5, 6.
[^6] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xix.
[^7] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxviii, 34.
[^8] Ibid, verse 35.
[^9] In evidence of the lofty spirit in which the revelation is pitched, and the sublimity of its style as literature, the opening paragraphs are here reproduced, which may be regarded as the preface to the noble theme in the body of the revelation:
[^10] The quotations in the above are from Catholic Belief, Bruno, D. D., of the Roman catholic church, ch. xxxvii, pp. 185-192. As all works of the Roman catholic church accessible to me have nothing on the different degrees of glory in which men will spend eternity, I conclude that Roman catholic teaching is that they who finally attain unto heaven are all equal in glory. So that in the last analysis of the matter, Roman catholic doctrine falls as far below the great truth that God has revealed upon the subject of the future estate of man, as the doctrine of orthodox Protestant christendom.
