B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XLIII

RECONSTRUCTION OF QUORUMS IN THE CHURCH—LAYING THE CORNER STONES OF THE NAUVOO TEMPLE—DOCTRINAL DEVELOPMENT

IN the meantime important changes in the church organization were pending. An important revelation was received on the nineteenth of January, 1841, which provided for filling the vacancies in the several quorums of the priesthood, and a re-confirmation of all the authorities of the church. Hyrum Smith, who had stood in the position of counselor in the first presidency, since the rejection of Frederick G. Williams by the church, on the seventh of November, 1837—was appointed to succeed his father as patriarch to the church; to hold the sealing blessings of the church, even the Holy Spirit of Promise, whereby the saints are sealed up unto the day of redemption, that they may not fall, notwithstanding the day of temptation that might come upon them. He was also appointed a prophet, seer and revelator, as well as President Joseph Smith with whom he was to act in concert, and from whom he was to receive counsel. The Prophet was to show unto him the keys whereby he might "ask and receive," and be crowned with the same blessing and glory and honor and priesthood, and gifts of the priesthood "that once," said the Lord, "were put upon him that was my servant Oliver Cowdery." [^1]

Joseph Smith was given to be the presiding elder of the church, to be a translator, a revelator, a seer and prophet. Sidney Rigdon was admonished of his neglect of duty, and his lack of faith; he was told, however, that if he would repent of his sins and stand in his place and calling, he might continue to act as counselor to President Joseph Smith, and the Lord promised to heal him, and make him powerful in testimony.

THE COMING OF WILLIAM LAW

William Law, whom, it will be remembered, the Prophet first met at Springfield, Illinois, when the latter was en route for Washington—Law then leading a small company of saints to Nauvoo from Canada [^2]—was appointed to fill the vacancy in the first presidency made by the appointment of Hyrum Smith to the office of patriarch. And such blessings and spiritual powers were pronounced upon him by the Lord, on condition of his faithfulness, as seldom falls to the lot of man.

BRIGHAM YOUNG—PRESIDENT OF THE TWELVE

Brigham Young was appointed the president of the twelve apostles, and direction was given to appoint another man to fill the vacancy made in the quorum through the death of David W. Patten, who was killed at the Battle of Crooked River, in Missouri. The seven presidents of the seventy were appointed; the high council for Nauvoo was named, and a presidency given to the high priests; and all the quorums of the priesthood both in the Melchizedek and the Aaronic divisions were set in order, so far as the appointments of the presidencies were concerned.

THE NAUVOO HOUSE

Besides setting the priesthood in order, the Lord in this revelation required that a house should be built in his name; "a house worthy of all acceptation; that the weary traveler may find health and safety while he contemplates the word of the Lord." President Smith and his family were to have right of permanent residence in it; and it was to be known as the "Nauvoo House," and built in the name of the Lord. The holding of individual stock was to range from fifty dollars to fifteen thousand dollars; that is to say, none could hold less than fifty dollars, and no one was to hold more than fifteen thousand dollars of the stock; it was to be a house of the people. And it was specially provided that only those who believed in the Book of Mormon and the revelations of God were permitted to hold stock in the house.

A TEMPLE TO BE BUILT—ITS USES

In addition to this commandment to build the Nauvoo House, the Lord told the saints that there was not a place found on the earth to which he might come and restore that which was lost, or which had been taken away, "even the fulness of the priesthood;" nor was there a baptismal font upon the earth where the saints might be "baptized for the dead."

The doctrine of baptism for the dead had been made known to the saints sometime previous to this, and the ordinance had been performed in the Mississippi and other convenient places; but this is an ordinance of God's house, and cannot be acceptable to him when performed elsewhere, only in the days of the poverty of his people. And as more prosperous times had now dawned upon the church, the saints were required to build a temple to the name of the Most High; and they were informed that they were granted sufficient time to build a temple, and if they failed to build it by the expiration of that appointed time, they should "be rejected as a church together with their dead."

To show to the church the importance of erecting this temple, the Lord reminded them how he had commanded Moses to build a tabernacle, that the children of Israel could bear with them into the wilderness, that those ordinances might be revealed which had been hidden from before the foundation of the world. Therefore said the Lord—

"Let this house be built unto my name that I may reveal mine ordinances therein, unto my people. For I design to reveal unto my church things which have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world, things which pertain to the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times; and I will show unto my servant Joseph all things pertaining to this house, and the priesthood thereof; * * * and ye shall build it on the place where you have contemplated building it, for that is the spot which I have chosen for you to build it." [^3]

The location which the saints had contemplated as the site for the temple was on a bold eminence overlooking the river, the landscape on the Iowa side, and all the surrounding country for miles around. It was not only by far the noblest site in Nauvoo for a temple, but ideal in its fitness.

The sixth of April, 1841, was a memorable day in the history of Nauvoo. That day the corner stones of the great temple which God had commanded his people to build were laid. To the Prophet Joseph the day must have been a veritable gleam of sunshine amid the constantly renewing storms of his eventful career. It was a beautiful day, clear and balmy—auspicious for the exercises to take place.

Early in the morning there was a hurrying to and fro in the streets of militiamen, for the presence of sixteen uniformed companies of the Nauvoo legion was to add brightness and interest to the imposing ceremonies. A great procession was formed and marched to the temple site. Here the legion was formed in a hollow square surrounding the excavations made for the foundation of the temple, and enclosing the officers of the legion, choir, citizens and prominent elders of the church who were to lay the corner stones of that structure. Sidney Rigdon was the orator of the occasion; and, doubtless owing to the recent admonition he had received—to which reference has already been made—he was aroused from his lethargy for the time. At any rate, on this occasion he is said to have spoken with his old fervor and eloquence. He reviewed the trials of the past, the blessings they then enjoyed, the brightening prospects of the future, and dwelt at some length upon the importance of building temples, and the labor to be performed in them.

At the conclusion of the oration, at the direction of the first presidency, the architects lowered the southeast corner stone to its place, and President Smith said:

"This principal corner stone in representation of the first presidency, is now duly laid in honor of the great God; and may it there remain until the whole fabric is completed; and may the same be accomplished speedily; that the saints may have a place in which to worship God, and the Son of Man may have where to lay his head."

To which Sidney Rigdon added:

"May the persons employed in the erection of this house be preserved from all harm while engaged in its construction, till the whole is completed, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, even so, amen."

Thus was laid the chief corner stone of the Nauvoo temple. The ceremonies attending upon the event occupied the entire forenoon. In the afternoon the remaining corner stones were laid amid the continued rejoicing of the saints; and even strangers forgot their prejudices and joined with hearty good will, as interested spectators of the proceedings. "Such an almost countless multitude of people," says one enthusiastic account of the scenes of the day, written at the time, "moving in harmony, in friendship, in dignity, told with a voice not easily misunderstood, that they were a people of intelligence, and virtue, and order; in short, that they were saints; and that the God of love, purity and light, was their God, their exemplar and director; and that they were blessed and happy." [^4]

While on this subject, I quote the instructions on temple building from the Prophet:

"If the strict order of the priesthood were carried out in the building of temples, the first stone will be laid at the southeast corner, by the first presidency of the church. The southwest corner should be laid next. The third, or northwest corner next; and the fourth or northeast corner the last.

The first presidency should lay the southeast corner stone and dictate who are the proper persons to lay the other corner stones.

If a temple is built at a distance, and the first presidency are not present, then the quorum of the twelve apostles are the proper persons to dictate the order for that temple; and in the absence of the twelve apostles, then the presidency of the stake will lay the southeast corner stone. The Melchizedek priesthood laying the corner stones on the east side of the temple, and the lesser priesthood [i. e. Aaronic] priesthood those on the west side."

During the remaining days of the conference, opened with such splendid ceremonies, the saints were instructed in principle and doctrine, the quorums of the priesthood were arranged in their proper order and the important questions of business sumitted to each quorum separately and voted upon; especially the names of those whom God had appointed and reappointed to fill the respective positions alluded to in the revelation above quoted.

Besides this, the several charters of Nauvoo, the Legion, University, Agricultural and Manufacturing Association, Nauvoo House Association, etc., were read and accepted by the people. Lyman Wight was sustained to fill the vacancy in the quorum of the twelve, occasioned by the death of David W. Patten. John C. Bennett was presented in connection with the first presidency as "assistant president" until Sidney Rigdon's health should be restored. Everything necessary for the welfare, happiness and prosperity of the saints was considered, and preparations made to push the work of God forward in all its departments. The conference lasted from Wednesday morning until Sunday night; and certainly was one of the most important ever held by the church.

The circumstances surrounding the saints at the time of this conference were of a character to bid them hope that Nauvoo would be to them "a safe retreat." The friendship of nearly all of the leading men of the state; the universal sympathy felt by the people of Illinois for the victims of Missouri's fury; the action of the state legislature in granting the several charters noted in chapter xlii of this History, all supported the hopes entertained.

SALVATION FOR THE DEAD

Reference has been made several times in this chapter to the ordinance of baptism for the dead, in connection with the corner stones of the Nauvoo temple; this is therefore a proper place to give an account of the development of that doctrine.

The foundation for the doctrine of salvation for the dead was laid in the very inception of the New Dispensation. On the occasion of the first visit of the angel Moroni to the Prophet, on the night of the 21st of September, 1823, among other ancient prophecies quoted by him, and which he declared was soon to be fulfilled, was the prophecy in the fourth chapter of Malachi in relation to the future coming of Elijah the prophet, "before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord." As quoted by the angel there was a slight variation in the language from King James' version, as follows:

"Behold, I will reveal unto you the priesthood by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers; if it were not so, the whole world would be wasted at his coming." [^5]

Here the promise is made, that in consequence of the restoration of a certain priesthood, or special keys held by Elijah, the promises made to the fathers shall be planted in the hearts of the children, "and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers." Why? For a complete answer to that question the church waited some years. Again, and still early in the history of the work, namely, March, 1830, the Lord in a revelation to Martin Harris through the Prophet Joseph, added another line or two of knowledge to this doctrine; knowledge which pushed out of the horizon of men's conceptions the terrible and unjust doctrine respecting the "eternal punishment" which God is supposed by orthodox, sectarian christendom to inflict eternally upon those who fail to obey the gospel in this life, and also those who died ignorant of it. In explanation of the terms, "eternal punishment," and "everlasting punishment," sometimes found in Holy Writ, the Lord said to the Prophet: "Behold, I am endless, and the punishment which is given from my hand is endless, for Endless is my name. Wherefore—

"Eternal punishment is God's punishment.

Endless punishment is God's punishment." [^6]

That is to say, the punishment takes the name of him in whose name it is inflicted; as if it were written, "Eternal's punishment," "Endless' punishment." And also, it must be understood, that the punishment itself is endless. That is, penalties always attend upon law, and follow its violation. That is an eternal principle. Law is inconceivable without accompanying penalties. But it does not follow that those who fall into transgression of law, and therefore under sentence of the Eternal's justice, will have to endure affliction of the penalty eternally. Justice can be satisfied. Mercy must be accorded her claims, and the culprit having been brought to repentance and taught obedience to law through the things which he has suffered, must go free. But only to suffer again the penalties of the law, if he again violates it; for laws and their penalties are eternal. Hence eternal punishment; hence endless punishment, administered again and again to the violator of the law, until he learns to live in harmony with law. For, on the one hand, as "that which is governed by law is also preserved by law, and perfected and sanctified by the same;" [^7] so "that which breaketh a law and abideth not by the law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself, and willeth to abide in sin and altogether abideth in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice, nor judgment. Therefore they [i. e. who persist in violation of law] must remain filthy still." [^8] Thus obedience to law becomes a savor of life unto life; while disobedience to law equally becomes a savor of death unto death.

PROGRESS IN THE DOCTRINE—THE VISION

In February, 1832, still further light was shed upon the subject of the different states or degrees of glory in which men will live in the future, by the revelation known as "The Vision." This revelation is one of the sublimest ever given to man. [^9] It utterly discredits and displaces the dogmas about the future of man held by modern christendom, or at least by Protestant christendom. The orthodox, Protestant view of man's future is that there are two states in one or the other of which man will spend eternity—in heaven or in hell. If one shall gain heaven, even by ever so small a margin, he will enter immediately upon a complete possession of all its unspeakable joys, equally with the angels and the holiest of saints. Not only in the "Shorter Catechisms," but in nearly all orthodox creeds the accepted doctrine is: "The souls of believers are at their death made perfect in holiness." On the other hand, if one shall miss heaven, even by ever so small a margin, he is doomed by sectarian creeds to everlasting torment equally with the wickedest of men and the vilest of devils, and there is no deliverance for him through all the countless ages of eternity!

It will be noted that I have excepted out of participating in the above view of man's future the Roman catholic church, by ascribing these views only to orthodox Protestant christendom. This is because the Roman catholic church doctrine slightly differs from the doctrine of the Protestants on this subject. That is catholics do not believe that all Christians at death go immediately into heaven, but on the contrary "believe that a Christian who dies after the guilt and everlasting punishment of mortal sins have been forgiven him, but who, either from want of opportunity, or through his negligence has not discharged the debt of temporal punishment due to his sin, will have to discharge that debt to the justice of God in purgatory." "Purgatory is a state of suffering after this life, in which those souls are for a time detained, which depart this life after their deadly sins have been remitted as to the stain and guilt, and as to the everlasting pain that was due to them, but which souls have, on account of those sins, still some temporal punishment to pay; as also those souls which leave this world guilty only of venial [that is pardonable] sins. In purgatory these souls are purified and rendered fit to enter into heaven, where nothing defiled enters." [^10]

THE BLENDED JUSTICE AND MERCY OF GOD

The doctrine in relation to the future state of man as revealed to Joseph Smith in the revelation called "The Vision," [^11] has for its central principles the justice and the mercy of God, which require that every man shall be judged according to his works, considered in the light of his intelligence, his consciousness of right and wrong, and the moral law under which he lived. If he lived in the earth when the gospel of Jesus Christ was not in the world, or if he lived at places or in circumstances where he did not learn of its existence, much less come to a knowledge of its truths, then the plain dictates of justice demand that some means must exist by which its sanctifying powers may be applied to him in the future; so also as to those who have even once rejected the truth (as in the case of the antediluvians who rejected the teaching of righteous Noah, and were disobedient, [^12] when once the long-suffering of God waited in vain in those days for their repentance), having paid the just penalty of their disobedience, then justice would demand that some means must exist by which the saving principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ may be applied to them; for only by the acceptance of the principles of the gospel, and obedience to its laws and ordinances as the means by which the grace of God is applied to man, can the sons of men hope for salvation. Then as men differ in degree of intelligence; in the intensity of their faith; in the heartiness of their obedience; in the steadiness of their fidelity; and inasmuch as there is the stern fact of human freedom and responsibility, and the possibility of a brief or long resistance to the will of God, even up to eternal resistance to that will, there is an infinitude of states of glory, of so-called rewards and punishments, in which man will live in the future. There is one glory of which the sun in heaven is spoken of as being typical; another of which the inferior light of the moon is typical; and another of which the varying light of the stars is typical. And even as one star differs from another star in glory, in light, so differ those states of existence in which men will live in the future, but each assigned to a place, to an environment, that corresponds to the status of this development, which is only the modern way of saying he shall be judged according to his works. These, in brief, are the underlying principles of this remarkable revelation.

THE PROPHET'S VISION OF ALVIN SMITH

In June, 1836, while attending to washings and anointings in the Kirtland temple, previous to its dedication, the Prophet received still further knowledge as to the future state of man. This was by means of a vision. He says:

"The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out, I cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; and also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and Son. I saw the beautiful streets of that kingdom, which had the appearance of being paved with gold. I saw fathers Adam and Abraham, and my father and mother, my brother, Alvin, that has long since slept, and marveled how it was that he had obtained an inheritance in that kingdom, seeing that he had departed this life before the Lord had set his hand to gather Israel the second time, and had not been baptized for the remission of sins. Thus came the voice of the Lord unto me saying—

All who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without receiving a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts.

And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven."

ELIJAH: THE MAN OF TWO WORLDS

The next step in the development of this doctrine of salvation for the dead was the coming of Elijah to "turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to the fathers," according to Malachi; to restore the priesthood and "plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers," by which "the hearts of the children shall be turned to the fathers," according to Moroni. Elijah committed the keys of this dispensation of turning the hearts of the fathers and children towards each other to Joseph Smith and to Oliver Cowdery. This took place in the Kirtland temple on the 3rd of April, 1836, [^13] as related in a previous chapter.

It will be remembered that Elijah was the ancient prophet who was "translated," without tasting death-i.e. his mortal life-was continued; and was he by this "translation" into heaven made a man of two worlds? Wholly perhaps of neither, but capable, because of this change of "translation," of administering in either or both worlds-earth or heaven-from time to time as the exigencies of his mission might require? And is this the significance of "translation," the right and the power to administer in both physical and spiritual worlds?

It was in the Nauvoo period that the doctrine of salvation for the dead was fully developed and active steps taken looking to the actual performance of ordinances in behalf of the dead.

After the revelation commanding the saints to build a temple, and prepare to proceed with baptisms for their dead, the subject was frequently expounded in Nauvoo, both by the Prophet and other leading elders. It was a theme upon which the twelve apostles dwelt in their epistles to the church both in America and in Great Britain. Baptisms for the dead were performed for some time in the Mississippi river, and later, November, 1841, in the baptismal font erected in the basement of the temple, and dedicated for that sacred purpose. For a time some irregularities obtained in relation to this ordinance owing to the overzeal and impatience of the church members, and the fact that the perfect knowledge of the order of it had not then been obtained, but it was developed later in this Nauvoo period of the history of the church.

It was a mighty stride forward in the doctrinal development of the church, this idea of the possibility of salvation for the dead through the administration of the ordinances of the gospel for and in their behalf by their kindred on earth. It greatly enlarged the views of the saints in relation to the importance and wide-spread effects of their work. The ends of the earth indeed converged in the labors of the saints henceforth, for their activities in the administrations of the holy ordinances of the gospel would affect all past generations as well as all generations to come. It was the bringing into view of a full half of the work which up to this time had lain hidden behind the horizon of men's conceptions of that "great and marvelous work" which God from the beginning declared was about to be brought forth among the children of men. [^14]

Footnotes

"Hear O ye heavens, and give ear O earth and rejoice ye inhabitants thereof, for the Lord is God, and beside him there is no Savior;

Great is his wisdom, marvelous are his ways, and the extent of his doings none can find out;

His purposes fail not, neither are there any who can stay his hand;

From eternity to eternity he is the same, and his years never fail.

For thus saith the Lord, I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto those who fear me, and delight to honor those who serve me in righteousness and in truth unto the end;

Great shall be the reward and eternal shall be their glory;

And to them will I reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom from days of old, and for ages to come will I make known unto them the good pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom;

Yea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come will I show them, even the things of many generations:

And their wisdom shall be great, and their understanding reach to heaven: and before them the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall come to naught;

For by my Spirit will I enlighten them, and by my power will I make known unto them the secrets of my will; yea, even those things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor yet entered into the heart of man." (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxvi:1-10).

Then follows the great revelation on the future state of man in the variously graded kingdoms of glory that shall exist. Neither the Psalmist, nor Isaiah has anything more noble or sublime in their contemplation of God than this; and Paul has nothing superior in all his writings. Neither Joseph Smith nor any of his associates, uninspired of God, were equal to it. There is but one way of accounting for it—it came of the inspiration of God.

---
Notas:
[^1] Commenting on this requisition of the governor of Missouri when first issued and under which an attempt was made to arrest Joseph Smith and others in 1840, the Times and Seasons editorially said: "These men do not feel disposed to try again the solemn realities of mob law in that state: * * * what a beautiful picture Governor Boggs has presented to the world, after driving twelve or fifteen thousand inhabitants from their homes, forcing them to leave the state under the pain of extermination, and confiscating their property, and murdering innocent men, women, and children; then, because that a few made their escape from his murdering hand, and have found protection in a land of equal rights * * * he now has the presumption to demand them back." (Times and Seasons for September, 1840).
[^2] As illustrating the love of the brethren for their Prophet leader, it should be stated that the arrest created great excitement in Nauvoo, and a party of seven men, under the leadership of Hosea Stout, left Nauvoo for Quincy, fifty miles distant, in a skiff, to render the Prophet any assistance in their power, and prevent, if possible, his enemies from taking him to Missouri. They struggled against a headwind all day, but reached Quincy at dusk, only to learn that Joseph had gone to Nauvoo in charge of Sheriff King and another officer. (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, p. 365).
[^3] The account of the trial from which the Browning excerpt is taken, was doubtless written by Robert B. Thompson, one of the editors of the Times and Seasons. (See History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, p. 369. Also Times and Seasons for June 15, 1841).
[^4] Doubtless one of the officers of the court—the sheriff of Warren county—thought Judge Douglas severe in his efforts to protect the prisoner. The courtroom was densely packed and the judge ordered the sheriff to keep the spectators back; but this he neglected and the judge fined him ten dollars. In a few minutes the order to keep the spectators from crowding the prisoner and witnesses was repeated, and the sheriff told the court that he had ordered a constable to do it. "Clerk," said Judge Douglas, "add ten dollars more to that fine." This was effectual, the sheriff after that did his duty. (See History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, p. 368).
[^5] The same writer—unknown—in the communication above quoted, describes his visit to Nauvoo, which is valuable for the side light it throws upon conditions obtaining among her citizens at that time: "Since the trial I have been at Nauvoo, on the Mississippi, in Hancock county, Illinois, and have seen the manner in which things are conducted among the Mormons. In the first place, I cannot help noticing the plain hospitality of the Prophet Smith, to all strangers visiting the town, aided as he is, in making the stranger comfortable by his excellent wife, a woman of superior ability. The people of the town appear to be honest and industrious, engaged in their usual vocations of building up a town, and making all things around them comfortable. On Sunday I attended one of their meetings, in front of the temple now building, and one of the largest buildings in the state. There could not have been less than 2,500 people present, and as well appearing as any number that could be found in this or any state. Mr. Smith preached in the morning, and one could have readily learned, then, the magic by which he had built up this society, because, as we say in Illinois, 'they believe in him,' and in his honesty. It has been a matter of astonishment to me, after seeing the Prophet, as he is called, Elder Rigdon, and many other gentlemanly men any one may sec at Nauvoo, who will visit there—why it is, that so many professing christianity, and so many professing to reverence the sacred principles of our Constitution (which gives free religious toleration to all), have slandered and persecuted this sect of Christians."
[^6] One such address was issued on the 15th of January, 1841; which, after appealing to the people of means within the church throughout the world to remove to Nauvoo, in order to "establish and build up manufactures in the city, purchase and cultivate farms in the country," and thus "prepare the way for the gathering of the poor"—was concluded in these words: "We wish it likewise to be distinctly understood, that we claim no privilege but what we feel cheerfully disposed to share with our fellow citizens of every denomination, and every sentiment of religion; and therefore say, that so far from being restricted to our own faith, let all who desire to locate themselves in this place, or the vicinity, come, and we will hail them as citizens and friends, and shall feel it not only a duty, but a privilege, to reciprocate the kindness we have received from the benevolent and kind-hearted citizens of the state of Illinois." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, p. 457).
[^7] The same spirit existed to some extent in Iowa as will be seen by the following occurrence, which happened in September, 1841: General Swazey, in command of the militia of Iowa, territory, invited Joseph and Hyrum Smith and General Bennett to attend the parade of the militia of the territory at Montrose. The invitation was accepted, and General Swazey received his visitors courteously, and so did the militia. But during the recess in the exercises taken at noon, a Mr. D. W. Kilburn tried to create a disturbance by circulating the following note among the militia troops:
[^8] Liverpool Route, p. 62. (The historical footnotes in the Route here quoted were supplied by Elder Franklin D. Richards, so long connected with the Church Historian's office).
[^9] Liverpool Route, p. 62.
[^10] Elder Orson Hyde was with them, en route for Jerusalem, and Willard Richards had been ordained to the apostleship after the arrival of the seven apostles who departed from Nauvoo as related in chapter xli.
[^11] History of the Life and Labors of Wilford Woodruff, Cowley, 1909, p. 144. Woodruff's statement also adds: "This was the first and only time in this dispensation that the twelve apostles sat in conference as a quorum in a foreign land." The apostles also set apart Orson Hyde for his mission to Jerusalem.
[^12] Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, p. 349.
[^13] The Millennial Star was the first foreign publication of the church. It was issued at first as a monthly, but afterwards more frequently, semi-monthly, and finally, and now for many years, a weekly. Its publication has been continuous from the time it was started until the present—1929. Also the Star has retained the general character imparted to it by its first publishers. "The Millennial Star," said its Prospectus, "will stand aloof from the common political and commercial news of the day. Its columns will be devoted to the spread of the fulness of the gospel—the restoration of the ancient principles of christianity—the gathering of Israel—the rolling forth of the kingdom of God among the nations—the signs of the times—the fulfillment of prophecy—recording the judgments of God as they befall the nations, whether signs in the heavens or in the earth, blood, fire, or vapor of smoke—in short, whatever is shown forth indicative of the coming of the 'Son of Man' and ushering in of his universal reign upon the earth."
[^14] Commenting in his journal under date of the 1st of August the Prophet says: "All the quorum of the twelve who were expected here this season, with the exception of Wilford Woodruff, have arrived. We have listened to the accounts which they give of their success, and the prosperity of the work of the Lord in Great Britain with pleasure. They certainly have been the instruments in the hands of God of accomplishing much, and must have the satisfaction of knowing that they have done their duty." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv. p. 390).
