B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XLIV

THE PROPHET'S TRIAL AT MONMOUTH—NAUVOO IN THE SUMMER OF 1841—BAPTISM FOR THE DEAD

THE attempt which was made by Missouri to extradite Joseph Smith in September, 1840, was renewed in the early part of June the following year. The Prophet had accompanied his brother Hyrum and William Law as far as Quincy en route to the eastern states on a mission to which Hyrum and Law had been appointed in the preceding January. While at Quincy the Prophet called upon Governor Carlin by whom he was cordially received, and with whom he had a pleasant interview. Nothing was said with reference to the impending arrest, nor was the fact mentioned that the old requisition from Missouri was to be again acted upon. The Prophet had reached Bear Creek on his return journey, a point some twenty-eight miles south of Nauvoo, when a sheriff's posse under the direction of Thomas King, sheriff of Adam's county, accompanied by an officer from Missouri, arrested him on the old Missouri charges of "murder, arson, burglary," etc.; and under the old requisition of 1840, claiming him as a fugitive from justice. [^1]

The Prophet returned to Quincy in company with the sheriff's posse and secured a writ of habeas corpus from Charles A. Warren, master in chancery. The same evening, Saturday, June 5th, Stephen A Douglas arrived in Quincy, and appointed the hearing on the writ to take place the following Tuesday, at Monmouth, Warren county, seventy-five miles northeast from Nauvoo. En route for the place of trial, Sheriff King was taken ill, and received the kindest attention at the hands of his prisoner, who personally waited upon him with all the tenderness of a brother.

THE PROPHET AT MONMOUTH

The advent of the Prophet and his party in Monmouth—he had been joined by a large number of his friends when passing through Nauvoo—created considerable excitement. [^2] He was invited to preach, but being a prisoner he thought it best not to accept the invitation. Amasa M. Lyman, however, preached in the courthouse on the evening following the arrival of the party.

The prejudice of the people of Monmouth was as excessive as it was blind. They employed at their own expense several attorneys to assist the prosecution, and declared that if there were any lawyers in the district who would even undertake the defense of the Prophet, they never need look to people of that county again for political favors. But there were strong men in attendance at the court, men not frightened by such threats, and whose souls despised the petty minds that could frame them; Joseph, therefore, was ably defended by Messrs. Charles A. Warren, Sidney H. Little, O. H. Browning, James H. Ralston, Cyrus Walker, and Archibald Williams. The pleadings of the lawyers for the defense were peculiarly affecting, since all of them were more or less acquainted with the condition of the saints when theyfled from the violence of the Missourians to Illinois. O. H. Browning, living at Quincy, had seen several of these companies of exiles in their flight from Missouri, and could trace them by blood left in their footprints on the snow; his recital of their sufferings moved Judge Douglas, most of the officers of the court, and the spectators to tears. One of the brethren present who wrote an account of the trial for the Times and Seasons, says:

"Mr. Browning concluded his remarks by saying that to tell the prisoner to go to Missouri for a trial was adding insult to injury, and then said: 'Great God! Have I not seen it! Yes, my eyes have beheld the blood-stained traces of innocent women and children, in the dreary winter, who had traveled hundreds of miles barefoot, through frost and snow, to seek a refuge from their savage pursuers. 'Twas a scene of horror, sufficient to have enlisted the sympathy of an adamantine heart. And shall this unfortunate man, whom their fury has seen proper to select for sacrifice, be driven into such a savage land, where none dare to enlist in the cause of justice? If there was no other voice under heaven ever to be heard in this cause, gladly would I stand alone, and proudly spend my last breath in defense of an American citizen'." [^3]

JUDGE STEPHEN A. DOUGLAS—FAIRNESS

The lawyers for the prosecution, according to the Prophet's own account, acted honorably and confined themselves to the merits of the case, excepting two—Messrs. Knowlton and Jennings. They made an appeal both to the passions and the prejudices of the people. Judge Douglas, however, was impartial in his rulings, and gave the prisoner the full protection he was entitled to both under the law, and the procedure of his court. [^4]

It was claimed for the prisoner in this case that he was unlawfully held, and could prove that the indictment upon which he was arrested had been obtained by fraud, bribery and duress. This line of defense, however, raised the question as to whether or not the court had the right to inquire into the merits of the case. A long debate between the opposing counsel followed. It will be remembered that an attempt to arrest President Joseph Smith on the requisition from the governor of Missouri had been made in September previous; and it appears that upon the fruitless effort to make the arrest, the sheriff of Hancock county made returns upon the writ; and the defense claimed that after the return of the writ to the executive, the defendant could not be again legally arrested upon it. It was upon this point that the court set the Prophet at liberty. Following is Judge Douglas' decision on this point:

"The writ being once returned to the executive by the sheriff of Hancock county was dead, and stood in the same relationship as any other writ which might issue from the circuit court, and consequently the defendant cannot be held in custody on that writ."

On the other point in the case—as to whether evidence on the merits of it was admissible—the judge withheld his opinion for further consideration, as the question was a grave one, involving the future conduct of the states in their relationship with each other; but on the ground that the writ was void by reason of a former return being made upon it by the sheriff of Hancock county, he ordered the discharge of the prisoner. Missouri was again foiled in her designs upon the liberty if not the life of the Prophet.

Judge Douglas incurred some local displeasure by reason of his fairness to the prisoner in the course of this trial, and because of it there arose some misrepresentation of his which was met by a Monmouth correspondent to the Juliet Courier as follows:

"As some misrepresentations have already gone abroad, in relation to Judge Douglas' decision, and the merits of the question decided by the judge; permit me to say, the only question decided, though many were debated, was the validity of the executive writ which had once been sent out, I think in September, 1840, and a return on it that Mr. smith could not be found. The same writ was issued in June, 1841. There can really be no great difficulty about this matter, under this state of facts. The judge acquitted himself handsomely, and silenced clamors that had been raised against the defendant." [^5]

PROSPERITY AT NAUVOO

By this time—the summer of 1841—Nauvoo was the most promising and thrifty city in Illinois, and the fame thereof extended throughout the nation, due, of course, to the peculiar religion of its inhabitants. Strangers from far and near made it a point to visit Nauvoo, and the peace, sobriety, industry and public spirit of the citizens challenged their admiration, whatever views they might entertain respecting the religion of her people. A large bowery was constructed just west of the temple site, where the people assembled for worship. Here the Prophet preached some of his most powerful discourses, and taught his people in the doctrine of the heavenly kingdom; and not unfrequently it happened that

"Fools who came to mock, remained to pray."

The saints never intended to make their city exclusively "Mormon." On the contrary, the people at Nauvoo expressed a willingness to unite with their fellow citizens in every good work and enterprise, and tolerate religious differences. Indeed, repeated invitations were sent out to the honorable men, not only of the state of Illinois, but of the United States, to men of capital and of influence and of integrity, asking them to come to Nauvoo, and assist in building up a large and splendid city. [^6]

In July, Sidney H. Little, of the state senate, was killed by leaping from his carriage, while his horse was unmanageable; and that the citizens of Nauvoo "might mourn with those who are called to mourn," the eighteenth day of July was set apart as a day of fasting and prayer among the people of Nauvoo. By thus manifesting a feeling of sympathy and interest, they sought to cultivate peace and good will among their fellow citizens, and a number of honorable men, while not accepting the faith of the saints, became friendly disposed towards them, and associated with them in various business enterprises.

But the good will of the saints was not very generally reciprocated by the people of Illinois; and there were, even at that early date, envyings and bitterness manifested by those who were jealous of the prosperity and increasing power of the "Mormons" in Nauvoo and vicinity. [^7]

CONCENTRATION AT NAUVOO

Early in the summer of 1841, the saints everywhere were called upon to come into Hancock county, that there might be a concentration of effort to build up Nauvoo. The proclamation closed with the following words:

"Let it therefore be understood that all the stakes excepting those in this county (Hancock) and in Lee county, Iowa, are discontinued: and the saints are instructed to settle in this county as soon as circumstances will permit."

Nauvoo by this time numbered more than 3,000 in population. Heber C. Kimball writing from there in July, 1841, shortly after his return with other of the twelve apostles from England, gives a vivid description of changes that had taken place in the city during the two years of his absence, and a pen picture of activities which must have been a daily program to achieve such results. "You know," he writes, "there were not more than thirty buildings in the city when we left about two years ago; but at this time there are 1,200; and hundreds of others in progress, which will soon be finished. On Friday last seventy saints came to Nauvoo, led by Larenzo Barnes, from Chester county, Pennsylvania, in wagons, living in tents by the way. On the next day a company came in wagons from Canada, all in good spirits, and in two or three days after, they all obtained places to live in. They are coming from all parts of this continent daily and hourly, and the work is spreading in all of this land and calls for preaching in all parts. You will all recollect when we built our houses in the woods there was not a house within a mile of us. Now the place, wild as it was at that time, is converted into a thickly populated village." [^8]

About the same time the St. Louis Atlas referred to Nauvoo as the largest town in Illinois:

"The population of Nauvoo is between 8,000 and 9,000, and of course, the largest town in the state of Illinois. How long the Latterday Saints will hold together and exhibit their present aspect, it is not for us to say. At this moment they present the appearance of an enterprising, industrious, sober and thrifty population, such a population, indeed, as in the respects just mentioned, have no rivals east, and we rather guess, not even west of the Mississippi." [^9]

RETURN OF THE TWELVE—THE WORK IN ENGLAND

The twelve apostles, whose departure from Nauvoo on their mission to England was noted in a former chapter, returned in July, 1841. They had accomplished a most remarkable mission in that distant land. It is doubtful if any religious movement in modern times was quite the equal of it. On the sixth of April, 1841, the general conference of the British Mission had convened at Carpenter's Hall, Manchester. Nine of the quorum of the twelve were present. [^10] "The total membership in the British Mission at that time," writes Elder Wilford Woodruff, "was represented as 5,814; and 800 besides had emigrated to America under the transportation of the church. [^11] There were also 136 elders, 303 priests, 169 teachers, and 68 Deacons. [^12]

On the eve of the departure of the twelve from England, Brigham Young in his Journal makes the following review of their labors, under the entry for—

April 20th. It truly seemed a miracle to look upon the contrast between our landing and departing from Liverpool. We landed in the spring of 1840, as strangers in a strange land and penniless. But through the mercy of God we have gained many friends, established churches in almost every noted town and city in the kingdom of Great Britain, baptized between seven and eight thousand, printed 5,000 Books of Mormon, 3,000 Hymn Books, 2,500 volumes of the Millennial Star, [^13] and 50,000 tracts, and emigrated to Zion 1,000 souls, established a permanent shipping agency, which will be a great blessing to the saints, and have left sown in the hearts of many thousands the seeds of eternal truth, which shall bring forth fruit to the honor and glory of God, and yet we have lacked nothing to eat, drink or wear: in all these things I acknowledge the hand of God."

The work had also extended into Scotland, Ireland and the Isle of Man under the ministry of the twelve while on this mission.

It has already been noted that the work in England was begun in 1837, under the direction of Heber C. Kimball and others; but the mission of the twelve to England, as a quorum, established the work in the British Isles on a broader and more permanent basis, and thence forward the body religious in America—Zion, was strengthened from this mission; and as much from the character as from the numbers of the British saints. [^14]

On the return of the twelve to Nauvoo—excepting Elder Parley P. Pratt, who remained in charge of the British Mission—they were immediately employed by President Joseph Smith in assisting him to build up Nauvoo. The minutes of a special conference held in August, represent the Prophet as saying that—

"The time had come when the twelve should be called upon to stand in their place next to the first presidency: and attend to the settling of emigrants and the business of the church at the stakes, and assist to bear off the kingdom victoriously to the nations."

The Prophet accordingly turned over to the twelve the direction of many of the temporal affairs in the building up of Nauvoo with which he had been perplexed, and devoted himself more exclusively to spiritual labors.

INDIAN CHIEF KEOKUK VISITS THE PROPHET

One of the most pleasing events that happened during the summer of 1841, was the visit of the Indian chief Keokuk to Nauvoo. He was accompanied by Kiskukosh, Appenoose, and about one hundred chiefs and braves of the Sac and Fox tribes, together with their families. They were brought over from the Iowa side on the ferry and two large flat boats. The legion band and a detachment of the legion met them at the landing, but as soon as Keokuk failed to recognize President Smith among those who had come to bid him welcome, he refused to land or allow any of his party to go ashore until the president made his appearance. The arrangement had been made for the band and the detachment of the legion to lead the Indian visitors to the grove where the saints held their meetings; and there President Smith would have joined them. But Keokuk seemed to have his own ideas in relation to the etiquette to be observed at his reception, and waited until the Prophet met him at the landing and bade him welcome to Nauvoo.

At the grove President Smith addressed the Indians at some length, upon what the Lord had revealed to him concerning their forefathers, and recited to them the promises contained in the Book of Mormon respecting themselves, the despised remnants of a once great race of people. How their hearts must have glowed as they listened to the Prophet relate the story of their forefathers—their rise and their fall; and the promises held out to them of redemption from their fallen state! In conclusion the Prophet counseled them to cease killing each other, and warring with other tribes, or with the whites.

To this speech Keokuk replied:

"I have a Book of Mormon at my wigwam that you gave me a number of moons ago. I believe you are a great and good man. Keokuk looks rough, but I am a son of the Great Spirit. I have heard your advice. We intend to quit fighting, and follow the good talk you have given us."

After the "talk," the Indians were feasted by the citizens of Nauvoo, and at the conclusion of the feast the visitors gave a specimen of their war dance to entertain the spectators, and then returned to the Iowa side of the river to their encampment.

The visit of Indians to Nauvoo continued occasionally through the remaining years of the Prophet's life; and as often as they came they were hospitably received and instructed as above described. The steel engraving accompanying this chapter is intended to typically represent these occasions.

EDWARD HUNTER

In September, Edward Hunter, who in later years, in Utah, became the presiding bishop of the church, came to Nauvoo. Mr. Hunter was a wealthy farmer living in Chester county, Pennsylvania, where his house for some time had been a home for the traveling elders of the church passing through Chester county. The Prphet himself had been entertained at the Hunter residence when he was returning from Washington, where he had been to plead the cause of his people before the national congress. Mr. Hunter, though of a deeply religious nature, had, under the advice of his father, refrained from identifying himself with any religious organization until the advent of "Mormonism" in his neighborhood, when he was so thoroughly impressed with its doctrines that he finally joined the church, Elder Orson Hyde baptizing him when the latter was en route for Jerusalem.

Being a man of considerable means, large business capacity, and liberal instincts, the coming of Edward Hunter to Nauvoo was an event of some moment. He made quite extensive purchases of town lots and farming lands on the occasion of his first visit, and shortly afterwards sold his farms and all his interests in Pennsylvania and removed to Nauvoo where he became identified with all the business activities of that thriving town. [^15]

The semi-annual conference which convened on the 2nd of October in Nauvoo, was a memorable one in the annals of the church. At the opening of it President Smith was was not present, being engaged that morning with others in laying the corner stone of the Nauvoo House, which the church had been commanded by revelation to build. [^16]

SAVIORS ON MOUNT ZION—BAPTISM FOR THE DEAD

During the conference the twelve requested the Prophet to give instructions upon the doctrine of baptism for the dead, that being the subject then uppermost in the minds of the people. The Prophet responded most readily with the result that many choice doctrinal truths were at that time delivered to the church. Some of these items are here set down. Explaining how men could become "saviors on Mount Zion," the Prophet said:

"The proclamation of the first principles of the gospel, was a means of salvation to men individually, and it was the truth and not men that saved them: but men by actively engaging in rites of salvation substantially became instruments in bringing multitudes of their kindred into the kingdom of God. [And hence] he presented baptism for the dead as the only way by which men can appear as 'saviors on Mount Zion.'

The difference between an angel and a ministering spirit: the one [the first] is a resurrected or translated body with its spirit, ministering to embodied spirits; the other a disembodied spirit, visiting and ministering to disembodied spirits.

Jesus Christ became a ministering spirit (while his body was laying in the sepulchre) to the spirits in prision, [^17] to fulfill an important part of his mission, without which he could not have perfected his work or entered into his rest. After his resurrection he appeared as an angel to his disciples. (St. Matt. xxvii:16-20).

Translated bodies cannot enter into rest until they have undergone a change equivalent to death. * * * Translated bodies are designed for future missions. * * * The angel which appeared to John on the Isle of Patmos was a translated or resurrected personage, (Rev. xix:10).

Jesus Christ went in body after his resurrection to minister to translated or resurrected bodies.

It is no more incredible that God should save the dead than that he should raise the dead.

There is never a time when the spirit is too old to approach God.

All are within the reach of pardoning mercy, who have not committed the unpardonable sin, 'which hath no forgiveness, neither in this world nor in the world to come.' There is a way to release the spirit of the dead; that is by the power and authority of the priesthood—by binding and loosing on earth. This doctrine appears glorious, inasmuch as it exhibits the greatness of divine compassion and benevolence in the extent of the plan of human salvation. * * *

This glorious truth is well calculated to enlarge the understanding, and to sustain the soul under troubles, difficulties, and distresses. For illustration: suppose the case of two men, brothers, equally intelligent, learned, virtuous and lovely, walking in uprightness and in all good conscience, so far as they have been able to discern duty from the muddy stream of tradition, or from the blotted page of the book of nature. One dies and is buried, having never heard the gospel of reconciliation; to the other the message of salvation is sent, he hears and embraces it, and is made the heir of eternal life. Shall the one become a partaker of glory, and the other consigned to hopeless perdition? Is there no chance for his escape? Sectarianism answers, none! * * * Such an idea is worse than atheism. The truth shall break down and dash in pieces all such bigoted Pharisaism.

This doctrine [salvation for the dead through baptism and other ordinances] presents in a clear light the wisdom and mercy of God in preparing an ordinance for the salvation of the dead, being baptized by proxy, their names recorded in heaven, and they judged according to the deeds done in the body. This doctrine was the burden of the scriptures. [^18] Those saints who neglect it, in behalf of their deceased relatives, do it at the peril of their own salvation. The Dispensation of the Fulness of Times will bring to light the things that have been revealed in all former dispensations; also other things that have not been before revealed."

During the conference the announcement was made that there would be no more baptisms for the dead until the ordinance could be administered in the baptismal font of the Lord's house, "for thus hath the Lord commanded," said the Prophet. The saints however were not long denied the privilege of being baptized for their dead, as on the eighth of November, following the October conference, 1841, a temporary baptismal font was completed in the basement of the temple, and dedicated to this sacred purpose.

Footnotes

"Citizens of Iowa: The laws do not require you to muster or to be reviewed by Joe Smith or General Bennett; and should they have the impudence to attempt it, it is to be hoped that every person having a proper respect for himself, will at once leave the ranks."

The facts are that these militia companies were not mustered by Joseph Smith's order, nor did he expect to review them. He had simply accepted General Swazey's invitation to witness the movements of the troops as other spectators were doing, and neither Joseph nor his brother Hyrum was in uniform. General Swazey had been several times invited to attend drills and reviews of the legion at Nauvoo, and he had simply returned the courtesy to the officers of the legion. Kilburn's effort to create a disturbance, however, was not successful, though the papers of the state commented upon it, and some of them began to intimate that it was Joseph Smith's ambition to build up a military church and extend his faith, "Mohammed-like" by the sword. From the first settlement of the saints at Montrose there had been some manifestation of opposition. Brigham Young in his History, under date of May 21st, 1839, relates the following: "In the evening, while Brother Noble [Joseph B.] was plowing a piece of ground which he had obtained from Mr. Kilburn for a garden, a man named Campbell accompanied by a mob came up to Brother Noble, armed with clubs, and taking his horse by the bit, ordered him off the grounds; Brother Noble left the ground for the sake of peace." Under the 26th of the same month he writes: "There was much of the spirit of mobocracy made manifest at Montrose by some outlaws who remained there; some cut down the barns there belonging to the military station [Montrose had been a military station and the old barracks were still somewhat intact] lest the saints might have the use of them." (History of Brigham Young, Millennial Star, vol. xxv, p. 585).

The first number of the Star was issued in May, 1840, at Manchester, and upon its cover appeared the following stanzas by the editor, Parley P. Pratt, voicing the Star's message, and the message of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to the world.

"The morning breaks the shadows flee; Lo! Zion's standard is unfurled! The dawning of a brighter day Majestic rises on the world. The clouds of error disappear Before the rays of truth divine; The glory, bursting from afar, Wide o'er the nations soon will shine. The Gentile fulness now comes in, And Israel's blessings are at hand; Lo! Judah's remnant, cleans'd from sin, Shall in their promised Canaan stand. Jehovah speaks! Let earth give ear, And Gentile nations turn and live! His mighty arm is making bare, His covenant people to receive. Angels from heaven, and truth from earth Have met and both have record borne; Thus Zion's light is bursting forth, To cheer her children's glad return."

Edward Hunter finally settled in Chester county, Pennsylvania, where he purchased an extensive farm, and married Ann Standley, daughter of Jacob and Martha Standley. Here "Mormonism" found him in 1839, with the result stated in the text.

---
Notas:
[^1] THE REVELATION ON THE ETERNITY OF THE MARRIAGE COVENANT, AND PLURAL MARRIAGE COMMITTED TO WRITING The term "Celestial Marriage" is not used in the revelation that makes known the eternity of the marriage covenant; nor in any of the books recognized as the authoritative scriptures of the church. In books of a secondary character, however, written by prominent elders of the church, and in some affidavits given upon the subject of the introduction of the system into the church, the term is frequently used (see affidavits of Joseph B. Noble, B. F. Johnson, John Benbow et al., Historical Record, Jensen, pp. 221, et seq.) The Prophet Joseph also uses the term in his journal under date of August 25, 1843, as follows: "My brother Hyrum in the office conversing with me about the new revelation upon Celestial Marriage" (History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, p. 541).
[^2] THE INTERNAL EVIDENCE OF AUTHORSHIP See the Book of Common Prayer, Church of England, article, "Solemnization of Matrimony."
[^3] SUPPOSED CONFLICT BETWEEN THE BOOK OF MORMON AND THE REVELATION ON MARRIAGE Jesus said unto Peter: "I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (St. Matt. xvi:19.)
[^4] See Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxxii. Emma Smith, wife of the Prophet is commanded in verse 52 of the revelation "to receive all those that have been given unto my servant Joseph, and who are virtuous and pure before me," which proves that the doctrine and its practice was in existence before the revelation was committed to writing.
[^5] Ibid, verse 66. "And now, as pertaining to this law, verily I saw unto you, I will reveal more unto you, hereafter; therefore let this suffice for the present." Hence I say "partial revelation" in the text.
[^6] The statement of the text is made with care on this point, because the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has never stood as the advocate of indiscriminate or the general practice of a plural marriage system, under mere human, legal sanctions. Such a general practice would doubtless be mischievous and lead to the disasters which opponents have from time to time charged to the more limited and specifically guarded practice of the principle under what the Latter-day Saints held to be divine sanctions, restraints and regulations. It was indeed a principle of religion to the Latter-day Saints, a holy sacrament, and not at all designed to become a general practice under merely human laws. It is unfortunate that the world outside of the church of the Latter-day Saints was not impressed with this phase of the subject; for then it would have been apparent that the thing the world argued against and fought against—a general plural marriage system free for all to adopt, considered to be destructive of the monogamous marriage system and a menace to the home itself—was not the thing upheld and contended for by the Latter-day Saints, who hold that the privilege of plural marriage was to be limited to persons of high character, approved lives, and living under the most sacred obligations to chastity, and granted this privilege of the church's marriage system only under the most carefully guarded permission of the church, amounting to divine sanction. Such were the limitations put upon the practice of the plural feature of the marriage system given to the church, and the proof that they never sought to make their plural marriage system of general practice, under merely human sanctions, is seen in the fact that neither under the "State of Deseret" nor while in full control of the territory of Utah, having both governorship and legislature under Brigham Young, 1850-58, they enacted no law legalizing polygamy.
[^7] See Orson Pratt's statement given later in this chapter.
[^8] See History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, pp. 243-253.
[^9] Messenger and Advocate, May, 1837, p. 517.
[^10] "Orson Pratt," says the late President John Taylor, "also had some difficulties while we were in Nauvoo, arising out of the introduction of the celestial order of marriage." President Taylor then proceeds to relate the labors of various members of the quorum of the twelve with Elder Pratt, his excommunication from the church, his final reconciliation with the Prophet, his restoration to the church and subsequent service therein, (Succession in the Priesthood, 1881, pp. 18-20). This is the circumstance referred to in the above "report."
[^11] Signed report of Elders Pratt and Smith, Millennial Star, vol. xl, nos. 49, 50, 1878.
[^12] Noble's affidavit is on file in the Historian's Office, Salt Lake City.
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] The Life of John Taylor, 1892; p. 100. Elder Taylor also adds in the same passage: "I had always entertained strict ideas of virtue, and I felt as a married man that this was to me, outside of this principle, an appalling thing to do. The idea of going and asking a young lady to be married to me when I already had a wife! It was a thing calculated to stir up feelings from the innermost depths of the human soul. I had always entertained the strictest regard of chastity. I had never in my life seen the time when I have known of a man deceiving a woman—and it is often done in the world, where, notwithstanding the crime, the man is received into society and the poor woman is looked upon as a pariah and an outcast—I have always looked upon such a thing as infamous, and upon such a man as a villain. * * * Hence, with the feeling I had entertained, nothing but a knowledge of God, and the revelations of God, and the truth of them, could have induced me to embrace such a principle as this."
[^15] Journal of Discourses, vol. iii, p. 266. It has been claimed, chiefly by the sons of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and the founders of what is known as the "Reorganized Church of Latter-day Saints" that Joseph Smith never introduced either the doctrine or the practice of the plurality of wives in the church; but the evidence is overwhelmingly against this contention. In addition to the evidence incidentally existing in the text above, there is a large collection of affidavits upon the subject in the files of the Historian's Office, Salt Lake City, a number of which—ten in all—are published in the Historical Record, together with many less formal statements and evidences. Some of the affidavits and statements are from women who were married to Joseph Smith, and some by those who performed the ceremonies (Historical Record, Jenson, pp. 219-234), and other persons whose relationship to Nauvoo events gave them exceptional opportunities to know the truth of the matters whereof they testified. (See also Linn, who discusses the subject at length, Story of the Mormons, ch. x. Also Bancroft's History of Utah, pp. 158-166; and the Notes at the close of this chapter).
[^16] The doctrine of plural marriage both by those who without authorization and, prematurely, undertook to teach it, and those who bitterly denounced it, was not properly apprehended either by such advocates or such denunciators. Plural marriage as taught by the Prophet was not the "polygamy" of the orient, with its attendant despotism and harems; nor the "bigamy" of western civilization, banned by the law of all the western nations, including our own, and in which the element of deception was always present by keeping the fact of the first and perhaps other marriages secret, thus betraying its victims to unsuspected disgrace and humiliation. And hence, because these overzealous advocates, and ill informed denunciators never truly represented the doctrine of the revelation on marriage, the denial of their misstatements of the doctrine and its practice was not regarded by the leading elders of the church as a denial of the doctrine of the revelation given to the Prophet; and while this may be considered a refinement in presentation that the world will not allow, it nevertheless represents a distinction that was real to those who were struggling with a difficult proposition, and accounts for the seeming denials referred to in the text above; as also later seeming denials made by John Taylor, in a public discussion with three ministers at Boulogne-sur-mer, France, 1850 (Public Discussion in France, included in Orson Pratt's Works, 1851 edition, England. Also Life of John Taylor, ch. xxiv); and by Parley P. Pratt in England, 1845 (Millennial Star, vol. vi, p. 22). Both Elders Pratt and Taylor in their denials were referring to the charges made by John C. Bennett and other apostates. Pratt says, in his denial: "Beware of seducing spirits and doctrines of devils, as first introduced by John C. Bennett under the name of 'the spiritual wife doctrine.' * * * It is but another name for whoredom, wicked and unlawful connection and every kind of confusion, corruption and abomination. * * * The Spiritual wife doctrine of J. C. Bennett and numerous other apostates, is as foreign from the real principles of the church as the devil is from God, or as sectarianism is from Christianity." (Ibid.)
[^17] See Times and Seasons for March, 1844. The main point in Hyrum's letter is contained in the following paragraph:
[^18] Times and Seasons, vol. v, no. 3, p. 423.
