B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XLVI

EFFECT OF GENERAL CONDITIONS ON NAUVOO AFFAIRS—THIEVES—BANKRUPTCY—POLITICS

IN order to a right understanding of the events which make up the history of the Latter-day Saints, it is necessary to keep constantly in mind the general conditions in which they lived, the atmosphere of place and period. In the northern part of the state of Illinois the people had settled upon the public lands of the United States before they were in the market or even had been surveyed; and on these lands the settlers had made valuable improvements, opening individual farms of several hundred acres, building costly mills, and in some cases whole villages of six or eight hundred inhabitants were built upon these unsurveyed public lands. [^1]

PRIMITIVE CONDITIONS IN ILLINOIS—LAWLESSNESS

"By a conventional law of each neighborhood," says Governor Ford in his History of Illinois, the settlers were pledged to protect each other in the amount of their respective claims. But there were mean men, who disregarded these conventional arrangements, "such as these," he remarks in a tone of sarcasm, "belonged to that very honest fraternity, who profess to regulate all their dealings by the law of the land. Such men had but little regard for public opinion or abstract right; and their consciences did not restrain them from 'jumping' their neighbors claim, if they could be sustained by law and protected against force. It soon became apparent to everyone that actual force was the only protection for this description of property." [^2] This meant, of course, reversion to the exercise of natural rights; and their protection by physical force. In protecting themselves from the encroachments of the unscrupulous and dishonorable, the settlers on unsurveyed public lands were frequently embroiled in riots and mob violence. "Many were the riots and mobs in every county, arising from this state of things," says Ford—and he has reference to all northern Illinois. "Every neighborhood was signalized by some brawl of the kind." [^3]

These conditions gave rise to a spirit of violence and lawlessness, especially throughout northern Illinois. Ford refers to them as fostering that mob spirit which led, in 1837, to the destruction of an abolition press at Alton, in Madison county, and the killing of the Rev. Elijah P. Lovejoy, the proprietor of the press; also, subsequently, to the murder of Joseph Smith and the expulsion of the Latter-day Saints from the state.

In connection with these matters Mr. Ford refers to the fact that notwithstanding most of the settlers of Illinois were from the eastern states, "from the land of steady habits where mobs were regularly hated and denounced, and all unlawful fighting held in abhorrence," yet in this new environment the staid New Englander quickly responded to the spirit of mobocracy more or less prevalent. [^4]

Moreover Illinois in her early days had passed through the experience of lawlessness more or less common to all border states, to which horse thieves, counterfeiters and other lawless characters gravitate. A score of years before the founding of Nauvoo these had become so numerous, "and so well combined in many counties," adds Mr. Ford, "as to set the laws at defiance. Many of the sheriffs, justices of the peace, and constables, were of their number; and even some of the judges of the county courts; and they had numerous friends to aid them and sympathize with them, even amongst those who were the least suspected. When any of them were arrested, they either escaped from the slight jails of those times, or procured some of their gang to be on the jury; and they never lacked witnesses to prove themselves innocent. The people formed themselves into revolutionary tribunals in many counties, under the name of 'regulators;' and the governor and judges of the territory, seeing the impossibility of executing the laws in the ordinary way, against an organized banditti, who set all law at defiance, winked at and encouraged the proceedings of the 'regulators'." [^5]

In consequence of the activity of the "regulators" this regime of crime was largely suppressed, but the methods by which the suppression was effected begot such a disregard for the regular administration of the law as to demoralize civil government in some sections of the state for many years. Nor were the gangs of thieves and counterfeiters that had infested northern Illinois wholly broken up by the methods described. Speaking of conditions existing in northern Illinois in 1841, Mr. Ford says:

"Then again the northern part of the state was not destitute of its organized bands of rogues, engaged in murders, robberies, horse-stealing, and in making and passing counterfeit money. These rogues were scattered all over the north; but the most of them were located in the counties of Ogle, Winnibago, Lee, and DeKalb. In the county of Ogle, they were so numerous, strong, and well organized, that they could not be convicted for their crimes. By getting some of their numbers on the juries, by producing hosts of witnesses to sustain their defense by perjured evidence, and by changing the venue from one county to another, and by continuances from term to term, and by the inability of witnesses to attend from time to time at a distant and foreign county, they most generally managed to be acquitted." [^6]

Our author then proceeds to detail a number of instances of the lawlessness and the effort of the people to suppress them by recourse to mob violence.

LAWLESSNESS BROUGHT OVER INTO THE "MORMON" PERIOD

These conditions were prevailing in northern Illinois in 1841. In November of that year a nest of thieves were uncovered at Ramus, in Hancock county, a settlement about twenty miles east of Nauvoo. What made the not unusual circumstance of finding a gang of thieves in Illinois so exciting in this instance was the fact that this particular gang of thieves were "Mormons;" or at least claimed membership in the church, and what was worst of all when discovered in their nefarious practice they gave it out that they were sustained in their conduct by the leaders of the church, so long as the stealing was practiced upon the "Gentiles"—i. e. non-members of the church.

THE CHURCH ATTITUDE ON LAWLESSNESS

The guilty persons were promptly excommunicated by the church, however, and President Joseph Smith, his brother, Hyrum, and the twelve took occasion to denounce as untrue the charge that the church gave sanction to thieving in any form or upon any class of people. President Joseph Smith in an affidavit said:

"It has been proclaimed upon the housetops and in the secret chambers, in the public walks and private circles throughout the length and breadth of this vast continent, that stealing by the Latter-day Saints has received my approval; nay, that I have taught them the doctrine, encouraged them in plunder, and led on the van—than which nothing is more foreign from my heart. I disfellowship the perpetrators of all such abomination; they are devils and not saints, totally unfit for the society of Christians or men. It is true that some professing to be Latter-day Saints have taught such vile heresies, but all are not Israel that are of Israel; and I want it distinctly understood in all coming time, that the church over which I have the honor of presiding, will ever set its brows like brass, and its face like steel, against all such abominable acts of villainy and crime."

Hyrum Smith said:

"I hereby disavow any sanction, or approbation by me of the crime of theft, or any other evil practice in any person or persons whatever, whereby either the lives or property of our fellow men may be lawfully taken or molested; neither are such doings sanctioned or approbated by the first presidency or any other person in authority or good standing in the church, but such acts are altogether in violation of the rules, order and regulations of the church, contrary to the teachings given in said church, and the laws of both God and man."

Nor were the twelve less forcible in denouncing this iniquity. In an epistle published at the same time as the above, they said:

"We know not how to express our abhorrence of such an idea and can only say it is engendered in hell, founded in falsehood, and is the offspring of the devil; that it is at variance with every principle of righteousness and truth, and will damn all that are connected with it. * * * We further call upon the church to bring all such characters before the authorities, that they may be tried and dealt with according to the law of God and delivered up to the laws of the land." [^7]

In addition to the emphatic utterances of the Prophet Joseph, his brother Hyrum, and the twelve, the Times and Seasons editorially said:

"THIEVES"

"We are highly pleased to see the very energetic measures taken by our citizens to suppress thieving. It has been a source of grief unto us that there were any in our midst who would wilfully take property from any person which did not belong to them, knowing that if any person, who does, or ever did belong to the church, should steal, the whole church would have to bear the stigma, and the sound goes abroad that the 'Mormons' are a set of thieves and robbers, a charge which we unequivocally deny, and pronounce a falsehood of the basest kind. That there are some amongst us base enough to commit such acts we do not pretend to deny, whether they are all members of this church or not, we do not know; but some who are, have been caught in their iniquity, and one was among the missing after a warrant was out for him; circumstantial proof is so strong against him, that his guilt is established without doubt. We have heard that some of those characters have said that such things are sanctioned by the authorities of the church, this is the most base of all lies: and we would here warn all well disposed persons, to be aware of such characters, and if any such thing is ever intimated to them, to heed it not, unless it be to report such persons to the proper authorities so that they can be brought to condign punishment; for know assuredly that if you listen to them, they will prove an adder in your path, and eventually lead you down to destruction." [^8]

In adition to excommunicating those who were guilty of this wickedness of theft and misrepresentation, Ramus was discontinued as a stake of Zion. [^9]

The saints themselves about this time and later were the victims of gangs of robbers operating up and down the Mississippi. Many of their horses and cattle were stolen, but more serious injury arose from the fact that the acts of the robbers were attributed to the saints, and did much to prejudice the minds of the public against them. Governor Ford in referring to these charges against the "Mormons," and speaking of events taking place about this time in Nauvoo, said: "It was a fact also, that some larcenies and robberies had been committed, and that Mormons had been convicted of the crimes, [^10] and that other larcenies had been committed by persons unknown, but suspected to be Mormons. Justice, however, requires me here to say, that upon such investigation as I then could make, the charge of promiscuous stealing appeared to be exaggerated." [^11]

BANKRUPTCY AT NAUVOO AND THROUGHOUT ILLINOIS

Another event which was influenced somewhat by general conditions prevailing in the state as well as certain local conditions at Nauvoo, was the fact of some of the leading authorities in the church going into bankruptcy.

The general conditions referred to are stated by Mr. Ford in his History of Illinois. The canal and the railroads mentioned were those projected in 1836-7 by the state, when Illinois entered upon that system of public improvements by state aid, mentioned in a previous chapter [^12] and now Mr. Ford:

"The great plenty of money brought here by the work on the canal and railroads, set up a great many merchants all over the country in business; it increased the stocks of goods brought to be sold; created unnatural competition amongst the merchants to sell; who were forced to sell on a credit or not at all. The people were encouraged to buy on credit, and when their debts became due, for want of money to pay them, they gave their notes to the merchants with twelve per cent interest, which the reader will observe hereafter was the cause of some strange legislation on the collection of debts, and caused the reduction of the rate of interest to six per cent. Until the year 1833, there had been no legal limit to the rate of interest to be fixed by contract." [^13]

Again Mr. Ford says:

"To sum up, then, this was the condition of the state when I came into office as governor [1842]. The domestic treasury of the state was indebted for the ordinary expenses of government to the amount of about $313,000. Auditor's warrants on the treasury were selling at fifty per cent discount, and there was no money in the treasury whatever; not even to pay postage on letters. The annual revenues applicable to the payment of ordinary expenses, amounted to about $130,000. The treasury was bankrupt; the revenues were insufficient; the people were unable and unwilling to pay high taxes; and the state had borrowed itself out of all credit. A debt of near fourteen millions of dollars had been contracted for the canal, railroads, and other purposes. The currency of the state had been annihilated; there was not over two or three hundred thousand dollars in good money in the pockets of the whole people, which occasioned a general inability to pay taxes. The whole people were indebted to merchants; nearly all of whom were indebted to the banks, or to foreign merchants; and the banks owed everybody, and none were able to pay." [^14]

To these general conditions so depressing throughout the state must be added still other difficulties that harassed the saints at Nauvoo. The church had passed through a long period of disaster. Time and again the early members of the church had been driven away from their homes; and these frequent drivings and mobbings stripped them of their property and of course ruined their financial undertakings; and though their prospects at Nauvoo began to brighten, the people were constantly plagued by the presentation of old claims upon them, their creditors making small or no allowance for the disasters which had overtaken them. This was a constant draft upon their resources, and a great hindrance to the growth of Nauvoo.

FINANCIAL EMBARRASSMENT OF THE SAINTS

In the Iowa stake of Zion, with headquarters at Montrose, the high council, taking into account the disasters which had overwhelmed the church in Missouri, decided to disfellowship those who pressed their claims for indebtedness contracted in Missouri. [^15] A like understanding, though not so definitely stated, obtained also among the saints at Nauvoo. But finally, as an effective means of protection against unreasonable, importunate creditors a number of leading authorities in the church, among them President Joseph Smith, took advantage of the federal bankrupt law. Under this law anyone owing a certain amount more than he was able to pay, made out a schedule of his property and likewise of his debts, and placed both in the hands of an assignee, who paid his creditors whatever percentage of his debts his property amounted to; and the assignee could start again without being compelled to pay any of the old claims held against him previous to his declared insolvency.

In whatever light this action on the part of the brethren may appear at first sight, an examination into all the circumstances will reveal the fact that as a means of self-protection it became absolutely imperative. They were financially broken down, and before they could rise to their feet, inexorable creditors were upon them to take away their substance. If it is possible for an individual or a company to be justified in taking advantage of the bankrupt law, then the "Mormon" leaders were justified. There was no effort on the part of those who took advantage of the bankrupt law to defraud their creditors. To parties with whom President Joseph Smith had contracted for lands, he wrote that he still considered his contracts with them as good; and in the case of the Hotchkiss purchase he proposed to renew the contract. This step in bankruptcy had the effect of placing the brethren beyond the power of their unjust creditors, and necessity compelled the action. [^16]

CONTRACTION OF BORDERS

About this time there seemed to be a contraction of the borders of the church in Hancock county. Ramus, as already stated, was abandoned as a "stake of Zion," owing immediately to the fact that that section of the county was becoming a rendezvous for thieves, and their crimes were charged against the saints. The action of dissolving the stake organization was under the direction of Brigham Young and others of the apostles at a conference held on the 4th and 5th of December, 1841. Shortly afterwards, in the same month, Warren, a settlement founded early in the spring of that year was also abandoned. Warren was situated about a mile south of Warsaw on the Mississippi river. As early as the fall of 1839 Daniel S. Witter, a man owning a flour mill at Warsaw, held out inducements to the first presidency of the church to settle at or in the vicinity of Warsaw, but the location where the saints built up Nauvoo was considered preferable. Still Witter, Aldrich, Warren, and others continued to solicit the authorities of the church to make an attempt to build a city near Warsaw; and finally, in the spring of 1841, an agreement was entered into between the church authorities and Witter, Warren, and Aldrich—owners of the school section located just south of Warsaw—by which any of the saints settling on this school section, already surveyed into town lots and called Warren, were to have certain privileges granted them.

In September, Willard Richards was located at Warsaw and made what preparations he could to receive the settlers. Some few families of saints gathered there, and in November two hundred and four emigrants from England, under the leadership of Joseph Fielding, were counseled to locate in that vicinity. But no sooner had preparations to build up the place been made than the citizens of Warsaw attempted to form an anti-"Mormon" association, and manifested other symptoms of an unfriendly character. They raised the rents—Mr. Witter himself raised one dollar per barrel on flour, while Aldrich forbade the people using the old wood on the school section. These unfriendly demonstrations led to the abandonment of the enterprise of building up Warren, and the church authorities promptly advised the saints who had located there to remove to Nauvoo.

This action with reference to both Ramus and Warren was also somewhat in harmony with the general policy of the church at that time, which recognized the necessity of concentration of efforts at Nauvoo. In the preceding month of May the first presidency had issued instructions for all the saints residing outside of Hancock county to come within her boundaries "without delay." "This is important," said the communication, "and should be attended to by all who feel an interest in the prosperity of this corner stone of Zion. Here the temple must be raised, the university built, and other edifices erected which are necessary for the great work of the last days, and which can be done by a concentration of energy and enterprise. Let it therefore be understood, that all stakes excepting those in this (Hancock) county and in Lee county, Iowa, are discontinued, and the saints instructed to settle in this county, as soon as circumstances will permit." [^17] A later recommendation of gathering from the outlying districts of the county into Nauvoo was but another step in the policy of concentration.

CHURCH ATTITUDE ON POLITICS—NON-PARTISAN

It was in the closing month of this eventful year, 1841, that a public announcement was made concerning the attitude of the citizens of Nauvoo respecting politics. Under date of 20th of December, President Joseph Smith addressed a communication to his "friends in Illinois," in which he announced that the "gubernatorial convention of Illinois" had placed in nomination for governor, Colonel Adam W. Snyder; and for lieutenant governor, Colonel John Moore;" that as they were "sterling men, and friends of equal rights;" and also because they had befriended the citizens of Nauvoo and had assisted their representatives in the state legislature in securing the passage of the several charters for the city, [^18] President Smith announced what must be regarded as the intention of the citizens of Nauvoo to vote for these candidates. "They have served us," said President Smith's communication, "and we will serve them." Notwithstanding these men were the nominees of the Democratic party and placed in nomination by the Democratic Conventions held at Springfield, President Smith claimed to be acting independent of party considerations. "In the next canvass,'" said he, "we shall be influenced by no party consideration. * * * We care not a fig for Whig or Democrat: they are both alike to us; but we shall go for our friends, our tried friends, and the cause of human liberty, which is the cause of God." In the previous national election, two years before, the people of Nauvoo, quite generally, had voted for General William H. Harrison, a Whig, for president of the United States; and as late as the previous August had voted for the Whig candidate for congress, Mr. John J. Stuart. [^19] Referring to the fact of the people of Nauvoo having voted for these Whig candidates President Smith said:

"We voted for General Harrison because we loved him—he was a gallant officer and a tried statesman; but this is no reason why we should always be governed by his friends—he is now dead, and all his friends are not ours. We claim the privileges of free men, and shall act accordingly. Douglas is a master spirit, and his friends are our friends—we are willing to cast our banners on the air, and fight by his side in the cause of humanity and equal rights—the cause of liberty and the law. Snyder and Moore, are his friends—they are ours. These men are free from the prejudices and superstitions of the age, and such men we love, and such men will ever receive our support, be their political predilections what they may." [^20]

Before the election took place, however, Mr. Snyder died, and Thomas Ford, one of the judges of the state supreme court, was nominated to fill the vacancy. He was nominated not because he was in any sense a leader of his party in Illinois, as he himself explains; "but because," he adds, "I was believed to have no more than a very ordinary share of ambition; because it was doubtful whether any of the leaders could be elected, and because it was thought I would stand more in need of support from leaders, than an actual leader would. To this cause, and perhaps there were others, I trace the fact which will appear, that I was never able to command the support of the entire party which elected me." [^21]

Joseph Duncan, who had previously been governor of Illinois, 1836-38, was the Whig candidate for governor, and really expected to be elected because of his pronounced and even bitter opposition to the "Mormons."

The fact is that for some time there had been an agitation going on in respect of the saints and their relationship to the politics of the state; and political capital was sought to be made by manifestations of friendliness or of hostility towards them. Although, in the main, the people of Nauvoo had sustained the Whig candidates, both locally and nationally, in the preceding elections, yet there were outbreaks against them both among the Whig politicians and in the Whig press of Illinois. "The Whig newspapers," writes Governor Ford, "teemed with accounts of the wonders and enormities of Nauvoo, and of the awful wickedness of a party which could consent to receive the support of such miscreants. Governor Duncan, (nominated in opposition to Snyder) who was really a brave, honest man, and who had nothing to do with getting the "Mormon" characters passed through the legislature, took the stump on this subject in good earnest, and expected to be elected governor almost on this question alone." [^22]

The position of the saints in their relations to the political parties in the state of Illinois is tersely set forth by the late President John Taylor in his review of affairs at Nauvoo, leading up to the martyrdom of the Prophet; which document was prepared at the request of the historians of the church, and filed in the archives of the church as the testimony of an eye witness and participant in those events. [^23] Of the political situation at Nauvoo—which was forming at the period to which the political announcement by President Smith of the text above, belongs—President Taylor says:

"There were always two parties, the Whigs and Democrats, and we could not vote for one without offending the other; and it not infrequently happened that candidates for office would place the issue of their election upon opposition to the 'Mormons,' in order to gain political influence from religious prejudice, in which case the 'Mormons' were compelled, in self-defense, to vote against them, which resulted almost invariably against our opponents. This made them angry; and although it was of their own making, and the 'Mormons' could not be expected to do otherwise, yet they raged on account of their discomfiture, and sought to wreak their fury on the 'Mormons.' As an instance of the above, when Joseph Duncan was candidate for the office of governor of Illinois, 1842, he pledged himself to his party that, if he could be elected, he would exterminate or drive the 'Mormons' from the state. The consequence was that Governor Ford was elected."

It cannot in truth be claimed that any favor shown by the Democratic party, as such, to the "Mormon" people was the cause of the announcement of the above independent attitude in politics. For while it is true that Judge Douglas, a leading Democrat of the state, if not then the leader of his party in Illinois, had recently rendered a decision favorable to the Prophet, liberating him from the clutches of Missouri, it should be remembered that the judge had but pronounced upon the course of the officers of the states of Missouri and Illinois and found that course at variance with the law, and there was no alternative but to set the Prophet free. But it was the law that vindicated Joseph Smith, not the favor of Judge Douglas. And then, if a judge who was a Democrat had decided a case in favor of the Prophet, it should be remembered that it was the act, and I might say the unwarranted, illegal act, of a Democrat, Governor Carlin, which had put the life and liberty of the Prophet in jeopardy by issuing an illegal requisition for his arrest and deliverance to Missouri. This to show that it was not any favor that had been exhibited by the Democratic party, as such, that prompted the assumption of an independent attitude in politics by President Joseph Smith, but that for weal or woe, the attitude was taken as a measure of self-defense, and for the protection of the people in whose interest it was announced.

Footnotes

And thus sensational reports of "Mormon stealing" were made the shuttlecock between the battledoors of various neighborhoods.

---
Notas:
[^1] ABRAHAM IN EGYPT vol. iii, nos. 9 and 10.
[^2] ABRAHAM'S ASTRONOMY The title in full is as follows:
[^3] RECENT CONTROVERSY ON THE BOOK OF ABRAHAM AND JOSEPH SMITH AS A TRANSLATOR See Note I, end of chapter.
[^4] "The more carefully one studies the great work of Copernicus (the father of modern astronomy) the more surprised he will be to find how completely Ptolemy (the Egyptian) furnished him both ideas and material. If we seek the teachers and predecessors of Hipparchus, the Greek, (160-125 B. C.) was find only the shadowy forms of Egyptian and Babylonian priests, whose names and writings are all entirely lost. In the earliest historic ages, men knew that the earth was round; that the sun appeared to make an annual revolution among the stars; and the eclipses were caused by the moon entering the shadow of the earth, or the earth that of the moon." (Popular Astronomy, Simon Newcomb, Introduction, p. 2.) It is not at all improbable that among the Egyptian and Babylonian priests above spoken of, "whose names and writings are all entirely lost," that Abraham may have had a place.
[^5] See Gillet and Rolfe's Astronomy for Schools and Acadamies, pp. 365-371. Popular Astronomy, Newcomb, pp. 464-476. Proctor's Other Worlds than Ours, ch. x. See Note 2, end of chapter.
[^6] It was published in Times and Seasons, vol. iii, March 15th, 1842.
[^7] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, ch. xxxi, where the Wentworth Letter is given in extenso.
[^8] See this History, ch. xliii, cf. History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, ch. i.
[^9] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxiv.
[^10] History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, pp. 1-3.
[^11] There has been some controversy as to the time when these sacred ceremonies were introduced into the church. An organization styling itself the "Reorganized Church," even goes so far as to claim that these ceremonies were not introduced into the church by the Prophet Joseph Smith at all, but on the contrary claim that they had their origin with Brigham Young and the apostles who followed him in the migration from Nauvoo to Great Salt Lake Valley. The evidence against such claims, however, is overwhelming. First, the statement of the Prophet in the text above. Second, a previous allusion to the same things in his remarks at Nauvoo, on the 6th of January, 1842. (See History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, p. 492.) Third, the same ceremonies are referred to in the revelation of Jan. 19, 1841, in which washings, anointings, conversations, statutes, judgments, etc., are explicitly referred to. (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, p. 277.) In addition to this evidence also, Ebenezer Robinson, for a time associate editor of the Times and Seasons, and who at the death of Don Carlos Smith, 1841, became editor-in-chief of that periodical, and so continued until the 15th of March, 1842—declares that such ceremonies as are alluded to in the text were inaugurated by special action of the Prophet as early as 1843. Mr. Robinson subsequently left the church, but when in 1890, the aforesaid "Re-organized Church" persisted in claiming that Joseph Smith the Prophet did not inaugurate these temple ceremonies, he published an article in the magazine he was then conducting, called The Return, in which he bears emphatic testimony to the effect above stated, namely, that these ceremonies were introduced into the church by the Prophet Joseph Smith, at least as early as 1843. (See The Return, vol. ii, no. 4, p. 252.)
[^12] Antiquities of the Jews, bk. i, ch. xiii.
[^13] This was written in 1889. Of course, now, 1930, the movement among the so-called "fixed stars" is very generally and so far as I know universally admitted, being confirmed by actual observations.
[^14] The Book of Abraham, A Divine and Ancient Record, George Reynolds, 1879, pp. 30, 31.
[^15] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, p. 42.
[^16] The comment of President Smith upon this action is as follows: "The justice or injustice of such a principle in law, I leave for them who made it, the United States. Suffice it to say, the law was as good for the saints as for the Gentiles, and whether I would or not, I was forced into the measure by having been robbed, mobbed, plundered, and wasted of all my property, time after time, in various places, by the very ones who made the law, namely, the people of the United States, thereby having been obliged to contract heavy debts to prevent the utter destruction of myself, family and friends, and by those who were justly and legally owing me, taking the advantage of the same act of bankruptcy, so that I could not collect my just dues, thus leaving me no alternative but to become subject again to stripping, wasting, and destitution, by vexatious writs, and law suits, and imprisonments, or take that course to extricate myself which the law had pointed out." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, pp. 594-5.)
[^17] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, p. 362.
[^18] In fact Mr. Snyder was chairman of the judiciary committee of the state legislature to which the charters were referred and he reported them to the senate with the recommendation that they pass. (See Ford's History of Illinois, p. 263).
[^19] History of Illinois, Ford, p. 264.
[^20] 20. Times and Seasons, vol. iii, p. 651.
[^21] 21. History of Illinois, Ford, p. 271.
[^22] 22. History of Illinois, Ford, p. 269.
[^23] 23. The document under the title of The Martyrdom of Joseph Smith, was published by the permission of its author, in Tyler's History of the Mormon Battalion. Introductory, pp. 10 to 64. Also it is published in Burton's City of the Saints, Appendix, iii, pp. 517-574. Remarking on this document in his text Burton says: "A tone of candor, simplicity, and honesty renders it highly attractive." (Ibid, p. 272).
