B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XLVII

THE BOOK OF ABRAHAM—WENTWORTH LETTER—ENDOWMENT CEREMONIES INTRODUCED

DURING the winter of 1841-2 President Joseph Smith completed the translation of, and prepared for publication, certain ancient Egyptian papyrus which came into his possession in July, 1835, in the following manner: One Michael H. Chandler appeared in Kirtland to exhibit some Egyptian mummies. There were four well preserved human figures, together with some two or more rolls of papyrus covered with hieroglyphics. Very naturally the fact that Joseph Smith was reputed to have translated the Book of Mormon from an ancient language, led up to the question of his ability to translate the Egyptian papyrus. Some conversation took place between Mr. Chandler and President Smith, also a comparison of the Egyptian hieroglyphics and a transcript of Book of Mormon characters, resulting in the discovery of some points of resemblance. The Prophet translated some of the hieroglyphics Mr. Chandler submitted to him, whereupon that gentleman certified as to the agreement of the Prophet's translation with that which had been made by scholars in other places where the mummies and papyrus rolls had been exhibited.

CHANDLER'S STORY OF GETTING POSSESSION OF EGYPTIAN RECORDS

The people of Kirtland became interested in these ancient documents and purchased both them and the mummies of Mr. Chandler. The manner in which the Egyptian relics came into Mr. Chandler's possession,—the account somewhat abridged,—is as follows: In 1831, the French traveler, Antonio Sebolo, penetrated Egypt as far as the ancient city of Thebes, under a license procured from Mohemet Ali—then Viceroy of Egypt—through the influence of Chevalier Drovetti, the French consul. Sebolo employed four hundred and thirty-three men for four months and two days, either Turkish or Egyptian soldiers, paying each from four to six cents a day. They entered the catacombs near ancient Thebes on the seventh of June, 1831, and procured eleven mummies. These were shipped to Alexandria, and from there the traveler started with his treasures for Paris. But en route for the French capitol, Sebolo put in at Trieste, where he was taken sick, and after an illness of ten days, died. This was in 1832. Previous to his death he willed his Egyptian treasures to his nephew, Michael H. Chandler, who was then living in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; but whom Sebolo believed to be in Dublin, to which city he ordered the mummies shipped. The mummies were shipped to Philadelphia; and from there Mr. Chandler traveled through the country, exhibited them and the rolls of papyrus, reaching Kirtland in July, 1835, where they were purchased by the saints as already stated.

A further examination of the rolls of papyrus convinced the Prophet that these Egyptian fragments were writings of the patriarchs Abraham and Joseph, the son of Jacob. With the assistance of Oliver Cowdery and W. W. Phelps, President Smith began the work of translating this record which had come into his possession in such singular manner. The work of translation was taken up from time to time, but was not completed and ready for publication until March, 1842, when the publication began in the Times and Seasons, [^1] with facsimiles of certain portions of the papyrus. Only the writings of Abraham were published, and these under the title of the Book of Abraham. [^2]

SUBJECT MATTER OF THE BOOK OF ABRAHAM

This work is rich both in doctrine and in historical incidents. Of the latter the fact of the large influence (if not identity) of Egyptian religious ideas in Chaldea in the days of Abraham is established; the descent of the black race (Negro) from Cain, the first murderer; the preservation of that race through the flood by the wife of Ham—"Egyptus," which in the Chaldean signifies "Egypt," which signifies that which is forbidden"—the descendants of "Egyptus" were cursed as pertaining to the priesthood—that is, they were barred from holding that divine power; the origin also of the Egyptians—these things, together with the account of Abraham migrating from Chaldea to Egypt, [^3] constitute the chief historical items that are contained in the book. As to its doctrines, perhaps the most important are the pre-existence of the spirits of men and the eternal existence, yet varying grades of, intelligences; the choice of the more noble spirits as God's rulers in the earth; the purpose of the earth-life of these eternal intelligences, viz., to be "added upon," which means growth, increase of knowledge through experience, enlarged wisdom, increased power and glory for intelligences; and the existence of a plurality of Divine Intelligences implied in the fact that in his creation story Abraham uses the plural form throughout in reference to the Divine Beings engaged in the work of creation—"And the Gods said let there be light,"—and "the Gods called the light day," etc.

ABRAHAMIC SYSTEM OF ASTRONOMY

There is also, in outline, a most noble system of astronomy in this Egyptian fragment, which system, according to the record itself, was revealed to Abraham by means of Urim and Thummim, and which more modern research and discovery does but confirm. Briefly stated the system stands as follows [^4]—omitting, however, most of the Egyptian names used:—There are many great stars, called "governing ones," one of which rises preeminent above the others "nearest the throne of God," and is called "Kolob." This great star constitutes the grand center of our universe, around which all other great stars revolve, or by which they are governed in their movements, or receive controlling force; and thence from this great central governing star, in ever widening circles revolve countless worlds and world-groups with their respective central suns in bewildering yet orderly magnificence and splendor. This view represents the universe not as static, but as dynamic; movement everywhere, leading not to "being," merely, but to that "becoming" which as it is the noblest, so also is it the most scientific conception of the universe; so also the most in harmony with religious feeling, since it gives evidence of the Intelligence back of the phenomena, and some idea of the magnificence and glory of that Intelligence—some idea—"of God moving in his majesty and power," since he must be thought upon as immanent in the universe by his spirit.

It should be remembered, too, in passing, that the Book of Abraham containing this conception of our universe having a center around which the world-systems, including our own, revolve in orderly procession, was published before our modern astronomers had advanced the idea of the movement among what hitherto had been regarded as "the fixed stars" but which now is very generally conceded and explained by them. [^5]

THE WENTWORTH HISTORIC LETTER

One other document of great historical and even doctrinal importance was published about the same time as this Book of Abraham, namely, in the spring of 1842. This document is what is called The Wentworth Letter. Mr. John Wentworth, editor and proprietor of the Chicago Democrat, solicited of Joseph Smith a statement concerning the history and doctrine of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, for his friend Mr. Barstow, of New Hampshire, who was writing a history of that state. Responding to this request the Wentworth Letter was prepared by the Prophet. Beginning with the birth of Joseph Smith, in 1805, it traces in admirable manner the development of the great latter-day work, the story of its persecutions, up to the settlement of the saints in Nauvoo; and also details their prosperous condition and happy prospects at the time the letter was written.

It is the earliest published document by Joseph Smith, [^6] making any pretension to consecutive narration of those events in which the latter-day work had its origin; and for combining conciseness of statement with comprehensiveness of treatment, it has few equals among historical documents, and certainly none that excel it in our church literature. In a few pages (less than six of this History) it gives a remarkably clear statement of the leading events in the Prophet's life and in the history of the church, together with an epitome of its doctrines, which has since been called "The Articles of Faith." Millions of these "Articles of Faith" have been published; they have been translated into many languages and carried to all the nations of the earth and tribes of men where the New Dispensation of the gospel has been preached. They were not produced by the labored efforts and the harmonized contentions of scholastics, but were struck off by one mind at a single effort to make a declaration of that which is most assuredly believed by the church, for one making earnest inquiry about her history and her fundamental doctrines. The combined directness, perspicuity, simplicity and comprehensiveness of this statement of the doctrine of the church is regarded as strong evidence of a divine inspiration operating upon the mind of Joseph Smith. Said articles are herewith given:

"THE ARTICLES OF FAITH"

I

"We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in his Son Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost."

II

"We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression."

III

"We believe that, through the Atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel."

IV

"We believe that the first principles and ordinances of the gospel are: First, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying on of the Hands for the Gift of the Holy Ghost."

V

"We believe that a man must be called of God, by 'prophecy, and by the laying on of hands,' by those who are in authority, to preach the gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof."

VI

"We believe in the same organization that existed in the primitive church, namely, apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, etc."

VII

"We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation, visions, healing, interpretation of tongues, etc."

VIII

"We believe the Bible to be the word of God, as far as it is translated correctly; we also believe the Book of Mormon to be the word of God."

IX

"We believe all that God has revealed, all that he does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God."

X

"We believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the restoration of the Ten Tribes. That Zion will be built upon this (i. e. the American) continent. That Christ will reign personally upon the earth, and that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory."

XI

"We claim the privilege of worshipping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience, and allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may."

XII

"We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers and magistrates, in obeying, honoring and sustaining the law."

XIII

"We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men; indeed we may say that we follow the admonition of Paul, 'We believe all things, we hope all things' we have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely or of good report, or praiseworthy, we seek after these things." [^7]

THE TEMPLE RITUAL ENDOWMENT CEREMONIES

It was during this month of May, 1842, into which so many historical events were crowded, that the Prophet introduced and established the temple ritual contemplated in the revelation of January 19th, 1841. [^8] It is in that revelation, it will be remembered, that the saints were commanded to build the Nauvoo temple, a "House for the Most High;" "for there is not a place found on earth that he may come and restore again that which was lost unto you, or which he hath taken away, even the fulness of the priesthood. * * * For therein are the keys of the holy priesthood ordained, that you may receive honor and glory. * * * For it is ordained that in Zion, and in her stakes, and in Jerusalem, those places which I have appointed for refuge, shall be the places for your baptism for your dead."

"And again, verily I say unto you, how shall your washings be acceptable unto me, except ye perform them in a house which you have built to my name? For, for this cause I commanded Moses that he should build a tabernacle, that they should bear it with them in the wilderness, and to build a house in the land of promise, that those ordinances might be revealed which had been hid from before the world was; therefore, verily I say unto you, that your anointings, and your washings, and your baptisms for the dead, and your solemn assemblies, and your memorials for your sacrifices, by the sons of Levi, and for your oracles in your statutes and judgments, for the beginning of the revelations and foundation of Zion, and for the glory, honor, and endowment of all her municipals, are ordained by the ordinance of my holy house which my people are always commanded to build unto my holy name. And verily I say unto you, let this house be built unto my name, that I may reveal mine ordinances therein, unto my people; for I deign to reveal unto my church, things which have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. And I will show unto my servant Joseph all things pertaining to this house, and the priesthood thereof." [^9]

THE FIRST "ENDOWMENT HOUSE"

This contemplated order of things so pressed upon President Joseph Smith's mind that apparently he could not wait for the completion of the temple in Nauvoo, but improvised the means of introducing this foreshadowed ritual by arranging rooms in the upper story of his brick store standing near the banks of the Mississippi river on Water street, and there, on the fourth of May, 1842, began the introduction of the said ritual, General James Adams, of Springfield, Patriarch Hyrum Smith, Bishops Newel K. Whitney and George Miller; also Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Willard Richards of the quorum of the twelve apostles, being present. The Prophet's Journal for the 4th of May says that he spent the day instructing these men "in the principles and order of the priesthood, attending to washings, anointings, endowments and the communication of keys pertaining to the Aaronic priesthood, setting forth the order of the 'Ancient of Days,' and so on to the highest order of the Melchizedek priesthood, setting forth the order pertaining to the 'Ancient of Days,' and all those plans and principles by which any one is enabled to secure the fulness of those blessings which have been prepared for the 'Church of the First Born,' and come up and abide in the presence of the Elohim in the eternal worlds." He continues his record of the 4th of May as follows:

"In this council was instituted the ancient order of things for the first time in these last days. And the communications I made to this council were things spiritual, and to be received only by the spiritually minded: and there was nothing made known to these men but what will be made known to all the saints of the last days, so soon as they are prepared to receive, and a proper place is prepared to communicate them, even to the weakest of the saints; therefore let the saints be diligent in building the temple, and all houses which they have been, or shall hereafter be, commanded of God to build; and wait their time with patience in all meekness, faith, perseverance unto the end, knowing assuredly that all these things referred to in this council are always governed by the principle of revelation.

Thursday, May 5.—General Adams started for Springfield, and the remainder of the council of yesterday continued their meeting at the same place, and myself and Brother Hyrum received in turn from the others, the same that I had communicated to them the day previous." [^10]

Such is the Prophet's account of the introduction of what is known in the church as the "Endowment Ceremonies," the sacred ritual of the temples, accessible to all the faithful Latter-day Saints, as promised by the Prophet when instituting the said ordinances among the faithful brethren above named, and subsequently among other faithful brethren at Nauvoo. [^11]

A photogravure of the "brick store" in the upper story of which were instituted these sacred ceremonies accompanies this chapter. In addition to its use as a "temple" it was also the place of meeting for the Nauvoo Lodge of Free Masons. Here also the Prophet had his private office where he translated very much of the Book of Abraham, where he received revelations and where the revelation on "Celestial Marriage" was committed to writing; so that all in all this "old brick store" is one of the most noted buildings in Nauvoo, sacred to the faithful Latter-day Saints, and worthy to be held in memory as a sacred shrine, the "first ordinance temple" proper in the church.

NOTES

That Abraham was in Egypt is clear both from the Bible and the writings of Josephus. The latter after relating all that the Bible does, only in greater detail, adds to the account that the Egyptian king made Abraham a large present in money; "and gave him leave to enter into conversation with the most learned among the Egyptians; from which conversation, his virtue and his reputation became more conspicuous than they had been before. For whereas the Egyptians were formerly addicted to different customs, and despised one another's sacred and accustomed rites, and were very angry one with another on that account, Abraham conferred with each of them, and confuted the reasonings they made use of, every one for his own practices; he demonstrated that such reasonings were vain, and void of truth; whereupon he was admired by them, in those conferences, as a very wise man, and one of great sagacity, when he discoursed on any subject he undertook; and this was not only in understanding it, but in persuading other men also to assent to him. He communicated to them arithmetic, and delivered to them the science of astronomy; for before Abraham came into Egypt, they were unacquainted with those parts of learning; for that science came from the Chaldeans into Egypt, and from thence to the Greeks also." [^12]

When Joseph Smith enunciated the sublime truths noticed in the text of this History no such thoughts were prevalent among the students of astronomy. "The Herschels had some inkling of the facts, but their ideas were crude and undeveloped. It was not until the Book of Abraham had been published in America, and if we mistake not in England also, that Sir Wm. G. Hamilton, of the Dublin University, advanced the idea that our solar system had a center around which the sun and all its attendant planets moved. Today [^13] the scholars in the most radical school of astronomy will only admit that our world-system has a center, and that the probabilities are that that center has a center also, around which it and all its satellites move. Further than this they cannot go. However, the little they do admit, confirms the mighty truth revealed to Abraham of old and to Joseph Smith of today. On the other hand the followers of the more conservative school will simply acknowledge that our solar system has a proper motion of its own, independent of its relative or apparent motions with regard to other stars. They admit that 'relative to the general mass of stars, our sun is moving in the direction of the constellation Hercules.' They have come to this conclusion, because they find that the stars in that part of the heavens are continually growing brighter, (thus showing they are coming nearer), whilst those in exactly the opposite direction are as continually growing more dim. They have also discovered that 'there are in the heavens several cases of widely extended groups of stars, having a common proper motion entirely different from that of the stars around and among them.' Such groups they say 'must form connected systems,' or in other words, are all controlled by one and the same governing planet. It is also admitted that 'the stars in all parts of the heavens move in all directions with all sorts of velocities; but they claim that the distances of the stars from the earth are so immense, and so short a period of time has elapsed since astronomers first began to notice these movements, that they cannot with certainty say whether they are moving in circles or straight lines, it is only by analogy that they reason that they are moving around a center.' So little are some of these observers willing to admit, that Professor Newcomb simply allows that 'as our sun is merely one of the stars, and rather a small one, too, it may have a proper motion as well as other stars.' The Smithsonian report for 1871, speaking of Herschel, says: 'The world can afford to wait. Astronomy advances. It may be, in the distant future that mysterious center around which our sun and his worlds revolve, may be detected and afford a solution for other mysteries as well as these. The greatest astronomer is equipped for no more than a Sabbath-day's journey.' Another writer remarks, 'Madler attempted to show, from an examination of the proper motions of the stars, that the whole stellar universe was revolving around Alcyone, of the Pleiades (or seven stars) as a center—a theory, the grandeur of which led to its wide diffusion in popular writing.' Mr. Wm. Petrie, of London, writing with regard to this same star says: 'Alcyone, a primeval name of the star, means the center, and has quite recently been discovered to be really the center around which even our whole solar system, amongst others, revolves.'" [^14]

In 1912 a widespread interest was awakened in the Book of Abraham by the publication of a brochure, by Rt. Rev. F. S. Spalding, D. D. Episcopal Bishop of Utah, under the title Joseph Smith, Jun., as a Translator. The bishop submitted the facsimiles of some of the parchment pages from which the Book of Abraham had been translated, (copies of which accompany this chapter) to a number of the foremost of present day Egyptian scholars. These were Dr. A. H. Sayce, Oxford, England; Dr. W. M. Flinders Petrie, London University; James H. Breasted, Ph. D., Haskel Oriental Museum, University of Chicago; Dr. Arthur C. Mace, Assistant Curator, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, Department of Egyptian Art; Dr. John Peters, University of Penn., in charge of Expedition to Babylonia, 1888-1895; Rev. Prof, C. A. B. Mercer, Ph. D., Western Theological Seminary, Custodian Hibbard Collections, Egyptian Reproductions; two German scholars—Dr. Edward Meyer, University of Berlin; and Dr. Friedrich Freiheer Von Bissin, Professor of Egyptology in the University of Munich—eight in all. Speaking of the result obtained from the submission of these facsimiles to these foremost Egyptologists, Bishop Spalding says: "It will be seen that there is practically complete agreement as to the real meaning of the hieroglyphics, and that this meaning is altogether different from that of Joseph Smith's translation." (Joseph Smith, Jun., as a Translator, p. 19). He also says that "The opinions were obtained from the scholars themselves, and in no case did one man know the opinion of another" (Ibid).

The seeming triumph of the bishop's test of the "Mormon" Prophet's ability to translate ancient languages correctly by inspiration from God, was much commented upon throughout the United States, and especially by the religious press; and the "collapse of Mormonism" was confidently looked for in some quarters; for if Joseph Smith's translation of the Egyptian parchment could be discredited, and proven false, then doubt would be thrown also upon the genuineness of his translation of the Book of Mormon; and thus all his pretensions as a translator would be exposed and come to naught. "It is the belief," wrote Bishop Spalding, "that the honest searchers for truth among the Latter-day Saints will welcome the opinions of authoritative scholars, and, if necessary, courageously readjust their system of belief, however radical a revolution of thought may be required, that the following judgments of the world's greatest Egyptologists have been ascertained." (Joseph Smith, Jun., as a Translator, p. 19). Nothing of this kind happened however, "Mormonism" was not moved a peg by the critique. So far as known there were not a score of Latter-day Saints whose faith was affected by the Spalding brochure. There were no Egyptian scholars in the church of the Latter-day Saints who could make an effective answer to the conclusions of the eight scholars who in various ways pronounced against the correctness of Joseph Smith's translation of the Egyptian parchments that so strangely fell into his hands; but a number of articles were written by elders of the church pointing out the bias of the scholars and some evident defects in the treatment of the subject; and also reviews of Bishop Spalding's arguments. (See Improvement Era for February, 1913, articles by the author of this History; by J. M. Sjodahl, editor of the Deseret News; Dr. Frederick J. Pack, Prof. of Geology, University of Utah; J. F. Wells; John H. Evans; and Levi Edgar Young, M. A. Other articles will be found in the March number of the Era for the same year; by John A. Widtsoe, A. M., Ph. D. and president, at the time, of the Utah Agricultural College; and Judge R. W. Young). Finally a volunteer champion appeared outside the church in the person of "Robert C. Webb, Ph. D.," who wrote a review of the whole controversy in three articles which appear in the Improvement Era for March and September, 1913, and for February, 1914. "Dr. Webb" was an assumed name because, doubtless, the author did not wish to appear in his own personal character as champion of the "Mormon" side of the controversy and expose himself to undesirable notoriety. And while the desire to escape such notoriety may not to some justify the assumption of a name other than his own in such a controversy, still if the argument of "Dr. Webb" be considered apart from who wrote it, but judged upon its merits, its effectiveness will not be doubted. "The author," said the Deseret News, when publishing "Dr. Webb's" first article in its impressions of Jan. 18, 1913, "is a non-resident of Utah, and is not a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The article as received by The News was accompanied by the statement that the author had written it upon his own initiative, without request or suggestion from any member of the church, and solely because of his interest in the subject, to which his attention had been drawn by the publication of the pamphlet by Bishop F. S. Spalding, and comments thereon."

The controversy continued through two years, Bishop Spalding and Dr. Samuel A. B. Mercer sustaining the position of the "scholars," against their "Mormon" critics—named above—and "Dr. Webb." Bishop Spalding's brochure of 31 pages was published in November, 1912, and is still extant; Dr. Mercer's defense of the "scholars" occupies most of the space in the Utah Survey of September, 1913, pp. 4-36. The Survey was published monthly, except in July and August, by the "Social Service Commission" of the Episcopal church in Utah. Nearly all the controversial papers will be found in the Improvement Era for 1913 and 1914, passim.

Footnotes

THE BOOK OF ABRAHAM.

Translated From The Papyrus, By Joseph Smith.

A translation of some ancient records, that have fallen into our hands from the catacombs of Egypt. The writings of Abraham while he was in Egypt, called the Book of Abraham, written by his own hand, upon papyrus.

It is due to the reader to say that fragments of the Book of Abraham, the fac similes published with this chapter, were submitted to a young French savant in 1860, M. Jules Remey. This celebrated French traveler and writer visited Utah in the fall and winter of 1855-6, where he made a study of the "Mormon" history and religion. In 1861 he published the results of his investigations in two large volumes, in Paris, under the title, A Journey to Great Salt Lake City, with a Sketch of the History, Religion and Customs of the Mormons; and an Introduction on the Religious Movement in the United States. The young French savant of the Museum of the Louvre, to whom the facsimiles of the fragments of the Book of Abraham were submitted, was M. Theodule Deveria. His explanations differ from the translations made by Joseph Smith, but of the merits of M. Deveria's translation the writer can form no judgment. But one thing is very striking in the interpretation he gives, and that is, he insists that the hieroglyphics and figures in the copies submitted to him are in some cases dim and may not be deciphered, in others he insists that the figures should be different, and claims that others still have been purposely altered in the copying. If it is the facsimiles thus changed that M. Deveria has interpreted, then of course his interpretation would differ from that translation made by Joseph Smith, who doubtless followed strictly the papyrus text. In any event we do not think the pronunciamiento of M. Deveria is to be regarded as the last word upon the subject. Meantime there are the internal evidences of the truth of the Book of Abraham translated from the papyrus to be accounted for; all which will also stand for the correctness of the Prophet's translation of the ancient 'record. These evidences are considered at length in the very excellent work of the late Elder George Reynolds under the title The Book of Abraham: Its Authenticity Established as a Divine and Ancient Record, 1879: Deseret News, publishers; to which the reader is referred. For an account of a more recent controversy respecting the Book of Abraham and Joseph Smith as a translator, see Note 3, end of chapter.

---
Notas:
[^1] History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, p. 4.
[^2] Ibid, p. 11.
[^3] History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, pp. 38, 39.
[^4] Affidavit of Daniel H. Wells, will be found in full in History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, pp. 80-82.
[^5] See History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, p. 68.
[^6] All the publications, affidavits and documents pertaining to this case will be found in History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, chs. ii and iv, and the June number of the Nauvoo Wasp, pp. 37, 39.
[^7] Leland and Whiting, publishers, Boston, 1842.
[^8] Bennett's Expose, pp. 5, 6.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] H. H. Bancroft in his History of Utah makes the following pertinent remarks upon Bennett and his book: "The role of traitor is not one which in any wise brings credit to the performer, either from one side or the other. However great the service he may render us, we cannot but feel that he is false-hearted and vile. Many of the apostates, though they may not have written books, declare that they joined their sect only to learn their secrets and then expose them. These are the most contemptible of all. There may be cases where a young or inexperienced person, through ignorance or susceptibility, has been carried away for a time contrary to the dictates of cooler judgment; but the statements of such persons are justly regarded with more or less suspicion. Far better is it, far more honest and praiseworthy, for him who, having unwittingly made a mistake, seeks to rectify it, to go his way and say nothing about it; for if he talks of writing a book for the good of others, as a warning, and that they may avoid his errors, few will believe him. 'If he has proved traitor once,' they say, 'he will deceive again; and if he is sincere, we cannot more than half believe him, for such an individual is never sure of himself.' John C. Bennett, general, doctor, Methodist preacher, and quack, is from his own showing a bad man. He devotes some fifty pages to the vindication of his character, which would not be necessary were he honest; other fifty are given to the defaming his late worshipful patron, Joseph Smith, which would never have been written were he true. When a man thrusts in your face three-score certificates of his good character, each signed by from one to a dozen persons, you may know that he is a very great rascal. Nor are we disappointed here. This author is a charlatan, pure and simple; such was he when he joined the Mormons, and before and after. We may credit him fully when he says, 'I never believed in them or their doctrines,' although in a letter to Dr. Dyer, dated Nauvoo, Jan. 20, 1842, he declares: 'My heart is filled with indignation and my blood boils within me, when I contemplate the vast injustice and cruelty which Missouri has meted out to the great philanthropist and devout Christian, General Joseph Smith, and his honest and faithful adherents.' When, however, he affects patriotism and lofty devotion to the welfare of his fellow men, pretending to have joined the society in order to frustrate a daring and colossal scheme of rebellion and usurpation throughout the northwestern states, * * * a despotic military and religious empire, the head of which, as emperor and pope, was to be Joseph Smith, we know that the writer is well aware that it is all nonsense." (History of Utah, pp. 150-1).
[^11] Address to the Church, Joseph Smith, Times and Seasons, vol. iii, pp. 839-842.
[^12] The principle of mercy by which President Smith was actuated is very well expressed by him in an address he delivered to the Female Relief Society of the church, on the ninth of June, 1842, and in the passage quoted he undoubtedly had in mind the case of Bennett and the criticism of himself in consequence of his excessive mercy: He said: "How oft have wise men and women sought to dictate to Brother Joseph by saying, 'O, if I were Brother Joseph I would do this and that.' But if they were in Brother Joseph's shoes they would find that men or women could not be compelled into the kingdom of God, but must be dealt with in long-suffering, and at last we shall save them. The way to keep all the saints together, and keep the work rolling, is to wait with all long-suffering, till God shall bring such characters to justice. There should be no license for sin, but mercy should go hand in hand with reproof." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, p. 24.)
[^13] This was written in 1889. Of course, now, 1930, the movement among the so-called "fixed stars" is very generally and so far as I know universally admitted, being confirmed by actual observations.
[^14] The Book of Abraham, A Divine and Ancient Record, George Reynolds, 1879, pp. 30, 31.
