B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XLVIII

THE FALL OF DR. JOHN C. BENNETT

THE first intimation given in our annals which foreshadows the coming fall of John C. Bennett is in May, 1842. On the 7th of that month there was a special military display in sham battle by the Nauvoo Legion for which there had been intermittent preparation from the 25th of the preceding January, when the order for general inspection, parade, and sham battle had been made. The review and sham battle was preceded by an officer's banquet at the house of President Smith; and such was the interest in the military event, that Judge Stephen A. Douglas adjourned the circuit court, then in session at Carthage, and with other officers of the court and leading lawyers rode out to Nauvoo to be present on the occasion which had long been a matter of curiosity and of some excitement throughout Hancock county. Hearing of the presence of Judge Douglas in Nauvoo, President Smith at once sent an invitation to him and his company to be present at the officers' banquet, which was accepted. Twenty-six companies, amounting to about two thousand men, were on inspection and parade. In the afternoon the legion was separated into cohorts and fought an animated sham battle; the first cohort under the command of General Wilson Law, the second under General Chas. C. Rich. At the close of the "battle" President Smith delivered an animated speech expressing satisfaction with the legion. Under this date President Smith makes the following entry in his Journal.

THE PROPHET'S POSITION IN THE LEGION'S SHAM BATTLE

"I was solicited by General Bennett to take comand of the first cohort during the sham battle; this I declined. General Bennett next requested me to take my station in the rear of the cavalry, without my staff, during the engagement; but this was counteracted by Captain A. P. Rockwood, commander of my life guards who kept close by my side, and I chose my own position. And if General Bennett's true feelings toward me are not made manifest to the world in a very short time, then it may be possible that the gentle breathings of that spirit, which whispered me on parade, that there was mischief concealed in that sham battle, were false; a short time will determine the point. Let John C. Bennett answer at the time of judgment, 'Why did you request me to to command one of the cohorts, and also to take my position without my staff, during the sham battle, on the 7th of May, 1842, where my life might have been the forfeit, and no man have known who did the deed?'" [^1]

Matters developed rapidly after this in the affairs of John C. Bennett. Ten days after the sham battle he resigned as mayor of Nauvoo. President Joseph Smith was elected mayor in his place by the city council, and Hyrum Smith vice-mayor. This action of Bennett's was forced by the rising tide of popular indignation against the evil and corrupt manner of life into which he had fallen. For some time he had been guilty of gross licentiousness. He had betrayed the innocent by most insidious and seductive arts; and had used the name of President Smith to accomplish his base ends by declaring that the president and other leading elders of the church countenanced and practiced such conduct, and taught that no sin attached to it if it was but kept secret. Yet when confronted with these charges he vigorously denied them.

On the day of his resignation Bennett went before Daniel H. Wells, one of the aldermen of Nauvoo—but not then a member of the Church of the Latter-day Saints—and made affidavit in which he said:

BENNETT'S EXONERATION OF THE PROPHET

"He was never taught anything in the least contrary to the strictest principles of the gospel, or of virtue or of the laws of God or man, under any circumstances, or upon any occasion; either directly or indirectly in word or deed, by Joseph Smith, and that he never knew the said Smith to countenance any improper conduct whatever either in public or private; and that he never did teach to me in private that an illegal, illicit intercourse with females, was under any circumstances justifiable, and that I never knew him to so teach others." [^2]

Two days later in the presence of the full city council and a house crowded with spectators, President Joseph Smith asked Bennett to state if he knew aught against him; to which Bennett replied:

"I know what I am about, and the heads of the church know what they are about, I expect. I have no difficulty with the heads of the church. I publicly avow that any one who has said that I have stated that General Joseph Smith had given me authority to hold illicit intercourse with women, is a liar in the face of God, those who have said it are d—— liars; and they are infernal liars. He never either in public or private gave me any such authority or license, and any person who states it is a scoundrel and a liar. I have heard it said that I should become a second Avard by withdrawing from the church, and that I was at variance with the heads [i. e. of the church] and should use an influence against them because I resigned the office of mayor; this is false. I have no difficulty with the heads of the church, and I intend to continue with you, and hope the time may come when I may be restored to full confidence and fellowship, and my former standing in the church, and that my conduct may be such as to warrant my restoration—and should the time ever come that I may have an opportunity to test my faith, it will then be known whether I am a traitor or a true man."

Joseph Smith then asked: "Will you please state definitely whether you know anything against my character either in public or private?"

General Bennett answered: "I do not; in all my intercourse with General Smith, in public and in private, he has been strictly virtuous." [^3]

BENNETT'S CONFESSION BEFORE THE MASONS

The above statement is signed by the five aldermen and the eight councilors comprising the city council, and attested by James Sloan, the city recorder, under date of May 19, 1842.

On the twenty-sixth of May, the case of Bennett came up in the Masonic lodge, of which the Doctor was a member, as were also nearly all the principal men of Nauvoo. In the presence of more than one hundred of the fraternity, he confessed his licentious practices, and acknowledged that he was worthy of the severest chastisement, yet he pleaded for mercy, and especially that he might not be published in the papers. So deep, apparently, was his sorrow, that President Joseph Smith pleaded for mercy in his behalf, and he was forgiven at that time as a Mason; but previous to this viz., on the 11th of May, the first presidency of the church, the twelve and the presiding bishop had sent a formal notice to Bennett that they could not fellowship him as a member of the church, but they withheld the matter from publication, at his earnest solicitation, because of his mother.

John C. Bennett, however, had fallen too far to recover from the effects of his deep transgression. He suddenly left Nauvoo, and soon afterward was found plotting with the enemies of the saints for the destruction of the church. By this time the Masonic lodge learned that he was an expelled Mason, and had palmed himself off on the Nauvoo lodge as a Mason in regular standing, consequently he was disfellow-shipped from the Nauvoo lodge, and was also cashiered by the court-martial of the Nauvoo Legion.

DOUBLE DEALING AND CLAIMS OF DURESS

After Bennett left Nauvoo, he again said that President Joseph Smith had authorized and encouraged promiscuous sexual wickedness; and when confronted with his own affidavit, which declared President Smith to be a virtuous man, and a teacher of righteousness, and upright both in his public and private character, he claimed that he was under duress when he made that affidavit. But Squire Wells, before whom Bennett had qualified to make his sworn statement went before a justice of the peace, and made affidavit that during the time that Bennett's wickedness was going on, and he the while making statements favorable to the character of President Smith and the church—

"During all this time, if he (Doctor Bennett) was under duress or fear, he must have had a good faculty of concealing it; for he was at liberty to go and come when and where he pleased, so far as I am capable of judging."

Squire Wells further testifies in the same statement:

"I was always personally friendly with him [Bennett], after I became acquainted with him. I never heard him say anything derogatory to the character of Joseph Smith until after he had been exposed by said Smith on the public stand in Nauvoo." [^4]

All the members of the city council made a conjoint affidavit to the same effect. [^5] As soon as it was learned that the doctor had left Nauvoo, and was operating for the destruction of the church, the whole case was published in the Nauvoo papers, and his wickedness made known to the world. [^6] Those whom he had involved in his vile snares, both men and women, were brought before the proper tribunals of the church; some of them were disfellowshipped; and others, who sincerely repented, were forgiven.

BENNETT'S "EXPOSE OF MORMONISM"

Bennett in his role of anti-"Mormon" agitator and lecturer revived his charges of unchastity against President Smith and the church leaders; alleged the practice of polygamy; the existence of the "Danites;" secret murders and designs for the overthrow of the government of the United States! Everything in fact which gave promise of creating a sensation. He finally published a book under the title The History of the Saints; or an Expose of Joe Smith and Mormonism. [^7]

The low ribaldry of this book alone would condemn its author in the minds of all sincere people, as being utterly untrustworthy. If it be true that "from the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh," and what is said reveals the state of the mind, then nothing but putrid corruption occupied the mind of Dr. Bennett.

According to Bennett's own account of himself and his connection with the people of Nauvoo, he joined the church not because he believed its doctrines or in the sincerity of its members, but for the purpose of exposing what he suspected to be the treasonable designs of the "Mormons" against several of the "northwestern states," and the purpose of the "Mormon" leaders to erect upon their ruin "a despotic military and religious empire, at the head of which, as emperor and pope was to be Joseph Smith, the Prophet of the Lord, and his ministers and viceroys, the apostles, high priests, elders, and bishops of the Mormon church!" [^8] To defeat these designs Bennett took upon himself the heroic mission of joining the "Mormons" in order to "detect and expose the movers and machinery of the plot." [^9] Bennett's course in this illustrates the truth of Dr. Johnson's declaration, that "patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel." [^10]

THE ERROR OF LONG-SUFFERANCE IN BENNETT'S CASE

It must be confessed that both President Joseph Smith and the people of Nauvoo erred greatly in their treatment of John C. Bennett, by being too indulgent and long-suffering with him. Prompter action and less trust in his professions of repentance would have been justified, much trouble prevented, and less color given to a seeming sanction of his well known immoralities. Soon after Dr. Bennett joined the church, President Smith received a communication from the vicinity of the Doctor's former home in Ohio, giving information that Bennett had a wife and two or three children in McConnellsville, Morgan county, Ohio; and that he was a wicked man. "But knowing that it is no uncommon thing," writes the Prophet in his explanation of the matter, "for good men to be evil spoken against, the above letter was kept quiet, but held in reserve." [^11]

A VIRTUE RUN TO SEED

The Doctor kept the fact of his marriage a secret, and began paying his addresses to a young lady, evidently intending to marry her, which President Joseph Smith observing sought to dissuade him from such a course but could not succeed until he threatened to make known the communication charging the Doctor with being a married man. Shortly after this confirmation of the fact of Bennett's being a married man was received by letter from Hyrum Smith and Wm. Law written from Pittsburg, Pennsylvania where they were given information respecting Bennett's family. Confronted with this new evidence the Doctor admitted its truth and attempted suicide by taking poison. From this he was rescued by antidotes, but only to continue his career of wickedness. Still he was borne with, in the hope of reformation, especially by President Smith, who sought with all his might to save him but to no purpose; and meantime the Prophet brought upon himself much criticism, and by his persistent friendship for Bennett, discredited himself with many both in the church and outside of it. But loyalty to his friends, or those whom he thought to be so, was of the essence of the Prophet's nature; and truly forebearance is a great virtue; but like many other virtues, followed to excess, it becomes a virtue run to seed. [^12]

In any event Dr. John Cook Bennett proved himself unworthy the personal sacrifices President Joseph Smith made for him.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The following is the Prophet's description of his arrest by Wilson and Reynolds taken from a speech he delivered at Nauvoo in the presence of those officers and many thousands of Nauvoo's citizens, a few days after he was arrested: "The day before I was taken at Inlet Grove, I rode with my wife through Dixon to visit my friends, and I said to her, 'Here is a good people.' I felt this by the spirit of God. The next day I was a prisoner in their midst, in the hands of Reynolds, of Missouri, and Wilson, of Carthage. As the latter drove up, he exclaimed, 'Ha, ha, ha! By G—d, we have got the Prophet now!'—he gloried much in it—'But he is now our prisoner!' When they came to take me, they held two cocked pistols to my head, and saluted me with, 'G—d—n you, I'll shoot you! I'll shoot you, G—d—n you.' repeating these threats nearly fifty times, from first to last. I asked them what they wanted to shoot me for. They said they would do it, if I made any resistance.
[^2] See chapter xlix.
[^3] The affidavits in full are published in the History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, Appendix, pp. 403-466.
[^4] The whole subject is reviewed by Ford in a communication to Governor Reynolds, of Missouri, under date of August 14th, 1843, published in extenso in History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, pp. 533-4, 5, 6. In this communication Governor Ford makes the following statement about the friends of the Prophet who went from Nauvoo to his assistance when en route from Dixon to Nauvoo:
[^5] History of the Church, Period I. vol. v, pp. 465-473—the Prophet's speech.
[^6] See this History, chs. xxiv and xxxviii.
[^7] Leland and Whiting, publishers, Boston, 1842.
[^8] Bennett's Expose, pp. 5, 6.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] H. H. Bancroft in his History of Utah makes the following pertinent remarks upon Bennett and his book: "The role of traitor is not one which in any wise brings credit to the performer, either from one side or the other. However great the service he may render us, we cannot but feel that he is false-hearted and vile. Many of the apostates, though they may not have written books, declare that they joined their sect only to learn their secrets and then expose them. These are the most contemptible of all. There may be cases where a young or inexperienced person, through ignorance or susceptibility, has been carried away for a time contrary to the dictates of cooler judgment; but the statements of such persons are justly regarded with more or less suspicion. Far better is it, far more honest and praiseworthy, for him who, having unwittingly made a mistake, seeks to rectify it, to go his way and say nothing about it; for if he talks of writing a book for the good of others, as a warning, and that they may avoid his errors, few will believe him. 'If he has proved traitor once,' they say, 'he will deceive again; and if he is sincere, we cannot more than half believe him, for such an individual is never sure of himself.' John C. Bennett, general, doctor, Methodist preacher, and quack, is from his own showing a bad man. He devotes some fifty pages to the vindication of his character, which would not be necessary were he honest; other fifty are given to the defaming his late worshipful patron, Joseph Smith, which would never have been written were he true. When a man thrusts in your face three-score certificates of his good character, each signed by from one to a dozen persons, you may know that he is a very great rascal. Nor are we disappointed here. This author is a charlatan, pure and simple; such was he when he joined the Mormons, and before and after. We may credit him fully when he says, 'I never believed in them or their doctrines,' although in a letter to Dr. Dyer, dated Nauvoo, Jan. 20, 1842, he declares: 'My heart is filled with indignation and my blood boils within me, when I contemplate the vast injustice and cruelty which Missouri has meted out to the great philanthropist and devout Christian, General Joseph Smith, and his honest and faithful adherents.' When, however, he affects patriotism and lofty devotion to the welfare of his fellow men, pretending to have joined the society in order to frustrate a daring and colossal scheme of rebellion and usurpation throughout the northwestern states, * * * a despotic military and religious empire, the head of which, as emperor and pope, was to be Joseph Smith, we know that the writer is well aware that it is all nonsense." (History of Utah, pp. 150-1).
[^11] Address to the Church, Joseph Smith, Times and Seasons, vol. iii, pp. 839-842.
[^12] The principle of mercy by which President Smith was actuated is very well expressed by him in an address he delivered to the Female Relief Society of the church, on the ninth of June, 1842, and in the passage quoted he undoubtedly had in mind the case of Bennett and the criticism of himself in consequence of his excessive mercy: He said: "How oft have wise men and women sought to dictate to Brother Joseph by saying, 'O, if I were Brother Joseph I would do this and that.' But if they were in Brother Joseph's shoes they would find that men or women could not be compelled into the kingdom of God, but must be dealt with in long-suffering, and at last we shall save them. The way to keep all the saints together, and keep the work rolling, is to wait with all long-suffering, till God shall bring such characters to justice. There should be no license for sin, but mercy should go hand in hand with reproof." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, p. 24.)
