B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER L

REVIVAL OF OLD MISSOURI CHARGES—TRIAL AND ACQUITTAL OF PRESIDENT JOSEPH SMITH

MISSOURI was not content to let her pursuit of President Joseph Smith stop with his acquittal on the charge of complicity in the Boggs affair. No sooner was he released from arrest and departed from Springfield than John C. Bennett arrived there and wrote some of his friends in Nauvoo his intention to leave immediately for Missouri and obtain a new indictment by a grand jury on the old charge of "murder, treason, burglary, theft," etc., brought against the Prophet, Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight, Parley P. Pratt et al, in 1838; hoping that upon this charge he might succeed in getting out extradition papers on the ground that the Prophet was a fugitive from the justice of the state of Missouri.

An indictment on these old charges was finally obtained, supposedly at the instance of John C. Bennett and the Prophet's old Missouri enemies, at a special term of the circuit court of Daviess county, Missouri, on the 5th of June, 1843. Governor Reynolds, of Missouri, issued a requisition on Governor Ford for Joseph Smith on the 13th of the same month, and appointed J. H. Reynolds as agent of Missouri to receive Joseph Smith from the authorities of Illinois.

SENSATIONAL ARREST OF THE PROPHET AT DIXON

Governor Ford, responding to the request of Missouri, issued extradition papers and placed them in the hands of Harmon T. Wilson for execution. Friends in Springfield hearing that a warrant was issued for the Prophet's arrest dispatched messengers with that word to Nauvoo. President Smith was absent from the city with his wife visiting her relatives, the Wassons, living near Dixon in Lee county, some two hundred miles north of Nauvoo. Hyrum Smith dispatched two messengers, Stephen Markham and William Clayton, to warn the Prophet of his danger, and these messengers reached him before the arrival of the officers. President Smith, however, concluded not to avoid arrest; for he feared that if he started for Nauvoo he might be apprehended en route where he had no friends and be run over into Missouri among his bitterest enemies. A short time after the arrival of Markham and Clayton, the two officers, Wilson and Reynolds, appeared at the Wasson home and very brutally, with oaths and threats and unnecessary violence, [^1] placed President Smith under arrest, and were for dragging him into Missouri sans ceremony. By the activity and energy of his friends, however, President Smith succeeded in so far delaying the haste of his captors that he obtained a writ of habeas corpus at Dixon, made returnable before Hon. John D. Caton, judge of the ninth judicial circuit at Ottawa, Lasalle county. Before starting for Ottawa it was learned that Judge Caton was absent from the state and a new writ was issued "returnable before the nearest tribunal in the fifth judicial district to hear writs of habeas corpus."

CYRUS WALKER—COMPLICATED ARRESTS

Cyrus Walker, the Whig candidate for congress, was at Dixon conducting his canvass; and President Smith called upon him to take his case as counsel. Walker refused to take the case unless President Smith would pledge himself to vote for him in the coming election. This agreement was made and Walker began a vigorous counteraction against the officers Wilson and Reynolds. Writs were issued against them before the local justice of the peace for threats against President Smith's life; another for violation of the law in relation to writs of habeas corpus; and still another, this from the circuit court of Lee county, for private injuries and false imprisonment, claiming $10,000 damages. As the officers could furnish no bondsman they were under the necessity themselves of obtaining writs of habeas corpus. So that while President Smith was the prisoner of Wilson and Reynolds, pending the hearing on a writ of habeas corpus, the two officers were prisoners under the same circumstances in charge of the sheriff of Lee county. Under these complex circumstances the parties started for Quincy, the nearest point within the fifth judicial district, it was supposed, where the cases could be heard. Quincy was two hundred and sixty miles distant.

En route for Quincy President Smith convinced the sheriff of Lee county and Esquire Walker—at least Walker pretended to be convinced—that the municipal court of Nauvoo had the right to try cases under writs of habeas corpus, and since the writ he had secured was made returnable before the nearest tribunal in the fifth judicial district authorized to hear and determine writs of habeas corpus, President Smith insisted on being taken to Nauvoo for the hearing. He prevailed, too, and for that place the party directed its course.

NAUVOO AROUSED FOR THE SAFETY OF THE PROPHET

Meantime there were exciting times in Nauvoo. As soon as he was arrested President Smith dispatched William Clayton with the word to his brother Hyrum Smith that his friends might take such steps as would secure to him his rights. Clayton arrived in Nauvoo about two o'clock on Sunday, the twenty-fifth of June, while the regular Sunday services were in progress. Hyrum Smith called upon the brethren to meet him at the Masonic Hall where he imparted to them the information of the Prophet's arrest, and called for volunteers to go to his assistance. Immediately three hundred volunteered, and of these nearly two hundred were accepted, and before sunset were mounted and left the city under the command of Wilson Law and Charles C. Rich, both officers in the Nauvoo Legion.

A company of seventy-five men under the leadership of captain Dan Jones, a Welshman, boarded the Maid of Iowa—a small steamboat, purchased by the people of Nauvoo a few months before—and started down the Mississippi for the mouth of the Illinois river, thence up that stream with the view of intercepting any party which might attempt to take the Prophet via the river route into Missouri. It was supposed at Nauvoo that the officers were en route with President Smith for Ottawa, as Clayton had left him before it was learned that Judge Caton was not in the state, which fact changed the course of those having him in charge in the direction of Quincy.

The force of one hundred and seventy-five men under Law and Rich divided and subdivided into small companies in going northward through the country, and on the third day some of these small companies joined President Smith near Monmouth, in Warren county.

While in the vicinity of Monmouth, Wilson and Reynolds planned a scheme to go into that town, raise a posse of men, take President Smith by force and run him into Missouri. The plot was overheard, however, and disclosed, by Peter W. Conover, one of the Prophet's newly arrived friends, whereupon Sheriff Campbell of Lee county, disarmed and took into closer custody the two officers.

GREETING OF THE PROPHET AT NAUVOO

As the party drew nearer to Nauvoo the small bands of the Prophet's friends were encountered one after another until his escort numbered one hundred and forty mounted men. At noon on the 30th of June he was met a mile and a half north of the city by a great concourse of the citizens of Nauvoo. A procession was formed and with President Smith at its head entered the city amid the enthusiastic cheers of the people, the firing of musketry and cannon, and the music of the band. The great concourse of people that thronged the streets in the vicinity of the president's house seemed unwilling to disperse until he announced that he would address them in the grove near the temple at four o'clock.

A company of fifty sat down at the Prophet's table to partake of the feast provided, and Wilson and Reynolds, who treated him so inhumanly when he was in their power at Dixon, were placed at the head of the table, and waited upon by Emma, the Prophet's wife, with the utmost regard for their comfort.

In the afternoon, several thousand people assembled at the grove, and at four o'clock, President Smith addressed them in an animated speech of considerable length, in which he related to them his adventures while in the power of his enemies, and contended that the municipal court of Nauvoo had the right to hear cases arising under writs of habeas corpus. In the course of this speech the Prophet allowed himself to be carried away by the fervor of his feelings. That will create no astonishment when the excitement and the indignation under which he was laboring, are taken into account. Under such circumstances and from such temperaments as that of President Smith's, we shall look in vain at such times for a dispassionate discourse; and more than human must that man be who under the accumulated wrongs of years of oppression, can always confine his speech, when recounting those wrongs, within the lines that calm wisdom would draw.

COURAGE AND TENDERNESS OF THE PROPHET

There never was any doubt as to the courage of Joseph Smith. From boyhood he had been noted for his fearlessness under trying circumstances, but during the period here considered, when he was the constant object of assault, both by legal processes, under the leadership of cunning, malicious men, and the physical brutality of officials charged with the execution of the law; and both when facing the maliciously skillful in their proceedings under the color of law, and the threats of physical force from brutal captors, the conduct of the Prophet was most admirable. Also in seclusion, when others were easily excited and manifested symptoms of panic under circumstances of conflicting rumors of impending dangers, it is refreshing to see how calmly he keeps his balance and rightly judges the true status of many trying situations. But what is most pleasing to record of this period of enforced seclusion, while avoiding his enemies, is the development of that tenderness of soul manifested in his reflections upon his friends who stood by him from the commencement of his public career; for his father and mother, for his brother Alvin, for Emma, his wife, for his brother Hyrum, the Knights, who were his friends even before the Book of Mormon was translated, and especially for the friends who received him and ministered unto him during his retirement from public view. No act of kindness seems to go unmentioned. No risk run for him is unappreciated. Indeed he gathers much benefit from those trials, since their effect upon his nature seems to be a softening rather than a hardening influence. The trials of life are always beneficial where they do not harden and brutalize men's souls; and every day under trials the Prophet seems to have grown more tender-hearted, more universal in his sympathies; his moments of spiritual exaltation are superb. [^2]

TRIAL BEFORE THE MUNICIPAL COURT OF NAUVOO

In the meantime, a requisition was made on Sheriff Reynolds to bring his prisoner before the municipal court of Nauvoo, that the validity of the warrant, by virtue of which he held him, might be tested. Reynolds refused to recognize the summons of the court; therefore, his prisoner petitioned the court for a writ of habeas corpus to be directed to Sheriff Reynolds, commanding him to bring his prisoner before said court, and there state the cause of his capture and detention, in order that the lawfulness of his arrest might be determined. Reynolds complied with the attachment, and the Prophet was delivered into the charge of the city marshal. The next day, the municipal court held a session, William Marks acting as chief justice, D. H. Wells, N. K. Whitney, G. W. Harris, Gustavus Hills and Hiram Kimball, associate justices.

When President Smith was on trial for this same offense before Judge Douglas, on a writ of habeas corpus, in 1841, as already related in a previous chapter, the court refused to enter into the consideration of the merits of the case, as the judge doubted whether on a writ of habeas corpus he had a right to go behind the writ and inquire into the merits of the case. The same point was avoided by Judge Pope in the hearing before his court in the Boggs case. But the municipal court of Nauvoo had no such scruples, and at once proceeded to try the case ex parte, on its merits; and Hyrum Smith, Parley P. Pratt, Brigham Young, George W. Pitkin, Lyman Wight and Sidney Rigdon were examined as witnesses. Their affidavits before that court concerning events that happened to the saints in Missouri, afford the most circumstantial, reliable and exhaustive data for the History of the Church while in that state that has ever been published. [^3]

After hearing the testimony of these witnesses, and the pleadings of counsel, the court ordered that Joseph Smith be released from arrest, for want of substance in the warrant by which he was held, as well as upon the merits of the case.

At the conclusion of the trial the citizens of Nauvoo held a mass meeting and passed resolutions thanking the people of Dixon and vicinity, and of Lee county generally, for the stand they had taken in defense of the innocent, and in favor of law and justice.

A copy of the proceedings of the municipal court of Nauvoo, and of all the papers connected with the case, were immediately sent to Governor Ford as also were the affidavits from leading counsel and gentlemen from Dixon, as to the treatment of Wilson and Reynolds, that the governor and the people might know that they had not been injured.

ATTITUDE OF GOVERNOR FORD ON THE PROPHET'S COURSE

Governor Ford, also at that time, gave tacit approval of the course taken by the municipal court in issuing the writ of habeas corpus, though he afterwards became very pronounced in his opposition to the exercises of such powers by the city. Governor Ford's approval of what was done appears in this: As soon as President Smith was liberated, Sheriff Reynolds applied to the governor for a posse to retake him, representing that the Prophet had been unlawfully taken out of his hands by the municipal court of Nauvoo. The governor refused to grant the petition. Subsequently the governor of Missouri asked Governor Ford to call out the militia to retake the Prophet, but this he also refused to do; and gave as a reason that "no process, officer, or authority of the state had been resisted or interfered with," and recited how the prisoner had been released on habeas corpus by the municipal court of Nauvoo. The governer acted in this instance with perfect knowledge of what had taken place, for the petition and statement of Reynolds were in his possession as were also complete copies of all the documents which contained the proceedings before the municipal court of Nauvoo; and in addition to these sources of information, the governor had dispatched a trusted, secret agent, a Mr. Brayman, to Nauvoo, who investigated the case and reported the above named information to him. [^4]

COMMENT ON THE NAUVOO CHARTER: WRITS OF HABEAS CORPUS

Very naturally after the experiences of the "Mormon" people in Missouri, the Prophet was anxious to environ them with conditions that would insure protection to the community; hence for Nauvoo he secured as large concessions of political power as it was possible to obtain, and an examination of the Nauvoo charter proper with its attendant charters providing, as they did, for an independent educational system, from common schools to a university; an independent military organization, with a "lieutenant-general" as its commander; a large grant of commercial as well as municipal power, demonstrates how well he succeeded. Commenting upon the charter immediately after its passage by the state legislature had been formally announced, he said: "The city charter of Nauvoo is of my own plan and device. I concocted it for the salvation of the church, and on principles so broad, that every honest man might dwell secure under its protective influence without distinction of sect or party." On another occasion when defending the right of the city to issue writs of habeas corpus, even against processes of the state, he held: "If there is not power in our charter and courts, then there is not power in the state of Illinois nor in the congress or Constitution of the United States; for the United States gave unto Illinois her Constitution or charter; and Illinois gave unto Nauvoo her charters conceding unto us our vested rights which she has no right or power to take from us. All the power there was in Illinois she gave to Nauvoo. * * * The municipal court has all the power to issue and determine writs of habeas corpus within the limits of this state that the legislature can confer. This city has all the power that the state courts have, and was given by the same authority—the legislature. * * * 'But,' says the mob, 'what dangerous powers!' Yes, dangerous, because they will protect the innocent and put down mobocrats. There is nothing but what we have power over, except where restricted by the Constitution of the United States. * * * If these powers are dangerous, then the Constitution of the United States, and of this state are dangerous; but they are not dangerous to good men; they are only so to bad men who are breakers of the laws. * * * The lawyers themselves acknowledge that we have all power granted us in our charters that we could ask for—that we have more power than any other court in the state; for all other courts were restricted while ours was not." [^5]

Such views in relation to an ordinary municipal government would unquestionably be regarded as untenable. No such powers as are here claimed are accorded to any ordinary city government in Illinois or any other of the states of the American union. What then may be said of the Prophet's claims in respect to the municipal powers of Nauvoo? Nothing in way of defense, except it be held that Nauvoo was not an ordinary municipality; that Joseph Smith had sought for extraordinary grants of power for the city of Nauvoo and had obtained them; that his personal experiences and the experiences of his people in Ohio and Missouri, had taught him the necessity of having officers charged with the duty of administering government, wherein his people were concerned, who were friendly disposed and whose interests were largely identical with those of the saints: local self-government was an imperative necessity to them. The things which the Prophet and his people suffered justified both him and them, perhaps, in seeking for and obtaining such powers as had been conferred by charters upon the city of Nauvoo; and under these granted powers, as he conceived them, the Prophet was wholly within the lines of right conduct when he invoked municipal powers in his own protection against the aggressions of his old enemies in Missouri and his new betrayers in Illinois. But whether the legislature of Illinois was fully aware of the extraordinary powers it was confering upon the city of Nauvoo, or being aware of the import of their action the party in control of the legislature was willing to grant the extraordinary powers in the hope of currying political favor with the saints, may not be determined; but in any event these extraordinary powers were granted; and wittingly or unwittingly a "city-state" had practically been established within the state of Illinois. Nothing short of this descriptive term can adequately set fort the municipal government of Nauvoo. It seems to be an unconscious reversion, in an incipient way, to the "city-states" or "city-republics" of the old Greek confederacies, or the "free-towns" of mediaeval times, when the cities were more potent than nations in commerce and even in politics. Whether or not the state courts of Illinois and United States courts would have sustained the Nauvoo charters if the matter of their validity had been referred to them for adjudication, may not be determined; but the likelihood is that they would not have been sustained; on the contrary they would have been most likely declared anomalous to the American system of government.

ON THE BROAD PRINCIPLES OF JUSTICE

Reverting to the case of the Prophet just before the municipal court, however, whatever opinion may be entertained as to the right of the city of Nauvoo to issue writs of habeas corpus to arrest state processes, there can be no question but what by the broad principles of justice, Joseph Smith ought to have been set free. The state of Missouri had no just claims upon him. He had been arrested and several times examined on these old charges now revived by the personal malice of John C. Bennett, and after being held a prisoner awaiting indictment and trial for five months, so conscious were the officers of the state that they had no case against him that they themselves connived at his escape. [^6] After such proceedings to demand that Joseph Smith be dragged again into Missouri among his old enemies for trial upon these five-year-old charges, was an outrage against every principle of justice; and he and his friends were justified in resisting such process either by strategy or even by force.

We may conclude the account of this adventure of President Smith's by saying that about a year afterwards, a jury in Lee county awarded fifty dollars damages, and costs, against Wilson and Reynolds, for false imprisonment and abuse of the Prophet—a verdict which, while it confirms the unlawful course of those officers, and the fact that their prisoner was abused, insults justice by awarding such an amount for damages.

Footnotes

'Oh, very well,' I replied, 'I have no resistance to make.' They then dragged me away, and I asked them by what authority they did these things. They said, 'By a writ from the governors of Missouri and Illinois.' I then told them I wanted a writ of habeas corpus. Their reply was, 'G—d—n you, you shan't have it. I told a man to go to Dixon and get me a writ of habeas corpus. Wilson then repeated, 'G—d—n you, you shan't have it; I'll shoot you.'

When we arrived at Dixon, I sent for a lawyer, who came; and Reynolds shut the door in his face, and would not let me speak to him, repeating, 'G—d—n you, I'll shoot you.' I turned to him, and opened my bosom, and told him to 'shoot away.' I have endured so much persecution and oppression that I am sick of life. Why, then, don't you shoot, and have done with it, instead of talking so much about it?' This somewhat checked his insolence.". (History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, pp. 465-473.)

"On the road, during their progress, they were met by parties of the citizens of Nauvoo, some or most of whom are said to have been members of the Nauvoo Legion, though there is no evidence that they appeared in a military capacity. There was no exhibition of arms of any description, nor was there any military or war-like array, nor was there any actual force used, though Mr. Reynolds testifies that he felt under constraint, and that Smith, soon after meeting the first parties of Mormons, enlarged himself from his custody. * * *

After arriving at Nauvoo, a writ of habeas corpus was issued by the municipal court of that city, and Mr. Reynolds was compelled by the authority of the court to produce Mr. Smith before that tribunal. After hearing the case, the court discharged Smith from arrest.

There is much other evidence submitted; but the foregoing is the material part of it to be considered on the present occasion.

Now, sir, I might safely rest my refusal to order a detachment of militia to assist in retaking Smith upon the ground that the laws of this state have been fully exercised in the matter. A writ has been issued for his apprehension. Smith was apprehended and was duly delivered by the officer of this state to the agent of the state of Missouri appointed to receive him. No process, officer or authority of this state has been resisted or interfered with. I have fully executed the duty which the laws impose upon me, and have not been resisted either in the writ issued for the arrest of Smith or in the person of the officer appointed to apprehend him."

---
Notas:
[^1] NAUVOO IN 1843 A steel engraving of "The Mansion" accompanies this chapter, from a photograph taken by the writer in 1885. It is an "L" shaped building, the west front facing Main street, and the south front Water street. The chief interest in "The Mansion" of course is that it was the home of the Prophet, where he feasted the poor and humble among his own people, as well as some of the first men of the state of Illinois.
[^2] AN EPISODE IN THE HISTORY OF THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN IN THE YEAR 1860 See Note 1 end of chapter.
[^3] IF STEPHEN A. DOUGLAS HAD BEEN TRUE TO THE PEOPLE OF HIS FRIEND JOSEPH SMITH—WHAT? History of the Church, Period I, vol. v. p. 85, and note.
[^4] Tullidge's Histories, vol. ii, History of Northern Utah and Southern Idaho—Biographical Supplement, p. 271, et seq. There is some confusion of dates respecting this Call statement. The Prophet fixes the date of his prophecy on Saturday, the 6th of August, 1842. In Whitney's History of Utah, vol. iv, Biographical Section of the History (p. 143), the date on which Call heard the prophecy is given as the 8th of August, 1842. While in Tullidge's Biography of Call the date is given as the 14th of July, 1843, evidently an error. There is no entry in the Prophet's Journal upon the subject for the 8th of August, 1842; and the entries for the 8th of August, 1843, and the 14th of July, 1843, relate to matters of quite a different character. Tullidge, in relating Anson Call's recollection of the incident, also says that J. C. Bennett was present on the occasion, which must also be an error, as the rupture between Bennett and the church and its authorities occurred and he had left Nauvoo previous to the 6th of August, 1842. In the Call statement, as published by Tullidge, the name of Mr. Adams, the deputy grand master Mason in charge of the ceremonies, is given as "George." It should be "James."
[^5] Millennial Star, vol. xxi, no. 9, p. 142.
[^6] See Cooper's American Politics, bk. i, p. 86.
