B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LI

GROWTH OF NAUVOO: TWO REMARKABLE PROPHECIES

MEANTIME Nauvoo was growing. Early in 1843 her population was variously computed from twelve to sixteen thousand. Her public buildings, chiefly the temple and the Nauvoo House, were progressing rapidly. More pretentious homes were being erected, and new additions to the original city plat were made. Among the substantial buildings of Nauvoo completed in 1843, was the Nauvoo Mansion, [^1] the principal hotel of the city, and also the home of President Smith. It was a frame structure built and owned by President Smith for the accomodation of visitors to Nauvoo, now very numerous, pending the erection of the more pretentious Nauvoo House. President Smith did not long continue in control of it as a hotel, however, but leased it to others, though he continued to make it his home up to the time of his death, and here it was that his bullet-torn body lay in state after the tragedy at Carthage.

THE NAUVOO MANSION

"The Mansion" was said to have been the most commodious hostelry and to set the best table of any public place of entertainment on the upper Mississippi in those days. Among other conveniences it had brick stables with stalls for seventy-five horses and storage for hay and grain to feed them.

Early in December, 1842, the city had been divided, ecclesiastically, into ten wards and bishops were appointed to preside over each. The city council was active in passing ordinances to meet growing necessities of a rapidly increasing population, looking especially to the cleanliness, health and morality of the city. In February, 1843, Joseph Smith was chosen a second time mayor of the city, and, all things considered, Nauvoo was rapidly approaching the high watermark of her prosperity. [^2]

THE TURMOIL THAT HINDERS PROGRESS

But peace is essential to the growth of cities. Commerce flees from strife; and trade sinks into decay where conflicts distract the people. Nauvoo was favorably located and no city in the west gave better promise of becoming an important center of domestic commerce, manufactures, and inland and river trade. With peace it could easily have become the rival of St. Louis or Chicago. In addition to being a center of trade, manufactures and domestic commerce, the presence of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints would have made it a shrine, a gathering place for the faithful from all parts of the world, and an educational center also; for already steps had been taken towards founding a university, and the keen interest which President Smith and his followers had ever manifested in education, gave every promise that Nauvoo in time would be one of the prominent centers of higher education in the United States.

The peace essential to this material and educational growth, however, was not granted to Nauvoo. Sectarian bitterness against the religion of the Latter-day Saints was too deep-rooted; political jealousy was too strong; and hence strife, plots, threats of violence, actual violence, rumors of invasions from Missouri, hints of assistance from mobs in Illinois, the frequent arrest of the founder of the city, the false reports that went abroad concerning its inhabitants—all combined to blight the prospects and hinder the growth which otherwise might have been realized because of Nauvoo's favorable position and early development.

Two great prophecies by Joseph Smith belong to this period. The first was in relation to the removal of the saints to the valleys of the Rocky Mountains; the other was a most remarkable prediction concerning Judge Stephen A. Douglas, just then beginning to become prominent in the politics of Illinois.

THE REMOVAL OF THE SAINTS TO THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS—A PREDICTION

The first of these predictions falls under the date of August the 6th, 1842. The Prophet records the following incident as occurring on that day:

"Passed over to Montrose, Iowa, in company with General Adams, Colonel Brewer and others, and witnessed the installation of the officers of the Rising Sun Lodge of the Ancient York Masons, at Montrose, by General James Adams, deputy grand master of Illinois. While the deputy grand master, was engaged in giving the requisite instructions to the master elect, I had a conversation with a number of brethren, in the shade of the building, on the subject of our persecutions in Missouri, and the constant annoyance which has followed us since we were driven from that state. I prophesied that the saints would continue to suffer much affliction and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains, many would apostatize, others would be put to death by our persecutors, or lose their lives in consequence of exposure or disease; and some of you will live to go and assist in making settlements and build cities and see the saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains." [^3]

Of this incident, one of the brethren who was present, Anson Call, according to Edward Tullidge, makes the following statement, important as relating to the prophetic incident itself, and also as a description of the Prophet when under the influence of the divine inspiration by which his prophetic utterances were prompted.

"On the 6th of August, 1842, with quite a number of his brethren, he [Joseph Smith] crossed the Mississippi river to the town of Montrose, to be present at the installation of the Masonic Lodge of the Risin Sun. A block schoolhouse had been prepared with shade in front, under which was a barrel of ice water, Judge James Adams was the highest Masonic authority in the state of Illinois, and had been sent there to organize this lodge. He and Hyrum Smith, being high Masons, went into the house to perform some ceremonies which the others were not entitled to witness. These, including Joseph Smith, remained under the bowery. Joseph, as he was tasting the cold water, warned the brethren not to be too free with it. With the tumbler still in his hand he prophesied that the saints would yet go to the Rocky Mountains; and, said he, this water tastes much like that of the crystal streams that are running from the snow-capped mountains. We will let Mr. Call describe this prophetic scene: 'I had before seen him in a vision, and now saw while he was talking his countenance change to white; not the deadly white of a bloodless face, but a living, brilliant white. He seemed absorbed in gazing at something at a great distance, and said: 'I am gazing upon the valleys of those mountains.' This was followed by a vivid description of the scenery of these mountains, as I have since become acquainted with it. Pointing to Shadrach Roundy and others, he said: 'There are some men here who shall do a great work in that land.' Pointing to me, he said: 'There is Anson, he shall go and shall assist in building up cities from one end of the country to the other; and you, rather extending the idea to all those he had spoken of, shall perform as great a work as has been done by man, so that the nations of the earth shall be astonished, and many of them will be gathered in that land and assist in building cities and temples, and Israel shall be made to rejoice." [^4]

We shall see in the progress of this History a wonderful fulfillment of the prophecy.

The prophecy relating to Judge Stephen A. Douglas occurred on the 18th of May, 1843. The text of it is taken from the daily Journal of William Clayton, then the private secretary of President Smith, and present at the interview described. Under the date above given Mr. Clayton makes the following entry:

PROPHECY UPON THE HEAD OF JUDGE STEPHEN A. DOUGLAS

"May 18th, 1843:—Dined with Judge Stephen A. Douglas, who is presiding at court. After dinner Judge Douglas requested President Smith to give him a history of the Missouri persecution, which he did in a very minute manner for about three hours. He also gave a relation of his journey to Washington city, and his application in behalf of the saints to Mr. Van Buren, the president of the United States, for redress, and Mr. Van Buren's pusillanimous reply—'Gentlemen, your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you;' and the cold, unfeeling manner in which he was treated by most of the senators and representatives in relation to the subject, Clay saying, 'You had better go to Oregon,' and Calhoun shaking his head solemnly, saying, 'It's a nice question—a critical question; but it will not do to agitate it.'

The judge listened with the greatest attention, and then spoke warmly in deprecation of Governor Boggs and the authorities in Missouri, who had taken part in the extermination, and said that any people that would do as the mobs of Missouri had done ought to be brought to judgment; they ought to be punished.

President Smith, in concluding his remarks, said that 'if the government, which receives into its coffers the money of citizens for its public lands, while its officials are rolling in luxury at the expense of its public treasury, cannot protect such citizens in their lives and property, it is an old granny anyhow, and I prophesy in the name of the Lord of Israel, unless the United States redress the wrongs committed upon the saints in the state of Missouri and punish crimes committed by her officers, that in a few years the government will be utterly overthrown and wasted, and there will not be so much as a potsherd left, for their wickedness in permitting the murder of men, women and children and the wholesale plunder and extermination of thousands of her citizens to go unpunished, thereby perpetrating a foul and corroding blot upon the fair fame of this great republic, the very thought of which would have caused the high-minded and patriotic framers of the Constitution of the United States to hide their faces with shame. Judge, you will aspire to the presidency of the United States; and if you ever turn your hand against me or the Latter-day Saints, you will feel the weight of the hand of the Almighty upon you; and you will live to see and know that I have testified the truth to you; for the conversation of this day will stick to you through life.' He [Judge Douglas] appeared very friendly and acknowledged the truth and propriety of President Smith's remarks."

TIME OF THE PUBLICATION OF THE PROPHECY

This prophecy was first published in Utah, in the Deseret News of September 24th, 1856; it was afterwards published in England, in the Millennial Star, February, 1859. [^5] In both instances it is found in the "History of Joseph Smith," then being published in sections in those periodicals. It is a matter of common knowledge that Stephen A. Douglas, after the publication of this prediction, did aspire to the presidency of the United States, and was nominated for that office by the Democratic Convention, held in Baltimore on the 23rd of June, 1860. When in the convention he was declared the regular nominee of the Democratic party, "The whole body rose to its feet, hats were waved in the air, and many tossed aloft; shouts, screams, and yells, and every boisterous mode of expressing approbation and unanimity, were resorted to." [^6]

BRIGHT PROSPECTS FOR MR. DOUGLAS

When Mr. Douglas first began to aspire to the presidency, no man in the history of American politics had more reason to hope for success. The political party of which he was the recognized leader, in the preceding presidential election had polled 174 electoral votes as against 122 cast by the other two parties which opposed it, and a popular vote of 1,838,169 as against 1,215,798 votes for the two parties opposing. It is a matter of history, however, that the Democratic party in the election of 1860 was badly divided; and factions of it put candidates into the field with the following result: Abraham Lincoln, candidate of the Republican party, was triumphantly elected. He received 180 electoral votes; Mr. Breckenridge received 72 electoral votes; Mr. Bell 39; and Mr. Douglas 12. "By a plurality count of the popular vote, Mr. Lincoln carried 18 states; Mr. Breckenridge 11; Mr. Bell 3; and Mr. Douglas one—Missouri! [^7] Twenty days less than one year after his nomination by the Baltimore Convention, while yet in the prime of manhood—forty-eight years of age—Mr. Douglas died at his home in Chicago, a disappointed, not to say heart-broken man.

THE DOUGLAS CAUSE OF FAILURE

Though it may be regarded somewhat as a digression here, let us now inquire into the relations between the prophecy and Mr. Douglas' failure to become president of the United States. Fourteen years after the interview containing the prophecy with which we are dealing, and about one year after the prophecy had been published in the Deseret News, Mr. Douglas was called upon to deliver a speech in Springfield, the capital of Illinois. His speech was delivered on the 12th of June, 1857, and published in the Missouri Republican of June 18th, 1857. It was a time of much excitement throughout the country, concerning the "Mormon" church in Utah. Falsehoods upon the posting winds seemed to have filled the air with the most outrageous calumny. Crimes the most repulsive—murders, robberies, rebellion and high treason were falsely charged against its leaders. It was well known that Mr. Douglas had been on terms of intimate friendship with President Joseph Smith, and was well acquainted with the other church leaders. He was therefore looked upon as one competent to speak upon the "Mormon" question, and was invited to do so in the speech to which reference is here made. Mr. Douglas responded to the request. He grouped the charges against the "Mormons" which were then passing current, in the following manner:

"First, that nine-tenths of the inhabitants are aliens by birth who have refused to become naturalized, or take the oath of allegiance, or do any other act recognizing the government of the United States as the paramount authority of the territory of Utah.

Second, that the inhabitants, whether native or alien born, known as 'Mormons' (and they constitute the whole people of the territory) are bound by horrible oaths and terrible penalties to recognize and maintain the authority of Brigham Young, and the government of which he is the head, as paramount to that of the United States, in civil as well as in religious affairs; and they will in due time, and under the direction of their leaders, use all means in their power to subvert the government of the United States, and resist its authority."

THE HAND RAISED AGAINST THE SAINTS

Mr. Douglas based his remarks upon these rumors against the saints, in the course of which he said:

"Let us have these facts in an official shape before the president and congress, and the country will soon learn that, in the performance of the high and solemn duty devolving upon the executive and congress, there will be no vacillating or hesitating policy. It will be as prompt as the peal that follows the flash—as stern and unyielding as death. Should such a state of things actually exist as we are led to infer from the reports—and such information comes in an official shape—the knife must be applied to this pestiferous, disgusting cancer which is gnawing into the very vitals of the body politic. It must be cut out by the roots and seared over by the red hot iron of stern and unflinching law. * * * Should all efforts fail to bring them [the Mormons] to a sense of their duty, there is but one remedy left. Repeal the organic law of the territory, on the ground that they are alien enemies and outlaws, unfit citizens of one of the free and independent states of this confederacy.

To protect them further in their treasonable, disgusting and bestial practices would be a disgrace to the country—a disgrace to humanity—a disgrace to civilization, and a disgrace to the spirit of the age. Blot it out of the organized territories of the United States. What then? It will be regulated by the law of 1790, which has exclusive and sole jurisdiction over all the territory not incorporated under any organic or special law. By the provisions of this law, all crimes and misdemeanors, committed on its soil, can be tried before the legal authorities of any state or territory to which the offenders shall be first brought to trial and punished. Under that law persons have been arrested in Kansas, Nebraska, and other territories, prior to their organization as territories, and hanged for their crimes. The law of 1790 has sole and exclusive jurisdiction where no law of a local character exists, and by repealing the organic law of Utah, you give to the general government of the United States the whole and sole jurisdiction over the territory."

DOUGLAS' LOST OPPORTUNITY

I shall so far anticipate historical events, which, if a chronological order were strictly followed, would belong to a later period of our narrative, as to say that the speech of Mr. Douglas was of great interest and importance to the people of Utah at the time it was made. Mr. Douglas had it in his power to do them a great service because of his personal acquaintance with Joseph Smith and the great body of the "Mormon" people in Utah, as well as their leaders; for he had known both leaders and people in Illinois, and those whom he had known in Illinois constituted the great bulk of the people in Utah when he delivered his Springfield speech. He knew that the reports carried to the east by vicious and corrupt men were not true. He knew that these reports in the main were but a rehash of the old, exploded charges made against Joseph Smith and his followers in Missouri; and he knew these Missouri reports to be false by many evidences furnished him by Joseph Smith in the interview of the 18th of May, 1843, and by the "Mormon" people at sundry times during his association with them at Nauvoo. He had an opportunity to befriend the innocent; to refute the calumny cast upon a virtuous community; to speak a word in behalf of the oppressed; but the demagogue triumphed over the statesman, the politician, over the humanitarian; and to avoid popular censure, which doubtless he feared befriending the "Mormon" people would bring to him, he turned his hand against them with the result that he did not destroy them but sealed his own doom. In fulfillment of the words of the prophet, he felt the weight of the hand of the Almighty upon him—Mr. Douglas failed of his dearest ambition, the presidency of the United States, and on the 3rd of June, 1861, he died.

ALL THE ELEMENTS OF A GREAT PROPHECY IN THE DOUGLAS INCIDENT

It was impossible for any merely human sagacity to foresee the events foretold in this prophecy. Stephen A. Douglas was a bright but comparatively an unknown man at the time of the interview, in May, 1843. There is and can be no question about the prophecy preceding the event. It was published, as before stated, in the Deseret News of the 24th of September, 1856, about one year before the Douglas speech at Springfield, in June, 1857; and about four years before Douglas was nominated for the presidency by the Baltimore Democratic Convention.

Moreover a lengthy review of Mr. Douglas' speech was published in the editorial columns of the Deseret News in the issue of that paper for September 2nd, 1857, addressed directly to Mr. Douglas, the closing paragraph of which is as follows:—

"In your last paragraph [of the Springfield speech] you say: 'I have thus presented to you plainly and fairly my views of the Utah question.' With at least equal plainness and with far more fairness have your views now been commented upon. And inasmuch as you were well acquainted with Joseph Smith, and this people, also with the character of our maligners, and did know their allegations were false, but must bark with the dogs who were snapping at our heels, to let them know that you were a dog with them; and also that you may have a testimony of the truth of the assertion that you did know Joseph Smith and his people and the character of their enemies (and neither class have changed, only as the saints have grown better and their enemies worse); and also that you may thoroughly understand that you have voluntarily, knowingly, and of choice sealed your damnation, and by your own chosen course have closed your chance for the presidential chair, through disobeying the counsel of Joseph which you formerly sought and prospered by following, and that you in common with us, may testify to all the world that Joseph was a true prophet, the following extract from the history of Joseph Smith is again printed for your benefit, and is kindly recommended to your careful perusal and most candid consideration."

Then follows the account of the interview between Joseph Smith and Mr. Douglas as recorded in the Journal of William Clayton, as published in the Deseret News a year before Mr. Douglas' Springfield speech, and as now quoted in this History. Also it should be remembered that the above editorial in the Deseret News boldly challenging Mr. Douglas on the matter of the presidency, preceded by three years the election of 1860.

This was boldly challenging Mr. Douglas. He raised his hand against the followers of Joseph Smith, despite the warning of the Prophet; and his people in the chief organ of their church, reproduced the prophecy and told him that he had sealed his doom and closed his chance for the presidential chair through disobeying the counsel of the Prophet; and this three years before the election took place. The presidential election of 1860, and the death of Mr. Douglas in the prime of life the year following, tell the rest of the story. [^8]

It may be that dwelling at such length upon this incident I have wandered from the direct line of the historical development of the history of the Latter-day Saints, but this remarkable prophecy, its no less remarkable fulfillment, and the deep interest of it must be my justification. I have nothing further to do with the career or character of Mr. Douglas than pointing out the remarkable fulfillment of a prophecy which demonstrates the divine inspiration of the man who uttered it. [^9]

NOTES

In the spring of 1843, Nauvoo was visited by a Methodist minister, a Mr. Samuel A. Prior, who gave the following description of the city and her people:

"At length the city burst upon my sight. Instead of seeing a few miserable log cabins and mud hovels which I had expected to find, I was surprised to see one of the most romantic places that I had visited in the west. The buildings, though many of them were small, and of wood, yet bore the marks of neatness which I have not seen equalled in this country. The fair-spread plain at the bottom of the hill was dotted over with habitations of men with such majestic profusion, that I was almost willing to believe myself mistaken, and instead of being in Nauvoo of Illinois, among Mormons, that I was in Italy at the city of Leghorn, which the location of Nauvoo resembles very much. I gazed for some time with fond admiration upon the plain below. Here and there arose a tall majestic brick house, speaking loudly of the genius and untiring labor of the inhabitants, who have snatched the place from the clutches of obscurity, and wrested it from the bonds of disease; and in two or three short years, rescued it from dreary waste to transform it into one of the first cities in the west. The hill upon which I stood was covered over with dwellings of men, and amid them was seen to rise the hewn stone and already accomplished work of the temple, which was now raised fifteen or twenty feet above the ground. * * * I passed on into the more active parts of the city, looking into every street and lane to observe all that was passing. I found all the people engaged in some useful and healthy employment. The place was alive with business, much more so than any place I have visited since the hard times commenced. I sought in vain for anything that bore the marks of immorality, but was both astonished and highly pleased at my ill success. I could see no loungers about the streets nor any drunkards about the taverns. I did not meet with those distorted features of ruffians, or with the ill-bred and impudent. I heard not an oath in the place, I saw not a gloomy countenance; all were cheerful, polite and industrious." [^10]

The following affidavit made at the request of the author of this History, cannot fail to be of interest, and is important as testimony to some of the facts of the Douglas incident.

AFFIDAVIT OF JAMES DWYER

"In the year 1860 I was on a mission in the eastern states in the interest of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, having in charge especially the saints scattered throughout the state of Connecticut. In this capacity I was in the city of Norwich, Connecticut, when Judge Stephen A. Douglas made one of the greatest speeches of the presidential campaign of that year. Thousands of people came from all over the New England States to hear him. As he spoke from the veranda of the hotel at which I was stopping, and where he, too, had rooms, I heard his speech.

After the speaking was over, as I was on my way upstairs to my room, a thought came to me that I would like to know from Mr. Douglas himself how he stood in regard to Utah and the 'Mormon' question, since that had become an incident of considerable interest in the campaign. I retraced my steps, knocked on Mr. Douglas' door and was admitted to his presence. I introduced myself and told him that I was a 'Mormon.' When I told him I was a 'Mormon' he shook my hand very cordially and with a smile upon his face said he knew Joseph Smith well. Said he had very important relations with him during those troublesome times in Illinois. Said he always found Joseph Smith to be a perfect gentleman in every sense of the word. I then asked Mr. Douglas the following question:

Mr. Douglas, I would like to know what your course and policy will be toward Utah and the 'Mormon' people should you suceed in being elected to the presidency. His answer was this: (In a defiant attitude.) 'I hold Brigham Young and the "Mormon" people in utter contempt, and should I be elected I will use the full power of the law against them.'

I then took the liberty of saying to him: 'Mr. Douglas, in consequence of the speeches you made against Brigham Young and the 'Mormon' people in Cleveland, and which appeared consecutively in the Cleveland Plain Dealer newspaper at that time, and your present views and intended policy, 'I feel to say to you with all due respect and candor, you never can reach the White House on such a record.'

(Signed) "JAMES DWYER."

"Subscribed and sworn to before me this 7th day of March, 1911.

(Signed) "ROBERT S. JUDD.

Notary Public."

"My commission expires December 19, 1914."

(SEAL.)

It would be mere conjecture, of course, to say what the result would have been had Stephen A. Douglas been true to the saints—the people of his friend, Joseph Smith. But certainly had he been elected in 1860, the southern states would have had no excuse for their great movement of secession as they at least persuaded themselves they had in the election of Abraham Lincoln. And had Mr. Douglas, in the event of his election, followed the counsel given to the government and people of the United States by Joseph Smith in respect of the question of slavery, that evil might have been abolished without the effusion of blood, and no place found in the history of the United States for that horrible conflict known as the "American Civil War," or "War Between the States."

The Prophet's counsel here referred to in respect of slavery was as follows:

"Petition also, ye goodly inhabitants of the slave states, your legislators to abolish slavery by the year 1850, or now, and save the abolitionists from reproach and ruin, and infamy and shame. Pray congress to pay every man a reasonable price for his slaves out of the surplus revenue arising from the sale of the public lands, and from the deduction of pay from the members of congress. Break off the shackles from the poor black man, and hire him to labor like other human beings; for 'an hour of virtuous liberty, is worth a whole eternity of bondage.' [^11]

The document from which this counsel is quoted was published in February, 1844. Eleven years later, namely, in 1855, Mr. Ralph Waldo Emerson declared that the question of slavery should be met in accordance "with the interests of the south, and with the settled conscience of the north. It is not really a great task," said this eminent writer, "a great feat for this country to accomplish, to buy that property of the planter as the British nation bought the West Indian slaves." He also predicted that "the United States will be brought to give every inch of their public lands for a purpose like this." This plan suggested by Mr. Emerson in 1855, brought to him no end of praise as a sage philosopher and wise humanitarian. But what of Joseph Smith, whose suggestion preceded that of Mr. Emerson by eleven years? Let another—Josiah Quincy—answer:

"We who can look back upon the terrible cost of the fratricidal war which put an end to slavery, now say that such a solution of the difficulty would have been worthy a Christian statesman. But if the retired scholar [referring to Emerson] was in advance of his time when he advocated this disposition of the public property, in 1855, what shall I say of the political and religious leader [referring to Joseph Smith] who had committed himself in print, as well as in conversation, to the same course in 1844? If the atmosphere of men's opinions was stirred by such a proposition when war clouds were discernible in the sky, was it not a statesman-like word eleven years earlier when the heavens looked tranquil and beneficent?" [^12]

Footnotes

The text of the Call statement given above has been edited to make it conform with the facts; that is, the date is given as the 6th of August, 1842; the name of John C. Bennett is omitted; and "James" has been substituted for "George," as the given name of Adams.

"EPHRAIM, UTAH TER., NOV. 27, 1860.

Will the judge now acknowledge that Joseph Smith was a true prophet? If he will not, does he recollect a certain conversation had with Mr. Smith at the house of Sheriff Backenstos, in Carthage, Illinois, in the year 1843, in which Mr. Smith said to him; 'you will yet aspire to the Presidency of the United States. But if you raise your hand or your voice against the Latter-day Saints, you shall never be President of the United States.'

Does Judge Douglas recollect that in a public speech delivered by him in the year 1857, at Springfield, Illinois, of comparing the 'Mormon' community, then constituting the inhabitants of Utah Territory, to a 'loathsome ulcer on the body politic,' and of recommending the knife to be applied to cut it out?

Among other things, the judge will doubtless recollect that I was present and heard the conversation between him and Joseph Smith at Mr. Backenstos' residence in Carthage, before alluded to.

Now, judge, what do you think about Joseph Smith and 'Mormonism?'

Signed "ORSON HYDE."

See also Note 2 end of chapter.

---
Notas:
[^1] History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, p. 490. The remarks were made at a public meeting soon after the Prophet's release by the municipal court of Nauvoo from the custody of Reynolds and Wilson in the Dixon affair.
[^2] The several things relied upon to prove the charges were: The desire on the part of the Whigs to put the Democrats in bad repute with the saints by making it appear that Governor Ford was willing to deliver Joseph Smith to Missouri through forcing him to issue extradition papers against the Prophet on the eve of the election; procuring an indictment against the Prophet by calling a special session of the circuit court of Daviess county, Missouri; employing in this business John C. Bennett, a special favorite and tool of the "Whig Junto" at Springfield, and whose movements the Whig press, especially the Sangamo Journal, carefully chronicled; the "treason" charged against President Smith was five or six years old, he was permanently settled at Nauvoo and could be found at any time, the circuit court which indicted him held three regular sessions every year—why, then, the special session of the court unless there existed the conspiracy? Mr. Walker, shortly after his nomination, went to Nauvoo to solicit the support of the "Mormons," but he was disappointed by their answers and dejected. When President Smith was arrested at Dixon, Walker "miraculously happened" to be within six miles of the place ready to be employed to deliver the Prophet from custody, but only on condition that he would pledge his vote to Walker. The Register article concludes:
[^3] On another occasion and in harmony with this principle, President Smith said: "It is right, politically, for a man who has great influence to use it, as well as a man who has no [i.e. small] influence to use his. From henceforth I will maintain all the influence I can get. In relation to politics I will speak as a man; but in relation to religion, I will speak in authority." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, p. 286). The speech from which the above is quoted was delivered on the 21st of February, 1843.
[^4] The day previous to this, Saturday, Wm. Law had stated when in controversy with Hyrum Smith, "that to his certain knowledge, the Prophet Joseph was in favor of Mr. Walker." (Ford's History of Illinois, p. 318).
[^5] History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, p. 526. Linn says that Hoge was elected by a majority of 455. (Story of the Mormons, p. 249). Ford says that Hoge received about three thousand votes in Nauvoo; "and was elected to congress by a six or eight hundred majority." Gregg, the historian of Hancock county, says that the vote for Hoge in the county was just 2,088, and he was elected by a majority of 455 in the district. (History of Hancock County, p. 375).
[^6] The minutes of the meeting at Carthage are given in full in History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 4-8.
[^7] The idea seems to have been to create of Nauvoo a territory: "Section 1. Be it ordained by the senate and house of representatives of the United States of America in congress assembled, that all rights, powers, privileges, and immunities belonging to territories, and not repugnant to the Constitution of the United States, are hereby granted and secured to the inhabitants of the city of Nauvoo, in addition to the spirit, letter, meaning, and provisions of the afore-mentioned [Nauvoo] charter, or act of incorporation from the state of Illinois, until the state of Missouri restores to those exiled citizens the lands, rights, privileges, property, and damage for all losses." In addition to this it was to be provided that "Section 2, the mayor of Nauvoo be and hereby is empowered by the consent of the president of the United States, whenever the actual necessity of the case and the public safety shall require it, to call to his aid a sufficient number of United States forces, in connection with the Nauvoo Legion, to repel the invasion of mobs, keep the public peace, and protect the innocent from the unhallowed ravages of lawless banditti that escape justice on the western frontier; and also to preserve the power and dignity of the Union.
[^8] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, ch. v. pp. 98-123.
[^9] I suppose the statement that a nolle prosequi had been entered in all these cases is based upon the fact stated in the certificates of the disposition of the several indictments in which President Smith figured before the courts in Missouri, filed with Hon. James L. Minor, secretary of state for Missouri, on 18th of March, 1841. On the 23rd of February of that year the secretary of state, acting under a resolution of the general assembly of Missouri, made inquiry of the clerk of the circuit court of Boone and other counties "what was the final disposition of the indictments against the Mormons." In answer, the clerk of the circuit court of Boone county said, respecting the indictment for "treason" against Joseph Smith, et al: "From the records sent to this court, it appears that Joseph Smith, Jun., Lyman Wight, Hyrum Smith, Caleb Baldwin and Alex. McRay, were ordered to be taken by the sheriff of Daviess county to the jail in the county of Boone, there to await their trial, on a change of venue from Daviess to Boone county, which was not done, and there being no recognizance on file, in my office, against the other defendants, and this cause, having been continued some time on the docket and no defendant appearing, was dismissed." (Document Containing Correspondence, Orders, ., In Relation to the Disturbance with the Mormons, published by order of the general assembly of Mo., pp. 152-59). The same statement is made as to the indictments in which Joseph Smith's name appears for "arson," "riot," "receiving stolen goods," "larceny." (See Document cited above).
[^10] This of course meant process other than that issuing from the municipal court.
[^11] Minutes special session of Nauvoo city council, Jan. 10, 1844. (History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 173-4).
[^12] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 212.
