B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LII

POLITICAL DIFFICULTIES OF THE SAINTS IN ILLINOIS—PETITION THAT NAUVOO BE TAKEN UNDER PROTECTION OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT

TO hold the balance of political power in a free state may be, under extraordinary circumstances, advantageous to those who possess it; but the position is always dangerous, and the hold upon the advantages precarious. Such a condition can never be permanently established; for as soon as likelihood of permanency appears there is quickly formed a combination of forces to break down the balance of power party, so obnoxious is it in free communities where political questions naturally divide the people into two parties.

THE DANGEROUS "BALANCE OF POWER"

Such were the conditions that confronted the Latter-day Saints at Nauvoo, in the congressional and county election in the fall of 1843. The Whig and Democratic parties were so divided in Illinois that the citizens of Nauvoo held the balance of power in the congressional district, as also in Hancock county, of which Nauvoo was the most populous town; and it was feared that they would soon hold the balance of power in the state if they did not even then possess it. This condition brought to the saints the usual temporary advantages that go with it. Many concessions were made to them, candidates of both political parties sought their support after the manner of political candidates, anxious to win. It was a case where "Bel boweth down, and Nebo stoopeth." In this instance, however, the position was not sought by the saints, but was one forced upon them by the nature of the circumstances that environed them. President Smith himself perhaps has given the best explanation of the enforced necessity of the saints voting unitedly in Illinois, and I here quote that explanation:

THE PROPHET'S EXPLANATION OF POLITICAL CONDITIONS

"With regard to elections, some say all the Latter-day Saints vote together and vote as I say. But I never tell any man how to vote, or whom to vote for. But I will show you how we have been situated by bringing a comparison. Should there be a Methodist society here and two candidates running for office, one says. 'If you will vote for me and put me in governor I will exterminate the Methodists, take away their charters, etc.' The other candidate says 'If I am governor I will give all an equal privilege.' Which would the Methodists vote for? Of course they would vote en mass for the candidate that would give them their rights. Thus it has been with us. Joseph Duncan said, if the people would elect him, he would exterminate the 'Mormons' and take away their charters. As to Mr. Ford he made no such threats, but manifested a spirit in his speeches to give every man his rights; hence the church universally voted for Mr. Ford, and he was elected governor." [^1]

In the congressional and county elections of 1843, the "balance of power" situation became a prominent factor. It will be remembered that Cyrus Walker refused to become legal counsel for President Smith when under arrest at Dixon, unless the latter would pledge him his vote in the then pending election. This President Smith did and Walker was satisfied that he would go to congress, as he expected that the Prophet's pledge to vote for him would bring to him practically, the entire vote of Nauvoo, which would insure his election, and he so expressed himself to Stephen Markham. He was justified, of course, in entertaining this expectation, since the pledge on the part of President Smith meant more than his individual vote.

WAS THE DIXON ARREST OF THE PROPHET A WHIG CONSPIRACY

Meantime, however, it began to be rumored that the arrest of President Smith at Dixon was a political plot on the part of what was called the "Whig Junto" at Quincy, to force Governor Ford, a Democrat, to issue extradition papers for President Smith, and thus put the Democratic state administration out of favor with the saints, provide for the deliverance of President Smith out of the hands of the officers from Missouri by Whig agencies, and thus win the gratitude of the saints and obtain their votes for the Whig party candidates.

The "Whig conspiracy" was set forth in great detail in the Illinois State Register about the middle of July, and was reprinted in the Nauvoo Neighbor of the 19th of that month. [^2] Credence must have been given to this charge, and was likely the factor which determined the vote at Nauvoo in favor of the Democratic candidates. At any rate on the day preceding the election, Sunday, August 6th, President Smith said in a public meeting:

"I am not come to tell you to vote this way, that way or the other. In relation to national matters, I want it to go abroad unto the whole world that every man should stand on his own merits. The Lord has not given me a revelation concerning politics. I have not asked him for one. [^3] I am a third party, and stand independent and alone. I desire to see all parties protected in their rights."

He then detailed his relations with Cyrus Walker, and referred to the fact that Walker in a public speech, before the people of Nauvoo, had withdrawn all claim to their vote and influence if it would be detrimental to their interests as a people. Then President Smith added:

"Brother Hyrum tells me this morning that he has a testimony to the effect that it would be better for the people to vote for Hoge; and I never knew Hyrum to say he had a revelation and it failed. Let God speak, and all men hold their peace. I never authorized Brother Law [William Law, his second counselor in the presidency] to tell my private feelings; [^4] and I utterly forbid these political demagogues from using my name henceforth and forever."

President Smith voted personally for Cyrus Walker, but the Democratic ticket both for congressman and for Hancock county officers was triumphantly elected. [^5]

The sudden and unexpected change in the vote of the citizens of Nauvoo, stirred to the very depths the enmity of the defeated political party; and when, shortly after the election, the newly elected county officers appeared at the courthouse in Carthage to take the oath of office, and file their bonds, an attempt was made to keep them from doing so; and the court was threatened with violence if the "Mormons" were permitted to qualify.

ANTI-"MORMON" AGITATION AT CARTHAGE

They qualified, nevertheless; whereupon a call was issued for an anti-"Mormon" meeting to convene in Carthage on the following Saturday, August the 19th, to protest against the "Mormons" holding office. The people of Carthage and vicinity assembled at the appointed time, organized with a chairman, Major Reuben Graves; and a secretary, W. D. Abernethy; and a committee of nine to draft resolutions. After listening to speeches by Valentine Wilson, Walter Bagby and others, the meeting adjourned to the sixth of September.

To enumerate the crimes alleged against the saints in the preamble to the resolutions adopted at their second meeting, would be drawing up a list of all the crimes that ever threatened the peace, happiness, prosperity and liberty of a state. They resolved that from recent movements among the "Mormons," there were indications that they were unwilling to conform to the ordinary restrictions of law; and therefore concluded that the people of Illinois must assert their rights in some way. That while they deprecated anything like lawless violence, they pledged themselves to resist all wrongs the "Mormons" should inflict upon them in the future—"peaceably if they could, but forcibly if they must." They called upon all good and honest men to assist in humbling the pride of that "audacious despot," Joseph Smith; pledged themselves to raise a posse and take him if the authorities of Missouri made another demand for him; that it might not be said of them that they allowed the most outrageous culprits "to go unwhipped of justice." They agreed to support no man of either political party who should truckle to the "Mormons" for their influence, and finally—

"Resolved, that when the government ceases to afford protection, the citizens of course fall back upon their original, inherent right of self-defense." [^6]

THE OLD MISSOURI FORMULA

The old formula of justification this, for mob-violence, and mob rule. How many crimes have been committed in its name! And how ridiculous withal to assume such an attitude in this instance when the people of Hancock county and of Illinois had all the machinery of the state government through which to correct alleged abuses in the city government of Nauvoo, and alleged crime among her people.

Later in the fall, acts of violence began to be perpetrated upon the saints who lived at a distance from Nauvoo; and threats of violence were frequent. In December a member of the church living near Warsaw, by the name of Daniel Avery, and his son, Philander, were kidnapped by Levi Williams, of Warsaw, John Elliot and others, and run across the Mississippi to Missouri, where for several weeks Daniel Avery was kept a prisoner in Clark county, while one Joseph McCoy was hunting up witnesses to prove that he had stolen a mare from him. Philander Avery escaped and returned to Illinois; but his father remained a prisoner, and suffered great cruelty at the hands of his captors. Finally, however, he was released by a writ of habeas corpus, and went to Nauvoo where he made affidavit as to his treatment.

A THREATENED MISSOURI INVASION OF ILLINOIS

Wild rumors abounded also as to what the Missourians intended to do; and some of the letters from Missouri that fell into the hands of President Smith, through friends of his, threatened Illinois with invasion, and for a time it would seem that a border war was inevitable. Governor Ford was kept informed as to all acts of violence perpetrated upon the saints, and especially as to the threats of the Missourians of an attack upon Nauvoo, and the services of the Nauvoo Legion were tendered to repel any attempt at invasion of the state should it occur. Governor Ford, however, refused to believe there was any danger in the threats, and therefore would detail no portion of the legion, or any other companies of the state militia, to be ready for such an event.

UNREASONABLE PETITIONS AND ACTIONS OF THE NAUVOO MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT

About this time also—December, 1843—the mayor of Nauvoo and the city council petitioned congress to take the city of Nauvoo directly under the protection of the United States government and accept the Nauvoo Legion as United States troops! This petition was made part of a memorial drafted by the city council covering the whole of the grievances of the Latter-day Saints endured in Missouri and Illinois, and reciting the threatening portents of the present and future. [^7]

A petition, signed by nearly all the citizens of Nauvoo, asking the governor to issue no more warrants at the demand of Missouri for the arrest of Joseph Smith on the old charges was presented to Governor Ford, but he refused to give the people any encouragement that he would favorably entertain their suit.

In view of the apathy of Governor Ford in relation to the security of Nauvoo, the city council and mayor increased the police force by the addition of forty men to act as night guards; and the legion was brought to a higher state of efficiency by frequent drills and musters. In the latter part of December—on information reaching Nauvoo of a threatened attack upon the city by mob forces collecting at Warsaw—a portion of the legion was detailed and held in readiness to repel such threatened attack. [^8]

Other steps of a rather unusual character were taken to "insure the peace of the city." A special ordinance was passed making it unlawful for any "person to come with process, demand, or requisition," founded upon the former Missouri difficulties to arrest Joseph Smith. This ordinance recited and justified its passage on the fact that a nolle prosequi had "once been entered in the courts of Missouri upon all the cases of Missouri against Joseph Smith and others;" and as there appeared "to be a determined resolution by the state of Missouri to continue these unjust, illegal, murderous demands for the body of General Joseph Smith," it had become "intolerable to be thus continually harrassed and robbed of * * * money to defray the expense of these prosecutions"—hence the ordinance. [^9]

Another ordinance was passed "to prevent unlawful search or seizure of person or property by foreign [^10] process in the city of Nauvoo." Protests to this ordinance arose from citizens of Carthage who considered said ordinance to be designed to hinder the execution of the statutes of Illinois within the limits of Nauvoo, and threatened to retaliate by stopping execution of processes issuing from that city. The mayor (President Smith) explained to a delegation of representatives from the people of Carthage that the purpose of the ordinance was to prevent kidnapping under the pretense of law or process, and to facilitate the apprehension of thieves in the city by throwing all "foreign processes" into the hands of the city marshal, who would be most likely to know the hiding places of fugitives from justice who might secret themselves in the city. The dissatisfaction continuing the ordinance was amended to the effect that nothing in the ordinance should be so construed "as to prevent, hinder or thwart the designs of justice, or retard the civil officers of the state or county in the discharge of their official duties, but to aid and assist them within the city limits. [^11] About a month later, this ordinance, also the special ordinance to prevent the arrest of Joseph Smith on old Missouri charges and one that had been passed making gold and silver alone legal tender in Nauvoo, were repealed on the recommendation of Joseph Smith, who recognized that in these matters the city council had exceeded its authority. [^12]

Another ordinance and one of importance as affecting the material welfare of the city was suggested by President Smith, and finally passed, for the erection of a dam in the Mississippi to create water power within the city limits; also he suggested petitioning congress to make a canal over the Des Moines Rapids in the Mississippi, at the head of which Nauvoo was situated. [^13]

It was in the closing months of 1843 that a number of prominent elders of the church, at President Smith's suggestion, made appeals to their native states, reciting the story of the wrongs inflicted upon them; deploring and denouncing the general government for assuming that it had no power to redress those grievances, and calling upon their respective states to unite in resenting the injustice of Missouri against the saints; to unite in chastizing her for her crimes against republican institutions; and procuring in some way redress of grievances for those who had been wronged. [^14]

LETTERS OF THE PROPHET TO PROSPECTIVE PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES

As the time of the United States presidential election for 1844 approached, the probable candidates for the office of president began to be discussed.

It was well known that the vote of the citizens of Nauvoo would be important, as it would most likely determine whether Illinois would go Whig or Democratic. The political friends of John C. Calhoun at Quincy, early perceived the importance of securing their favor, and began to work for it. A Colonel Frierson, United States surveyor at Quincy, the political friend of John C. Calhoun, expressed great sympathy for the saints because of the injustice and persecution they had received at the hands of Missouri, and intimated to Joseph L. Heywood that the Hon. B. Rhett, a representative from South Carolina to congress, and also a political friend to Mr. Calhoun, had expressed a willingness to present to congress a memorial for a redress of wrongs suffered by the saints in Missouri; but was careful to intimate that he supposed that Mr. Calhoun would be a more acceptable candidate to them than Mr. Van Buren. [^15]

Colonel Frierson afterwards went to Nauvoo, met in council with the leading citizens, and drafted a memorial to congress; a copy of which he took with him to Quincy to obtain signers; but it never reached the house of representatives.

It was this incident most likely that suggested to President Smith the propriety of addressing letters to each of the candidates for the presidency—five in number, viz.,—John C. Calhoun, Lewis Cass, Richard M. Johnson, Henry Clay and Martin Van Buren. These letters called attention to the wrongs endured by the Latter-day Saints in Missouri; of their being robbed and abused; deprived of the rights of citizenship in both state and nation; then banished from the state, contrary to all constitutional guarantees of the rights of citizens; also their ineffectual attempts to obtain redress of their grievances; and finally asking these candidates what would be their "rule of action" relative to the saints as a people, "should fortune favor your ascension to the chief magistracy?" Only three of the number gave any reply. They were John C. Calhoun, Henry Clay, and Lewis Cass. The first was of the opinion that the general government possessed such limited and specific powers, that the Missouri troubles of the saints did not come within its jurisdiction. As to his treatment of the Latter-day Saints, as the Constitution and the laws of the Union made no distinction between citizens of different religious creeds, he would make none; but so far as the executive was concerned all should have the full benefit of both, and none should be exempted from their operation. [^16]

Clay partially disclaimed being a candidate for the presidency, but said if he ever entered into that high office, he must do so free and unfettered, with no guarantees but such as might be drawn from his whole life, character and conduct. But he was careful to say, that he had watched the progress of the saints, and sympathized with them in their sufferings under the injustice which had been inflicted upon them; and thought that they, in common with other religious communities, should enjoy the security and protection of the Constitution and laws. [^17]

It is presumed that the letters addressed to Martin Van Buren and Lewis Cass were of similar import to those addressed to the other presidential candidates. Van Buren ignored the Prophet's inquiries, and nothing is known of the answer by Cass beyond the fact that he made one. [^18]

To the letters of Calhoun and Clay, President Smith wrote scathing replies. The particular portion of Calhoun's answer with which he dealt, was that which claimed that the general government had no jurisdiction in the case of the saints in Missouri, and handled rather severely the senator's doctrine of the limited powers of the general government.

In reply to Henry Clay President Smith dealt chiefly with that gentleman's "no pledge nor guarantee" proposition, "only such as could be drawn from his whole life, character and conduct;" and drew such a picture of that statesman's past life and conduct, that the Kentucky senator could not feel flattered withal; and in round terms he denounced the subterfuges of politicians in general, and demanded of the nation justice in behalf of his afflicted people.

Viewing these replies in the absence of the intensity of feeling which produced them, they seem unnecessarily harsh. The harshness, however, is rather the fault of the times than of the writer. Those were days when moderation in language was certainly not characteristic of current political literature. In it personal abuse seems often to have been mistaken for argument; and severity of expression rather than force of reason seemed to be the purpose both of political speaking and writing. The letters written to these leading candidates were also marred by senseless and pedantic quotations from foreign and ancient languages—the work probably of W. W. Phelps.

POLITICAL REFORM PRINCIPLES OFFERED BY JOSEPH SMITH

When it was ascertained that from none of the candidates in the field for president could the citizens of Nauvoo hope for assistance in obtaining justice for the wrongs they had suffered in Missouri, President Smith allowed his friends at Nauvoo to put his name in nomination for the office of president of the United States; and promptly published his Views on the Powers and Policy of the Government of the United States, a document which excited considerable comment from the press of the country, very much of which was favorable.

In this document the candidate reviewed the growth and development of the American government. He advocated prison reform. Advised the people of the south to "petition their respective legislatures to abolish slavery by the year 1850, or now." He recommended the payment of a reasonable price to the slaveholders of the south for their slaves, to be paid by the surplus revenue arising from the sale of public lands, and reduction in the salary paid to congressmen. "The southern people," said he "are hospitable and noble. They will help to rid so free a country of every vestige of slavery, whenever they are assured of an equivalent for their property." [^19] He recommended more economy in the national and state governments, and more equality among the people.

He proposed the establishment of a national bank, with branches in each state, the directors thereof to be elected yearly by the people; and the profits arising from the business to be used as revenue in defraying the expenses of government, the profits from the branch banks being used by the respective states, and those arising from the central institution by the general government; and the reduction of taxation to the extent of the net profits of these institutions.

In consequence of the experience the Latter-day Saints had passed through in Missouri, President Smith advocated in his Views the adoption of a constitutional amendment giving the president of the United States full power to send an army to suppress mobs; "and called for the repeal of that 'relic of folly,' which makes it necessary for the governor of a state to make demand of the president for troops in case of a rebellion." "The governor himself," he goes on to say, "may be a mobber; and instead of being punished, as he should be, for murder or treason, he may destroy the very lives, rights and property he should protect."

He favored the annexation of Texas, and the extension of the authority of the United States over contiguous territory on the west, and said:

"When a neighboring realm petitioned to join the Union of the Sons of Liberty, my voice would be, come—yea, come Texas, come Mexico, come Canada, and come all the world, let us be brethren, let us be one great family, and let there be a universal peace." [^20]

POLITICAL CONVENTION AT NAUVOO

On the seventeenth of May, 1844, a state convention was held at Nauvoo, which ratified the views of President Smith on the "Powers and Policy of Government," passed a series of resolutions inviting all men of all parties to assist in the work of reforming the government, and in a formal manner placed in nomination "General Joseph Smith for president of the United States, and Sidney Rigdon for vice-president."

James Arlington Bennett, of New York, was first asked to take the second place on the ticket; but being of foreign birth, was not eligible. Then the position was offered to Colonel Solomon Copeland of Paris, Tennessee, [^21] but for some reason he did not accept; so the next choice was Sidney Rigdon, who by that time had removed from Nauvoo to Pennsylvania.

Arrangements were made to hold a national convention at Baltimore, Md., on the thirteenth of July following, and preparations were made for an active campaign in favor of the prophet-nominee; but before the time for the national convention had arrived, the standard bearer of the new party of "Reform, Jeffersonian Democracy, Free Trade and Sailors Rights," [^22] fell pierced by assassins' bullets—the victim of a cruel mob.

Of course President Smith could have no hope that he would be elected to the presidency, but by becoming a candidate he gave the citizens of Nauvoo an opportunity to act consistently with their views of what ought to be done for the general good of the nation, and at the same time avoid the wrath of the political parties in the state of Illinois by affiliating with neither of them in the then pending election. Explaining his reasons on one occasion for allowing his name to go before the people as a candidate President Smith said:

"I would not have suffered my name to have been used by my friends on any wise as president of the United States, or candidate for that office, if I and my friends could have had the privilege of enjoying our religious and civil rights as American citizens, even those rights which the Constitution guarantees unto all her citizens alike. But as a people we have been denied from the beginning. Persecution has rolled upon our heads from time to time, from portions of the United States, like peals of thunder, because of our religion; and no portion of the government, as yet, has stepped forward for our relief. And in view of these things, I feel it to be my right and privilege to obtain what influence and power I can, lawfully, in the United States, for the protection of injured innocence." [^23]

The Times and Seasons editorially announcing the candidacy of President Smith said:

"One great reason that we have for pursuing our present course is, that at every election we have been made a political target for the * * * demagogues in the country to shoot their loathsome arrows at. And every story has been put into requisition to blast our fame from the old fabrication of 'walk on the water' down to 'the murder of ex-Governor Boggs.' The journals have teemed with this * * * trash, and even men who ought to have more respect for themselves—men contending for the gubernatorial chair have made use of terms so degrading, so mean, so humiliating that a billingsgate fisher-woman would have considered herself disgraced with. We refuse any longer to be thus bedaubed for either party. * * * We withdraw. Under existing circumstances, we have no other alternative; and if we can accomplish our object, well: if not, we shall have the satisfaction of knowing that we have acted conscientiously, and have used our best judgment. And if we have to throw away our votes, we had better do so upon a worthy rather than an unworthy individual, who might make use of the weapon we put in his hand to destroy us." [^24]

VIEWPOINT OF THE PROPHET ON HIS CANDIDACY

President Smith usually referred to his candidacy in a jocular vein. Speaking at a meeting at Nauvoo when his candidacy had been discussed rather earnestly he said:

"As to politics, I care but little about the presidential chair. I would not give half as much for the office of president of the United States as I would for the one I now hold as Lieutenant General of the Nauvoo Legion. * * * When I get hold of eastern papers, and see how popular I am, I am afraid myself that I shall be elected; but if I should be, I would not say, 'Your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you.'" [^25]

As another evidence that the Prophet entertained no serious thought of success in his election, mention should be made of the fact that during the time when preparations were being made for a vigorous canvass in favor of his election, extensive plans were being laid by President Smith and his associates for the removal of the church bodily from Illinois to that then little known great "West," rather vaguely spoken of as "Oregon" and "California."

Footnotes

"We say, let all these facts be borne in mind, and they produce a strong suspicion, if not conviction, that the whole affair is a Whig conspiracy to compel a Democratic governor to issue a writ against Smith, pending the congressional election, so as to incense the Mormons, create a necessity for Walker's and perhaps Browning's professional services in favor of Smith, to get him delivered out of the net of their own weaving, and thereby get the everlasting gratitude of the Mormons and their support for the Whig cause."

Another thing that may have influenced this election was that a Mr. Backenstos, a managing Democrat in Hancock county, is represented by Governor Ford as having gone to Springfield to ascertain what the governor would do if the "Mormons" voted the Democratic ticket. Ford was absent in St. Louis at the time; but this did not prevent Backenstos returning to nauvoo saying that he had "the most ample assurances of favor to the Mormons, so long as they voted the Democratic ticket." Ford admits that two years later a prominent Democrat of Springfield confessed to him the fact that during his absence in St. Louis in 1843, he had given such positive pledge to Mr. Backenstos. (Ford's History of Illinois, pp. 317-8).

Section 3. And be it further ordained that the officers of the United States army are hereby required to obey the requisitions of this ordinance.

Section 4. And be it further ordained that, for all services rendered in quelling mobs and preserving the public peace, the said Nauvoo Legion shall be under the same regulations, rules, and laws of pay as the troops of the United States."

Needless to say the proposed plan was utterly impractical and impossible under the Constitution of the United States; but the action of the city council does emphasize the fact that her people seemed to have had the idea that Nauvoo largely had the privileges and powers of a sovereign state, or that they were to be granted to her.

"Petition, also, ye goodly inhabitants of the slave states, your legislators to abolish slavery by the year 1850, or now, and save the abolitionist from reproach and ruin, infamy and shame.

Pray congress to pay every man a reasonable price for his slaves out of the surplus revenue arising from the sale of public lands, and from deduction of pay from the members of congress.

Break off the shackles from the poor black man, and hire him to labor like other human beings; for an hour of virtuous liberty on earth is worth a whole eternity of bondage. * * * The southern people are hospitable and noble. They will help to rid so free a country of every vestige of slavery, whenever they are assured of an equivalent for their property." (See the whole document in History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 197-209).

---
Notas:
[^1] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 222.
[^2] Ibid, p. 223.
[^3] Ibid, p. 224.
[^4] The foregoing excerpts are found in History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, chs. ix, x, passim, pp. 222-261. See also compilation of evidence by President Joseph F. Smith, presented at the memorial services of the fiftieth anniversary of the entrance of the "Mormon Pioneers" into Salt Lake valley, published in the Deseret Evening News of July 26th, 1897. Also this compilation is published in the writer's Succession in the Presidency of the Church, second edition, 1900, pp. 113-117. In the same will be found two affidavits of men who volunteered to go with the company which the Prophet was organizing to explore the west, viz., Samuel W. Richards and Joseph Kelting. (Ibid, pp. 118-120.)
[^5] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 275-277.
[^6] Orson Hyde makes his reports to President Smith in two letters dated respectively, April 25th and 26th; 1844. (See History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 369-376).
[^7] The memorial, however, was introduced into the house of representatives by Mr. John Wentworth of Chicago, a representative from Illinois when the following occurred in relation to it.
[^8] Let no one suppose these fears concerning Missouri to be groundless—a mere air-drawn dagger—a phantom fear. In an editorial of the Times and Seasons of February 15th, 1844—discussing the candidacy of Joseph Smith for president of the United States—the following occurs: "We have been informed from a respectable source, that there is an understanding between Mr. Benton [Senator Thomas H.], of Missouri, and Mr. Van Buren, and a conditional compact entered into, that if Mr. Benton will use his influence to get Mr. Van Buren elected, that Van Buren when elected shall use his executive influence to wipe away the stain from Missouri, by a further persecution of the Mormons, and wreaking out vengeance on their heads, either by extermination, or by some other summary process. We could scarcely credit the statement, and we hope yet for the sake of humanity, that the suggestion is false; but we have too good reason to believe that we are correctly informed."
[^9] ch. lii.
[^10] These were the ordinances forbidding the arrest of Joseph Smith under process issued by Missouri; to prevent unlawful search and seizure of persons or property in the city of Nauvoo by foreign [outside] process; and the ordinance making gold and silver alone legal tender in Nauvoo. See ch. lii this History.
[^11] This was Thomas C. Sharp, who waged relentless editorial war upon the church and urged the expulsion of the saints from Hancock county. The Warsaw Signal was the successor to the Western World, founded by a Mr. Daniel N. White, in 1840. The Signal had an intermittent existence for about thirteen years. The late President John Taylor refers to Sharp as "a violent, unprincipled man;" subsequently he was one of the nine men who were indicted for the murder of Joseph Smith.
[^12] Following is the paragraph containing the main proposition of the article: "So much to preface this 'Friendly Hint' to the state of Missouri; for, notwithstanding some of her private citizens and public officers have committed violence, robbery, and even murder upon the rights and persons of the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, yet compassion, dignity, and a sense of the principles of religion among all classes, and honor and benevolence, mingled with charity by high-minded patriots, lead me to suppose that there are many worthy people in that state who will use their influence and energies to bring about a settlement of all those old difficulties, and use all consistent means to urge the state, for her honor, prosperity, and good name, to restore every person she or her citizens have expelled from her limits, to their rights, and pay them all damage, that the great body of high-minded and well-disposed southern and western gentlemen and ladies—the real peacemakers of the western world, will go forth, good—Samaritan-like, and pour in the oil and wine, till all that can be healed are made whole; and, after repentance, they shall be forgiven; for verily the scriptures say, 'Joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repents, more than over ninety-and-nine just persons that need no repentance.' * * * Now is the time to brush off the monster that, incubus-like, seems hanging upon the reputation of the whole state. A little exertion, and the infamy of the evil will blacken the guilty only." (Nauvoo Neighbor, Impression of March 13, 1844.)
[^13] St. Matt. x:34-40.
[^14] August, 1833, Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xcviii.
[^15] Nauvoo Neighbor, impression of Feb. 28th, 1844.
[^16] This was a sport common in early times in the prairie states of the west, where wolves were numerous. The men and boys met at a given place, on county or township lines, and moved toward some center agreed upon, closing in from all sides upon the game. Firearms were prohibited; so also were dogs in the hunt referred to in the text; and it was requested by the committee in charge that no deer should be killed. The lines enclosing Hancock county on the above occasion were designated as the place of rendezvous, and the central place of meeting, where a flag was raised, was about two miles southwest of Carthage, the time two o'clock p. m. (See Nauvoo Neighbor, impression of February 28th, 1844). It was under the pretext of carrying on this sport that mobs sometimes convened to do violence to the saints scattered throughout Hancock county; and on one occasion such a hunt was doubtless planned against Nauvoo itself. (See Ford's History of Illinois, p. 364; and the Nauvoo Neighbor, impression of October 2nd, 1844). Gregg, in his Prophet of Palmyra, seeks to discredit Ford's account of the event, but fails to disprove the governor's charge.
[^17] Clay's letter in full is quoted in History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 376; and the Prophet's answer in full will be found in Millennial Star, vol. xxiii, pp. 553-557.
[^18] Wednesday, Dec. 27th, 1843: I received letters from General Lewis Cass of Michigan, and John C. Calhoun of South Carolina, in answer to mine of Nov. 4th." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 143-4.)
[^19] This recommendation was a statesman-like word, and deserves to be presented in the Prophet's own phrases.
[^20] The paper was published at Nauvoo in pamphlet form and widely circulated throughout the United States.
[^21] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 248.
[^22] The fifth resolution adopted at the Nauvoo Convention read as follows: "Resolved, that the better to carry out the principles of liberty and equal rights, Jeffersonian Democracy, Free Trade, and Sailors' Rights, and the protection of person and property, we will support General Joseph Smith for the president of the United States at the ensuing election." (Proceedings of the convention in full will be found in History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 386-397.)
[^23] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 210-211.
[^24] 24. Times and Seasons, vol. v, p. 441.
[^25] 25. History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 243.
