B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LIII

THE WESTERN MOVEMENT OF THE CHURCH PROJECTED BY JOSEPH SMITH: EFFORTS FOR PEACE

ON the 20th of February, 1844, President Smith instructed the twelve apostles of the church to send out a delegation to explore California and Oregon with the view of finding a location to which the church could remove after the temple at Nauvoo was completed. [^1] The day following seven of the apostles with other brethren convened in council in President Smith's office. The minutes of that meeting follow:

PREPARATIONS FOR THE WEST

"At a meeting of the twelve at the mayor's office, Nauvoo, February 21, 1844, seven o'clock, p. m., Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, Geo. A. Smith, Willard Richards, and four others, being present, called by a previous notice, by instruction of President Joseph Smith on the 20th instant, for the purpose of selecting a company to explore Oregon and California, and select a site for a new city for the saints.

Jonathan Dunham, Phineas H. Young, David D. Yearsley, David Fullmer, volunteered to go; and Alphonzo Young, James Emmet, George D. Watt, and Daniel Spencer were requested to go.

Voted the above persons to be notified to meet with the council on Friday evening next, at the assembly room.

Willard Richards, Clerk." [^2]

On the 23rd of the same month President Smith met with the apostles and others to further discuss the movement. He suggested the apointment of a "leader to drum up volunteers." "Let that man go that can raise $500; a good horse and mule, a double-barrel gun, one barrel rifle, and the other smoothbore, a saddle and bridle, a pair of revolving pistols, bowie-knife and a good sabre." If enough did not volunteer immediately to make up the party, the brethren were informed that they could wait until after the election. Nine of those present volunteered to go [^3]

After this, the "Western Exploration Company," and the progress it made in its preparations was a subject frequently mentioned in the Prophet's Journal.

The question is raised as to President Smith projecting this western movement of the church. That is why it is particularized in this text. Some there are who seek to make it appear that the whole western movement, in conception as in execution, originated with Brigham Young, after the death of President Smith. The following entries in his Journal, together with such evidence as is supplied in the text above are relied upon to establish the fact that the movement was conceived and plans for its consummation laid by Joseph Smith:—

SUMMARY OF EVIDENCE FOR WESTERN MOVEMENT

"Monday, Feb. 26th, 1844: 'Ira S. Miles volunteered to join the mountain expedition.'

Tuesday, Feb. 27th: 'Almon L. Fullmer and Hosea Stout volunteered to go on the western exploring expedition.'

Wednesday, Feb. 28th: 'Thomas S. Edwards volunteered to join the exploring expedition to the Rocky Mountains.

Thursday, Feb., 29th: 'Moses Smith and Rufus Beach volunteered to join the Oregon exploring expedition.'

Monday, March 4th: 'I instructed a letter to be written to James Arlington Bennett to consult him on the subject of nominating him for vice president. I here insert the letter.'

The letter which appears in full in the Journal of Joseph Smith, also contains this paragraph:

'All is right in Nauvoo. We are fitting out a noble company to explore Oregon and California, and progressing rapidly with the great temple which we expect to roof this season.

March 11, 1844: 'Spent the day in council in the lodge room, * * * to take into consideration * * * the best policy for this people to adopt to obtain their rights from the nation and insure protection for themselves and children, and to secure a resting place in the mountains or some uninhabited region, where we could enjoy the liberty of conscience guaranteed to us by the Constitution of our country, rendered doubly sacred by the precious blood of our fathers, and denied to us by the present authorities who have smuggled themselves into power in the state and nation." [^4]

On the 25th of February, and doubtless associating his thought with the preparations then going on for this western movement, President Smith predicted a speedy deliverance of the saints from their enemies. He records the incident as follows:

"I gave some important instructions, and prophesied that within five years we should be out of the power of our old enemies, whether they were apostates or of the world; and told the brethren to record it, that when it comes to pass they need not say they had forgotten the saying."

JOSEPH SMITH'S WESTERN ORDINANCE

Late in March, President Smith drew up "An ordinance for the Protection of the Citizens of the United States Emigrating to the Adjoining Territories, and for the Extension of the Principles of Universal Liberty." In the "Preamble" the ordinance called attention first to the conditions prevailing in the intermountain and Pacific-slope west, where no organized and effective government existed, leaving those who emigrated there exposed both to domestic feuds and foreign invasion, conditions that hindered the development of civilization in a vast region of country—an empire in its extent; and, second, to the aims of the memorialist, which unquestionably were beneficent as a statement of the essential points of them will disclose:

"To open the vast regions of the unpeopled west and south to our enlightened and enterprising yeomanry; to protect them in their researches; to secure them in their locations, and thus strengthen the government and enlarge her borders; to extend her influence; to inspire the nations with the spirit of freedom and win them to her standard; to promote intelligence; to cultivate and establish peace among all with whom we may have intercourse as neighbors; to settle all existing difficulties among those not organized into an acknowledged government bordering upon the United States, and territories; to save the national revenue in the nation's coffers; to supersede the necessity of a standing army on our western and southern frontiers; to create and maintain the principles of peace and suppress mob insurrections; and oppression in Oregon and all lands bordering upon the United States, and not incorporated into any acknowledged national government; to explore the unexplored regions of our continent; to open new fields for enterprise to our citizens and protect them therein; to search out the antiquities of the land, and thereby promote the arts and sciences, and general information; to amalgamate the feelings of all with whom we may have intercourse on the principles of equity, liberty, justice, humanity, and benevolence; to break down tyranny and oppression, and exalt the standard of universal peace." [^5]

To accomplish these purposes President Smith offered his services to the United States, and asked the congress of the United States to empower him to raise "a company of one hundred thousand armed volunteers in the United States and territories, at such times and places, and in such numbers as he shall find necessary and convenient for the purpose specified in the foregoing preamble, and to execute the same."

JOSEPH SMITH'S WESTERN MOVEMENT BEFORE CONGRESS

Orson Pratt and John E. Page, two of the twelve apostles, went to Washington in the interest of this scheme, and urged its consideration among the congressmen. Subsequently, in April, 1844, Orson Hyde was sent to Washington in the interest of the same great project; and through the influence of Mr. Hoge, representative to congress from the district which included Nauvoo, Mr. John J. Hardin, and Stephen A. Douglas, the senators from Illinois, succeeded in approaching a number of members of congress on the subject, but received small encouragement, as congressmen were extremely cautious in engaging in anything affecting their reputation and prospects for political preferment for the future. But however much these men objected to advocating anything which looked like favoring openly the scheme of President Smith, they all concurred in affirming that he had the right to lead his people to Oregon to settle, and the government could protect them under existing law. Stephen A. Douglas remarked, that if he could command the following that Mr. Smith could, he would resign his seat in congress to go to the west.

Also Mr. Douglas said that he would equally as soon go to Oregon without an act of congress as with one; "and that in five years," Orson Hyde represents him as saying, "a noble state might be formed; and then, if they would not receive us into the Union, we would have a government of our own." "He is decidedly of the opinion," continues Elder Hyde, "that congress will pass no act in favor of any particular man going there; but he says if any man will go, and desires that privilege, and has confidence in his own ability to perform it, he already has the right and the sooner he is off the better for his scheme." [^6]

No action was ever taken by congress upon the memorial and ordinance of President Smith. [^7] It is doubtful if any such action would have been taken in any event, but just at the time when the ordinance he had drawn up was presented to the Illinois delegation and other congressional friends, and to the house of representatives, Oregon affairs were much involved. No regularly organized government existed there and the country was held by the United States and Great Britain under a treaty of joint occupancy; and it was feared that the entrance into that region of any such force of "armed volunteers" as was proposed by the ordinance for policing that great region of the west, extending from Texas to Oregon—however beneficent its intentions—would be regarded by England as an infraction of the existing treaty. Also there was an effort being made to organize a territorial government for Oregon; and as a preliminary to its introduction Mr. Semple moved a resolution requesting the president to give notice to the British government for the discontinuance of the treaty of "joint occupancy." This, Orson Hyde reports, "was voted down with a rush;" and so long as the treaty of joint occupancy existed the ambitious plan by President Smith for policing and encouraging the settlement of the intermountain and Pacific-slope west, could not be considered practicable.

Incidentally it appears from the Hyde letters that one reason for seeking the protection of the government for this western movement was the fear that if it was undertaken without such protection, the old enemies of the church in Missouri would make that movement an occasion for renewing the war upon the saints. In conversation with Mr. Semple, who had just affirmed the right of the "Mormons" to emigrate to Oregon without an enactment of congress authorizing them to go, Mr. Hyde said to him:

"Other people might make a move to Oregon, and no prejudices bar their way, and their motives would not be misinterpreted. But, * * * Missouri knows her guilt; and should we attempt to march to Oregon without the government throwing a protective shield over us, Missouri's crimes would lead her first to misinterpret our intentions, to fan the flame of popular excitement against us, and scatter the fire-brands of a misguided zeal among the combustible materials of other places, creating a flame too hot for us to encounter—too desolating for us to indulge the hope of successfully prosecuting the grand and benevolent enterprise we have conceived." [^8]

About this time—the spring of 1844—there was such a bitter agitation of "Mormon" affairs in Hancock county, and things were so rapidly hastening to a climax, that nothing further was done during the lifetime of President Smith to receive government authorization for removal to the west; but the removal was a project never abandoned by him; for as hostility to the church increased in rancor and volume in Illinois, until the whole horizon appeared black and threatening, the Prophet repeatedly told his brethren that "it was light in the west."

PEACE EFFORTS OF THE SAINTS IN ILLINOIS

While these preparations for removal of the church to the west were under way, efforts were made by leading church officials to establish more peaceful relations with the people of Hancock and neighboring counties; also with Missouri. On the 14th of February the Warsaw Signal published a letter from Governor Ford, dealing with the situation in Hancock county. The letter was one acknowledging receipt of the resolutions adopted at the anti-"Mormon" meeting held at Carthage, to which reference has already been made. [^9] The letter was expostulatory in character. The governor had been called upon to abolish the Nauvoo charters, a thing, he points out, which both parties, by large majorities in each, refused to do after he called their attention to the necessity of some modification of them in a message to the last legislature. He had also been called upon to take away the arms of the "Mormons;" to raise the militia to arrest a supposed fugitive; and to repeal some of the ordinances of the city of Nauvoo! "Hancock county is justly famed for its intelligence," said the governor to his correspondent, "and I cannot believe that any of its citizens are so ignorant as not to know that I have no power to do these things." Some of the requests were so preposterous that they gave color to the supposition that they were made for political effect only. He hoped this charge was not true; for it would be more creditable to those concerned "to have their errors attributed to ignorance than to a disposition to embroil the country in the horrors of war for the advancement of party ends." In conclusion, and referring to the possibility of the demands made upon him being made for political effect only, he said:

"But if there should be any truth in the charge, (which God forbid) I affectionately entreat all the good citizens engaged in it to lay aside their designs and yield up their ears to the voice of justice, reason, and humanity. All that I can do at present is to admonish both parties to beware of carrying matters to extremity.

Let it come to this—let a state of war ensue, and I will be compelled to interfere with executive power. In that case also, I wish, in a friendly, affectionate, and candid manner, to tell the citizens of Hancock county, Mormons and all, that my interference will be against those who shall be the first transgressors.

I am bound by the laws and Constitution to regard you all as citizens of the state, possessed of equal rights and privileges, and to cherish the rights of one as dearly as the rights of another. I can know no distinction among you except that of assailant and assailed."

The governor's letter was published in the Nauvoo Neighbor with strong editorial endorsement of its pacific advice and warning to the people of Hancock county. It reviewed at length and justified the three releases granted to Joseph Smith in Illinois from processes issued by Missouri; it also called attention to the fact that such members of the Church of the Latter-day Saints who had been accused of crime, captured and taken into Missouri and examined before the courts of that state—Rockwell and Avery among the number—had been acquitted. Moreover, the ordinances of the city of Nauvoo which had been the occasion of most complaint had been repealed, [^10] so that there was "nothing left for a bone of contention." To the Latter-day Saints it said:

"'A soft answer turns away wrath,' says the wise man: and it will be greatly to the credit of the Latter-day Saints to show the love of God, by now kindly treating those who may have, in an unconscious moment, done them wrong; for truly, said Jesus, 'Pray for thine enemies.'"

The editorial declared it to be the intention. of the citizens of Nauvoo to carry out the suggestion of the governor for peace; and called upon all honest men to help them cherish all the love, friendship, courtesy, kindly feelings and generosity "that ought to characterize clever people." "Our motto, then, is peace with all," said the Neighbor's editorial, and also expressed a willingness to aid the governor "in his laudable endeavors to cultivate peace and honor the laws, believing that very few of the citizens of Hancock county will be found on the negative of such a goodly cause." Following is the concluding paragraph:

"Considering his [the governor's] views a kind of manifesto or olive leaf, which shows that there is rest for the soles of the saints' feet, we give it a place in the Neighbor, wishing it God speed, and saying, God bless good men and good measures! And as Nauvoo has been, so it will continue to be, a good city, affording a good market to a good country; and let those who do not mean to try the way of transgressors, say 'Amen.'"

In the same issue of the Neighbor, President Smith, in a signed communication, advised that paper to take no further editorial notice of the fulminations of the editor of the Warsaw Signal [^11] against the people of Nauvoo, and recommended that the advice of Governor Ford be honored, and that friendship and peace be cultivated with all men. President Smith also both in the Times and Seasons and in the Neighbor made overtures of peace to Missouri. He did not abate the just demands of the Latter-day Saints against Missouri for injuries inflicted upon them, both in person and in property, while they were living in that state, but he did appeal to them for an honorable settlement of the existing difficulties, to be followed by forgiveness. [^12]

Armed conflict with surrounding peoples, or with any people, was no part of the policy of the church. True it may be said of the work Joseph Smith introduced, as Jesus said of the work which he began by his personal ministry, that it brought "not peace, but a sword;" [^13] in each case, however, "the sword" has been found in the hands, not of those who accepted the work, but in the hands of those who rejected it, and made war upon it. Early in the New Dispensation of the gospel, the Lord commanded his servants to "renounce war and proclaim peace;" [^14] and true to this spirit of the work the Prophet sought for peace.

A "WOLF HUNT" PROPOSED

On their part the anti-"Mormons" of Hancock county exhibited no disposition to act favorably upon the pacific advice and warning of Governor Ford. His letter was published in the Warsaw Signal on the 4th of February; on the 17th of the same month the anti-"Mormons" at Carthage met in convention and among other unfriendly resolutions passed one appointing "Saturday the 9th of March as a day of fasting and prayer;" wherein "the pious of all orders" are requested to pray Almighty God, that he would speedily bring the false prophet, Joseph Smith, to deep repentance for his presumption and blasphemy; or that he will make a public example of him and his leading accomplices." [^15] Three days later a public meeting in Carthage appointed a "grand wolf hunt" [^16] for the same day, 9th of March, which all the citizens of Hancock and surrounding counties were urged to join, notwithstanding the previous appointment of that day as a day of fasting and prayer" against Joseph Smith and his associates; and which, if not sinister in its purposes, demonstrates how recklessly an invoked solemn occasion for a supposedly high purpose was set aside for a day of half riotous, prairie sport.

Footnotes

"MORMONS"

"Mr. Wentworth asked permission to present a memorial from General Joseph Smith, the head of the 'Mormons,' and required that it might be read by the clerk for the information of the house.

The clerk commenced the reading of the memorial. Before the reading was concluded, Mr. J. R. Ingersoll interposed, he had objected to the reception at first, and still objected. * * *

* * * Mr. Wentworth said he would move a suspension of the rules to enable him to have the paper read. * * * Mr. Wentworth then moved that the rules be suspended. * * *

* * * The question was put on suspending the rules and rejected—yeas, 79, nays, 86." (From the House Proceedings of May 25th, 1844. Congressional Globe, vol. xiii, no. 39, p. 624.)

---
Notas:
[^1] See ch. xlv, this History.
[^2] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 162-5.
[^3] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 170. This Wm. Marks afterwards was prominent among those who induced the Prophet to come back and deliver himself up to his enemies after he had started west. After the Prophet's death Marks joined the apostate James J. Strang in his attempt to lead the church, and still later was a principal factor in bringing into existence the "Josephite" or "Reorganized Church." (See the author's work on Succession in the Presidency of the Church, second edition, 1900.)
[^4] Minutes of the two special sessions of the council held on the 3rd and 5th of January respectively are published in History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 162-170.
[^5] A full account of this conspiracy, written by Horace Cummings, was published in the Contributor, Utah, vol. v, no. 7, April, 1884.
[^6] Affidavits given at length in History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 278-280.
[^7] The excommunication of these parties is recorded in the History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 341, under date of the 18th of April, and a long list of names of the prominent church officials who participated in the action is given. The announcement of the excommunication in the Times and Seasons bears the date of 18th of April, but it is published in the issue of that weekly periodical dated 15th of April, 1844. This may be accounted for on the ground that the Times and Seasons was issued irregularly, publication often delayed; and the April 15th number may have been so delayed and the excommunication notice of the 18th find place in it without any real anachronism. The matter is mentioned because the parties dealt with complained in the Nauvoo Expositor of the irregularity in the procedure of the council which excommunicated them. Dr. Foster declared that he had been notified to appear before the high council of the church on the 20th of April, but on the morning of the 20th, when preparing to go to trial, he was informed that he had already been excommunicated. It is also claimed on the part of the Laws that they were not given an opportunity to be present at the council taking action against them; and that as to Wm. Law the council acting had no jurisdiction in his case, since being in the presidency of the high priesthood he could only properly be tried before the general presiding bishop of the church, assisted by twelve high priests especially chosen. (See Doctrine and Covenants, sec. 107:81-84. The proceedings were irregular but justified, no doubt, in the minds of those who conducted them, on the ground that the apostasy of those affected by their action was so notorious that formalities were of little consequence. And yet such irregularities in church policy are to be deplored.
[^8] It was a matter of amusement to President Smith rather than anxiety, this "New Church Movement." Referring to it in a public address on Sunday, the 26th of May, he said: "Inasmuch as there is a 'new church' this [the church he had founded] must be the old, and of course we ought to be set down as orthodox. From henceforth let all the churches now no longer persecute orthodoxy. I never built upon any other man's ground. I never told the old Catholic that he was a 'fallen' true prophet!" (History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 411.)
[^9] The activities in this kind may be judged by citing the following:
[^10] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 405; 412-414.
[^11] History of Hancock County, Gregg, pp. 301-2.
[^12] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 413.
[^13] See article by United States' Secretary of State, John Hay, Atlantic Monthly, December, 1869; Ford's History of Illinois, p. 328; Linn's Story of the Mormons, p. 290.
[^14] William Law, Wilson Law, Charles Ivins, Francis M. Higbee, Chauncy L. Higbee, Robert D. Foster, and Charles A. Foster are announced as the publishers.
[^15] Thomas Gregg, author of the History of Hancock County, also author of the Prophet of Palmyra, an anti-"Mormon" history of "Mormonism" with the Prophet as the central figure, says of the Expositor and its publishers:
[^16] John Taylor, who became the third president of the church and at the time a member of the city council, in his account of The Martyrdom of Joseph Smith—published as an "Introduction" to A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion, by Sergeant Daniel Tyler, 1881, on this point says: "It [The Expositor] was, however, no sooner put in circulation than the indignation of the whole community was aroused; so much so, that they threatened its annihilation; and I do not believe that in any other city in the United States, if the same charges had been made against the citizens, it would have been permitted to remain one day."
