B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LIV

SECEDERS FROM THE CHURCH: DESTRUCTION OF THE NAUVOO EXPOSITOR

MORE serious than all external opposition to the church was the internal dissension which culminated about this time in the open revolt of men who had occupied leading positions in the church, and in the civil affairs of Nauvoo. It has already been stated that the introduction of the practice of the new marriage system of the church, permitting under special conditions a plurality of wives, gave opportunity to evil disposed persons to justify sexual immoralities because of this action of President Smith and the faithful brethren to whom he had confided the knowledge of this principle; that denunciation of these immoralities brought upon him the displeasure and hatred of those who were exposed. [^1] These finally united in secret covenant to encompass the Prophet's overthrow. On Orrin P. Rockwell's return to Nauvoo from prison he reported that some of the Missourians said they had secured the services of some of Joseph Smith's confidential friends, whom he did not suspect, but living in Nauvoo, to deliver him into their hands. These Missourians did not design to try the Prophet, but to hang him; and they had a man among the "Mormons" who would betray him, if they could not get him into their power without. [^2]

"AMONG FALSE BRETHREN"

The special night guards, whose appointment has already been noted, several times came in contact with men moving about the city in a manner which, to say the least, was suspicious; and soon complaints were made by a number of men that the city government was arbitrary and oppressive; they claimed that these night watchmen threatened their peace and even started rumors that President Smith had appointed them for the purposes of intimidation.

Among others who complained of the appointment of night watchman were William Law, second counselor in the first presidency of the church, and William Marks, president of the Nauvoo stake of Zion. In the course of a speech made at the meeting of the city council at the time of the appointment of the special watchmen, President Smith referred to the danger of invasion from Missouri and incidentally remarked: "We have a Judas in our midst." This gave great offense to both William Law and William Marks; also to Wilson Law, brother of William. "What can be the matter with these men?" commented the Prophet, on their manifestation of fear. "Is it that the wicked flee when no man pursueth, that hit pigeons always flutter, that drowning men clutch at straws, or that President Law and Marks are absolutely traitors to the church, that my remarks should produce such excitement in their midst? Can it be possible that the 'traitor' whom Porter Rockwell reports to me as being in correspondence with my Missouri enemies is one of my quorum [the first presidency]? The people in the town were astonished, almost every man saying to his neighbor, "is it possible that Brother Law or Marks is a traitor, and would deliver Brother Joseph into the hands of his enemies in Missouri? If not what can be the meaning of all this?' The righteous are bold as a lion." [^3]

Two special sessions of the city council were devoted to an inquiry into the cause of alarm on the part of these men. It appears from the minutes of the proceedings that the trouble arose from some of the night guards discussing who the "Judas" was on whom the Missourians relied to betray the Prophet, with the result that suspicions had fallen upon William Law. This "talk of the street" had alarmed Mr. Law and his friends, and hence came the charges that the night guards of the city were under secret orders from the mayor and oath-bound "to put out of the way" those suspected of treachery to the Prophet; that the organization of "Danites" had been revived and a reign of terror was to be inaugurated. The existence of such conditions was stoutly denied by the mayor and many others. The night guards in a body and at each of the special sessions of the city council denied the charges of being oath-bound, or of having received other instructions than those given in open council by the mayor at the time they received their appointment. The complainants against the guards and the city administration appeared at a very great disadvantage at the investigation. [^4]

Early in the spring of 1844, the Prophet was apprised by two young men, Denison L. Harris and Robert Scott, the latter living in the family of William Law, of a secret movement then on foot to take his life, and the lives of several other leading men of the church; among them the Prophet's brother, Hyrum. These young men were invited to the secret meetings by the conspirators, but before going conferred with the Prophet, who told them to go, but to take no part in the proceedings of these wicked men against himself. They carried out his instructions, and at the risk of their lives attended the secret meetings three times, and brought to President Smith a report of what they had witnessed—the hatching of plots to take the life of the Prophet and his brother Hyrum. [^5]

In addition to the testimony of these young men was that of M. G. Eaton, and A. B. Williams who related, substantially, the same thing. These men went before Daniel H. Wells, a justice of the peace, and made affidavit that such a plot existed. In their statements they named as leaders of the movement, Chauncey L. Higbee, R. D. Foster, Joseph H. Jackson, and William and Wilson Law. These names corresponded with those given by the young men before alluded to, except that they also named Austin Cowles, a member of the high council at Nauvoo, as one of the active and leading conspirators. [^6]

SELF-REVEALMENT OF THE CONSPIRATORS

These statements were shortly confirmed by the action of the conspirators themselves, as they soon came out in open as well as in secret opposition to the leading church authorities; and on the 18th of April a number of them were excommunicated for unchristian-like conduct, by a special council of leading brethren of the church, among whom were six of the twelve apostles. Among the number excommunicated were William Law, a member of the first presidency, his brother Wilson Law, and Dr. Robert D. Foster. [^7]

An effort was made by these men to organize a church by the appointment of apostles, prophets, presidents, etc.; but it failed miserably, the following was insignificant. William Law was "president" of the inchoate, ecclesiastical institution. [^8]

The mask having at last fallen from the faces of this coterie, they joined with the avowed enemies of the saints outside of Nauvoo, and openly advocated the repeal of the city charter, which but a few years before they had assisted to obtain. They violated on several occasions the city ordinances, resisted the city officers, and threatened the life of the mayor. These disturbances led to arrests and trials before the municipal court, from which the accused generally appealed to the circuit courts; and retaliated by counter arrests of the city authorities for false imprisonment, defamation of character, etc. In many of these cases the power of the municipal court to grant writs of habeas corpus was freely exercised, and the city authorities released as the actions were malicious, and adjudged to be insufficient grounds on which to hold the alleged offenders. In some cases, however, complaints were made before the Hancock circuit court by the seceders, and a number of such cases against President Smith were pending at the time of his death. [^9]

CHARGES OF ADULTERY AND PERJURY

At the May sitting of the grand jury at Carthage two indictments were found against President Smith, one for "adultery," on the testimony of William Law; and one for "perjury" on the testimony of Joseph H. Jackson. Instead of avoiding the issue thus presented President Smith promptly met it. Their information of the finding of the indictments reached Nauvoo on Saturday, 25th of May, and on Monday the Prophet presented himself before the court at Carthage and demanded a hearing. [^10] Anti-"Mormon" writers usually limit the Prophet's demand for a trial to the case of "perjury" [^11] but he placed himself in the hands of the court and was as likely to meet the one charge as the other. It was beyond his power to pick and choose as to which case he would answer. All that can be said in the matter is that on the perjury case the prosecution not being ready, a continuance was taken to the next term. "I was left to give bail to the sheriff at his option," remarks the Prophet in his narrative: "he told me I might go home, where he would call and take bail at his own convenience." [^12] The disposition of the charge of adultery is not given, and whether that too was continued until the next term of court or not is unknown. But certainly those making the charge could not have been very confident of their case as we hear no more of it. Anti-"Mormon" writers, however, seldom neglect to say that at the time of the Prophet's death "he was under an indictment for adultery and perjury," without mentioning the prompt boldness with which President Smith placed himself in the hands of the court to face these charges. [^13]

At last the disaffected parties imported a press into the city and proposed publishing a paper to be called the Nauvoo Expositor. It avowed its intention in its Prospectus to agitate for the repeal of the Nauvoo charter, and also announced that since its position in the city of the saints afforded it opportunities of being familiar with the abuses that prevailed, its publishers intended to give a full, candid and succinct statement of facts as they really existed in the city of Nauvoo, regardless of whose standing in the community might be imperiled. One Sylvester Emmons was employed as editor.

THE ONE AND ONLY NUMBER OF THE NAUVOO EXPOSITOR

The first number—and the only one ever issued—of the Nauvoo Expositor was published on the 7th of June. It must have been a great disappointment to its publishers [^14] if they possessed any newspaper taste or pride, since it was a sad jumble in arrangement of selected and original matter. Of the former there is a surprisingly large quantity of colorless stuff for a paper that so thundered in its Prospectus as to the "gross abuses" and the "unsupportable oppressions of the ministerial powers" it had to expose; and the original matter was both vapid and pointless; it was strong only in its bitterness and evil intent. It charged the Prophet with exercising illegal authority, both in ecclesiastical and civil affairs; with the introduction of the plural wife system, and other supposed doctrinal heresies; with gross immoralities; and malfeasance in the administration of the affairs of the church. Both by its Prospectus which was reproduced in the one published number, and by editorial utterance the Expositor avowed its intention to work for the repeal of the city's charter. Naturally the publication of such a paper aroused great indignation within Nauvoo; and such was the bitterness engendered in the public mind outside of Nauvoo, both in Hancock county and in the surrounding counties, that to allow its continued publication meant, undoubtedly, the rising of mob forces and open war upon the saints with the destruction of Nauvoo as the inevitable result.

This bitterness had been created in the public mind in large part through the misrepresentations that had been made of the purposes and designs of the church leaders; in part by the unwisdom of church members, for whom no claim is made of impeccability, either in word or action; nor is absolute inerrancy in judgment and policy claimed for even the leaders of the church; but most of the ill repute in which Nauvoo was held by the people of Hancock and surrounding counties—after the fact of misrepresentation—arose from the wickedness of the very men—adding to the coterie the villain John C. Bennett—who now engaged through the press they had founded to expose alleged corruption in high places in Nauvoo. [^15]

The appearance of the Expositor constituted a problem most difficult of solution. Such was the general indignation among the citizens of Nauvoo that there was danger of an uprising and a destruction of the press and printing office by them—this meant mob violence in Nauvoo, [^16] and any manifestation of mob violence in Nauvoo meant the awaited pretext for its destruction by outside forces. Indeed, there were those who believed that one reason for the publication of the Expositor was to provoke the citizens to some overt act against the law, that a pretext might be found for the raising of mob forces against the city. John Taylor (mentioned in note 16) says: "Various attempts had heretofore been made by the party [i.e. the seceders from the church] to annoy and irritate the citizens of Nauvoo; false accusations had been made, vexatious law suits instituted, threats made, and various devices resorted to, to influence the public mind, and, if possible, to provoke us to the commission of some overt act that might make us amenable to the law. * * * So far from displeasing our enemies it [the destruction of the Expositor] would be looked upon by them as one of the best circumstances that could transpire to assist them in their nefarious and bloody designs." [^17] In an editorial of the Nauvoo Neighbor the same writer says that the press was destroyed in response to the "cries and pleadings" of the people "with the city authorities," asking: "Will you suffer that servile, murderous-intended paper to go on and villify and slander the innocent inhabitants of this city, and raise another mob to drive and plunder us again as they did in Missouri?" [^18]

It is quite evident that the publishers of the Expositor provokingly relied upon this fear of outside interference as an asset in their audacious undertaking. It was part of the testimony before the city council that Francis M. Higbee and William Law had declared before the press was destroyed that "they had commenced their operations and would carry them out law or no law." [^19] Francis M. Higbee said the interest of the city is done the moment a hand is laid on the press." [^20] Again Francis M. Higbee, speaking of the Expositor press said: "If they [citizens of Nauvoo] lay their hands upon it, or break it, they may date their downfall from that very hour, and in ten days there will not be a Mormon left in Nauvoo." [^21]

In view of this trying situation the city council was convened and after long deliberation determined upon the destruction of the press by order of the city council as the wisest course. The justification for the procedure was as follows: "Blackstone on 'Wrongs' asserts the doctrine that scurrilous prints may be abated as nuisances." [^22]

The Nauvoo charter, following the Springfield charter gave the city authority to "remove nuisances." The city council after long deliberation and the hearing of testimony, much of which, though not all, taken under oath,

POWER TO "REMOVE NUISANCES"

"Resolved; by the city council of the city of Nauvoo, that the printing office from whence issues the Nauvoo Expositor is a public nuisance, and also all of said Nauvoo Expositors which may be or exist in said establishment; and the mayor is instructed to cause said printing establishment and papers to be removed without delay, in such manner as he shall direct.

Passed June 10th, 1844.

George W. Harris,

President, pro tem.

W. Richards, Recorder." [^23]

Whereupon the mayor issued an order to the city marshal to "destroy the printing press from whence issues the Nauvoo Expositor, and pie the type of said printing establishment in the street, and burn all the Expositors and libelous hand bills found in said establishment." [^24] Also at the same time the mayor issued an order to the acting major-general of the Nauvoo legion to be in readiness to assist the city marshal in the event of his meeting with resistance in the execution of the mayor's orders. There was but slight resistance—the merely formal denial of admittance—the locking of a door, which the marshal then broke down. The order was otherwise quietly executed.

It may not be denied that the procedure of the city council in destroying the Expositor press was irregular; and the attempt at legal justification is not convincing; but it was doubtless a better method of meeting the issue than by the action of a mob; for it stopped the offensive publication, and gave less ground for complaint against the people of Nauvoo; and if in their corporate capacity the city administration had exceeded their jurisdiction, they were amenable to the law. [^25] Such was the view expressed of the matter by President Smith in his interview with Governor Ford the day before the tragedy at Carthage. He said:

"We made that order [i.e. for the destruction of the Expositor press] in our corporate capacity, and the city marshal carried it out. It is possible there may have been some better way, but I must confess that I could not see it. * * * In relation to the press, you say that you differ from me in opinion. Be it so: the thing, after all, is only a legal difficulty, and the courts, I should judge, are competent to decide on that matter. If our act was illegal we are willing to meet it. * * * If it is deemed that we did a wrong in destroying that press, we refuse not to pay for it; we are desirous to fulfill the law in every particular, and are responsible for our acts." [^26]

In a letter to Governor Ford, President Smith also said: "If we have erred in judgment [in respect of the Expositor matter] it is an official act, and belongs to the supreme court to correct it, and assess damages versus the city to restore property abated as a nuisance." [^27]

The several references to Blackstone in this chapter as an authority for destroying the Expositor press is unfortunate: The author referred to says: "A fourth species of remedy by the mere act of the party injured, is the abatement, or removal of nuisances." On this, the following commentary in note 6 is made: "So it seems that a libelous print, or paper (not the printing press on which they may have been printed) affecting a private individual may be destroyed; or, which is the better course, taken and delivered to a magistrate." [^28] The destruction of libelous "prints and papers" can scarcely be held to sustain the action of destroying a printing press.

Footnotes

Treachery of William Law: On the 18th of June, Truman Gillett, Jun., made affidavit to the effect that about the first day of June, 1842, he overheard a conversation on the steamboat Massachusetts between two men talking of incidents on the upper Mississippi when one said to the other: "If Law could have succeeded in getting an introduction for us to Joe Smith, d—n him, we would have gagged him and nabbed him; and, d—n him, all h—could not have rescued him from our hands." The next morning Gillett got into conversation with the man who made these remarks, and leading him back to the above subject he explained that he had been "on the upper Mississippi on business; that he had stopped at Nauvoo on his way down with some twelve or fourteen other men, who laid a plan to kidnap Joe Smith; that some of the company queried about getting access to him, but one of them said he knew they could if he could find William Law. They called on William Law in the evening to get an introduction to their great Prophet, and Law went with them to the gate, where they were stopped by the police, 'and it was well for him that we did not succeed in getting an introduction to him.' Deponent said: 'Did William Law know your business?' and he said 'yes.'" (History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 500-1.)

"The May term of Hancock circuit court commenced its session at Carthage on the 20th, Hon. Jesse B. Thomas presiding. At this term, four cases were on docket against the Prophet, and were disposed of as follows:

Alexander Simpson—For false imprisonment: change of venue to Adams county.

Francis M. Higbee—For slander: change to the county of McDonough.

Charles A. Foster—For false imprisonment: change to the county of McDonough.

Amos Davis—For trespass: change to McDonough county."

These were all civil actions (Gregg's History of Hancock County, p. 301).

"As we have seen, the professed aim and purpose of this sheet, Nauvoo Expositor, were to expose the enormities practiced by the Prophet and his followers at Nauvoo. And from the statements and proofs adduced, and from corroborative facts—making all due allowance for exaggeration and vindicative feeling—we are compelled to accept many of them as true. Yet, it is painful to remember that while they were showing Joseph Smith to have been a desperately bad man, they were—to put it in as mild a way as possible—adding little to their own characters, inasmuch as for years they had been his supporters and defenders, and (having been in his confidence) must have known long before what his true character was, and that all his pretensions to religion and sanctity were false. And it will be remembered, too, that when Dr. Bennett revolted, but a short period before, and made the same or similar charges, all, or most of these men made public contradiction of them." (Gregg's Prophet of Palmyra, pp. 240-1).

Of course the reader should remember in connection with Mr. Gregg's conclusion from "corroborative facts" that many of the statements of these seceders from the church are true, that this is the conclusion of a man strongly prejudiced against the Church of the Latter-day Saints; and one who would especially count the charge of introducing the new marriage system as among the "enormities" of the Prophet. The fact of Joseph Smith establishing that system is, of course, not denied in this History; and neither is it conceded—within the limitations and explanations already set forth (ch. xlv) to be an "enormity."

Elias Smith, afterwards known in Utah as "Judge Elias Smith," a man of most excellent character, coolness of temperament, and soundness of judgment, is represented by the minutes of the Nauvoo city council as saying in the Expositor case that he "believed, by what he had heard, that if the city council did not do it [i.e. destroy the Expositor press] others would." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 446.)

---
Notas:
[^1] "These apostates, the Laws, Fosters, Higbees et al reckless of all consequences, made a deadly thrust at our overthrow, leaving the city suddenly, and, afterwards, by themselves or agents, fired their own buildings, doubtless thinking they could charge it upon the saints, and by that means excite a mob in the surrounding country, who would fall upon and burn the city, but in this they were disappointed, our vigilant police discovered and extinguished the flames." (From a letter of Willard Richards and John Taylor to Reuben Hedlock, presiding elder of the church in England, under date of July 9th, 1844. Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, p. 743.)
[^2] Gregg reports the rumor in his History of Hancock County, p. 319, as follows: "Hyrum was reported to have said: 'We had better send a message to long-nosed Sharp [editor of the Warsaw Signal] that if he does not look out, he might be visited with a pinch of snuff that will make him sneeze!' And he continued: 'If any person will go to Warsaw boldly, in daylight, and break the press of the Signal office with a sledge hammer, I will bear him out in it, if it costs me a farm. He could only be taken with a warrant at any rate, and what good would that do?'"
[^3] The names of the signers are as follows: John Taylor, G. W. Harris, Aaron Johnson, Phineas Richards, William Boles, Thomas Smith, Geo. P. Stiles, Edward Hunter, W. W. Phelps, Moses F. Clare, Alanson Ripley, Levi Richards, Orson Spencer, Addison Everett, John P. Greene, Philip B. Lewis.
[^4] Resolutions of Warsaw meeting, adopted also at Carthage meeting, see Warsaw Signal of the 19th of June, 1844. Resolutions are published in History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 462-466. For arrangements for cooperation of Carthage-Warsaw forces with Missouri mobs in attack upon Nauvoo, see affidavit of Thomas G. Wilson, Isaac Morley, et al. (Ibid, pp. 480-482).
[^5] Warsaw Signal, extra of June 17th, 1844.
[^6] The article of the late secretary of state is written in a very flippant spirit, utterly unworthy of the "tragedy" it undertakes to chronicle; and unworthy of the really great "secretary of state," in two presidential administrations, who wrote it. The only palliation that can be offered for this serious literary blunder of a great man is, that it was written when Mr. Hay was young [thirty-one years of age], and depending chiefly upon boyhood recollection [some of his boyhood was spent in Warsaw and Carthage], and contemporary newspapers rather than upon a careful examination of the documents in the case. Writing to Mr. William A. Linn, author of The Story of the Mormons, as late as Nov, 17, 1900, Mr. Hay says of his Atlantic Monthly article: "I relied more upon my memory and contemporary newspapers for my facts than on certified documents. I will not take my oath to everything the article contains, but I think in the main it is correct." An able Review of Mr. Hay's article was published by Elder Orson F. Whitney—author of Whitney's History of Utah—in 1905, in which the utter unworthiness of Mr. Hay's article as an historical document [except where sustained by corroborative evidence] is pointed out. H. H. Bancroft says of Hay's article that, "However justly it may lay claim to Boston 'smart' writing, so far as the facts are concerned it is simply a tissue of falsehoods." (History of Utah, p. 183, note). This view should be so far modified as to say that there are many statements in Mr. Hay's article which are valuable contributions to the history of the event he celebrates—the one quoted in the text above, for example; and others also as we shall see, in relation to which he had opportunity of obtaining special knowledge. Mr. Hay's chief offense is his flippant style in dealing with a murder of even more than national importance; and his disposition to excuse the murderers and make light of the perjury, and the miscarriage of court processes and justice, by which they escaped punishment for their crime; by which circumstance an American commonwealth was forever dishonored among the states of the Union.
[^7] The statements of the paragraph are sustained by the affidavits of many of the parties so called upon, and by their written communications sent to Nauvoo. (Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, pp. 141-2; 220, 222-230-1; also History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, chs. xxiii and xxiv)
[^8] See Warsaw Signal of the 19th of June, extra; and Nauvoo Neighbor, extra of the 21st of June.
[^9] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 480. The letter was accompanied by documents giving evidence of uprisings in Missouri to invade Illinois for the purpose of making an attack upon Nauvoo. (Ibid, pp. 480-1).
[^10] The Prophet's interview with Governor Ford, Tyler's Mormon Battalion, Introduction, p. 43.
[^11] The minutes of the trial are published in History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 488-491.
[^12] Affidavit of Anson Call, David Evans, Wm. E. Horner, Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, p. 221. Also affidavit of Hiram B. Mount and John Cunningham. Ibid, p. 222 et seq.
[^13] This doubtless in allusion to the great enterprise of conducting a mighty emigration into the western wilderness noted in chapter liii, this History.
[^14] A synopsis of the speech compiled by Geo. A. Smith from verbal reports will be found in History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 497-8.
[^15] Letter of Hyrum Smith to Brigham Young, Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, pp. 153-4.
[^16] Among these cases the one most offensive was that of Jeremiah Smith, accused of obtaining money—$4,000—from the United States treasury at Washington. He was found in Nauvoo, and twice arrested, first by the United States marshal of Iowa, and the second time by an Illinois marshal. In each case he sued out a writ of habeas corpus, brought before the city council and set free. Smith was afterward taken before the courts at Springfield, but apparently released. An effort was made, chiefly by one T. B. Johnson, to have the mayor and municipal court at Nauvoo indicted by the Springfield grand jury for exceeding their authority in trying this Smith case on its merits, and releasing the prisoner from both state and United States process. These efforts, however, were defeated. (See Nauvoo Expositor, also letters to the Prophet from Dr. L. W. Hickok and H. T. Hugins. Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, pp. 7 and 183; also History of the Church, Period I, vol vi, pp. 418-425 and pp. 594, 501.)
[^17] The Governor's letter, bearing date of June 22nd, is published in extenso in History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 538-539.
[^18] See Ford's History of Illinois, p. 367, and last paragraph of Ford's letter of June 22nd. History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 333-7.
[^19] The passages here referred to in the governor's letter are as follows: "I am anxious to preserve the peace, a small indiscretion may bring on a war. The whole country is now up in arms, and a vast number of people are ready to take the matter into their own hands. Such a state of things might force me to call out the militia to prevent a civil war; and such is the excitement of the country that I fear that the militia, when assembled, would be beyond control. * * * You have made it necessary that a posse should be assembled to execute legal process; and that posse, as fast as it assembles, is in danger of being imbued with the mobocratic spirit."
[^20] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 538-541.
[^21] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 545. For close of the history here cited and the consideration of "Mormon" annals thereafter, see Note end of this chapter.
[^22] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 545.
[^23] Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, pp. 332-3; also History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 547-548.
[^24] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 549.
[^25] See letter of Taylor and Richards to the saints in England announcing the martyrdom, (Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, p. 775.) The letter is dated July 9th, 1844. See also Times and Seasons, July 15th, 1844. Hyrum Smith also seems to have had a premonition of the approaching tragedy; for while in the midst of his preparations for going to Carthage, this same morning, he read the following paragraph near the close of the 12th chapter of Ether, ver. 38, in the Book of Mormon (current edition) and turned down the leaf upon it:
[^26] Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, p. 343.
[^27] Dunn's Dragoons were from Augusta, in the extreme southeast corner of Hancock county, but are several times mistakenly referred to by other writers as "McDonough" county troops.
[^28] Millennial Star, vol. xxv, pp. 279 to 280.
