B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LVI

PRELIMINARY STEPS TO MARTYRDOM

EARLY in the morning of the 25th of June, at Carthage, President Smith, his brother Hyrum and the members of the Nauvoo city council named in the warrant of arrest sworn out by Francis M. Higbee, voluntarily surrendered themselves to Constable Bettisworth. Shortly afterwards the Prophet was again arrested by the same constable on a charge of "treason" against the state and people of Illinois, on the oath of Augustine Spencer. [^1] Hyrum was arrested on a similar charge, sworn out by Henry O. Norton.

THE ARREST OF THE PROPHET FOR "TREASON"

Soon after the arrest of President Smith for treason [^2] Governor Ford presented himself at the Hamilton House, and requested the Brothers Smith to accompany him, as he desired to present them to the militia troops, in fulfillment of his promise to them of the night before. The troops had been drawn up in two lines, and Joseph and Hyrum Smith linking arms with Brigadier-General Miner R. Deming, passed down the lines followed by their friends and a company of Carthage Greys. They were introduced as "General" Joseph and "General" Hyrum Smith, of the Nauvoo Legion. The Carthage Greys, a few minutes before, at the headquarters of General Deming, had revolted and behaved in an uproarious manner, but were pacified by the governor, and accompanied him, General Deming, and the Prophet and his party to where the other troops were drawn up in line. Here they again revolted because the Brothers Smith were introduced to the troops from McDonough county as "Generals Smith." Some of the officers of the Carthage Greys threw up their hats, drew their swords and said they would introduce themselves to "the d—ned Mormons in a different style." They were again pacified by the governor, who promised them "full satisfaction." But they continued to act in such an insubordinate manner that General Deming put them under arrest, [^3] but afterwards released them without punishment.

A PROPHECY—"SCENES OF BLOOD!"

Shortly after this episode with the Carthage Greys, a number of the officers of other militia companies and other gentlemen curious to see the "Prophet" crowded into the hotel. President Smith took occasion to ask them if there was anything in his appearance to indicate that he was the desperate character his enemies represented him to be. To which they replied, "No, sir, your appearance would indicate the very contrary, General Smith; but we cannot see what is in your heart, neither can we tell what are your intentions." To which President Smith promptly replied:

"Very true, gentlemen, you cannot see what is in my heart, and you are therefore unable to judge me or my intentions; but I can see what is in your hearts, and I will tell you what I see. I can see that you thirst for blood, and nothing but my blood will satisfy you. It is not for crime of any description that I and my brethren are thus continually persecuted, and harassed by our enemies, but there are other motives, and some of them I have expressed, so far as relates to myself; and inasmuch as you and the people thirst for blood, I prophesy in the name of the Lord that you shall witness scenes of blood and sorrow to your entire satisfaction. Your souls shall be perfectly satiated with blood, and many of you who are now present shall have an opportunity to face the cannon's mouth from sources you think not of, and those people that desire this great evil upon me and my brethren shall be filled with sorrow because of the scenes of desolation and distress that await them. They shall seek for peace and shall not be able to find it. Gentlemen, you will find what I have told you to be true." [^4]

The members of the Nauvoo city council under arrest for riot, in destroying the Expositor press, were taken before Robert F. Smith, justice of the peace, also captain of the Carthage Greys. Governor Ford had said, in a communication referred to in the last chapter, [^5] that nothing but the appearance of the mayor (Joseph Smith) and the city council before Justice Morrison, who issued the writ against them for "riot," in the first place, would vindicate the majesty of the law; but now that the prisoners were at Carthage, where Justice Morrison lived, and could have been brought before him, and were willing to go before him, they were taken before another justice!

IN CARTHAGE PRISON

In order to avoid increasing the excitement, the prisoners admitted there was sufficient cause to be bound over to appear at the next term of the circuit court for Hancock county on the charge of "riot." The bonds of all the party amounted to seven thousand five hundred dollars.

Justice Smith dismissed his court without taking any action on the charge of "treason" under which the brothers Smith were still held; but about eight o'clock the same evening, Constable Bettisworth appeared at their lodgings at the Hamilton House and insisted on their going to jail. The Prophet demanded to see the copy of the mittimus which was at first denied; but upon his counsel, Messrs. Wood and Reid, informing the constable that the accused were entitled to a hearing before a justice before they could be sent to prison, to the surprise of all the constable produced a mittimus, issued by Justice Robert F. Smith. It stated that Joseph and Hyrum Smith were under arrest charged with treason; "and have been," so the paper read, "brought before me, as a justice of the peace, in and for said county, for trial, at the seat of justice hereof, which trial has been necessarily postponed, by reason of the absence of material witnesses." [^6] Now, this "mittimus," so far as it related to the prisoners appearing before Justice Smith for trial, was untrue; "unless," as lawyer Reid says, in the account he published of these proceedings—"unless the prisoners could have appeared before the justice without being present in person or by counsel!" The same representation of the case is made by lawyer James W. Woods, [^7] associated with Mr. Reid as counsel for President Smith.

Most vigorous protest was made against this unlawful proceeding, but to no avail.

Elder John Taylor went to the governor and reminded him of his pledges of protection, and expressed his dissatisfaction at the course things had taken, and told the governor that if they were to be subject to mob rule, and, contrary to law, be dragged to prison at the instance of every scoundrel whose oath could be bought for a dram of whisky, then the governor's protection availed very little, and they had miscalculated his promises. [^8]

In the meantime a drunken rabble had collected in the street in front of the Hamilton House, and Captain Dunn, with some twenty men came to guard the prisoners to the jail. The Prophet's friends followed him through the excited crowd in the direction of the jail. Stephen Markham walked on one side of him, and his brother Hyrum and Dan Jones on the other, and with their walking sticks kept back the rabble, which several times broke through the guard, while Elder John Taylor, Willard Richards and John S. Fullmer walked behind them.

The jail was reached and the prisoners given in charge of Mr. George W. Stigall, who first put them in the cell used for criminals, but afterwards gave them the more comfortable quarters known as the "debtors' apartment." When night came the prisoners and their friends stretched themselves out on the floor of the old jail—and so passed the night of the twenty-fifth.

PRISON INTERVIEW WITH GOVERNOR FORD

Governor Ford represents in his History of Illinois, that these men were placed in prison to protect them from the rabble, [^9] but says not a word about the protest of the prisoners against being thrust into jail, or the illegal means employed in putting them there.

In the forenoon of the twenty-sixth, a lengthy interview took place between Governor Ford and Joseph Smith in which the whole Expositor trouble was reviewed, the causes leading up to the destruction of the Expositor press, calling out the legion on which the charge of "treason" was based, and all other affairs connected with the difficulties. Governor Ford condemned the action of the city council in ordering the destruction of the press; but the course pursued by that body was defended by President Smith as the best that could be followed under the circumstances; and urged that even if they had been wrong in the course they had taken, it was a matter for the courts to decide and not a thing for mobs to settle. In conclusion the Prophet told the governor that he considered himself unsafe in Carthage, as the town was swarming with men who had openly sworn to take his life. He understood the governor contemplated going to Nauvoo, accompanied by the militia, to investigate certain charges about counterfeiting the United States' currency, and if possible secure the dies and other implements used in manufacturing it, and President Smith demanded his freedom that he might go with him. The governor promised him that he should go. [^10]

Colonel Thomas Geddes, commander of one of the divisions of the militia then gathered at Carthage, under the orders of Governor Ford, and for many years a prominent citizen in Hancock county, accompanied his excellency on this visit to the "Mormon" leaders in prison; and to Mr. Gregg, the historian of Hancock county—and a pronounced anti-"Mormon,"—he made a statement concerning a conversation between himself and the governor immediately following this visit to the prison, "of which," says Mr. Gregg in recording the incident, "he says his recollection is clear:"

"While the Smiths were in jail, I went to the jail in company with Governor Ford, and there we conversed with them for some time, the burden of Smith's talk being that they were only acting in self-defense, and only wanted to be let alone. After leaving the jail, and while returning from it, the governor and I had still further conversation about the subject matter. After some time the governor exclaimed, 'Oh, it's all nonsense; you will have to drive these Mormons out yet!' I then said, 'If we undertake that, governor, when the proper time comes, will you interfere?' 'No, I will not,' said he; then, after a pause, adding, 'until you are through.'" [^11]

This incident reveals, and from a non-"Mormon" source, the bias of Governor Ford's mind in this controversy now approaching its terrible climax; and will enable the reader to better understand the part taken by him in the events which follow in this Nauvoo period of our history.

ILLEGAL DEMAND FOR THE PRISONERS

The false mittimus on which President Smith and his brother Hyrum were thrust into prison, ordered the jailor to keep them in custody, "until discharged by due course of law." On the morning of the 26th the prosecutors expressed their wish that the prisoners be brought before the court for examination. Counsel for the defense objected inasmuch as the prisoners had already been committed and the justice and constable had no further control over them; that if they were brought out of prison it must be on habeas corpus proceedings or some other "due course of law." The constable, Mr. Bettisworth, with an order from the justice of the peace sought to take the prisoners before the court, but the jailor, Mr. George W. Stigall, refused to give them up until discharged from his custody "by due course of law." In this emergency Justice Robert F. Smith conferred with the governor as to what would be best to do; and that functionary is reported to have said: "We have plenty of troops; there are the Carthage Greys under your command, bring them out." [^12]

President Smith and his associates seem to have been uninformed of this movement, and at 3 p. m. sent the following note per hand of John Taylor to their counsel:

"JAIL, CARTHAGE, June 26, 3 p. m.

Messrs. Woods and Reid:

SIRS:—Constable Bettisworth called a little while since, and wanted to come in, the guard would not permit [him]. [^13] We since learned that he wanted to take us before the magistrate, and we have since learned that there is some excitement because we did not go, and we wish to see you without delay.

We are informed that Dr. Foster has said that they can do nothing with us, only by powder and ball, as we have done nothing against the law.

Yours,

JOSEPH SMITH,

Per W. RICHARDS." [^14]

The suggestion of Governor Ford to call out the Carthage Greys to take the prisoners from the custody of the jailor was acted upon. What the justice had illegally begun the same person as the captain of militia must consummate with unlawful force. Yet when this same governor was appealed to for protection for the prisoners against their illegal imprisonment, he expressed himself as being very sorry the circumstance had occurred, but he really could not interfere with the civil authorities! [^15]

It was about four in the afternoon of the 26th when the constable and the Carthage Greys appeared at the jail and demanded the prisoners. The jailor protested against the proceedings; so, too, did the counsel for President Smith; but by threats amounting to intimidation, Constable Bettisworth and Frank Worrell, the latter in command of the squad of Carthage Greys that attended the constable, compelled the jailor against his conviction of duty to surrender the prisoners. [^16]

Meantime a mob had gathered at the door of the jail and seeing that things had assumed a threatening aspect, President Smith stepped into the crowd, locked arms with one of the worst mobocrats, and with his brother Hyrum on the other arm, and followed by his faithful friends, proceeded to the courthouse. He had been unlawfully thrust into prison, and as illegally dragged out of it, and exposed to imminent danger among his worst enemies.

The counsel for the Brothers Smith asked for a continuance until the next day as they were without witnesses, not having been notified when they would come to trial. A continuance was granted until noon the next day. A new mittimus was made out and the prisoners committed again to prison—their old quarters. But after the prisoners were again lodged in jail, and without consulting either them or their counsel, Justice Robert F. Smith changed the time of the trial from noon of the twenty-seventh until the twenty-ninth. [^17]

This change was made, it is supposed—certainly there can be no other reason—in consequence of a decision reached by Governor Ford and his military council to march all his troops on the 27th to Nauvoo, except a company of fifty of the Carthage Greys that would be detailed to guard the prisoners. So Mr. Robert F. Smith, acting, it will be remembered, in the double capacity of a justice of the peace and captain of the Carthage Greys, as a justice altered the date of the return of the subpoenas without consultation with the defendants or their counsel, and excused the court until the twenty-ninth, that as a captain of a company of militia he might be free to accompany the military expedition designed to go to Nauvoo. [^18]

NIGHT OF THE 26TH OF JUNE IN PRISON

The evening of the twenty-sixth was spent very pleasantly by the prisoners and their friends—John Taylor, Willard Richards, John S. Fullmer, Stephen Markham and Dan Jones. Hyrum occupied the principal part of the time in reading accounts from the Book of Mormon of the deliverance of God's servants from prison, and in commenting upon them, with a view, doubtless, of cheering his brother Joseph, since the Prophet had expressed himself as feeling an uneasiness as to his safety, that he had never before experienced when in the hands of his enemies. [^19]

Willard Richards, President Smith's secretary and journalizer, worked on late into the night copying important documents by the flickering flame of a tallow candle. President Smith and his brother Hyrum occupied the only bedstead in the room, while their friends lay side by side on mattresses spread out on the floor. Sometime after midnight a single gun was fired near the prison. Richards was startled in his chair, and President Smith rose from the bed where he was and stretched himself upon a mattress between Fullmer and Jones. "Lay your head on my arm for pillow, Brother John," said he to Fullmer, as he kindly placed his arm under that person's head. Soon all was quiet, except that in a low tone Fullmer and the Prophet continued to talk of presentiments the latter had received of approaching death. "I would like to see my family again," said he, "and would to God that I could preach to the saints in Nauvoo once more." Fullmer tried to cheer him by saying he thought that he would have that privilege many times.

Again all was silent, and everybody apparently asleep. But President Smith turned to Dan Jones and was heard to say, "Are you afraid to die?" To which the one addressed said: "Has that time come, think you? Engaged in such a cause, I do not think death would have many terrors." And then the Prophet said: "You will see Wales"—his native land—"and fill the mission appointed you, before you die." [^20]

So passed the night preceding the day of the tragedy to be enacted at Carthage.

Early in the morning President Smith required Dan Jones to go downstairs and inquire of the guard about the gun that was fired in the night, what the meaning of it was, etc.

The answer Jones received to his inquiry from Frank Worrell, in command of the guard, was: "We have had too much trouble to get old Joe here to let him ever escape alive, and unless you want to die with him, you had better leave before sundown; and you are not a d—n bit better than him for taking his part; and you'll see that I can prophesy better than old Joe, for neither he nor his brother, nor anyone who will remain with them, will see the sun set today." This answer Jones related to President Smith who told him to go to Governor Ford at once and report the words of the guard. On his way to the governor's quarters at the Hamilton House, Jones passed a crowd of men who were being addressed by a person unknown to him. He paused long enough to hear these words:

"Our troops will be discharged this morning in obedience to orders, and for a sham we will leave the town; but when the governor and the McDonough troops have left for Nauvoo this forenoon, we will return and kill those men if we have to tear the jail down." (applause).

DAN JONES AND GOVERNOR FORD

These words and what the captain of the guard said were faithfully reported to Governor Ford, in reply to which his excellency said: "You are unnecessarily alarmed for the safety of your friends, sir, the people are not that cruel."

Angered at such an answer the following conversation occurred:

"Jones: The Messrs. Smith are American citizens, and have surrendered themselves to your excellency upon your pledging your honor for their safety; they are also master Masons, and as such I demand of you the protection of their lives. If you do not this, I have but one more desire, and that is, if you leave their lives in the hands of those men to be sacrificed—

Governor Ford: What is that, sir?

Jones: It is that the Almighty will preserve my life to a proper time and place, that I may testify that you have been timely warned of their danger." [^21]

The governor manifested some excitement during this conversation, turning pale at the significant warning Jones gave him. The effect, however, was but momentary.

Jones returned to the jail after his conversation with the governor, but was denied admission. He returned to the governor to secure a pass. He found his excellency in front of the company of dragoons detailed to accompany him to Nauvoo, the rest of the troops had been disbanded, and as they retired they were shouting loudly their intentions only to go a short distance out of town—"when they would return and kill old Joe and Hyrum as soon as the governor was far enough out of town." [^22] Jones called the attention of the governor to these threats, but that functionary gave no heed to them, though he himself could not have failed to have heard them.

Later in the day Jones was intrusted with a written message from President Smith to lawyer O. H. Browning of Quincy, engaging that gentleman's professional services in the impending examination on the charge of "treason." The pass to the prison Jones applied for was denied to him; but the governor ordered General Deming to give one to Dr. Willard Richards, President Smith's secretary. While waiting for this pass to be made out Jones' life was threatened by the rabble in the street, and Chauncy L. Higbee, one of the seceders from the church, said to him: "We are determined to kill Joe and Hyrum, and you had better go away to save yourself." [^23]

The guard at the jail having seen the written message handed to Jones, gave it out to the rabble now infesting Carthage that "Old Joe" was sending orders by Jones to raise the Nauvoo Legion to rescue the prisoners. Whereupon some were in favor of taking the message from Jones by force, others in favor of waylaying him in the woods, and started off with their rifles in hand. In the midst of the disagreement Jones mounted his horse and rode away to Quincy, avoiding, however, the Warsaw road.

LAST MESSAGES—CYRUS WHEELOCK

Early in the morning of the 27th, Cyrus Wheelock visited the prisoners. The morning was a little rainy and Wheelock wore an overcoat, in the inside pocket of which he carried a six-shooter. He passed the guard without close inspection and before leaving the prison handed the revolver to President Smith. [^24] As the latter took it, he handed to his brother Hyrum a single-barreled pistol left with him earlier in the morning by John S. Fullmer, and remarked: "You may have use for this."

"I hate to use such things or to see them used," said Hyrum Smith. "So do I" replied Joseph, "but we may have to defend ourselves."

Upon this Hyrum took the Fullmer pistol. These were the only weapons the prisoners had, except a heavy hickory walking cane left by Stephen Markham when he took leave of the prisoners.

President Smith dictated the following letter to be sent, per hand of Brother Wheelock, to his wife:

"CARTHAGE JAIL, June 27th, 1844.

20 minutes past eight a. m.

DEAR EMMA:—The governor continues his courtesies, and permits us to see our friends. We hear this morning that the governor will not go down with his troops today to Nauvoo, as was anticipated last evening; but if he does come down with his troops you will be protected; and I want you to tell brother Dunham [^25] to instruct the people to stay at home and attend to their own business, and let there be no groups gathering together, unless by permission of the governor they are called together to receive communications from the governor, which would please our people, but let the governor direct.

Brother Dunham, of course, will obey the orders of the government officers, and render them the assistance they require. There is no danger of any exterminating order. Should there be a mutiny among the troops, (which we do not anticipate, excitement is abating) a part will remain loyal and stand for the defense of the state and our rights.

There is one principle which is eternal: It is the duty of all men to protect their lives and the lives of their household, whenever necessity requires, and no power has a right to forbid it, should the last extreme arrive; but I anticipate no such extreme, but caution is the parent of safety.

[Signed] "JOSEPH SMITH."

"P. S. Dear Emma, I am very much resigned to my lot, knowing I am justified and have done the best that could be done. Give my love to the children and all my friends, Mr. Brewer, and all who inquire after me; and as for 'treason'—I know that I have not committed any, and they cannot prove an appearance of anything of the kind, so you need not have any fears that any harm can happen to us on that score. May God bless you all. Amen."

To this the following was subsequently added:

P. S.—20 minutes to 10. I just learn that the governor is about to disband his troops, all but a guard to protect us and the peace, and come himself to Nauvoo and deliver a speech to the people. This is right, as I suppose."

To this the Prophet added a few lines by his own hand which were not copied by his secretary.

To this written message were added many verbal ones, so numerous that Willard Richards feared that Wheelock would forget them, and proposed to write them down; but Hyrum Smith remarked: "Brother Wheelock will remember all we tell him, and he will never forget the occurrences of this day." [^26]

Among the verbal messages intrusted to Wheelock was one to the commanders of the legion, instructing them to avoid all military display or any other movement likely to produce excitement during the governor's visit to the city. Another to the special friends of President Smith admonishing them to remain perfectly calm and quiet as they valued the feelings and welfare of "their Prophet and Patriarch."

When Wheelock left the jail, Governor Ford had not yet started on his proposed visit to Nauvoo. Wheelock called upon him and said:

"Sir, you must be aware by this time that the prisoners have no fears in relation to any lawful demands made against them, but you have heard sufficient to justify you in belief that their enemies would destroy them if they had them in their power; and now, sir, I am about to leave for Nauvoo, and I fear for those men; they are safe as regards the law, but they are not safe from the hands of traitors, and midnight assassins, who thirst for their blood, and have determined to spill it; and under these circumstances I leave with a heavy heart." [^27]

To this Governor Ford replied:

"I was never in such a dilemma in my life; but your friends shall be protected, and have a fair trial by the law; in this pledge I am not alone; I have obtained the pledge of the whole of the army to sustain me."

Early in the afternoon—the governor had left Carthage for Nauvoo late in the forenoon—Stephen Markham was sent from the prison to obtain some tobacco for the relief of Dr. Richards who had been taken ill in the morning with stomach trouble. Returning to the jail he was accosted by a man of the name of Stewart who ordered him "to leave the town in five minutes." "I shall not do it," replied Markham. Whereupon he was surrounded by a number of the Carthage Greys, placed on his horse and forced out of town at the point of the bayonet. [^28]

This left in Carthage of the prisoner's friends only John Taylor and Dr. Willard Richards.

NOTES

In 1846, the president of the United States called upon Illinois to furnish four regiments of volunteers to engage in the war with Mexico, that number being Illinois' quota of the 50,000 troops authorized by congress for the war with that country. "This was no sooner known in the state," says Gregg, "than nine regiments, numbering 8,370 men answered the call, though only four of them, amounting to 3,720 men, could be taken." These served chiefly under General Taylor in northeastern and central Mexico, and the 1st and 2nd regiments, as stated in the footnote of the text of this History, took a prominent though disastrous part in the battle of Buena Vista, fought on the 22nd and 23rd of February, 1847. For the part taken in that battle by the two regiments named, and the overwhelming disaster which befell them, I give the narrative of Colton's History of the Battle of Buena Vista, quoted by Gregg in his History of Illinois, included in his History of Hancock County, pp. 120-124:

It will be remembered that the Mexican commander in this famous battle, General Santa Anna, confronted General Taylor's little army of less than five thousand men, with a force popularly held to be 20,000, and by Santa Anna's official report acknowledged to be 17,000. [^29] "With this superior force Santa Anna poured into the valley of Aqua Nuva early on the morning of the 22nd of February, and there was intermittent fighting throughout the day, and both armies bivouacked on the field, resting their arms. Early the next morning the battle was resumed and raged through that day most fiercely." And now Colton's account of the disaster to the 1st and 2nd Illinois regiments:

"As the enemy on our left was moving in retreat along the head of the plateau, our artillery was advanced until within range, and opened a heavy fire upon him, while Colonels Hardin, Bissel, and McKee, with their Illinois and Kentucky troops, dashed gallantly forward in hot pursuit. A powerful reserve of the Mexican army was then just emerging from the ravine where it had been organized, and advanced on the plateau, opposite the head of the southernmost gorge. Those who were giving way rallied quickly upon it; when the whole force, thus increased to over 12,000 men, came forward in a perfect blaze of fire. It was a single column, composed of the best soldiers of the republic, having for its advanced battalions the veteran regiments. The Kentucky and Illinois troops were soon obliged to give ground before it and seek the shelter of the second gorge. The enemy pressed on, arriving opposite the head of the second gorge. One-half of the column suddenly enveloped it, while the other half pressed on across the plateau, having for the moment nothing to resist them but the three guns in their front. The portion that was immediately opposed to the Kentucky and Illinois troops, ran down along each side of the gorge, in which they had sought shelter, and also circled around its head, leaving no possible way of escape for them except by its mouth, which opened upon the road. Its sides, which were steep,—at least an angle of 45 degrees,—were covered with loose pebbles and stones, and converged to a point at the bottom. Down there were our poor fellows, nearly three regiments of them (1st and 2nd Illinois and 2nd Kentucky), with but little opportunity to load or fire a gun, being hardly able to keep their feet. Above the whole edge of the gorge, all the way around, was darkened by the serried masses of the enemy, and was bristling with muskets directed on the crowd beneath. It was no time to pause. Those who were not immediately shot down rushed on toward the road, their number growing less and less as they went, Kentuckians and Illinoisans, officers and men, all mixed up in confusion, and all pressing on over the loose pebbles and rolling stones of those shelving, precipitous banks, and having lines and lines of the enemy firing down from each side and rear as they went. Just then the enemy's cavalry, which had gone to the left of the reserve, had come over the spur that divides the mouth of the second gorge from that of the third, and were now closing up the only door through which there was the least shadow of a chance for their lives. Many of those ahead endeavored to force their way out, but few succeeded. The lancers (Mexicans) were fully six to one, and their long weapons were already reeking with blood. It was at this time that those who were still back in that dreadful gorge heard, above the din of musketry and the shouts of the enemy around them, the roar of Washington's Battery. No music could have been more grateful to their ears. A moment only, and the whole opening, where the lancers were busy, rang with the repeated explosions of spherical-case shot. They gave way. The gate, as it were, was clear, and out upon the road a stream of our poor fellows issued. They ran panting down toward the battery, and directly under the flight of iron then passing over their heads, into the retreating cavalry. Hardin, McKee, Clay, Willis, Zabriskie, Houghton—but why go on? It would be a sad task indeed to name over all who fell during this twenty minutes' slaughter. The whole gorge, from the plateau to its mouth, was strewed with out dead. All dead! No wounded there—not a man; for the infantry had rushed down the sides and completed the work with the bayonet."

Surely those Illinoisans recruited chiefly from western Illinois, and among them doubtless a number of those who listened to Joseph Smith's prediction, were surfeited with scenes of blood, and faced the cannon's mouth from sources of which they had not thought. In proof that very many of the men of the 1st and 2nd Illinois regiments were from western Illinois and some of them active in the movement against the saints at Nauvoo, see footnote 4, chapter 1vi of this History. See Gregg's History of Illinois, in History of Hancock County, pp. 120-4, quoting Colton's History of the Battle of Buena Vista.

The following "summary" of the volunteer troops organized in Illinois for the war between the states is taken from the Adjutant-General's Report, quoted by Gregg in his History of Illinois, History of Hancock County, pp. 129-130.

"The number of the regiment, name of original colonel, call under which recruited, date of organization and muster into the United States' service, place of muster, and aggregate strength of each organization, from which we find that Illinois put into her one hundred and eighty regiments 256,000 men, and into the United States army, through other states, enough to swell the number to 290,000. This far exceeds all the soldiers of the federal government in all the War of the Revolution. Her total years of service were over 600,000. She enrolled men from eighteen to forty-five years of age when the law of congress in 1864—the test time—only asked for those from twenty to forty-five. Her enrollments were otherwise excessive. Her people wanted to go, and did not take the pains to correct the enrollment; thus the basis of fixing the quota was too great, and the quota itself, at least in the trying time, was far above any other state. The demand on some counties, as Monroe, (for example), took every able-bodied man in the county, and then did not have enough to fill the quota. Moreover, Illinois sent 20,844 men for one hundred days, for whom no credit was asked. She gave to the country 73,000 years of service above all calls. With one-thirteenth of the population of the loyal states, she sent regularly one-tenth of all the soldiers, and in the perils of the closing calls, when patriots were few and weary, she sent one-eighth of all that were called for by her loved and honored son in the White House. Of the brave boys Illinois sent to the front, there were killed in action, 5,888; died of wounds, 3,032; of disease, 19,496; in prison, 967; lost at sea, 205; aggregate 29,588, as upon every field and upon every page of the history of this war, Illinois bore her part of the suffering in the prison-pens of the south. More than 800 names make up the awful column of Illinois' brave sons who died in the rebel prison of Andersonville, Georgia. Who can measure or imagine the atrocities which would be laid before the world were the panorama of sufferings and terrible trials of these gallant men but half unfolded to view? But this can never be done until new words of horror are invented, and new arts discovered by which demoniacal fiendishness can be portrayed, and the intensest anguish of the human soul in ten thousand forms be painted."

The conversation of Joseph Smith at Carthage to which these notes are related as fulfillment of prophecy, as stated in footnote 4, was first published in the Deseret News of November 4th, 1857, nearly four years before the first gun was fired in the "War Between the States"—April 12th, 1861.

Footnotes

This account says nothing of the fact that the night before, Governor Ford had promised all the troops a view of General Smith; and that the Greys had been in revolt at General Deming's headquarters before the party, including Joseph and Hyrum Smith, reached the McDonough troops. Moreover the writer was informed by Colonel H. G. Ferris, when in Carthage in 1885, investigating these matters, that when word arrived in Carthage that Joseph Smith would surrender himself to the authorities, if the governor would pledge him protection and a fair trial, the governor made a speech to the mixed multitude of troops and citizens in which he stated the proposition of the Smiths, and wanted to know if they would sustain him in pledging them protection, to which they responded in the affirmative. There was some talk, too, of sending the Greys as a posse to escort the Smiths into Nauvoo. Against this proceeding General Deming protested and told Governor Ford that the pledge of protection made by the crowd and the troops was not to be depended upon, it was insincere, and that the lives of the Smiths were not to be trusted to the Carthage Greys. Colonel Ferris was present at the above meeting, a member of the Greys, and was the writer's informant. Such the statement to me by Colonel Ferris.—B. H. Roberts.

---
Notas:
[^1] Ford's History of Illinois, pp. 339, 340. Italics in above are mine—Author.
[^2] Ibid.
[^3] It is stated in several places in Mormon works (see Jensen's Joseph Smith, the Prophet, Rise and Fall of Nauvoo, Roberts; and even in the History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi. p. 603) that it was a company of McDonough county militia that formed the governor's escort to Nauvoo; but the statement is an error. (See Ford's History of Illinois, p. 345; and also Gregg's History of Hancock County. p. 322). The last authority, quoting Ford, in part, says: "Having ordered the guard (the Greys) for the prisoners, and left General Deming in command in Carthage, and discharged the residue of the militia, Ford immediately departed for Nauvoo, eighteen miles distant, accompanied by Colonel Buckmaster, quartermaster general, and Captain Dunn's (Augusta) company of dragoons," (Gregg's History of Hancock County, p. 322, and Ford's History of Illinois, p. 345.)
[^4] Ford's History of Illinois, p. 342.
[^5] Ford's History of Illinois, pp. 241-2.
[^6] Ford's History of Illinois, p. 346.
[^7] Ibid. Afterwards Governor Ford became fixed in the opinion that the plans of the anti-"Mormons" included the murdering of himself as well as of the Brothers Smith. He says: "As for myself, I was well convinced that those, whoever they were, who assassinated the Smiths, meditated in turn my assassination by the Mormons. The very circumstances of the case fully corroborated the information which I afterwards received, that upon consultation of the assassins it was agreed amongst them that the murder must be committed whilst the governor was at Nauvoo; that the Mormons would naturally suppose that he had planned it; and that in the first outpouring of their indignation they would assassinate him, by way of retaliation. And that thus they would get clear of the Smiths and the governor all at once. They also supposed that if they could so contrive the matter as to have the governor of the state assassinated by the Mormons, the public excitement would be greatly increased against that people, and would result in their expulsion from the state at least." (Ford's History of Illinois, p. 349.) Gregg ridicules this conclusion of the governor's and says that "for this suspicion he had not the shadow of evidence." (History of Hancock County, p. 323.)
[^8] Ibid, p. 346
[^9] The vacillating course of Governor Ford in all this proceeding justly lays him open to the cutting remark of the late United States Secretary of State, John Hay, who says: "During this day or two the governor seemed plagued by the foul fiend Flibbertigibet. He changed his mind every hour, with the best intentions. When the troops had started for Golden's Point, he began to doubt, as well he might. They were going to Nauvoo to search for 'bogus' (a noun which in that day was used to denote an ingenious imitation of the current coin, manufactured in the "City of the Saints"), and to overawe the Mormons by a calm display of force. What if they searched for other things, and did not content themselves with a calm display? These thoughts so agitated Governor Ford, that he wrote an order on the 27th countermanding former orders, and disbanding the militia. He then mounted his horse and rode to Nauvoo to deliver a firm and paternal address to the Mormons. All this was done with the best intentions. (Atlantic Monthly, December, 1869). Mr. Hay also speaks of Ford as 'a man of the best intentions, that accomplished nothing but patching the infernal pavement.'" (Ibid).
[^10] The number present according to Ford was variously estimated at from one to five thousand.
[^11] Church Historians' Compilation, Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, p. 502.
[^12] Ibid, p. 502.
[^13] Ford's History of Illinois, p. 347.
[^14] Affidavit of Wm. G. Sterrett, published in Church Historians' Compilation, Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, pp. 421-2.
[^15] I am following Mr. Hay's December No., 1869, Atlantic Monthly account of the movement of these Warsaw militia companies because "Dr. Hay," "surgeon of the regiment," and spoken of as among the "cooler heads" of the Warsaw forces, and who denounced the proposed march to Carthage, and "went at once back to Warsaw," was the father of the late secretary of state, (see National Cyclopaedia of American Biography, vol. xi, p. 12; cf. Gregg's History of Hancock County, p. 330), author of the article in question, and hence, doubtless, he received his information from his father who was on the ground and a reliable source of information upon the movement of the Warsaw division of the governor's troops, at least up to the time of his leaving them.
[^16] "There were none but words of law and order on their lips," says Mr. Hay, "but every man clearly understood that Nauvoo was to be destroyed before they returned. A public meeting in Warsaw had unanimously 'Resolved, that we will forthwith proceed to Nauvoo and exterminate the city and its people;' a manifesto which seemed too peppery even for the palate of Mr. Sharp, editor of the Signal, who, when he published it, added the saving clause, 'if necessary.' 'Of course it will be necessary,' said these law-abiding militia-men as they marched out of Warsaw on the Nauvoo road."
[^17] John Hay in Atlantic Monthly, December, 1869. Again I remind the reader that this Atlantic Monthly writer was John Hay who became secretary of state—member of the president's cabinet—1898-1905, and the biographer of Abraham Lincoln.
[^18] See Church Historians' Compilation of Data, Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, p. 472. Elder John Taylor was of a different frame of mind. "Brother Joseph," said he, "if you will permit it, and say the word, I will have you out of this prison in five hours, if the jail has to come down to do it." "My idea," he said in explanation of this proposition, "was to go to Nauvoo, and collect a sufficient force [to do this], as I considered the whole affair a legal farce, and a flagrant outrage upon our liberty and rights. Brother Joseph refused." (See Taylor's Martyrdom of Joseph Smith, in Tyler's History of the Mormon Battalion, Introduction, pp. 46-47.)
[^19] Hay says four shots were fired—his information came, of course, from the mob side. He also says that Joseph Smith had "two loaded, six-barrelled revolvers," and hints at responsibility attaching to General Miner R. Deming, whom he calls the "Jack-Mormon sheriff of Hancock county," for the prisoners having arms. The statement is not accurate, either as to Deming's responsibility or the pistols, since Joseph had but one six-barrelled ("pepper-box" type) revolver, and Hyrum a single-barrelled pistol which was not used; and Fullmer and Cyrus Wheelock left the pistols with the prisoners. Hay refers to the resistance of the Prophet to the mob as a "handsome fight," and also refers to four being wounded: "Joe Smith died bravely. He stood by the jamb of the door and fired four shots, bringing his man down every time. He shot an Irishman named Wills, who was in the affair from his congenital love of a brawl, in the arm; Gallagher, a southerner from the Mississippi Bottom, in the face; Voorhees, a half grown, hobbledehoy from Bear Creek, in the shoulder; and another gentleman, whose name I will not mention, as he is prepared to prove an alibi, and besides stands six feet two in his moccasins." [Sic]! Parley Pratt gives an account of learning in California, 1856, from a Mrs. Lawn—widow of one of the captains of the McDonough militia—of a Mr. Townsend being among those who forced the jail door at Carthage, and was wounded in the arm near the shoulder, from the effects of which he died in about six months. (Auto-biography of Parley P. Pratt, 475-6).
[^20] The hands of the watch stood at five o'clock, sixteen minutes, and twenty-six seconds, thus marking the moment when its possessor stood on the line between time and eternity.
[^21] See Note end of chapter.
[^22] See Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxxv, the church's authorized account of the Martyrdom. So Hay: "Severely wounded as he was, he ran to the window * * * and half leaped, half fell into the jail yard below. With his last dying energies he gathered himself up, and leaned in a sitting posture against the rude stone well curb. His stricken condition excited no pity in the mob thirsting for his life. * * * A squad of Missourians who were standing by the fence leveled their pieces at him, and before they could see him again for the smoke they made, Joe Smith was dead." (Atlantic Monthly, December, 1869.)
[^23] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxxv.
[^24] Hebrews ix:16, 17.
[^25] Dunham was then the commanding officer of the legion.
[^26] Church Historians' Compilation, Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, p. 460.
[^27] Church Historians' Compilation, Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, Governor Ford in effect says the same thing in his first proclamation announcing the murder of the Smiths to the people of Illinois.
[^28] Church Historians' Compilation, Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, p. 471.
[^29] 29. Marcus Wilson's History of the United States, subdivision. "Texas," Appendix, p. 684.
