B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LVII

THE MARTYRDOM

FOR several days Governor Ford had been arranging for his visit to Nauvoo to make a military display and overawe the citizens of that place, though during the time he had many misgivings as to the wisdom of such a proceeding. On this head he himself has said:

THE GOVERNOR'S ATTEMPT TO OVERAWE NAUVOO

"The force assembled at Carthage amounted to about twelve or thirteen hundred men, and it was calculated that four or five hundred more were assembled at Warsaw. Nearly all that portion resident in Hancock were anxious to be marched into Nauvoo. This measure was supposed to be necessary to search for counterfeit money and the apparatus to make it, and also to strike a salutary terror into the Mormon people by an exhibition of the force of the state, and thereby prevent future outrages, murders, robberies, burnings, and the like, apprehended as the effect of Mormon vengeance, on those who had taken a part against them. On my part, at one time, this arrangement was agreed to. The morning of the 27th day of June was appointed for the march; and Golden's Point, near the Mississippi river, and about equi-distant from Nauvoo and Warsaw, was selected as the place of rendezvous. I had determined to prevail on the justice to bring out his prisoners, and take them along. A council of officers, however, determined that this would be highly inexpedient and dangerous, and offered such substantial reasons for their opinions as induced me to change my resolution.

Two or three days' preparations had been made for this expedition. I observed that some of the people became more and more excited and inflammatory the further the preparations were advanced. Occasional threats came to my ears of destroying the city [i. e. Nauvoo], and murdering or expelling the inhabitants.

I had no objection to ease the terrors of the people by such a display of force, and was most anxious also to search for the alleged apparatus for making counterfeit money; and, in fact, to inquire into all the charges against that people, if I could have been assured of my command against mutiny and insubordination. But I gradually learned, to my entire satisfaction, that there was a plan to get the troops into Nauvoo, and there to begin the war, probably by some of our own party, or some of the seceding Mormons, taking advantage of the night, to fire on our own force, and then laying it on the Mormons. I was satisfied that there were those amongst us fully capable of such an act, hoping that in the alarm, bustle, and confusion of a militia camp, the truth could not be discovered, and that it might lead to the desired collision." [^1]

The governor then proceeds to estimate the relative strength of the parties to the probable conflict; sums up the folly and wickedness of an attack upon the people of Nauvoo, and adds:

"All these considerations were duly urged by me upon the attention of a council of officers, convened on the morning of the 27th of June. I also urged upon the council, that such wanton and unprovoked barbarity on their part would turn the sympathy of the people in the surrounding counties in favor of the Mormons, and therefore it would be impossible to raise a volunteer militia force to protect such a people against them. Many of the officers admitted that there might be danger of collision. But such was the blind fury prevailing at the time, though not showing itself by much visible excitement, that a small majority of the council adhered to the first resolution of marching into Nauvoo; most of the officers of the Schuyler and McDonough militia voting against it, and most of those of the county of Hancock voting in its favor." [^2]

Notwithstanding the majority of the officers still voted for the military display in Nauvoo, Governor Ford decided against making it, and ordered the troops disbanded both at Carthage and Warsaw, except two companies of the Carthage Greys, these to guard the prisoners; and Captain Dunn's company of dragoons, from Augusta, a town in the extreme southeast of Hancock county, the township cornering on Schuyler and Adams county [^3]—to form his escort to Nauvoo, to search for counterfeit plant and to arrest such as might be found violating the law in this kind. This decision to march into Nauvoo with Dunn's dragoons in search of counterfeit apparatus was a concession by Governor Ford to the desire among his officers that such a visit should be made to Nauvoo for those purposes; also, "and more particularly, to terrify the Mormons" from attempting any open or secret measures of vengeance against the citizens of the county who had taken part against them and their leaders. [^4] The governor's expedition was provisioned for two days, and expected to spend that time in Nauvoo. Four miles out from Carthage, however, Colonel Buckmaster expressed his suspicion that an attack would be made upon the jail. According to Ford's account he based his "mere suspicion" upon having seen "two persons converse together at Carthage with some air of mystery!" [^5] In view of the many evidences of deep hatred manifested in Carthage towards the prisoners during their incarceration, and the many warnings conveyed directly to Governor Ford as to the dangers threatening them, this statement of suspicion awakened by "two persons conversing together with some air of mystery" seems wonderfully like dealing with mere puerilities. "I myself," continues the governor at this point, "entertained no suspicion of such an attack; at any rate, none before the next day in the afternoon; because it was notorious that we had departed from Carthage with the declared intention of being absent at least two days." [^6]

The governor's assurance that there would be no attack upon the prisoners rested upon the comfortable conviction that no person would attack the jail while he was in Nauvoo, and thereby expose his life and the lives of his companions "to the sudden vengeance of the Mormons upon hearing of the death of their leaders." [^7] The precaution taken by the governor to suppress the rising fears of himself and Colonel Buckmaster, and provide against even "mere possibilities," was to send one of his company back to Carthage with a special order to Captain Robert F. Smith "to guard the jail strictly, at the peril of his life" until the governor's return. [^8]

This incident closed, the march Nauvoo-ward by the governor's troops was resumed. But after four miles more had been covered—making eight in all from Carthage—while the governor's reflections had convinced him that "no attack would be made upon the jail that day or night," he determined at this point to abandon all search for counterfeit apparatus at Nauvoo, as also to "defer an examination of all the other abominations charged on that people, in order to return to Carthage that same night, * * * to prevent an attack upon the jail, if any had been meditated." A halt of the troop was called; the baggage wagons ordered to stay where they were until towards evening and then return to Carthage; while the governor and the remainder of the expedition would hasten on to Nauvoo, [^9] to reprimand the people for past conduct, inform them "what degree of excitement and hatred prevailed against them in the minds of the whole people," and "warn them against attempts at vengeance upon those who had taken part against them."

GOVERNOR FORD IN NAUVOO

The governor arrived in Nauvoo about four o'clock in the afternoon and immediately the people assembled [^10] to hear his address on the points above enumerated. "Some impatience and resentment," says the governor, "were manifested by the Mormons at the recital of the various reports enumerated concerning them; which they strenuously and indignantly denied to be true. They claimed to be a law-abiding people, and insisted that as they looked to the law alone for their protection, so were they careful themselves to observe its provisions." [^11] The impatience and resentment at the governor's remarks were very natural; for he insulted the people by assuming that all their worst enemies had said against them was true; and he threatened them with dire calamities. He upbraided them for having so many firearms; and this after the experiences of the saints in Missouri, with which Governor Ford was familiar, and the constant menace of an attack upon the city by the Missourians! He also voiced the public fear that "these arms would be used against government!" "I know," he continued, "there is a great prejudice against you on account of your peculiar religion, but you ought to be praying saints, not military saints. Depend upon it, a little more misbehaviour from the citizens, and the torch, which is now already lighted, will be applied, the city may be reduced to ashes, and extermination would inevitably follow. [^12]

In closing his address the governor took a vote of his auditors on the question, "Whether they would strictly observe the laws, even in opposition to their Prophet and leaders;" and adds: "The vote was unanimous in favor of this proposition." [^13]

Ford's party visited the temple while in Nauvoo. Alpheus Cuttler, one of the building committee sent William G. Sterrett to quietly watch them while in and about the building. Sterrett was close to the governor in the basement of the temple where the party was inspecting the baptismal font, which rested upon twelve oxen—four on each side and two at each end—when one of the governor's company called his attention to one of the oxen that had part of one horn broken off. The governor stepped up to it and laying his hand upon it said: "'This is the cow with the crumply horn' that we read of." One of the staff continued: "That tossed the maiden all forlorn!" At which they all laughed. Several of the horns were broken off by the governor's attendants and one at least was carried away as a souvenir. [^14]

The governor and his party were invited to stay over night at Nauvoo but the invitation was declined. On leaving the city Dunn's troop of dragoons were drawn up in military order and dashed down Main street, performing the sword exercise, giving all the passes, guards, cuts and thrusts, taking up the whole width of the street and making as great a display of skill as they could. "This was apparently done," says the chronicler, "to intimidate the people, as the governor had remarked in his speech that they need not expect to set themselves up against such 'well disciplined troops.'"

It was six-thirty p. m. when the governor and his escort left Nauvoo on their return to Carthage.

THE WARSAW CONTINGENT OF GOVERNOR FORD'S FORCE

The order of Governor Ford to disband the four or five hundred troops that had started from Warsaw to meet him at Golden's Point (a point near the Mississippi river, seven or eight miles south of Nauvoo) met the Warsaw forces under command of Colonel Levi Williams on the prairie about seven miles from Warsaw. The courier bearing the order of disbandment was Mr. David Mathews, "a well known citizen of Warsaw" (Hay). This order was no pleasant news to Colonel Levi Williams' forces. According to Mr. Hay's Atlantic Monthly article (1869), [^15] the several companies of militia under that officer's command began the march in "high glee, fully expecting to march to the 'City of the Saints';" and not doubting that before they left it some occasion would arise that would give pretext for an assault upon the city. [^16] After Colonel Levi Williams, who was in command of the whole force, the principal officers were Captain Wm. N. Grover, who afterwards became United States attorney for Missouri; Thomas Sharp, editor of the Warsaw Signal; Captain C. Davis, then a state senator, and later member of congress; and Captain Mark Aldrich. The last named captain made a speech after the governor's order disbanding the troop had been read, calling for volunteers to go to Carthage. He did not succeed well in awakening enthusiasm for the enterprise, according to the chronicle; but Captain Grover and Sharp, the latter being "a spirited and impressive talker," soon "had a respectable squad about him." The talk of these men, it is said, was vague, and "the purpose of murder does not seem to have been hinted;" but they did not purpose being made "the tools and puppets of Tommy Ford. They were going to Carthage to see the boys about it, and talk things over." While they were deliberating over the matter on the prairie where they had been disbanded, a courier arrived from the Carthage Greys. "It is impossible to this day," remarks John Hay, "to declare exactly the purport of this message. It is usually reported and believed that he brought an assurance from the officers of this company that they would be found on guard at the jail where the Smiths were confined; that they would make no real resistance,—merely enough to save appearances," then follows this passage from Hay:

"This message was not communicated to the men. They followed their leaders off on the road to Carthage with rather vague intentions. They were annoyed at the prospect of their picnic coming so readily to a close, at losing the fun of sacking Nauvoo, [sic!] at having to go home without material for a single romance. Nearly one hundred and fifty started with their captains, but they gradually dwindled in number to seventy-five. These trudged along under the fierce summer sun of the prairies towards the town where the cause of all the trouble and confusion of the last few years awaited them. They sang on the way a rude parody of a camp-meeting hymn called in the west the 'Hebrew Children:'

'Where now is the Prophet Joseph? Where now is the Prophet Joseph? Where now is the Prophet Joseph? Safe in Carthage jail!'

"The farther they walked the more the idea impressed itself upon them that now was the time to finish the matter totally. The unavowed design of the leaders communicated itself magnetically to the men, until the entire company became fused into one mass of bloodthirsty energy. By an excess of precaution, they did not go directly into the town, but made a long detour, so as to come in by the road leading from Nauvoo." [^17]

Here we may leave the Warsaw mob for the moment, expressing the belief, however, that there was a better and more definite understanding between the leaders, and the body of this mob than comes from a "magnetically communicated design."

WITHIN PRISON WALLS—CARTHAGE GROUND

Meantime the prisoners, after the governor with his troops of dragoons had departed, and their few personal friends—excepting John Taylor and Willard Richards, both of the quorum of the twelve—had either been dispatched on their several commissions, or hustled from Carthage by the soldiery and the rabble, experienced that depression of spirit that so often precedes calamitous events in the lives of men. Especially was this the case with the Prophet. Elder Taylor to cheer him sang the following sacred song, which had been recently introduced into Nauvoo. The tune given is the one to which Elder Taylor sang it on that melancholy occasion.

A POOR WAYFARING MAN OF GRIEF

Once when my scanty meal was spread He entered—not a word he spake! Just perishing for want of bread; I gave him all; he blessed it, brake, * * * * * * In prison I saw him next,—condemned To meet a traitor's doom at morn; The tide of lying tongues I stemmed, And honored him 'mid shame and scorn. My friendship's utmost zeal to try, He asked if I for him would die; The flesh was weak, my blood ran chill, But the free spirit cried, 'I will.' Then in a moment to my view, The stranger started from disguise; The tokens in his hands I knew; The Savior stood before mine eyes. He spake, and my poor name he named— "Of me thou hast not been ashamed; These deeds shall thy memorial be; Fear not, thou didst them unto me."

The afternoon was sultry and hot. The four brethren sat listlessly about the room with their coats off; and the windows of the prison were open to receive such air as might be stirring. Late in the afternoon Mr. Stigall, the jailor, came in and suggested that they would be safer in the cells. Joseph told him that they would go in after supper. Turning to Elder Richards the Prophet said: "If we go into the cell will you go with us?"

Elder Richards: "Brother Joseph, you did not ask me to cross the river with you [referring to the time, when they crossed the Mississippi, en route for the Rocky Mountains]—you did not ask me to come to Carthage—you did not ask me to come to jail with you—and do you think I would forsake you now? But I will tell you what I will do; if you are condemned to be hung for 'treason,' I will be hung in your stead, and you shall go free.

Joseph: But you cannot.

Richards: I will." [^18]

Hyrum Smith asked Elder Taylor to sing again "The Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief."

Elder Taylor: "Brother Hyrum, I do not feel like singing.

Hyrum: Oh, never mind: commence singing and you will get the spirit of it."

THE ASSAULT UPON THE PRISON

Soon after finishing the song the second time, as he was sitting at one of the front windows, Elder Taylor saw a number of men, with painted faces, rushing round the corner of the jail towards the stairs. They were halted at the entrance but a moment. "The guards were hustled away from the door, good naturedly resisting until they were carefully disarmed" (Hay).

The brethren must have seen this mob simultaneously, for they all leaped to the door to secure it, as the lock and latch were of little use. The mob reaching the landing in front of the door fired a shot into the lock. Hyrum and Doctor Richards sprang back, when instantly another ball crashed through the panel of the door and struck Hyrum in the face; at the same instant a ball, evidently from the window facing the public square where the main body of the Carthage Greys was stationed, entered his back, and he fell, calmly exclaiming:

"I am a dead man!"

With an expression of deep sympathy in his face, Joseph bent over the prostrate body of the murdered man and exclaimed:—

"Oh, my poor, dear brother Hyrum!"

Then instantly rising to his feet he drew the pistol Cyrus Wheelock had left him, and with a quick, firm step, and a determined expression in his face he advanced to the door and snapped the pistol six successive times; only three of the loads, however, were discharged. [^19]

While Joseph was firing the pistol Elder Taylor stood close behind him, and as soon as he discharged it and stepped back, Elder Taylor took his place next to the door and with Markham's heavy walking stick parried the guns as they were thrust through the doorway and discharged.

The firing from within made the mob pause, but it was only for an instant, and then the attack was more furious than ever. The scene was terrible. Streams of fire belched forth from the ever increasing number of guns in the doorway, yet calm, and determined, Elder Taylor beat down the muzzles of those murderous guns.

"That's right, Brother Taylor, parry them off as well as you can," said the Prophet, as he stood behind him.

Meantime the crowd on the landing grew more dense and were forced to the door by the pressure of those below crowding their way up stairs. The guns of the assailants were pushed further and further into the room—the firing was more rapid and accompanied with demoniac yells and horrid oaths and execrations. Certain that they would be overpowered in a moment, Elder Taylor sprang for the open window directly in front of the prison door, and also exposed to the fire of the Carthage Greys from the public square. As he was in the act of leaping from the window, a ball fired from the doorway struck him about midway of his left thigh. He fell helplessly forward towards the open window, and would have dropped on the outside of the jail, but that another ball from the outside, striking the watch in his vest pocket, [^20] threw him back into the room.

As Elder Taylor was thrown back from the window Joseph Smith attempted to leap out, but in doing so was instantly shot and fell to the ground with the martyr-cry upon his lips—

"O Lord, my God!" [^21]

There seems to be conclusive evidence that the Prophet was fired upon as he lay on the ground beside the old well curb that stood under the window from which he leaped. [^22]

"They were both shot after they were dead, in a brutal manner, and both received four balls. * * * [Joseph Smith] * * * lived great, and he died great in the eyes of God and his people; and like most of the Lord's Anointed, in ancient times, has sealed his mission and his works with his own blood." [^23] "For where a Testament is, there must also be of necessity the death of the Testator: for a Testament is of force after men are dead; otherwise it is of no strength at all while the Testator liveth." [^24]

How quickly disastrous things happened! Three minutes after the attack was commenced upon the jail, Hyrum Smith lay stretched upon the floor of the prison—dead; John Taylor lay not far from him savagely wounded; the Prophet was lying outside the jail by the old well curb—dead; the mob in consternation and disorder had fled in the direction of Warsaw; the plighted faith of a state was broken, its honor trailed in the dust, and a stain of innocent blood affixed to its escutcheon that will remain a blot which time cannot efface.

NOTE

DID JOSEPH SMITH MAKE MASONIC APPEAL FOR HELP

Were Joseph Smith's last words—"O Lord My God"—an interrupted Masonic cry of distress? The question has been somewhat widely debated. Of it the author of this History can form no adequate or positive opinion. In an editorial of the Times and Seasons, published soon after the murder (July 15th, 1844), the following passage occurs; referring to Joseph and Hyrum Smith:

"They were both Masons in good standing. Ye brethren of 'the mystic tie,' what think ye! Where is our good Master Joseph and Hyrum? Is there a pagan, heathen, or savage nation on the globe that would not be moved on this great occasion, as the trees of the forest are moved by a mighty wind? Joseph's last exclamation was, 'O Lord My God!'

If one of these murderers, their abettors or accessories before or after the fact, are suffered to cumber the earth, without being dealt with according to law, what is life worth, and what is the benefit of laws? And more than all, what is the use of institutions which savages would honor, where civilized beings murder without cause or provocation?"

In the same editorial it is said: "With uplifted hands they gave such signs of distress as would have commanded the interposition and benevolence of savages or pagans."

Against this evident belief of his associates and companions in prison—the editorial was most likely written by John Taylor, W. W. Phelps, or Willard Richards, and may have been the result of consultation among them—there is nothing but the strange fact in human experience that when men are overtaken by sudden death, they so frequently die with some appeal to God upon their lips, especially if thoughts upon God have largely entered into their lives; and for one I can readily believe that not thoughts of deliverance from men and their violence was in the Prophet's mind, but thoughts of God and sacrifice blended in his martyr-cry—"O Lord My God!"

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] History of Hancock County, Gregg, p. 323.
[^2] The expression may seem harsh, but the facts warrant it; for though granting that some there were among the non-"Mormon" population of Hancock county, who, while anti-"Mormon" at heart, refused to countenance any but lawful measures "for redress of grievances" (History of Hancock County, Gregg, p. 320), yet they were so far apathetic that they took no positive stand in favor of law and order; and notwithstanding their "conservatism," they allowed mob lawlessness to assert itself and reap its harvests.
[^3] Bancroft's History of Utah, pp. 146-7.
[^4] The truth of the statement is demonstrated by the fact that when Captain Singleton, on the morning of the 27th of June, called out the legion within the city limits for review, about two-thirds of the legion assembled, "nearly all of whom were well armed, although all the state arms had been taken away; which fact caused Captain Singleton and his company to express their astonishment. The captain made a remark to the effect that it would not do to come against such a force as this." (Church Historians' Compilation from Journals of Richards and Woodruff et al., Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, pp. 599, 600.) Singleton had been sent to Nauvoo by Governor Ford with about sixty militiamen to take charge of the city, lest a mob should attack it after learning that the legion had given up the state arms. (See also Governor Ford's Message to Illinois Legislature, Dec. 17, 1844. It is published in extenso in the Nauvoo Neighbor of Jan. 1, 1845).
[^5] See ch. lvi this History.
[^6] One struck him midway of the left thigh; another a little below the left knee, it was never extracted; another tore away the flesh to the size of a man's hand from his left hip and spattered the wall with blood and mangled fragments; another entered the fore part of the left arm, a little above the wrist, and, passing down the joint, lodged in the palm of the hand. (Life of John Taylor, 1892. p. 139.)
[^7] It is alleged that these alarm guns—cannons—were the signal agreed upon to announce the death of the prisoners. Upon hearing a cannon fired a merchant of Warsaw rode direct to Quincy and reported that Joseph and Hyrum Smith and those who were with them in jail were killed; that they were attempting to break jail and were all killed by the guard. It is also charged that hearing a cannon fired was what hastened Ford's departure from Nauvoo. (The Martyrdom of Joseph Smith, John Taylor, published in Tyler's Mormon Battalion. Introduction, pp. 58, 59. "The Martyrdom" is also published in Burton's City of the Saints, Appendix III, Littlefield also alludes to the signal cannon as above. The Martyrs, p. 90.)
[^8] In The Life of John Taylor, p. 145, it is erroneously stated that Grant was the bearer of the first Richards-Taylor note making official announcement of the death of the Prophet. He doubtless was the bearer of the second note given in the text above.
[^9] Times and Seasons, vol. v, no. 12, July 1st, 1844, p. 560-1.
[^10] Ibid., p. 561.
[^11] Church Historians' Compilation of Facts of the Martyrdom, Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, p. 503.
[^12] These were Demick B. Huntington, Edward Hunter, William D. Huntington, William Marks, Jonathan H. Holmes, Gilbert Goldsmith, Alpheus Cutler, Lorenzo D. Wasson, Philip B. Lewis and James Emmet, the last named acting as guard. As to the final resting place of the Smith brothers, a grandson of Joseph Smith says: "It is a short distance from the Nauvoo House, [which is near the 'Mansion'] on the banks of the Mississippi." (Frederick M. Smith in a communication to W. A. Linn. Story of the Mormons, p. 308.)
[^13] This will be treated in a later chapter.
[^14] Governor Ford admits having given this pledge in the following passages: "If these men [the Smith brothers] had been the incarnation of satan himself, as was believed by many, their murder was a foul and treacherous action, alike disgraceful to those who perpetrated the crime, to the state, and to the governor, whose word had been pledged for the protection of the prisoners in jail, and which had been so shamefully violated; and required that the most vigorous means should be used to bring the assassins to punishment." (Ford's History of Illinois, p. 367). Again he said: "I pledged myself for their safety, and upon the assurance of that pledge they surrendered as prisoners. * * * The pledge of the security to the Smiths was not given upon my individual responsibility. Before I gave it I obtained a pledge of honor by a unanimous vote from the officers and men under my command to sustain me in performing it. If the assassination of the Smiths was committed by any portion of these, they have added treachery to murder, and have done all they could to disgrace the state and sully the public honor." (Proclamation of Governor Ford to the People of the State of Illinois, published in Nauvoo Neighbor, extra, of June 30th, 1844.)
[^15] Church Historians' Compilation, Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, p. 649.
[^16] Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, p. 775. See also Richards' letter to Mr. Tho. H. Owens, July 16th, 1844, Millennial Star, vol. xxv, p. 40.
[^17] Church Historians' Compilation, Millennial Star, vol. xxv, p. 136.
[^18] The letter in full is printed in Millennial Star, vol. xxv, p. 87.
[^19] The resolutions are published at length, as also the communications of Messrs. Fellows and Jonas to the city council, and the commissions and instructions of Governor Ford to them in Times and Seasons for July 1st, 1844.
[^20] Times and Seasons, July 1st, 1844, p. 568.
[^21] Governor Ford, in his proclamation of the 29th of June, says: "The Mormons surrendered the public arms in their possession, and the Nauvoo Legion submitted to the command of Captain Singleton, of Brown county, deputed for that purpose by me. All these things were required to satisfy the old citizens of Hancock that the Mormons were peaceably disposed; and to allay jealousy and excitement in their minds. It appears, however, that the compliance of the Mormons with every requisition made upon them failed of that purpose. * * * The Mormons had done everything required, or which ought to have been required of them." (Times and Seasons, July 1st, 1844, p. 564-5). And as up to the point indicated by the governor they "had done everything required, or which ought to have been required of them," so they continued throughout the proceedings arising from the Carthage tragedy.
[^22] See Messrs. Fellows and Jonas' letter of appointment from Governor Ford. (Times and Seasons, July 1st, 1844, p. 565.)
[^23] The statements are condensed from an article in the St. Louis Transcript, written by Mr. Chambers, editor of the Missouri Republican, and copied into the Nauvoo Neighbor of July 17, 1844. See also Ford's Message to Legislature, published in Nauvoo Neighbor for Jan. 1st, 1845.
[^24] The governor's reply to the Warsaw Committee is published at length in the Church Historians' Compilation, Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, p. 693-5.
