B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LVIII

AFTERMATH OF THE CARTHAGE TRAGEDY

IT is a strong portrayal of conditions existing in Hancock county on the morning of the 28th of June, 1844, that Mr. Gregg, the historian, gives; and one which forever must vindicate the Latter-day Saints of Nauvoo as a law-abiding, peace-loving, unfanatical community. These are his words:

A GREAT HUMAN WONDER IN HANCOCK COUNTY

"The sun rose on as strange a scene as the broad Hancock prairies had ever witnessed. At the three corners of a triangle eighteen miles asunder, stood a smitten city [Nauvoo], and two almost deserted villages, [Warsaw and Carthage] with here and there a group of questioning men, anxious to hear the news of the night. Toward the two villages the more courageous ones were returning to find their several abodes unsacked and untouched. The wet and heavy roads leading to the county seat from the south and east were being traversed by the refugees of the night, now returning and wondering that they had homes to return to. All knew that a great crime had been committed, by whom they knew not; and they knew not how, upon whom, where, or in what manner retribution might fall." [^1]

The marvel of that morning was—as it has been the marvel ever since, and will be in all the generations to come—that the "Mormons" at Nauvoo did not wreak vengeance upon the inhabitants of Carthage and Warsaw at least, if not upon all the people of Hancock county, as being involved in the responsibility, as the saints might well believe, [^2] for the murder of their Prophet and Patriarch. The means of vengeance at their command was ample. There was in Nauvoo a body of the best trained militia in the state of Illinois or in the United States, numbering about four thousand men. [^3] And though the state arms had been surrendered by them a few days before, like all people in the western states of those days—and all the more so because of their late experiences in Missouri—the people of Nauvoo were well armed, [^4] and could have swept Hancock county as with a besom of destruction. This, to their everlasting credit, they did not do; but remained true to their pledged word to Governor Ford, and to the instructions of their Prophet. [^5]

Willard Richards was the only one who escaped death or wounding in that awful assault upon the prison. John Taylor was struck by four bullets, [^6] but he survived and finally succeeded Brigham Young in the presidency of the church. By the aid of the few people who remained at Carthage—for most of them had fled in terror—the bodies of the Brothers Smith were removed to the Hamilton Hotel, as also Elder Taylor. Here a consultation between the two survivors was held and the following announcement made of the tragedy to the saints at Nauvoo:

"CARTHAGE JAIL.

8 o'clock, 5 min., p. m., June 27.

Joseph and Hyrum are dead. Taylor wounded, not badly. I am well. Our guard was forced as we believe, by a band of Missourians from 100 to 200. The job was done in an instant, and the party fled towards Nauvoo instantly. This is as I believe it. The citizens here are afraid of the 'Mormons' attacking them; I promise them no.

W. RICHARDS."

"N. B.—The citizens promise us protection. Alarm guns have been fired. [^7]

JOHN TAYLOR."

BE STILL: GOD REIGNS

This note was addressed to Governor Ford, supposed to be in Nauvoo; General Dunham, Colonel Markham; or Emma Smith; in the hope that one or the other among these persons would be readily found at Nauvoo. It was not easy to find a messenger. The note was first entrusted to two men of the name of John and William Barnes; but these being afraid to go to Nauvoo carried it to Arza Adams, living about two miles north of Carthage, who piloted by Benjamin Leyland over a blind road—for they feared to travel the main one—arrived in Nauvoo a little after sunrise. Varying reports of the tragedy had preceded them, and a dozen men were discussing the rumored event when Adams delivered the official announcement from Richards and Taylor.

The evening before, George D. Grant, whose home was about a mile and a half east of Carthage, and Constable David Bettisworth, had arrived within three miles of Nauvoo with the news of the death of the Brothers Smith, when they met Governor Ford and his escort en route for Carthage. The governor, fearing the immediate vengeance of the citizens of Nauvoo upon the other inhabitants of Hancock county, compelled these men to return with him to Carthage where he held them until the county records and other public documents were removed from the courthouse, and the people of Carthage given a chance to flee for their lives. As soon as released Grant again rode to Nauvoo with the sad intelligence of the murder, and most probably was the bearer of a second note from Richards and Taylor, and Samuel H. Smith, [^8] a brother of the martyrs; and also an order from Governor Ford suggesting self-defense on the part of the citizens, and a word of caution and assurance from their friend General Miner R. Deming, all of which follow:

"12 o'clock at night, 27th of June, Carthage, Hamilton's Tavern.

To Mrs. Emma Smith and Major-General Dunham, c.

The governor has just arrived; says all things shall be inquired into, and right measures taken.

I say to all the citizens of Nauvoo, my brethren, be still, and know that God reigns. Don't rush out of the city—don't rush to Carthage—stay at home, and be prepared for an attack from Missouri mobbers. The governor will render every assistance possible—has sent out orders for troops. Joseph and Hyrum are dead. We will prepare to move the bodies as soon as possible.

The people of the county are greatly excited, and fear the 'Mormons' will come out and take vengeance. I have pledged my word the 'Mormons' will stay home as soon as they are informed, and no violence will be on their part, and say to my brethren in Nauvoo, in the name of the Lord, be still, be patient; only let such friends as choose come here to see the bodies. Mr. Taylor's wounds are dressed, and not serious. I am sound.

WILLARD RICHARDS,

JOHN TAYLOR,

SAMUEL H. SMITH."

"Defend yourselves until protection can be furnished necessary. June 27th, 1844.

Signed, THOMAS FORD,

Governor and Commander-in-Chief." [^9]

To which was appended this note:

"Mr. Orson Spencer.

DEAR SIR:—Please deliberate on this matter—prudence may obviate material destruction. I was at my residence when this horrible crime was committed. It will be condemned by three-fourths of the citizens of the county. Be quiet, or you will be attacked from Missouri.

M. R. DEMING." [^10]

Governor Ford, having written the above message within the Richards- Taylor-Smith note, and having given assurances to Elders Taylor and Richards that the murder of the Brothers Smith should be investigated, and expressing his sense of responsibility in the matter, rode out to the public square of Carthage and advised all present to disperse, as he expected the "Mormons" to come and take summary vengeance upon the people of Carthage. Upon this announcement the people fled in every direction; and the governor himself made a hasty flight to Quincy.

A CITY IN MOURNING

On the day following the martyrdom the bodies of the Brothers Smith were taken to Nauvoo, where they were met by a sorrow-smitten throng of several thousand people on Mullholland street, about a mile east of the temple, headed by the city council, Major General Jonathan Dunham and staff, and other officers of the legion. The procession moved slowly into the city, amid the lamentations of the people, to the Nauvoo Mansion where the bodies were given into the care of their families and other immediate kindred.

In the streets about the Mansion ten thousand sorrowing ing people were assembled, and these were addressed by several leading citizens, among whom were the counsel for the murdered men, Messrs, Reid and Wood; also W. W. Phelps, Stephen Markham and Dr. Willard Richards. The latter admonished the people "to keep peace, stating that he had pledged his honor and his life for their good conduct." The people then "with one united voice resolved to trust to the law for a remedy of such a high-handed assassination, and when that failed, to call upon God to avenge them of their wrongs." [^11]

BURIAL OF THE MARTYRS

On the 29th of June the bodies of the two martyrs laid in state in the Nauvoo Mansion where they were viewed by a constant throng of people who filed in and out of the Mansion rooms from eight o'clock in the morning until five in the afternoon. At that time the doors were closed, the coffins with the bodies were removed from the outer boxes which were then filled with bags of sand and taken to the cemetery where they were deposited with the usual burial ceremonies. About midnight the bodies were taken by a few trusted friends [^12] and buried in the basement of the then building Nauvoo House. They remained there until the fall when they were removed at the request of Emma Smith, the Prophet's wife, to a spot near the Nauvoo Mansion over-looking the Mississippi; and there, side by side, lie the martyred brothers. [^13] "In life they were not divided; in death they were not separated."

THE SAINTS LEAVE RETRIBUTION TO THE STATE

The murderers of Joseph and Hyrum Smith were never punished. The law outraged by the "deep damnation of their taking off," was never vindicated. The honor of the state of Illinois pledged by the executive of the state and the officers of the state militia under his command at Carthage, [^14] was neither redeemed by fulfillment nor by making retribution fall upon those guilty of the murder which broke the pledge.

The governor on arriving in Carthage from Nauvoo, about midnight of the day of the murder, urged upon the two survivors of the tragedy, Elders Taylor and Richards, the importance of keeping the people of Nauvoo quiet, to persuade them to forego all thoughts of revenge or retaliation. Before the arrival of the governor, however, the two brethren in their first note announcing the death of the martyrs had said— "The citizens here [i. e. in Carthage] are afraid of the 'Mormons' attacking them: I promise them no." [Signed] "W. Richards;" Elder Taylor, wounded as he was, also signed this note. On his part Governor Ford gave such pledges to vindicate the law by bringing the murderers to justice as to enable the two surviving brethren to give assurances in their second communication to their people that the governor would see to it that all things would be inquired into, "and all right measures taken." Two days later, as we have already seen, the proposition to leave retribution and the execution of the law to the constituted authorities of the state was presented to and unanimously adopted by the multitude of ten thousand that thronged the streets about the Nauvoo Mansion, while the bodies of the martyrs were being prepared for burial. In writing to Brigham Young, president of the apostles' quorum, on the 30th of June, Elder Willard Richards said:

"The saints have entered into covenants of peace with the governor and government officers not to avenge the blood of the martyrs, but to leave it with the executive, who had pledged the faith of the state for their safekeeping. * * * The governor appeared to act with honest intentions, we bring no charge against him—will wait patiently his proceedings in the matter." [^15]

In a letter to A. Jonas, Esq., ten days later, the same writer reporting the status of things in Nauvoo, said:

"Can still give you the fullest assurance that all is perfect peace, at Nauvoo, calmly waiting the fulfillment of Governor Ford's pledge to redeem the land from blood by legal process." [^16]

Naturally, however, some of the saints in Nauvoo, grew somewhat restive under the law's delay. In the latter part of July, Bishop Geo. Miller called on some of the twelve and requested the privilege of passing some resolutions against the murderers of Joseph and Hyrum. "The brethren told him to be quiet and see what the governor and state authorities would do; that Dr. Richards had pledged himself that the brethren would be quiet, and the Lord had said: 'Vengeance is mine, I will repay.' Miller left the council saying. 'Fat men for patience!'" [^17]

Leonora Taylor, wife of Elder John Taylor, who was savagely wounded in the attack upon the Smith brothers, and now lying wounded at his home, she, on the 22nd of July, evidently growing impatient of the very deliberate actions of Governor Ford, in the matter of bringing the murderers to trial, and meantime permitting the mob forces about Warsaw to continue in hostile attitude and in armed resistance to the legal authorities, wrote a very vigorous letter to the governor reminding him of his pledges to vindicate the law. A few excerpts will disclose the spirit of this very forceful letter, and also exhibit how strong were the feelings suppressed by the people of Nauvoo, in order to follow the pacific instructions of their leaders:

LEONORA TAYLOR'S LETTER TO GOVERNOR FORD

"Sir, I am sorry to say the murderers and mobbers are still at large in our neighborhood; as there have been no steps taken to bring them to justice, they have taken fresh courage and held meetings to carry out their work of destruction. I have been told they have sent messengers to Missouri to collect all the force they can to come and exterminate the 'Mormons' after the harvest. * * *

Mr. Taylor does not know of my writing this letter. Nothing but the urgency of the case could have induced me to remind your excellency of your promise to bring the murderers to justice. If a step of that kind is not taken soon I much fear that it cannot benefit us as a people. * * *

My feelings as a wife and mother of helpless children, together with the afflictions of an injured people, all constrain me to beseech of you to exert the power and authority which the people and God have given you in the cause of the oppressed. You shall have our prayers that wisdom may be given you from on high to act in this case to the glory of God, your own honor, and that of the state we live in.

Your excellency was warned of our brethren's danger, who were murdered, but could not believe that men were so base and degraded. The same men are now plotting our destruction.

As an individual who feels herself injured, and also in behalf of an oppressed, injured and persecuted people, I again beg your official interference. Your excellency cannot now be mistaken in the men nor their designs; I beseech you then, for the honor of our bleeding country, for the sake of the suffering innocence and the cause of humanity, by the wounds of my husband and the blood of those murdered victims, to use prompt measures for our protection and the bringing to justice of those murderers." [^18]

AGENTS OF THE GOVERNOR IN NAUVOO—WARSAW—CARTHAGE: RECEPTION OF

On the 1st of July Governor Ford sent two special commissioners to Nauvoo, Colonel Hart Fellows and Captain A. Jonas to ascertain what were the "feeling, disposition, and determination of the people there, in reference to the late disturbances;" and to "ascertain whether any of them proposed in any manner to revenge themselves, whether any threats had been used, and what was proposed generally to be done by them." These questions were propounded to the city council as the only authority of the city now known to the country that would pacify the public mind and satisfy the governor of the determination of the citizens of Nauvoo to sustain the supremacy of the laws. In response to these inquiries the city council in a formal series of resolutions unanimously adopted said, that for the purpose of insuring peace and promoting the welfare of Hancock county and the surrounding country, they would rigidly sustain the laws, and the governor of the state as long as he sustained them in their constitutional rights; for the greater assurance of peace, they suggested that as the governor had taken away from the people of Nauvoo the public arms, so should he also take the public arms from the mob party; to further secure peace, friendship, happiness, and to allay the excitement they announced their determination to reprobate private revenge on the assassinators of Joseph and Hyrum Smith; the city council pledged itself for the city of Nauvoo, that no aggressions would be made upon the citizens of the surrounding country, and invited them as friends and neighbors to the practice of the "golden rule," at the same time pledging themselves to observe it. Lastly they highly approved the pacific course of Governor Ford in his efforts to allay excitement and restore peace; "and while he does so," concludes the resolution, "and will use his influence to stop all vexatious proceedings in law until confidence is restored, so that the citizens of Nauvoo can go to Carthage or any other place for trial, without exposing themselves to the violence of assassins, we will uphold him and the law by all honorable means." [^19] A public meeting of the citizens was called which was addressed by Mr. Jonas and others, among them a Mr. Chambers, editor of the Missouri Republic, and Mr. Field, editor of the Reveille, St. Louis. The resolutions adopted by the city council were read and endorsed by a hearty "amen" at the public meeting. A vote of thanks was given to all who had in any way given their influence for peace and good order; and afterwards a communication signed by Messrs. W. W. Phelps, Richards, and Taylor was addressed to the church at large "beseeching the saints everywhere to hold fast to the faith," and to be "quiet, peaceable citizens, doing the works of righteousness." [^20]

No more complete surrender of the case into the hands of the constituted officers of the state for vindication of the law could have been conceived or made by any people. No more complete or intelligently pledged support to the law and officers charged with the duty of administering it could have been given. The saints of Nauvoo did all—as was abundantly acknowledged by the officers of the state at the time [^21]—that they could be asked to do. Let us see how well the state through its officers discharged its obligation to its "Mormon" citizens.

The governor's representatives, Messrs. Fellows and Jonas, were not only commissioned to make inquiries at Nauvoo, already considered, but they were authorized to "make similar inquiries" at Warsaw. Also "ascertain how far false rumors have been put afloat for the purpose of raising military forces; what is the purpose of the militia assembled, whether any attack is intended on Nauvoo. Ascertain also, whether any persons from Missouri or Iowa intend to take part in the matter;" [^22] if so they were to be forbidden to take such part in the name of the governor of Illinois.

The governor's commissioners, accompanied by Messrs. Wood and Conyers, mayor and ex-mayor of Quincy, and other gentlemen, visited both Carthage and Warsaw in the interest of peace. At Warsaw, when Captain Jonas in a public address called upon the people to say if they would support the governor in enforcing the law, and in upholding the Constitution, "unanimously refused to give the pledge." The same evening a Mr. Skinner of Carthage, who professed to speak in the name of the citizens of Hancock county, expressed the same sentiment. He deprecated as impossible the idea of a settlement if the "Mormons" were to remain. A committee of the citizens of Warsaw waited upon Governor Ford, informing him of their fixed conviction that it was necessary one of the parties should leave the county, and desiring him to decide which should go. The governor replied that it was not for him to decide such a question, or to "order any body of citizens, whether Mormons or anti-Mormons, out of the county or state." [^23]

The Warsaw committee referred to above left with the governor a written communication on behalf of the citizens they represented, expressing their determination to compel the "Mormons" to leave the state or otherwise abandon their own homes and evacuate the county. The communication also dealt with the "history, character and offenses of the Mormons," from the Warsaw, that is to say, the mob view-point. To this communication the governor, under date of July 3rd, 1844, made a written answer in a somewhat caustic but complaining tone. A few excerpts will exhibit the spirit of the letter, as well as confirm some statements heretofore made in this History. After refusing to exercise his influence to assist the Warsaw people to procure the removal of the "Mormons;" or to make a reply to that part of the Warsaw letter treating of the "history, character, and offenses of the Mormons," he says:

"When I came to your country I announced the policy by which I intended to be governed. The law was to be my guide; and this you well understand. I announced this determination in numerous public addresses, and uniformly in my private conversations. I successively obtained a vote to sustain me in this course from every troop stationed at Carthage, or who was visiting there.

From the detachment of your town and vicinity, who visited Carthage the day before the surrender of the Smiths, I obtained a similar pledge. * * * All the other portion of the Hancock forces under my command were repeatedly and deeply pledged to sustain me in the same course. Under the firm and confident assurance of support thus obtained, I demanded the surrender of the Smiths, and promised them security.

In doing so, I now acknowledge that I erred, and erred grievously, in relying with too much confidence upon men with whom I was but little acquainted. The idea that men could be treacherous under such circumstances was abhorrent to my nature, and rejected with indignation.

Whatever your hatred of the Smiths might be, I was too confident you would respect your honor—the honor of your country and your state, and the rights of defenseless prisoners. I could not believe that so much stupidity and baseness as was necessary for such an enterprise as the murder of defenseless prisoners in jail would be, could be mustered in Hancock county. * * * Upon the whole I cannot too strongly express my indignation and abhorrence of the base and profligate act which has disgraced the state and raised suspicions in the minds of many in regard to my conduct in the matter of the most painful character to my feelings."

Then coming to the matter of influencing the "Mormons" to remove from the state, he says:

"I am in but a poor situation to use influence with the Mormons, to procure their removal. Your own people have destroyed whatever influence I might otherwise have possessed in that quarter to serve you.

Your own conduct has placed me in a suspicious attitude; and I have no hopes that I could now have a more persuasive influence with the Mormons than I had with the perpetrators of the horrid deed which I sought to prevent. Under the circumstances I cannot ask the Mormons to confide in me.

It must appear to them that they have been betrayed by somebody, and they do not know whom.

If you mean to request me to exercise a forcible influence to expel them from the state, I answer you now, as I have uniformly done that the law is my guide, and that I know of no law authorizing their expulsion. From this determination I have not swerved for an instant from the beginning until this time.

I see nothing now requiring any deviation, and besides, if I were ever so much determined to drive them out, I believe such is the abhorrence against the base deed which some of you have committed, that I could not obtain voluntary aid from the people."

Coming to the vindication of the law by the punishment of the perpetrators of the crime, Governor Ford said:

"An inquiry must be made concerning the murderers; they must for the honor and credit of the state be dealt with according to law." [^24]

Under date of July 12th, our church annalists record that Messrs. Bedell and Backenstos, the latter then clerk of Hancock county, arrived in Nauvoo and reported that Governor Ford had demanded the public arms at Warsaw, and the people there refused to give them up; [^25] which action was in harmony with the whole course of conduct on the part of that people.

GENERALIZATION OF CONDITIONS IN HANCOCK AND SURROUNDING COUNTIES FOLLOWING THE MARTYRDOM

At this point I introduce a letter of Governor Ford's which sets forth the conditions prevailing in Hancock and surrounding counties, in the weeks immediately following the martyrdom. The governor's communication is too important a document to be omitted from this History or presented in any other form than the complete copy, though some of his strictures are scarcely just to the people of Nauvoo. It will be observed that notwithstanding his prejudices against the Latter-day Saints, he has to give the mead of praise to them over their adversaries for preserving law and order, and they had behaved much better than could have been expected under the circumstances. The letter was addressed from Quincy, Ill., to W. W. Phelps, who at the time was acting editor of the Times and Seasons, Elder John Taylor, the chief editor, still being unable to leave his room on account of his wounds received at Carthage.

GOVERNOR FORD'S LETTER

"Quincy, July 22, 1844.

Sir:—On Thursday last I wrote to Dr. Richards and yourself, requesting you to come or send some person to me at this place, to confer with me in relation to the time and mode of proceeding against the murderers of the Messrs. Smith; and I therein stated that I would have come to Nauvoo for that purpose were it not for the certainty that my motives and objects for so doing would be misinterpreted. As none of you have come, and have probably not received my letter, I have concluded to write you again and send this letter by special messenger.

In this letter I will say to you what I intended to say in a personal conference. In the beginning, then, you must allow me to say that my position forbids that I should be a partisan on either side of your unhappy controversy.

I may, for aught I know, have stern duties to perform in relation to both parties. This, however, will depend on which side may be the aggressor. Thus far, since the death of the Smiths, your people have behaved well; much better than could have been expected under the circumstances, and much better than the opposite party. I anxiously hope that they may have the grace to continue in the same line of conduct.

An unresisting, passive, peaceable, but defensive course on your parts, will do much to disarm prejudices in the surrounding country. That such prejudices do exist in the minds of the people you know as well as I, though you may not be fully aware of their extent, or the ferocity which they engender.

If I speak of those prejudices and the causes of them, I do not wish you to misunderstand me, as some of you did on a former occasion, and suppose that I am speaking my own opinions and feelings.

I say now, once for all, that I have nothing to do with those prejudices further than as a practical man; they obtrude themselves on my consideration, as presenting obstacles to me in the discharge of my official duty. The more prejudice and bad feeling which is gotten up against your people, whether by their own imprudence or the malice of their enemies, the more difficult it is for me to do anything effectually to protect either party according to law.

There are, I am informed, some few inflammatory and hot-blooded individuals amongst you, who, by their imprudence and rashness, continue to give cause for those prejudices, and, of course, by so doing, continue to involve you all in a common danger; I speak of the danger of a mob.

I am also informed that most of you entertain the opinion that there has been a great and universal reaction in the public mind since the death of the Smiths.

On this subject I desire to tell you the naked truth. I am aware that you scarcely ever hear the truth, as to public sentiment abroad, from those who visit you in your city. The complaisance of such persons, and their desire to please, will induce them to omit the statement of disagreeable truths, and to say such things only as are pleasing and complimentary. You are bound, as men of sense, to receive all such statements with a great deal of allowance.

On my part, without desiring to please any of you, or to conciliate your favor, but certainly without any design to insult your misfortunes, and in a pure spirit of friendly concern for the peace and safety of all who repose under the shade of our political fig tree, I desire to state to you frankly, candidly and thoroughly, what I do know on this subject.

The naked truth, then, is, that most well informed persons condemn in the most unqualified manner the mode in which the Smiths were put to death, but nine out of every ten of such accompany the expression of their disapprobation by a manifestation of their pleasure that they are dead.

The disapproval is most unusually cold and without feeling. It is a disapproval which appears to be called for, on their part, by decency, by a respect for the laws and a horror of mobs, but does not flow warm from the heart.

The unfortunate victims of this assassination were generally and thoroughly hated throughout the country, and it is not reasonable to suppose that their death has produced any reaction in the public mind resulting in active sympathy; if you think so, you are mistaken.

Most that is said on the subject is merely from the teeth out; and your people may depend on the fact, that public feeling is now, at this time, as thoroughly against them as it has ever been.

I mention this, not for the purpose of insulting your feelings, but to show you clearly how careful your people ought to be in future to avoid all causes of quarrel and excitement, and what little reliance could be placed on any militia force which I could send in your favor.

I ought, perhaps, to qualify what I have said, by remarking that but few persons from the surrounding counties could now be procured to join a mob force against you, without further cause of excitement to be ministered by some misguided imprudence of your people. But what I mean to say, and to say truly, is, that in the present temper of the public mind I am positively certain that I cannot raise a militia force in the state who would be willing to fight on your side, or to hazard their lives to protect you from an attack of your enemies.

The same state of things exists in relation to any force which might be ordered to arrest the murderers. If troops should be ordered for that purpose, I would expect that they would behave as the militia did in the late Philadelphia riots. The militia in that case sympathized with the native party and against their opponents. It was an unpopular service, and rather than fight they suffered themselves to be defeated and driven from the field.

It is true that I might call upon the Mormons themselves, and then I would have a reliable force. This, however, would be a dangerous experiment, and would, in my mind, inevitably lead to civil war, the result of which no man can foresee.

I think I may safely say, that if the Nauvoo Legion should be called out against the old citizens, the crimes which are sought to be punished would be instantly forgotten in the general and burning indignation which would be kindled.

Men would rally to their assistance who would otherwise be neutral. Your legion has ever been regarded with a jealous eye; the arming and drilling of your people, with such exceeding industry, in a season of peace, (not wrong in itself) has been looked upon by the great body of the people with suspicion, and as intended in due time for the subversion of the public liberty: in the beginning you would have been much better without it. If your people had never made any military pretensions, no military feeling would ever have been aroused against you.

This much I hope you will consider has been said from a friendly motive, and for the further purpose of showing you what a dangerous experiment it would be, and how well calculated to excite a civil war, in which your city might be utterly destroyed, if I should attempt to call out the hated legion against the old citizens.

You may be disposed to ask, What use is there for law and government if these things be so? I answer you, that cases like the present do not seem to be fully provided for by our Constitutions; they were not anticipated to occur.

Upon the first institution of our governments, it was a season of internal peace and union among our people. The population was homogeneous, and all agreed together as brothers. It was supposed that the great body of the people would be always willingly submissive to the laws which they themselves had made. It was not foreseen that great and hostile parties would soon spring up and combine in large numbers to set the law at defiance.

A voluntary submission and obedience was supposed as the basis of government, for this reason no adequate provision was made in our state Constitutions for coercing this submission, when the laws were to be trampled upon by the concerted action of large numbers.

The states are prohibited from maintaining standing armies: the only military force at their command, without aid from the general government, is the militia; and, as I have already shown you, this force can only be relied on to do effectual service where that service is popular and jumps with their inclinations.

For this same reason, I must beg leave to say that a party, as in your case, which is the object of popular odium, cannot be too circumspect in their behavior, so as to give no color to the hatred of your enemies, 'Truth is great and will prevail.'

From this you may be assured that if the conduct of your people shall be uniformly, peaceably, honest and submissive to the laws, even if they have to bear persecution for a season, such conduct must result in dissipating the unhappy prejudices which exist against you.

Truth and candor, however, compel me to say that the Mormons have not always acted in such a manner as if they intended to avoid the creation of prejudices.

The pretensions of your municipal court, the unheard of description of ordinances passed by your city council, the assault on Mr. Bagby, the attempt to kidnap persons from Missouri, the formal destruction of the printing office and the general tone of arrogance and defiance of some of your leaders, were well calculated to inflame the public mind against you.

I think that I have considered this difficult subject in every possible point of view. I am afraid to rely on the militia in the present temper of the public mind. To call on the Nauvoo Legion would be suicidal to any effort as pacification of existing troubles, and for that reason would fail to bring about an enforcement of the laws.

If the laws are to be enforced at all in your county, out of the ordinary way by courts alone, it must be done by a force which is indifferent as to both parties.

To call in one party to put down and subdue the other, would lead to the most disastrous consequences; all the pride of conquest and victory; all the shame of defeat by, and submission to, an adversary; all the fury of unconquerable hate and exasperated feeling would necessarily be mingled with the contest, and render it bloody and bitter beyond anything we know of in this country.

For these reasons I have called upon the officers now in command, in the absence of General Gains, of the 3rd military department of the United States, for five hundred men of the regular army to be stationed in Hancock county, with whose aid I hope to be able to preserve order and proceed against all criminals whomsoever they may be. The following is a copy of the answer to the application:"

COLONEL S. W. KEARNEY'S (U. S. A.) LETTER

'Head Quarters, 3rd Mil. Dept.,

St. Louis, Mo., July 11, 1844.

Sir:—I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency's communication of this date, relating to the difficulties which have occurred between the Mormons and the people of Hancock county, Illinois, and the further difficulties apprehended by you, and requesting of me a force of some five hundred men from the regular army of the United States to be stationed for a time in Hancock county, and to act in conjunction with such forces as may be ordered on the part of the state of Illinois.

I have not the power of complying with your request, but will forward by tomorrow's mail a copy of your communication to be laid before the authorities in Washington city, and will advise your excellency of the result as soon as ascertained.

With great respect,

Your most obedient servant,

S. W. KEARNEY, Col. 1st Drags.

His Excellency, Thomas Ford,

"'Governor of Illinois, St. Louis, Mo.'

By the above letter you will perceive that I cannot yet be enabled to say with certainty whether the application will be successful. We will know in two weeks, I think, at most. [^26]

The anti-Mormon party intend to renew the war this fall, and if it were known with certainty that the troops of the regular army would be obtained to prevent their operations, they would, most likely, hasten their plans and do all the mischief in their power before the force arrives. They are not afraid of the state militia, and would give themselves but little concern in fear of such opposition.

I therefore caution you not to let it be known beyond your most trusted men that a regular force is expected. I have, myself, not informed any one who would make the matter public, and yet, most unaccountably, the fact has got into the newspapers.

Another caution I would give you, your people cannot pay too much attention to it. It is very natural and probable to suppose that with the prospect of such a force, and the increased security it may give, some of your people may be prompted to such audacity and imprudence as will tend to prolong angry feelings. They may thus be induced to do and say foolish and wicked things, uselessly vexatious and mortifying to the opposing party.

There are no doubt wicked people in Nauvoo, ready for the commission of crime, as well as in every other city of the same number of inhabitants. The well disposed amongst you must restrain those persons, and, if need be, bring them to punishment. The public at large will not distinguish among you, but will involve you all in a common obloquy.

I have dwelt more, perhaps, than may be agreeable to you on this point; but I have done so in my anxiety that the Mormons demonstrate to the world that they are no [^27] more deserving than their enemies.

Three or four of your people are reported to me as having already been threatening life, and publicly following men about the city with clubs, and that no effort was made to restrain them. An effectual stop must be put to all such vaporings, if you expect it to stop on the other side. You are interested in bringing all such men to immediate justice, if you can. If pacification is what you ask, you must restrain your own hostility.

It may be thought that there has already been too much delay in proceeding against the murderers, that a further delay will give an opportunity for many of the guilty to escape, and that the apparent impunity for the present will greatly encourage further outrages against you.

This last consideration is one of considerable force, and on that account I could wish to proceed without delay, if it could be done without exciting further troubles, or if I had a force at my command on which I could rely to suppress them.

I do not fear that any of the leaders will escape or flee from justice; they are determined to remain and brave it out to the end.

In my humble opinion there is no utility in proceeding against any but the leaders.

As to the misguided multitude who were the mere followers of others and the instruments of mischief, it has never been the practice of civilized states to proceed against them with rigor.

The punishment of some of the principal offenders has always been looked upon as sufficient to vindicate the majesty of the law and to deter others from the commission of like offenses, and this is the whole object of human punishment.

I do not apprehend that anything requiring my further stay here will happen immediately, and will return home tomorrow.

I am, most respectfully,

Your obedient servant,

[Signed] "THOMAS FORD."

"William W. Phelps, Esq.,

Nauvoo, Illinois." [^28]

THE PATIENCE OF THE SAINTS

So much is here set forth in order to exhibit the spirit of the "Mormons" and anti-"Mormons" respectively, with reference to their regard for law and order, and their desire for peace. In addition to the facts which indicate that the greater loyalty to law and order, and the greater desire for peace to be on the side of the saints, in any judgment to be formed of the parties it should always be remembered that it was the Latter-day Saints who were the injured party. It was their leaders who had been murdered while under guarantee of protection from the state, both upon the general principle that a state under all circumstances, and constantly, will give protection to its citizens—and more especially those whom it takes into its custody charged with crime—and besides there was the specific pledge of protection on the part of the governor and his militia officers and men; some of whom, however, afterwards, beyond doubt, were parties to the murder. It was the Latter-day Saints who restrained themselves while laboring under a sense of outraged justice, and yet with ample means at hand in the Nauvoo Legion for taking a terrible vengeance, and breaking up the lawless gangs assembling at various points and threatening the people of Nauvoo as a community with extermination from the state.

Footnotes

Among other false reports circulated at the time is one mentioned by Josiah B. Conyers, M. D., author of a Brief History of the Leading Causes of the Hancock Mob, 1846, to the effect that at the time the two Smiths were murdered "certain individuals were dispatched from Carthage and Warsaw to Quincy, in order to make a false report, viz., that the attack had been made by the "Mormons," and they expected that these two places were then burnt to ashes, and Governor Ford and his detachment murdered. Yet they must have known, at the same time, that the Smiths had been murdered by a base and treacherous mob of anti-"Mormons." "These reports," he continued, "wrought our citizens up to the highest degree of excitement, and three hundred armed men were on board of a steamboat in the short space of a few hours. * * * Who does not know that, when our men arrived at Warsaw, and learned the true state of the facts in the case, and when they were urged by the people of Warsaw, and of Hancock county, to join them in a war of extermination of the Mormons that they sternly refused, and returned to their homes in disgust, and for which they received the curses of hundreds of the people of Hancock county?"

---
Notas:
[^1] There is some confusion of dates in relation to this projected military movement. Gregg, in the History of Hancock County, says that the "Grand Military Encampment" at Warsaw was appointed for "the 2nd of October," the call having been issued and "circulated by means of hand bills dated Sept. 27th." Yet he chronicles the appearance of Governor Ford on the scene with a military force to disband the "encampment" as taking place from the 27th to the 29th of October. In his Prophet of Palmyra, published ten years later than his History of Hancock County—the History was published in 1880—he omits these exact dates; but still places the event in October (p. 293). Governor Ford also places the time of his visit to Hancock county to disperse this "encampment" or "wolf hunt," as being on "October 25th." This, however, is an error. The Nauvoo Neighbor of the 2nd of October editorially notes the arrival of two independent companies of militia in Nauvoo, "as directed by the governor." On the 27th of September, Governor Ford and staff, General John J. Hardin and staff, and between 400 and 500 men arrived. "They were all cordially received and showed a decorum highly praiseworthy. The 28th, being the time of the Nauvoo Legion muster, the governor and General Hardin reviewed that body, and the governor's troops being in the city too, gave Nauvoo quite a martial appearance. In the evening at the camp, about two miles from the city, one of the soldiers was mortally wounded in a false alarm, and died before morning. The troops left for Warsaw on Sunday morning, the 29th." This was the counter military display on the part of the state to disperse the "encampment" or "wolf hunt" of the text.
[^2] History of Hancock County, pp. 326-7.
[^3] The nature of a "wolf hunt" is described in footnote 16 of ch. liii, this History.
[^4] Governor Ford's statement is of sufficient importance for reproduction: "In the course of the fall of 1844 the anti-Mormon leaders sent printed invitations to all the militia captains in Hancock, and to the captains of militia in all the neighboring counties in Illinois, Iowa, and Missouri, to be present with their companies at a great wolf hunt in Hancock; and it was privately announced that the wolves to be hunted were the Mormons and Jack-Mormons. Preparations were made for assembling several thousand men, with provisions for six days; and the anti-Mormon newspapers, in aid of the movement, commenced anew the most awful accounts of thefts and robberies, and meditated outrages by the Mormons. The Whig press in every part of the United States came to their assistance. The democratic newspapers and leading Democrats, who had received the benefit of the Mormon votes to their party, quailed under the tempest, leaving no organ for the correction of public opinion, either at home or abroad, except the discredited Mormon newspapers at Nauvoo. But very few of my prominent Democratic friends would dare to come up to the assistance of their governor, and but few dared openly to vindicate his motives in endeavoring to keep peace. They were willing and anxious for Mormon votes at elections, but they were unwilling to risk their popularity with the people by taking a part in their favor, even when law and justice, and the Constitution were all on their side. Such being the odious character of the Mormons, the hatred of the common people against them, and such being the pusillanimity of leading men, in fearing to encounter it." (History of Illinois, p. 364).
[^5] Gregg says, "People were reluctant to volunteer, believing that the governor was engaged in an unnecessary and uncalled for enterprise" (History of Hancock County, p. 327).
[^6] After speaking of the difficulties he encountered in his efforts "to keep peace" (note 4) he states that he "applied to General John J. Hardin of the state militia, and to Colonels Baker and Merriman, all Whigs, but all of them men of military ambition; and they, together with Colonel Weatherford, a Democrat, with my own exertions, succeeded in raising about 500 volunteers" (History of Illinois, pp. 364-5).
[^7] Why this flight of the leaders into Missouri if the purpose of this "encampment" was the peaceful military display accepted by Gregg as its sole purpose?
[^8] Ford's History of Illinois, p. 365.
[^9] History of Illinois, p. 367.
[^10] History of Hancock County, p. 327. An interesting episode is related in connection with serving the writs upon the Laws and the Fosters. It is detailed in the Nauvoo Neighbor of the 9th of October, 1844. It appears that John C. Bennett was in Hampton at the time the deputy sheriff of Hancock county was serving the writs upon the Laws and the Fosters, and now the Neighbor: "The deputy sheriff of Hancock county last week went to Hampton to arrest the Laws and Fosters for the crime of murder as charged in the writ. R. D. Foster made a fuss about a 'Danite' come to kill him. The deputy called on Dr. John C. Bennett for his book and read the story of Dr. Foster's following Dr. Bennett to New York to kill him. Says he, Doctor, is that the truth?' 'I then thought it was true, but I was mistaken.' 'O, yes,' says the deputy, 'perhaps Foster is mistaken too.' He then took out the Neighbor and read Wm. Law's affidavit of Dr. Bennett's rascality, and asked Wm. Law if it was true? He replied, 'Yes!' Bennett then tapped the deputy on his shoulder, took him aside, and said, 'I would not have you think I associate with the Laws and Fosters!'" "When rogues fall out," etc.
[^11] Reproduced in the Nauvoo Neighbor of Oct. 2nd, 1844, from the Warsaw Signal.
[^12] The Proclamation bears date of September 27th, and is published in the Nauvoo Neighbor of Oct. 2nd, 1844.
[^13] History of Illinois, p. 366.
[^14] Late Secretary Hay credits the arrangement to McConnel, the governor's representative in the prosecution. (Atlantic Monthly, Dec. 1869).
[^15] Nothing further for some time was heard of this desperate character, after his refusal to return to Illinois for trial. It appears, however, that he joined the United States army invading Mexico during the war with that country—1846-7, and died in Mexico with the "black vomit." See Elder William I. Appleby's report at a conference with the twelve on the east side of the Missouri river, Oct. 3rd, 1847. Following is the excerpt from Wilford Woodruff's Journal, in which the item occurs. After referring to the twelve meeting with brother Appleby on his return from Philadelphia, the Journal proceeds: "We also learned that many who had been enemies to the church were dead. Jackson [Joseph H.] who had a hand in the death of the Prophet, died in Mexico with the black vomit. Mr. Eagle [editor of a paper in Nauvoo at the time the last remnant of the saints were driven from that city] is also dead. We were informed that General Hardin, Major Warren and Captain Morgan, with half of the Quincy, Grey's were killed in the Mexican war." (Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry for Oct. 3rd, 1847. See also Note 1 at the end of chapter lvi).
[^16] Nauvoo Neighbor, Oct. 2nd, 1844.
[^17] Ibid.
[^18] Ibid.
[^19] Little's Living Age, 1848.
[^20] Mormon Portraits, Wyl. 1886.
[^21] Polycarp made several flights from the minions of the law who sought him; his hiding place was several times betrayed, until on the last occasion of such betrayal, he yielded himself to the officers of the law. (See Neander's History of the Christian Religion and Church, vol. i, pp. 110-11.) Cyprian acted in much the same manner. On one occasion when the clamor of the multitude demanded that Cyprian, the leader of the Christians, should be thrown to the lions, "prudence suggested the necessity of a temporary retreat, and the voice of prudence was obeyed." On another occasion, when it was evident that he would be singled out as one of the first victims of the imperial edict, "the frailty of human nature tempted him to withdraw himself by a secret flight from the danger and the honor of martyrdom." (Gibbon's History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, vol. ii, pp. 248-9).
[^22] See ch. liv.
[^23] Church Historians' Compilation, Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, p. 358.
[^24] Ibid, pp. 358-9.
[^25] Ibid, pp. 323-4, p. 439, and p. 359.
[^26] Atlantic Monthly, December, 1869.
[^27] Church Historians' Compilation, Millennial Star, vol. xxiv, pp. 632-3.
[^28] Martyrdom of Joseph Smith, Taylor, in Tyler's Mormon Battalion, p. 53.
