B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LIX

THE HANCOCK COUNTY "WOLF HUNT"—PRELIMINARY STEPS TO "TRIAL" OF MOB LEADERS—JOSEPH SMITH, MARTYR—RESPONSIBILITY OF FALSE BRETHREN

IN the month of September [^1] there was planned on the part of the people of Hancock county what was undoubtedly intended to be an extensive military movement against the saints at Nauvoo, and throughout Hancock county. The historian of the county (Gregg), refers to it as "a Grand Military Encampment," called by "Colonel Levi Williams, Major Aldrich [both charged with the murder of the Brothers Smith], and a number of the officers of the independent companies in the neighborhood of Warsaw." Gregg accepts the assurance that "this movement actually intended nothing beyond what was expressed in the call"—viz., "a peaceful military display." "But," he adds, "it gave great uneasiness to the Mormons and their friends." [^2] Gregg fails, however, to note that the invitations extended to the captains of the military and their companies in all the neighboring counties to Hancock in Illinois, Iowa, and Missouri; that according to Governor Ford the purpose was to attend "a great wolf hunt in Hancock;" [^3] and further, according to the same authority, "it was privately announced that the 'wolves' to be hunted were the Mormons and Jack-Mormons;" also that preparations were made for the assembling of several thousand men with provisions for six days; that the anti-"Mormon" newspapers, "in aid of the movement," commenced anew the publication of awful accounts of thefts and robberies and "meditated" "Mormon" outrages. [^4]

THE "WOLF HUNT" THWARTED

To counteract this movement and prevent the mischief it threatened, Governor Ford issued a proclamation calling for 2,500 volunteers. After an embarrassing delay of several days, [^5] and after great exertion on the part of the governor, [^6] he succeeded in raising about five hundred volunteers. With this force, under the immediate command of General John J. Hardin, the governor on the 25th of September, marched into Hancock county. "The malcontents," as Ford calls the movers of this "wolf hunt," "abandoned their design, and all the leaders of it fled to Missouri." [^7] "The Carthage Greys," continues Ford's account, "fled almost in a body, carrying their arms with them." [^8]

Nauvoo was included in the governor's visit to Hancock county, as already detailed.

PREPARATION FOR THE "TRIAL" OF THE MOB LEADERS

The first attempt to arrest those who were supposed to be implicated in the crime at Carthage was made sometime previous to this "wolf hunt" episode. Murray McConnel, Esq., a somewhat noted lawyer of Jacksonville, Morgan county, was employed by Governor Ford to assist the prosecuting attorney, William Elliot, in gathering evidence and getting the supposed guilty parties arrested; for "from the first," according to his own statement, the governor "had determined that some of the ring leaders in the foul murder of the Smiths should be brought to trial." [^9] The result of McConnel's visit to Carthage and Nauvoo was that warrants were issued by Aaron Johnson, a Nauvoo justice of the peace, for the arrest of Colonel Levi Williams, Joseph H. Jackson, the two Laws, Wilson and William, the two Fosters, Dr. Robert D. and Charles A.—the last four were living at Hampton, near Rock Island, about eighty miles north of Nauvoo, to which place they had moved after the destruction of the Expositor press. "These writs, excepting as to Colonel Williams, were all served," says Gregg, "but all refused to go to Nauvoo for a hearing, and no attempt was made to take them there." [^10]

When the writ was served upon Thomas C. Sharp at Warsaw he cooly refused service. The following is his own account of the treatment of the officers, published in his own paper:

"Just as our paper was going to press this morning, a man came in and said that he had a writ for me.

'Well, sir, let me see it.' He produced the paper which proved to be a warrant for the murder of Joe and Hyrum Smith, issued by Aaron Johnson, justice of the peace in Nauvoo. After reading, I told Mr. Office, that if my friends said 'go,' I would go—if not I would stand fast. Accordingly I went out and conversed with the citizens and unanimously they said, 'don't go.' I then told the officer that he could return and report progress, but I could not go with him, for I had no security for my safety, and, moreover, I was not to be singled out as the sole object of Mormon vengeance." [^11]

ACCUSED MOB LEADERS FIX OWN TERMS OF SURRENDER

A second attempt to arrest some of the leaders of the Carthage mob was made in connection with the advent of Governor Ford and his military escort into Hancock county to break up the "wolf hunt" movement. Before arriving at Warsaw on the 29th of September, Governor Ford learned that Colonel Levi Williams, Thomas C. Sharp, and Joseph H. Jackson had crossed the Mississippi into Missouri; going into camp with some of their friends at the settlement called Churchville, opposite Warsaw. Three of Ford's officers, viz., Colonels Baker, Merriman and Weatherford, volunteered their services, if the governor would go with them, to cross into Missouri with a force and capture these leaders for whose arrest writs had been issued; and also for whose arrest the governor had made a proclamation—though it had not then been published [^12]—offering a reward of two hundred dollars for the apprehension of each of the aforesaid persons. In the afternoon preceding the night arranged for the attempt to make the capture, Colonel Baker, it seems, visited the encampment of the refugees, and on his return refused to join in the expedition, and advised his friends against participating in it; "and as there was no authority," Governor Ford remarks, "for compelling men to invade a neighboring state," the enterprise was abandoned, much to the vexation of the governor and several others according to the latter's account of the incident. [^13] It was this same Colonel Baker, according to Governor Ford, who arranged the terms on which the accused consented to surrender, viz., [^14] they were to be taken to Quincy for examination under a military guard; the prosecuting attorney was to be advised to admit them to bail; they were to be granted a continuance of their trial at the next court at Carthage. Upon this arrangement being agreed upon two of the accused men, Williams and Sharp, surrendered and crossed the Mississippi to Warsaw; Jackson was sick and refused to surrender. [^15]

Governor Ford announced this action to the people at Nauvoo in the following note:

"WARSAW, Sept. 30, 1844.

SIR:—I write to inform you that Williams and Sharp have surrendered and will be sent to Quincy for trial. Jackson has not come over and is so very sick that we could do nothing with him if we had him. It will be necessary to get all the witnesses down as soon as possible," [^16]

As the governor on his arrival at Warsaw, the day before, had also demanded the surrender of the state arms, and two cannons and about sixty stands of small arms had been given up, [^17] it appeared at last as if some progress towards vindicating the law and keeping the peace was really to be made; and in an editorial of the Nauvoo Neighbor of October 2nd, these signs of progress were applauded in the following passage:

"Thus far the proceedings show a desire to retrieve the broken faith and laws of the state, as well as a firm determination to put a 'veto' on mobbing whether it comes creeping among the people as a 'grand encampment' for a wolf hunt, or springs up blacked as passant negroes, for cold blooded murder. Our voice is and ever has been, 'magnify the law and make it honorable.'" [^18]

Here, and pending the opening of the "trial" of the murderers of the Carthage victims may fittingly be discussed the question—

MAY JOSEPH SMITH AND HIS BROTHER HYRUM BE CLASSED AS MARTYRS

Whenever the terms "martyr" or "martyrdom" as connected with the name of Joseph Smith are used, they are placed within quotation marks by nearly all non-"Mormon" writers, and certainly so placed by all anti-"Mormon" writers. The claim of "martyrdom" for the Prophet is quite generally denied; and even in the few cases where admitted it is usually with some modifications that detract from its value; as, for instance, when the gentle Quaker poet, Whittier, commenting on the death of the Prophet, says—"He died by the hands of wicked and barbarous men, a martyr—unwilling doubtless, but still a martyr—of his faith." [^19] Two reasons can perhaps be assigned for this denial of the title of "martyr" to the Prophet of the New Dispensation, though I have never heard any given. Writers, so far as I know, depending upon the force and authority of a sneer to justify the denial, as when a German writer, says, in speaking of the Prophet's death, "that revolver in the hand of the 'lamb that goes to the slaughter' is highly characteristic." [^20] Of the two reasons to which I refer as ground for denying Joseph Smith the title of "martyr," the first is an exaggerated idea of what constitutes martyrdom; and second, the fact that Joseph Smith offered resistance to his murderers.

The conception of martyrdom has been unduly influenced by the martyrdoms of the early Christian centuries, where the witnesses of the early Christian centuries, where the witnesses to the Christian verities sought and even provoked martyrdom beyond all prudence, because of the air of sanctity it gave and the fame it promised by the inordinate esteem and veneration in which the martyrs were held. And hence it comes that the idea of a martyr is one who not only suffers death rather than deny his faith, but one who seeks such a death and meets it unresistingly. There is, however, another and equally as true a conception of martyrdom; and that is where in the persistence in, and the maintenance of a cause, one suffers toil and danger and finally death because of adherence to this cause, though using all the means that prudence would suggest to avoid danger and death—these are martyrs, no less than those who clamor for death in attestation of their sincerity—or is it the building up of a fame? The avoidance of danger and death for some time by both the celebrated Christian martyrs Polycarp and Cyprian, by no means detracted from their character as real martyrs for the cause of Christianity, when finally they yielded to the sentence passed upon them by their Roman judges. [^21]

JOSEPH SMITH'S SELF-SURRENDER TO CERTAIN DEATH

It was self-surrender that Joseph Smith made to certain death. He was clean escaped out of the hands of his enemies. He had crossed the Mississippi from Nauvoo and was surrounded by trusted men who were aiding his departure for the west. One more day would have seen him at the head of a small company of men in the wilderness of Iowa en route for the Rocky Mountains. Then came the pleading of some mistaken and some false friends that he submit to the demands of Governor Ford and trust to his promises of protection, and not play the part of the false shepherd who leaves the flock when attacked by wolves. This was more than Joseph's spirit could endure, and hence he recrossed the river, against his better judgment, and with absolute conviction that he would be killed, went to Carthage and among a host of publicly and repeatedly avowed enemies, pledged to encompass his death, surrendered to the requirements of the officers of the law. At Nauvoo, eighteen miles away, he had left a body of between three and four thousand men, the best body of militia in the state of Illinois, with arms and other equipments for war. And yet the Smith brothers voluntarily placed themselves in the hands of the officers. No self-surrender, with every means for successful resistance, could have been more complete; and in fulfillment of the requirements of the governor, the Brothers Smith went to Carthage unarmed. The matter of their having one six-barrelled and one single-barrelled pistol with them when assailed was because friends on parting from them left these fire arms with them as stated in a former chapter, under circumstances alike honorable and justifiable. These arms offered but a meager defense against the overwhelming odds of the assailants; nor did the Prophet use the pistol left with him until he had seen his brother shot to death from his side—not until he had looked into the dead face of that brother, calm but bullet-torn, did the war spirit native to his race—his revolutionary ancestry—rise within him and impel him to the conflict at the door where muskets were belching fire and death, where he stood for one splendid moment as some avenging spirit returning the fire of the mob. Much less or far more than mortal man must he have been not to have done what he did. And what he did in that supreme moment of trial and death, does not depreciate him in the esteem of Christian men, nor make him less a martyr to the mission given him of God. President McKinley's and Roosevelt's United States secretary of state, John Hay, was right when he said Joseph Smith put up a "handsome fight" in the prison; but it in no way detracts from the solemn fact of his martyrdom, and emphasizes the glory of his manhood.

Equally important to the question of the martyrdom is the question—

WERE THE BROTHERS SMITH KILLED BY APOSTATE MORMONS

It is fairly clear from the text of this chapter who were the parties immediately responsible for the killing of the Smith brothers. Yet it is a question discussed in some quarters of late as to whether, after all, it was not apostate "Mormons" who killed them, the evident intention being not so much to ascertain the truth as to cast the odium for the Carthage murder upon former members of the church; and of course, by so much, relieve non-"Mormons" from such odium. The chief seceders from the church at Nauvoo who, with any color of reason could be charged with complicity in the affair would be the Brothers Law, William and Wilson; the two Higbee brothers, Francis M. and Chauncy L.; the two Fosters, Dr. Robert D. and Charles A. It is evident form our church annals and from this History, [^22] that these men were in a conspiracy against the lives of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. And it is also true that they were among those who were charged with the crime, soon after it was committed, and for whom warrants of arrest were issued by Justice Aaron Johnson, of Nauvoo, and upon whom service was made as already detailed in this chapter. But they were never indicted, and it is doubtful if more could be charged against them than being accessories before the fact to the crime. It is true, however, that some of them were in and about Carthage during the days immediately preceding the tragedy. On the 25th of June, about midday, word was brought to President Joseph Smith that the Laws, Fosters, Higbees, and others were leaving Carthage for Nauvoo to plunder. This information the Prophet conveyed to Governor Ford, who, within the hour communicated to his informant that he had ordered Captain Singleton with a company of men from McDonough county to march to Nauvoo to cooperate with the police in keeping the peace; and he would call out the legion if necessary. [^23]

Later in the afternoon—about four o'clock—report was brought to the Prophet that William and Wilson Law, Robert D. Foster and the two Higbees "had said that there was nothing against these men [the Smith brothers]; the law could not reach them, but powder and ball would, and they should not go out of Carthage alive." [^24]

Chauncy L. Higbee was one of the prosecutors in the Expositor press case and as counsel moved the adjournment of that case. He was also counsel for the state in connection with Sylvester Emmonds, editor of the Expositor, Thomas C. Sharp et al., in the trumped up charge of "treason" against the Smiths, and appeared in that case late in the afternoon of the 26th. [^25] On the morning of the 27th of June, the same Higbee was in Carthage, and on meeting Dan Jones in the street said: "We are determined to kill Joe and Hyrum, and you had better go away to save yourself." Closer to the murder than this it is impossible to trace him from any evidence of history. According to Mr. Hay, he later became "a distinguished legislator and judge in southern Illinois." [^26]

In a list of the leaders of the Hancock county mob, "and those who took an active part in the massacre of Joseph and Hyrum Smith," the list being furnished by J. B. Backenstos, sheriff of Hancock county, Francis M. Higbee is the only name among the seceders given by the sheriff. [^27] When a coroner's jury assembled in the prison and were holding an inquest over the body of Hyrum Smith, Captain Robert R. Smith being among the jurors, the name of Francis M. Higbee was mentioned, whereon John Taylor, present, though savagely wounded, arose and said: "Captain Smith you are a justice of the peace; I have heard his (Higbee's) name mentioned. I want to swear my life against him." [^28] Word was immediately sent to Higbee and he left the place. In a list of the names of those whom he considered active in taking part in the massacre Willard Richards names the two Laws, the two Fosters, the two Higbees, Joseph H. Jackson, Sylvester Emmons, Henry C. Norton, and Augustine Spencer. Unfortunately, however, he does not make it clear whether their "activity" extend to their being in the mob that made the assault upon the jail, or only to their being accessories before the fact, of which there can be no question, and hence "active" in the matter, and equally responsible with those who did the physical deed.

In a communication to the Upper Mississippian, from Hampton, near Rock Island—under date of "August, 1844," in denying the charge that the "Laws and Fosters were engaged in the assassination of the Smiths at Carthage, William Law said: "The statement is false; for Dr. R. D. Foster, Wilson Law and myself were in Fort Madison, Iowa territory, at the time of the murder—which fact can be proved by Dr. Bostwick, General Brown, Mr. Bullard, Mr. Reid, and the Hon. John C. Calhoun's two sons with whom we were conversing at the very hour. Chas. C. Foster was then in Burlington, Iowa territory." [^29]

All that can now be said is that no positive proof exists that any of these Nauvoo seceders were actually with the mob that made the assault upon the jail and killed the Smith brothers. The mob that did that physical crime was made up from the disbanded Warsaw militia—officers and men—aided and abetted by unknown parties already in Carthage, and they may even have joined in the assault upon the jail; and surely the Carthage Greys, officers and men, were directly implicated in the awful tragedy. The names of those immediately on duty at the jail as a guard, and who "good naturedly resisted until they were carefully disarmed" (Hay), are given by Sheriff Backenstos as follows: F. A. Worrell, officer of the guard. Franklin Rhodes, William Baldwin, Levi Street, lives near Mendon, Adams county, Illinois; Joseph Hawley, lives in Carthage, Illinois; Anthony Barkman, and Clabourn Wilson." [^30]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Gregg's History of Illinois, pp. 328-9.
[^2] The complete list of the officers of the court at this time was as follows: Jesse B. Thomas, judge; William Elliot, prosecuting attorney; Jacob B. Backenstos, clerk; and General Miner R. Deming, sheriff. The following composed the grand jury:
[^3] Sharp was once an anti-Masonic editor of western New York. He invented the name "Jack-Mason," for all such persons as refused to take part in the anti-Masonic movement of that day and neighborhood, according to a correspondent to the Illinois State Register, writing under date of November 1st, 1844. He it was, also, according to this same authority, who coined the phrase "Jack-Mormon," an opprobrious epithet applied to such non-"Mormons" of Illinois who did not favor the illegal procedure and mob violence of Sharp and his associates against the "Mormons." He is also described as having made himself the "organ of a gang of town lot speculators at Warsaw, who are afraid that Nauvoo is about to kill off their town and render speculations abortive." (The State Register article is copied into the Nauvoo Neighbor of Nov. 13th, 1844.)
[^4] John Hay, in Atlantic Monthly, December, 1869. Davis is described as a professional politician by Hay, who "dearly loved both Mormon and anti-Mormon votes." He is represented by the same writer as being sorely perplexed on the question of going to Carthage with the mob, at the time some of the Warsaw militia were converted into the mob that marched to Carthage. "It was heavy weather for him. * * * He was so backward in coming forward that his company left him in disgust, and followed the fiery Grover, whose company had gone home to dinner. Davis still could not make up his mind to go home, but got into Calvin Cole's wagon and followed the boys at a distance; so that at last he had the luck [Sic!] to be in at the closing scene, and the honor to be indicted with the rest."
[^5] "It seemed fated," says Hay, in referring to another of the prominent actors in the martyrdom, "that every one connected with this affair should have greatness thrust upon him."
[^6] I follow the historian of Hancock county, Gregg, in the spelling of this name. Hay gives it "Voorhees."
[^7] According to Mr. Gregg, the historian of Hancock county, the names of about sixty persons were presented to the Grand Jury for indictment, which list included the Laws, the Fosters, the Higbees, and John Elliot—the last concerned in the kidnapping of the Averys, see ante. Gregg says that the evidence was so inconclusive that the jury voted on the whole sixty; but failing to indict they struck off ten and voted again, and so on to the last nine, when the indictment carried. He also says that even these indictments were found chiefly upon the testimony of the three witnesses—Daniels, Brackenbury and Miss Graham—whose evidence on the trial the court instructed the petit jury to disregard (History of Hancock County, Gregg, p. 330). Our church annals are practically silent upon the matter of these court proceedings, doubtless for the reason that the court was in possession of and dominated by the mob forces, while by threats of violence the saints were kept away.
[^8] It is held by Gregg that this agreement was violated by the prosecution "by frequent attempts made by the sheriff and his deputies to arrest some of them during the winter." And especially was it violated in respect of Jacob C. Davis, state senator. "At the opening of the legislature he took his seat in that body. During the winter he was arrested at Springfield by an officer from Hancock county, but was ordered released by resolution of the senate." (History of Hancock County, pp. 329, 336). The violation of the agreement can only be accounted for on the ground of a change in the personnel of the county and circuit court officers, and the very likely belief in the unusual if not utter illegality of the agreement ab initio.
[^9] The personnel of the court officers at the time of the trial were: Richard M. Young, judge; Jas. H. Ralston, prosecuting attorney; David E. Head, clerk; Miner R. Deming, sheriff; Josiah Lamborn, of Jackson, was appointed assistant prosecutor; and William A. Richardson, O. H. Browning, Calvin A. Warsaw, Archibald Williams, O. C. Skinner and Thomas Morrison were counsel for defendants. The trial jury was as follows:
[^10] The county commissioners were George Caulson and Andrew H. Perkins, both "Mormons;" and the sheriff, Miner R. Deming, was known as a "Jack-Mormon." (Gregg's Prophet of Palmyra, p. 299).
[^11] Atlantic Monthly, December, 1869.
[^12] History of Illinois, p. 367.
[^13] Atlantic Monthly, Dec., 1869. "No one accused her of wilful perjury," says Mr. Hay, "but her nervous and sensitive character had been powerfully impressed by the influence of Smith and brooding constantly upon his death, she came at last to regard her own fancies and suspicions as positive occurrences." Not having Miss Graham's testimony in hand, how far this characterization of it is just, we have no means of determining.
[^14] The story of Daniels is incredible, not because it involves incidents that would be set down as "miraculous," but because the story is all out of harmony with what in the nature of things would happen under the circumstances, and the incidents he details are too numerous, too complicated, too deliberate, and would have occupied too much time to be crowded into the space within which necessarily they must have happened, if they happened at all. No copy of the Littlefield-Daniels pamphlet, as published at Nauvoo, has been preserved in the church collection of books and documents, but the story of Daniels as then published was reproduced by Mr. Littlefield in 1882; and, in connection with some additional matter, was published in a booklet under the title, The Martyrs.
[^15] "Instructions to the jury had been asked by both parties. The following, among a list of nine asked by defendants' counsel, were given, and probably had most influence on the verdict.
[^16] History of Illinois, p. 368.
[^17] History of Hancock County, p. 330.
[^18] History of Hancock County, pp. 330, 331.
[^19] History of Illinois, p. 368. For consideration of Governor Ford's relationship to the Carthage tragedy and "Mormonism," see later remarks, this chapter.
[^20] II Nephi xxviii:2-14.
[^21] For a detailed exposition of the prophecy see the writer's work, New Witnesses for God, vol. iii, pp. 249-253.
[^22] Rev. vi, 9-11.
[^23] Jenson's letter from Carthage, Oct. 8, 1888, published in Infancy of the Church, 1889, p. 55.
[^24] Robert F. Smith was made colonel of the 16th Illinois Regiment at the time of its organization at Quincy, in May, 1861. At the expiration of its term the 16th with its colonel veteranized, participated in the siege of Atlanta, Ga., and thence marched with Sharman to the sea. Upon the occupation of Savannah, Colonel Smith was made military governor, and was brevetted brigadier general on the 13th of March, 1865.
[^25] I Tim. v:24.
[^26] The Martyrs, Littlefield, p. 71.
[^27] Atlantic Monthly, 1869.
[^28] Its latest appearance was in the Deseret News of March 5th, 1905, with a lot of inaccuracies of detail!
[^29] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxxv. This in the 2nd Nauvoo edition of 1844; also Liverpool (English) edition of June 14, 1845, and in all subsequent editions.
[^30] This citation is from the Nauvoo edition of the Book of Mormon. In the current Salt Lake edition the passage appears in Ether chapter xii, vs. 36-38, the chapters and paragraphs of the Book of Mormon having been differently divided in the later editions.
