B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LX

"TRIAL" AND ACQUITTAL OF THE MURDERERS OF THE PROPHET

AT the October term of the state circuit court in which Hancock county was included, a grand jury was impaneled, and the Carthage murder case investigated. Great anxiety was felt as it was widely rumored that the old citizens intended to interpose obstacles to the court's procedure. A number of people from Nauvoo came to Carthage to attend court, and to avoid hotel expenses encamped in their wagons in the outskirts of the town. A number of Indians en route for Iowa—for what purpose is not known—passed through the county, and rumor soon had it that the "Mormons" and Indians were camped near Carthage which "occasioned considerable uneasiness," says the chronicle. An investigation was ordered that resulted in the report that the "Mormon camp at Carthage and the passage of Indians through the county "had no connection with each other." [^1]

OPENING OF THE "TRIAL" OF THE MURDERERS

The court session began on Monday, the 21st of October. In his charge to the grand jury the judge, Jesse B. Thomas, [^2] urged the jurors "to do their duty in the case likely to come before them, and leave the consequences." His charge is said to have given general satisfaction. The grand jury began its sessions on Tuesday, 22nd, and on the following Saturday brought in two bills of indictments against nine individuals; one for the murder of Joseph Smith, and the other for the murder of Hyrum Smith. The indicted were Colonel Levi Williams, of Green Plains, a Baptist minister. Thomas C. Sharp, of Warsaw, editor of the Warsaw Signal. [^3] Mark Aldrich, captain of a company of Hancock county militia. Jacob C. Davis, then state senator, and afterwards member of congress for that district. [^4] William N. Grover, captain of a company of Warsaw militia under Colonel Williams. Hay speaks of Grover as afterwards becoming a distinguished lawyer in Missouri, and "an eminently respectable and conservative man." [^5] John Allen, William Voras, [^6] John Wills, William Gallaher. Of the last four nothing is known except their connection with this Carthage mob, and their trial for the murder of the Brothers Smith. [^7]

On the announcement of the indictments most of the defendants appeared and demanded immediate trial. To this Mr. McConnel, Governor Ford's appointee to assist the prosecuting attorney of the circuit court, objected on the ground of not being ready; his witnesses before the grand jury had departed without being recognized; and Mr. Elliot, the chief prosecuting attorney was absent. The cause was postponed until the next term of court, and it was agreed that no capias should issue in the interim, [^8] if the defendants would pledge themselves to appear at the time agreed upon.

The next term of the court convened on the 19th of May, 1845. By that time the personnel of the court was changed by the new officers taking the places to which they had been elected in the fall of 1844. [^9]

COURT PROCEDURE

On motion of the defense the array of jurors chosen in the first week of the trial was set aside because of alleged prejudice of the county commission and the county sheriff and deputies who selected them. [^10] Thomas Owen and Wm. D. Abernethy were appointed elisors for the case. Neither of these elisors was a "Mormon." The first was regarded as a "Jack-Mormon," the second was known as an anti-"Mormon." Ninety-six men were summoned and brought before the court before the requisite panel of twelve men could be filled—"Before twelve were found ignorant enough and indifferent enough to act as jurors," is Hay's summing up of the jury selection. [^11] That is not the view of Governor Ford, however. According to him it was not a question of ignorance or indifference as to the trial jury, but one of corruption and intimidation. He says: "One friend of the Mormons and one anti-Mormon were appointed for this purpose; [i. e. to choose the jury] but as more than a thousand men had assembled under arms at the court to keep away the Mormons and their friends, the jury was made up of these military followers of the court, who all swore that they had never formed or expressed any opinion as to the guilt or innocence of the accused." [^12]

THE WITNESSES FOR THE STATE

The trial lasted from the 19th of May to the 30th. The principal witnesses on the part of the state were two young men who accompanied the Warsaw mob to Carthage, and claimed to have witnessed the whole affair, from the organization of the Warsaw mob out of the disbanded militiamen of that place, to the attack upon the jail and the shooting of Joseph Smith by order of Colonel Levi Williams. The names of these witnesses were Wm. M. Daniels and Benjamin Brackenbury. To these should be added a Miss Eliza Jane Graham, a waitress at the Warsaw House, who served supper to a number of the mobbers as "they came straggling in from Carthage." She claimed to have heard their conversation, and to have learned from this the connection of many with the tragedy at Carthage. "She could remember where every man sat, and what he said, and how he said it," says John Hay. "Unfortunately she remembered too much," he continues; "a few alibis so discredited her evidence that it was held to prove nothing but her own honest and half insane zeal." [^13] The alibis under all the circumstances developed in the trial would be easily obtained.

The testimony of Daniels was spectacular and dealt somewhat with the miraculous, which of course discredited it with the court. Daniels collaborated with Lyman O. Littlefield, then a young man working in the Nauvoo Neighbor and Times and Seasons office, and published in a pamphlet the story of Daniels' experience with the Warsaw mob, and their murderous assault upon the prisoners, wherein he describes an alleged attempt of a ruffian,—supposedly a Missourian, and impliedly a bastard son of ex-Governor Boggs—to decapitate the Prophet after he was dead, and his being prevented by a sudden flash of light from out of heaven, passing its vivid chain between Joseph and his murderers, which paralyzed the would-be mutilator of the dead, and also the four men whom Daniels avers shot the Prophet, so that they all stood like marble statues, not having power to move a single limb of their bodies. [^14] Having published this story before the trial, when brought into court he was confronted with it, swore to its truth, which destroyed the credit of his evidence; and in the court's instruction, the jury was told to exclude from their consideration all that was said by the three witnesses, Daniels, Brackenbury and Miss Graham. [^15]

The spirit of the testimony on the part of the defendants, and, indeed, the nature of the whole trial may be fairly judged by the testimony of Frank Worrell, as given by Mr. Hay, in his Atlantic Monthly article, "which," he remarks, "we copy for its curious and cynical bonhomie." (!) He represents Worrell as testifying:

"'I was one of the guards at the jail. Saw Smith when he was killed. Saw none of the defendants at the jail! Suppose there were one or two hundred there. They stayed three or four minutes. They formed in front of the jail and made a rush. Knew none that came up. * * * Heard nothing that was said. * * * Saw Smith die,—was within ten feet of him. * * * Perhaps a minute after he fell I saw him die. * * * I was pushed and shoved some fifty feet. * * * Did not see Sharp, Grover, or Davis. It was so crowded I could not see much. I know about one-third of the men in the county; but none at the jail. I might have been some scared.'

It would be difficult to imagine anything cooler than this quiet perjury to screen a murder. Yet the strangest part of this strange story is that Frank Worrell was a generous young fellow, and the men with whom he carried on the ghastly comedy of attack and resistance at the door of the prison—Sharp and Grover—were good citizens, educated and irreproachable, who still live to enjoy the respect and esteem of all who know them."

When conceded murderers and perjurers can be characterized by a man of the standing of Mr. Hay, as "good citizens," Latter-day Saints have a right to feel that all moral values are confounded when the events which comprise their history are up for consideration by Gentiles.

VERDICT: "NOT GUILTY"—OF COURSE!

"Many other witnesses," says Governor Ford—that is, others than Daniels, Brackenbury and Miss Graham—"were examined, who knew the facts, but under the demoralization of faction denied all knowledge of them." [^16] The jury after a deliberation of several hours returned a verdict of "not guilty." This was the close of the trial of the defendants for the murder of Joseph Smith. "The same defendants, for the murder of Hyrum Smith, were required to enter into recognizance of $5,000 each (with 14 sureties) to the June term, 1845. At said term case was called, and Elliot and Lamborn not answering, the case was dismissed for want of prosecution, and defendants were discharged." [^17]

"The case was closed," says Mr. Hay, in his account of the trial. "There was not a man on the jury, in the court, in the county, that did not know the defendants had done murder. But it was not proven, and the verdict of 'not guilty' was right in law." "And," he adds, "you cannot find in this generation [he wrote in December, 1869] an original inhabitant of Hancock county who will not stoutly sustain the verdict."

Mr. Gregg both in his History of Hancock County and in his Prophet of Palmyra, takes exception to what he calls Mr. Hay's "fling at the jury, the judge, and people." "And," he remarks, "we venture to characterize it as extremely unjust." Mr. Gregg declares that from personal knowledge of some of the trial jury he knew that instead of being either "ignorant or indifferent," as intimated by Mr. Hay, "they were men of intelligence, and probity, and worth." "It is very easy to say," Gregg concludes, on this head. "that a murder had been committed; that somebody had done the deed; but to say that among the Elliots, Laws, Fosters, and Higbees, and a long list of men charged, those five or six who were on trial had done it, is saying a great deal." [^18] All which will be conceded; but it is somewhat unfortunate for Mr. Gregg when he undertakes to defend this trial of the murderers of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, he himself suppresses, by failing to mention, some facts in connection with this trial that are emphasized by Governor Ford, namely: the fact that "more than a thousand men had assembled under arms at court to keep away the "Mormons" and their friends; that the jury, for some of whom Mr. Gregg stands sponsor as to their "intelligence, probity and worth," were chosen from these "military followers of the court," and who all swore they had never formed, or expressed any opinion as to the guilt or innocence of the accused; that, as Governor Ford further declares:—

"During the progress of these trials, the judge was compelled to permit the courthouse to be filled and surrounded by armed bands, who attended court to browbeat and overawe the administration of justice. The judge himself was in duress, and informed me that he did not consider his life secure any part of the time. The consequence was that the crowd had everything their own way; the lawyers for the defense defended their clients by a long and elaborate attack on the governor; the armed mob stamped with their feet and yelled their approbation at every sarcastic and smart thing that was said; and the judge was not only forced to hear it, but to lend it a kind of approval." [^19]

ACQUITTAL OF THE CARTHAGE MURDERERS ACCORDING TO FORM

"Not guilty!" was the verdict, and undoubtedly the murderers on trial, and many others not on trial in Hancock county, Illinois, went unwhipped of justice at that time. And it is a singular thing that in all cases of persecution and mob violence, where Latter-day Saints have been shot down, or murdered in other ways—and there have been many such cases; or where they have died from the effects of exposure, as direct and palpable results of persecutions endured—and there have been hundreds of such cases—in no instance has there been a vindication of the law by the legal punishment of those who have assailed them! Perhaps it is more fitting that it should be so. In the Book of Mormon [^20] is a description of conditions that would prevail when that record should come forth to the world; and also a prophecy concerning some who "shall seek deep to hide their counsels from the Lord; and their works shall be in the dark, and the blood of the saints shall cry from the ground against them;" [^21] a prophecy of martyrdom in the New Dispensation notwithstanding 19th and 20th century enlightenment, civilization, and constitutional guarantees of religious freedom! Hence, I say, it is more fitting that for the martyrdom of the Brothers Smith, as for all others who have fallen in our religious persecutions, and who have been murdered while proclaiming the new message to the world as missionaries, it is more fitting that there should be no legal punishment for their assailants and murderers. It seems to render the martyrdoms more complete; and more fully meets the terms of the prophecy that the blood of the saints, "in the day" [i. e. period of time] when the Book of Mormon should be brought forth, should cry unto the Lord from the ground for vengeance, clearly foreshadowing the fact that man would not avenge it.

"And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? And white robes were given unto every one of them, and it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until their fellowservants also and their brethren, that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled." [^22]

Here I consider it fitting that several important matters closely associated with this "trial," should be set forth.

"GREATNESS" "THRUST UPON" JOSEPH SMITH'S MURDERERS

I have already quoted in a footnote (5) of this chapter the statement of Mr. John Hay, that it seemed fated that every one connected with the murder of the Brothers Smith should have greatness thrust upon him. In justification of this statement there may be cited from Mr. Hay's Atlantic Monthly article the fact that Wm. N. Grover subsequently became "a distinguished lawyer of St. Louis, and United States attorney for Missouri—an eminently respectable and conservative man"—if we accept as final the judgment of Mr. Hay. Mark Aldrich, described by his biographer—Gregg—as a man of great enterprise, went to California in 1850; thence, a few years later, to Arizona, where for five years he was a member of the Arizona legislature "and held other important offices in the territory," dying in 1874. Thomas C. Sharp "afterwards became principal of the public schools [of Hancock] and greatly esteemed as county judge." He was also a member of the state constitutional convention of 1847. Jacob C. Davis, state senator at the time of the murder, was afterwards elected to congress from the district where he lived. Colonel Levi Williams, the remaining prominent one of the group indicted, and the leader of the mob, had no "greatness" "thrust upon him," but lived quietly at "Green Plains"—no longer in existence on the map, not even as a postoffice—where he died about the year 1858. [^23] Captain Robert F. Smith, of the Carthage Greys, though not among the indicted murderers was nevertheless an undoubted accomplice in the crime; for with the means at his command to have prevented it, he stopped his company half a dozen times, according to Mr. Hay, in its march from the courthouse to the jail—a distance of only several hundred yards—"to remonstrate against defects in their alignment; and it was owing to this extreme conscientiousness about discipline that they arrived at the jail when all was over!" This captain of the Carthage Greys "became the great war general, Robert F. Smith," says Mr. Hay, "and marched his troops from Hancock county to the Atlantic with more speed if less science, than he displayed in leading his squad that day from the courthouse to the jail." [^24] When reading of these characters thus veneered by the record of the "greatness thrust upon them," one may not forget that four of them, Aldrich, Grover, Sharp and Davis, were of the number of whom Mr. Hay said—when he records that the jury pronounced them "not guilty"—there was not a man on the jury, in the county, that did not know the defendants had done murder." And as to Robert F. Smith, no war record he made, and no promotion to military honors he received can ever efface the deep disgrace his conduct brought upon himself and the state of Illinois when he betrayed the trust of an officer by conniving at the murder of men placed under his protection!. Special pleaders will try in vain to make the world believe that murderers and their accomplices are satisfactory or worthy citizens, and deserve the honors to which "in the corrupted currents of this world" they may attain or even have "thrust upon them." Nor need those who look for retribution to follow evil deeds feel disappointment because justice seems to halt, and even known murderers seemingly go unwhipped of justice. Judgment does not always overtake evil deeds in this world. "Some men's sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment; and some men they follow after" [^25] but all may be assured that Justice does not sleep nor can he be thwarted—Justice will yet claim his own against the murderers of Joseph and Hyrum Smith.

ALLEGED MIRACLES AT THE MARTYRDOM OF JOSEPH AND HYRUM SMITH

It was inevitable, perhaps, that something miraculous should be alleged as connected with the death of Joseph Smith; that both myth and legend, those parasites of truth, should attach themselves to the Prophet's career. His character was too extraordinary, his mission too great, and his achievements too splendid to escape such a fate; and therefore both myth and legend are supplied in the stories detailing the scenes attendant upon the Prophet's death. Hence we have the legend of the body dragged to a sitting posture by the old well curb by the Missouri ruffian—the alleged bastard son of ex-Governor Boggs; the effort to behead the Prophet by the same person; the flash of heavenly light from the clear sky that paralyzed the arm of the would-be mutilator of the dead; and also paralyzing four other persons detailed by Captain Levi Williams to shoot the Prophet after he was set up by the well curb—paralyzed so that they stood like marble statues having no power to move a single limb and had to be carried away in their helpless condition by their companions! The imagination of the person detailing these incidents adds the delicate suggestion that while the deliberate preparations were being made to shoot him, President Smith's eyes rested upon his murderers "with a calm and quiet resignation; * * * his countenance seemed to betoken his only prayer to be, 'O Father, forgive them, they know not what they do!'" And thus would men fain by forced imaginings link together the tragedy of Carthage with that at Golgotha. The fancy of an "artist," in a painting has added to the foregoing scene the detail of a supposed angel in modern clothing with raised hand forbidding the mutilating of the Prophet! Of course this whole fabric of myth and legend comes from the story of Daniels and Brackenbury, and has, unfortunately, found its way into some of our otherwise acceptable church works, and still more unfortunately has entered into the beliefs of many Latter-day Saints.

This William M. Daniels after the tragedy at Carthage joined the church, but soon after the trial dropped out of sight. Mr. Littlefield, who published at Nauvoo in pamphlet form Daniels' account of the murder of the Brothers Smith, says that his whereabouts has been unknown to him since 1846; and then offers the wholly gratuitous suggestion that it was not at all unlikely that "some of the parties implicated in the tragedy at Carthage assassinated him for exposing them." [^26] Ford says that Daniels was "afterwards expelled from the Mormons, but no doubt they will cling to his evidence in favor of the divine mission of the Prophet." It was for the refutation of the governor's supposition that this paragraph, in part, is written. Our church annals, except for the Littlefield writings, are singularly silent respecting Daniels; also as to Brackenbury, of whom less is known. It was supposed that Brackenbury's testimony would corroborate Daniels', but Hay represents their testimony as conflicting, and because of jealousy Brackenbury contradicted "in his evidence all that Daniels had sworn to." [^27] Hay also represents that Brackenbury brought out the story of the martyrdom in a series of paintings, that were badly executed.

Littlefield also published a letter in his Martyrs, from one Wm. Web that corroborates some points in the Daniels story. The letter appears to be addressed to some newspaper (name and place of publication unknown) within some district of Illinois, where Thomas C. Sharp is running for office, and the purpose of this letter is to damage his political prospects, and hence pretends to detail Sharp's connection with the murder at Carthage. The writer of it claims to be the one who set the body of the Prophet against the well curb, and was posing as the son of ex-Governor Boggs, etc., etc.,— "corroborating" Daniels. The letter is dated at "Carthage, October 14, 1844." It was not published by the unknown paper to which ostensibly it was sent; but it is alleged to have remained in the office of said paper until a change of owners was effected. The purchaser of the unknown paper, and himself unknown, found the letter among the rejected papers of his predecessor—handed it to a friend (name not given) with permission to keep it over night. The borrower happened to be friendly towards the "Mormons" and allowed two visiting "Mormon" elders, McEwen and Wareham, to copy it, and they certify on their copy that it is a true copy of the original. This copy comes to the hands of one C. C. A. Christiensen who furnishes Littlefield with a copy of it and so it gets into our literature to appear and reappear ad nauseam. [^28] It is wholly apocryphal, and the great, determining facts of "Mormonism" rest on no such questionable witnesses as Daniels and Brackenbury to alleged miraculous displays of divine power connected with the Prophet's death; nor upon any such documents as this very questionable "Web" letter.

THE OFFICIAL STATEMENT OF JOSEPH AND HYRUM SMITH'S MARTYRDOM

Fortunately for the church; fortunately for the truth of history, the church placed on record at an early date, following the event, an official declaration of the accepted facts and incidents attending upon the martyrdom of her two chiefest men and prophets: and it is with a deep satisfaction that one can note the absence of the myths and legends that ignorance and superstition would all too willingly attach to the tragedy of their martyrdom.

Martyrdom of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and his Brother Hyrum: [^29]

"To seal the testimony of this book and the Book of Mormon, we announce the Martyrdom of Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Hyrum Smith the Patriarch. They were shot in Carthage jail, on the 27th of June, 1844, about five o'clock p. m., by an armed mob, painted black—of from 150 to 200 persons. Hyrum was shot first and fell calmly, exclaiming, 'I am a dead man!' Joseph leaped from the window, and was shot dead in the attempt, exclaiming, 'O Lord my God!' They were both shot after they were dead in a brutal manner, and both received four balls.

John Taylor and Willard Richards, two of the twelve, were the only persons in the room at the time; the former was wounded in a savage manner with four balls, but has since recovered; the latter, through the providence of God, escaped, 'without even a hole in his robe.'

Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more (save Jesus only) for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it. In the short space of twenty years, he has brought forth the Book of Mormon, which he translated by the gift and power of God, and has been the means of publishing it on two continents; has sent the fulness of the everlasting gospel which it contained to the four quarters of the earth; has brought forth the revelations and commandments which compose this book of Doctrine and Covenants, and many other wise documents and instructions for the benefit of the children of men; gathered many thousands of the Latter-day Saints, founded a great city; and left a fame and name that cannot be slain. He lived great, and he died great in the eyes of God and his people, and like most of the Lord's anointed in ancient times, has sealed his mission and his works with his own blood; and so has his brother Hyrum. In life they were not divided, and in death they were not separated!

When Joseph went to Carthage to deliver himself up to the pretended requirements of the law, two or three days previous to his assassination, he said, 'I am going like a lamb to the slaughter; but I am calm as a summer's morning; I have a conscience void of offense towards God, and towards all men. I shall die innocent, and it shall yet be said of me—he was murdered in cold blood.' The same morning, after Hyrum had made ready to go—shall it be said to the slaughter? Yes, for so it was,—he read the following paragraph, near the close of the fifth chapter of Ether, in the Book of Mormon and turned down the leaf upon it: [^30]

'And it came to pass that I prayed unto the Lord that he would give unto the Gentiles grace, that they might have charity. And it came to pass that the Lord said unto me, if they have not charity, it mattereth not unto thee, thou hast been faithful; wherefore thy garments are clean. And because thou hast seen thy weakness, thou shalt be made strong, even unto the sitting down in the place which I have prepared in the mansions of my Father. And now I * * * bid farewell unto the Gentiles; yea and also unto my brethren whom I love, until we shall meet before the judgment-seat of Christ, where all men shall know that my garments are not spotted with your blood.'

The testators are now dead, and their testament is in force.

Hyrum Smith was 44 years old in February, 1844, and Joseph Smith was 38 in December, 1843; and henceforward their names will be classed among the martyrs of religion; and the reader in every nation will be reminded that the Book of Mormon, and this book of Doctrine and Covenants of the church, cost the best blood of the nineteenth century to bring them forth for the salvation of a ruined world; and that if the fire can scathe a green tree for the glory of God, how easy it will burn up the 'dry trees' to purify the vineyard of corruption. They lived for glory, they died for glory; and glory is their eternal reward. From age to age shall their names go down to posterity as gems for the sanctified.

They were innocent of any crime, as they had often been proved before, and were only confined in jail by the conspiracy of traitors and wicked men; and their innocent blood on the floor of Carthage jail, is a broad seal affixed to 'Mormonism' that cannot be rejected by any court on earth; and their innocent blood on the escutcheon of the state of Illinois, with the broken faith of the state as pledged by the governor, is a witness to the truth of the everlasting gospel, that all the world cannot impeach; and their innocent blood on the banner of liberty, and on the magna charta of the United States, is an ambassador for the religion of Jesus Christ, that will touch the hearts of honest men among all nations; and their innocent blood, with the innocent blood of all the martyrs under the altar that John saw, will cry unto the Lord of Hosts, till he avenges that blood on the earth. Amen." [^31]

GOVERNOR FORD

(a) Personal Appearance and Character: "Thomas Ford, governor of Illinois, was a man rather above the average politician usually chosen [at the time] among these American states to fill that position. Not specially clear-headed, and having no brain power to spare, he was quite respectable and had some conscience, as is frequently the case with mediocre men. He had a good heart, too, was in no wise vindictive, and though he was in no sense a strong man, his sense of right and equity could be stubborn upon occasion. Small in body, he was likewise small in mind; indeed, there was a song current at the time that there was no room in his diminutive organism for such a thing as a soul. Nevertheless, though bitterly censured by some of the Mormons, I do not think Ford intended to do them wrong." [^32]

(b) Was there Complicity on the part of Ford in the Murder of the Smiths? This question is ably discussed by President John Taylor in his Martyrdom of Joseph Smith; [^33] and for a participant in the scenes of the tragedy, and one who suffered greatly because of the governor's inability to cope with a situation, if not because of his complicity in the plans of the murderers, President Taylor presents the subject in a commendably dispassionate manner:

"There had been various opinions about the complicity of the governor in the murder, some supposing that he knew all about it, and assisted or winked at its execution. It is somewhat difficult to form a correct opinion; from the facts presented it is very certain that things looked more than suspicious against him.

Firstly: He positively knew that we had broken no law.

Secondly: He knew that the mob had not only passed inflammatory resolutions, threatening extermination to the 'Mormons,' but that they had actually assembled armed mobs and commenced hostilities against us.

Thirdly: He took those very mobs that had been arrayed against us, and enrolled them as his troops, thus legalizing their acts.

Fourthly: He disbanded the Nauvoo Legion, which had never violated the law, and disarmed them, and had about his person in the shape of militia known mobocrats and violators of the law.

Fifthly: He requested us to come to Carthage without arms, promising protection, and then refused to interfere in delivering us from prison, although Joseph and Hyrum were put there contrary to law.

Sixthly: Although he refused to interfere in our behalf, yet, when Captain Smith went to him and informed him that the prisoners refused to come out, he told him that he had a command and knew what to do, thus sanctioning the use of force in the violation of law when opposed to us, whereas he would not for us interpose his executive authority to free us from being incarcerated contrary to law, although he was fully informed of all the facts of the case, as we kept him posted in the affairs all the time.

Seventhly: He left the prisoners in Carthage jail contrary to his plighted faith.

Eighthly: Before he went he dismissed all the troops that could be relied upon, as well as many of the mob, and left us in charge of the 'Carthage Greys,' a company that he knew were mobocratic, our most bitter enemies, and who had passed resolutions to exterminate us, and who had been placed under guard by General Deming only the day before.

Ninthly: He was informed of the intended murder both before he left and while on the road, by several different parties.

Tenthly: When the cannon was fired in Carthage, signifying that the deed was done, he immediately took up his line of march and fled [i. e. from Nauvoo]. How did he know that this signal portended their death if he was not in the secret? It may be said some of the party told him. How could he believe what the party said about the gun signal if he could not believe the testimony of several individuals who told him in positive terms about the contemplated murder?

He has, I believe, stated that he left the 'Carthage Greys' there because he considered that, as their town was contiguous to ours, and as the responsibility of our safety rested solely upon them, they would not dare suffer any indignity to befall us. This very admission shows that he did really expect danger; and then he knew that these people had published to the world that they would exterminate us, and his leaving us in their hands and talking of their responsibilities was like leaving a lamb in charge of a wolf, and trusting to its humanity and honor for safe keeping.

It is said, again, that he would not have gone to Nauvoo, and thus placed himself in the hands of the 'Mormons' if he had anticipated any such event, as he would be exposed to their wrath. To this it may be answered that the 'Mormons' did not know their signals, while he did; and they were also known in Warsaw, as well as in other places; and as soon as the gun was fired, a merchant of Warsaw jumped upon his horse and rode directly to Quincy, and reported 'Joseph and Hyrum killed, and those who were with them in jail.' He reported further that 'they were attempting to break jail and were all killed by the guard.' This was their story; it was anticipated to kill all, and the gun was to be the signal that the deed was accomplished. This was known in Warsaw. The governor also knew it and fled; and he could really be in no danger in Nauvoo, for the 'Mormons' did not know it, and he had plenty of time to escape, which he did.

It is said that he made all his officers promise solemnly that they would help him to protect the Smiths; this may or may not be. At any rate, some of these same officers helped to murder them.

The strongest argument in the governor's favor, and one that would bear more weight with us than all the rest put together, would be that he could not believe them capable of such atrocity; and, thinking that their talk and threatenings were a mere ebullition of feeling, a kind of braggadocia, and that there was enough of good moral feeling to control the more violent passions, he trusted to their faith. There is, indeed, a degree of plausibility about this, but when we put it in juxtaposition to the amount of evidence that he was in possession of it weighs very little. He had nothing to inspire confidence in them, and everything to make him mistrust them. Besides, why this broken faith? Why this disregard of what was told him by several parties? Again, if he knew not the plan, how did he understand the signal? Why so oblivious to everything pertaining to the 'Mormon' interest, and so alive and interested about the mobocrats? At any rate, be this as it may, he stands responsible for their blood, and it is dripping on his garments. If it had not been for his promises of protection, they would have protected themselves; it was plighted faith that led them to the slaughter; and, to make the best of, it was a breach of that faith and a non-fulfillment of that promise, after repeated warning that led to their death.

Having said so much, I must leave the governor with my readers and with God. Justice, I conceive, demanded this much, and truth could not be told with less; as I have said before, my opinion is that the governor would not have planned this murder, but he had not sufficient energy to resist popular opinion, even if that opinion led to blood and death." [^34]

(c) The Place in History that Ford Assigns Himself: "The Christian world, which has hitherto regarded Mormonism with silent contempt, unhappily may yet have cause to fear its rapid increase. Modern society is full of material for such a religion. * * * It is to be feared that, in course of a century, some gifted man like Paul, some splendid orator, who will be able by his eloquence to attract crowds of the thousands who are ever ready to hear, and be carried away by the sounding brass and tinkling cymbal of sparkling oratory, may command a hearing, may succeed in breathing a new life into this modern Mohammedanism, and make the name of the martyred Joseph ring as loud, and stir the souls of men as much as the mighty name of Christ itself. Sharon, Palmyra, Manchester, Kirtland, Far West, Adam-ondi-Ahman, Ramus, Nauvoo, and the Carthage jail, may become holy and venerable names, places of classic interest, in another age; like Jerusalem, the Garden of Gethsemane, the Mount of Olives, and Mount Calvary to the Christian, and Mecca and Medina to the Turk. And in that event, the author of this History feels degraded by the reflection that the humble governor of an obscure state, who would otherwise be forgotten in a few years, stands a fair chance like Pilate and Herod, and by their official connection with the true religion, of being dragged down to posterity with an immortal name, hitched onto the memory of a miserable impostor. There may be those whose ambition would lead them to desire an immortal name in history, even in those humbling terms. I am not one of that number." [^35]

(d) The Fate of the Ford Family: The office of governor was the last public trust held by Thomas Ford. At the close of his term in 1846, he retired to private life and obscurity, in which he died penniless, at Peoria, Ill., on the 3rd of Nov., 1850, "leaving his orphan children in a destitute condition," says the Introduction to his History of Illinois. It was during this four years of his retirement that he wrote his History, strongly tinged not only with severity but with bitterness, which is deplored by his literary executor in the Introduction. This executor, General James Shields, for four years sought for a publisher for Ford's History upon such terms as would secure some percentage of the profits to the destitute orphans of its author, and finally succeeded in placing it on such terms with S. C. Grigg and Co., of Chicago. The Mss. had been placed in the hands of General Shields while Ford was on his death bed, and he did not feel at liberty to alter its text. "I therefore give it to the public," he says in his brief Introduction of it, "just as I received it from the hands of the author, and with the sincere hope, for the sake of his destitute children, that it may meet with an indulgent and generous reception." It seems like the irony of fate, that the governor of Illinois, who, whatever other failures may have attended upon his administration, has to his credit the raising of Illinois from bankruptcy, and paying off its three million dollar debt (a very great sum for Illinois in 1842-46). should himself die penniless, and, it is said, filled a pauper's grave!

Misfortune seems to have followed the family after the death of the father. Two of the sons were associated with gangs of "Prairie Riders"—the picturesque name for horse thieves—in southwestern Kansas, where they were lynched by vigilantes for their crimes. One, the elder brother, Thomas, in 1871; the other Sewell Ford, in 1874. [^36]

Misfortune followed the female branch of the family as well as the males. In a special dispatch to the Los Angeles Times of March 21, 1910, the following sad story of the last daughter of Governor Ford is told:

"Peoria, (Ill.) March 20, 1910.—With but four mourners the body of Mrs. Anna Davis, last daughter of the late Governor Thomas Ford, was interred beside her mother, father and sister, as darkness settled over Springdale cemetery this evening. No word of eulogy was spoken, no minister read a prayer!"

NOTE

DEATH OF GOVERNOR FORD: A FULFILLED PROPHECY

We read in an exchange some particulars relating to Thomas Ford, the governor of Illinois, who pledged his protection to Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and then left them exposed to the murderous attack of a mob with their faces blackened. A lady was invited to attend a Methodist church at Peoria, Illinois, and noticing a rough box or coffin resting under the pulpit, inquired concerning it, and was informed that it enclosed the remains of the wife of ex-Governor Ford, and was supplied at the public expense. Ford was present, and he looked gaunt and miserable, and his bones appeared ready to pierce through the skin. Two weeks later the lady attended again and was astonished to see a similar coffin in the same place. It contained all that was left of Governor Ford, who had for some time lived, and had now died a pauper. The lady who saw this, though she had left the "Mormon" church, remembered hearing Elder John Taylor say in Nauvoo, that "Governor Ford would live until the flesh would wither from his bones and he would die a pauper." [^37]

Footnotes

Abram Lincoln, Thomas Gilmore,

James Reynolds, Benj. Warrington,

Thomas J. Graham, Reuben H. Loomis,

Wm. M. Owens, Samuel Scott,

Ebenezer Rand, James Ward,

Thomas Brawner, Samuel Ramsey,

Ralph Gorrell, Thomas H. Owen,

Brant Agnert, David Thompson,

Martin Yetter, John J. Hickok.

William Smith.

(History of Hancock County, p. 328.)

Jesse Griffitts, Jonathan Foy,

Joseph Jones, Solomon J. Hill,

Wm. Robertson, James Gittings,

Wm. Smith, F. M. Walton,

Joseph Massey, Jabez A. Beebe,

Silas Griffitts, Gilmore Callison.

(History of Hancock County, Gregg, p. 329.)

That where the evidence is circumstantial, admitting all to be proven which the evidence tends to prove, if then the jury can make any supposition consistent with the facts, by which the murder might have been committed without the agency of the defendants, it will be their duty to make that supposition, and find defendants not guilty.

That in making up their verdict, they will exclude from their consideration all that was said by Daniels, Brackenbury and Miss Graham (witnesses).

That whenever the probability is of a definite and limited nature, whether in the proportion of 100 to 1 or of 1,000 to 1, or any ratio, is immaterial, it cannot be safely made the ground of conviction; for to act upon it in any case would be to decide that for the sake of convicting many criminals, the life of one innocent man might be sacrificed. (Starkie, p. 508; History of Hancock County, Gregg, p. 330.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Solomon's Songs iv:7.
[^2] Origin and Progress of Mormonism, Tucker, 1867, p. 16; also p. 288. The latter from a letter of Rev. Jesse Townsend, Palmyra, Dec. 24, 1833.
[^3] Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, pp. 12, 13. Edition of 1834. Hunt in his Mormonism, 1844, paraphrases Howe's description. See pp. 6, 7.
[^4] Kennedy's Early Days of Mormonism, 1888, see pp. 12-16. Kennedy admits that some of the things said of the Prophet and his family may have been dictated by envy or malice (p. 17). Charges of this kind made against the Prophet and his family, when living in New York, were considered and refuted in chapter iv of this History.
[^5] Prophet of the Nineteenth Century, Caswall, 1845, p. 223.
[^6] Harding's letter is given in extenso in Gregg's Prophet of Palmyra, pp. 34-56. That Harding's letter was written in a spirit of malice cannot be doubted; both from the spirit of the writing itself, and by recollection of the fact that Harding was engaged in a bitter controversy with the people of Utah when he was governor of the territory, 1862-3; and that on the petition of the people of Utah—chiefly "Mormons"—he was removed from office by President Lincoln. His letter to Gregg twenty years later on The Early Days of Mormonism was the opportunity of a small soul "to get even" with a people who had caused his dismissal from public office.
[^7] Gregg's Prophet of Palmyra, p. 4.
[^8] Ibid, 56, note.
[^9] The Prophet of Palmyra, Gregg, p. 2.
[^10] History of Illinois, p. 354-355.
[^11] History of Illinois, p. 355.
[^12] Story of the Mormons, pp. 12, 13, and 311.
[^13] The article from the Christian Reflector is quoted in Smucker's History of the Mormons, pp. 180-1.
[^14] Smucker's History of the Mormons, pp. 181-3.
[^15] Figures of the Past, 9th edition, p. 376.
[^16] Figures of the Past, p. 376.
[^17] Elsewhere, upon the relative value of the testimony of disciples and enemies of Joseph Smith, I have said: If of these testimonies it shall be said they are borne by men who were Joseph Smith's friends and followers—interested parties, bent on perpetuating the frauds he inaugurated—I would reply by asking: Whose testimony do Christians accept as representing the true character of Jesus Christ? Certainly not the testimony of the Sadducees and Pharisees; but the testimony of St. Matthew, of St. Peter, of St. James and St. John—"his friends and followers," the infidel exclaims—"interested parties, bent on perpetuating the frauds he inaugurated!" Will the Christian world because of that preposterous claim that Christ's friends and followers are not proper witnesses of his life and character, give up the evidence supplied in the testimonies of his friends to the uprightness and purity of his life, and the divinity of himself and his mission? Ah, no! They will ask rather, who so competent to bear testimony of his life and the divinity of his character as those who intimately knew him, who lived with him, who shared his joys and his sorrows; who were in sympathy with his life's mission and could enter into its spirit? I only ask that the same reasoning be applied to the testimony of the friends of Joseph Smith. (New Witnesses for God, vol. i, p. 218.)
[^18] The Martyrdom of Joseph Smith, Taylor, in Tyler's Mormon Battalion. Introduction, pp. 51-2.
[^19] Public Discussion in France, published in Orson Pratt's Works, 1851, pp. 23, 24.
[^20] Journal of Discourses, vol. i, pp. 40, 41.
[^21] See ch. xxxvi, this History.
[^22] Autobiography, Parley P. Pratt, pp. 47, 48.
[^23] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxii:3, 4. The context of the passage in which the sentence occurs is worthy of reproduction: "The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in derision, and hell shall rage against thee. While the pure in heart, and the wise, and the noble, and the virtuous, shall seek counsel, and authority, and blessings constantly from under thy hand, And thy people shall never turn against thee by the testimony of traitors; And although their influence shall cast thee into trouble, and into bars and walls, thou shalt be had in honor, and but for a small moment and thy voice shall be more terrible in the midst of thine enemies, than the fierce lion, because of thy righteousness; and thy God shall stand by thee forever and forever."
[^24] I Tim. ii:6, marginal reading.
[^25] From a discourse at Nauvoo on the 6th of May, 1841. (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, pp. 358-360).
[^26] Of course this remark was in humorous vein, though humor is a quality quite generally, but erroneously, denied the Prophet. The above is closely akin to the remark he made to Josiah Quincy on the occasion of that gentleman's visit with him at Nauvoo. They had been discussing the concentration of power in the hands of the Prophet—by far too much power, in Mr. Quincy's view, to be entrusted to one man. "'In your hands or that of any other person's,' was the reply, 'so much power would no doubt be dangerous. I am the only man in the world whom it would be safe to trust it with. Remember, I am a Prophet!' The last in a rich, comical aside, as if in recognition of the ridiculous sound they might have in the ears of a Gentile" (Figures of the Past, p. 397).
[^27] History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, p. 401.
[^28] History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, p. 265.
[^29] History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, p. 516.
[^30] Heb. xii:6-8. The reproofs and corrections of the Prophet from the revelations are collected and published in the introduction of the History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, pp. 36 and 37.
[^31] See especially this History, ch. vii.
[^32] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, p. 445.
[^33] Ibid, vol. v, p. 517.
[^34] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xxi.
[^35] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lviii.
[^36] 36. Kansas City Star of Oct. 16th, 1910, where the story of the lynching and the facts of identification are told in detail; also copied into Improvement Era, Utah, for February, 1911.
[^37] 37. Ogden Junction; copied into Millennial Star, vol. xxxvii, p. 15.
