B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LXI

JOSEPH SMITH: PERSONAL APPEARANCE AND CHARACTER

IT will be well to pause now and contemplate the central figure of our History and what he accomplished—Joseph Smith and his work. Eighty-six years have passed since his death; one hundred years since he organized the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; one hundred and seven years since the Book of Mormon was revealed to him; one hundred and ten years since he received and proclaimed his first vision; one hundred and twenty-five years since he was born. Sufficient time therefore has elapsed in reference to all these several events in which "Mormonism" had its origin to apply somewhat the test of time to this man and his work. And first I speak of the man himself.

VARIED ESTIMATES OF JOSEPH SMITH CLASSIFIED

During his lifetime, and since, a great diversity of opinion has obtained concerning Joseph Smith, even as to his personal appearance and bearing, as well as to his character. These diverse opinions, however, may be classified, and naturally they fall under three general divisions: first, his enemies who hated him cordially and unreasonably—their views are wholly unfavorable; second, those to whom he was an enigma that eluded analysis and defied classification; these have sought to balance the account of strength and weakness; of honesty and fraud; of charlatan and honest fanatic, but without achieving any marked success in satisfactory results—their analysis and speculations leave him still an enigma; third, his immediate and enthusiastic disciples—their views of him are wholly favorable, and tinged perhaps in some instances with something akin to superstitious reverence, that magnifies every virtue and blinds them to every fault. Men still say of the beloved—"Thou art all fair, my love; there is no spot in thee!" [^1]

THE VOICE OF ENEMIES

The first class report that "from the age of twelve to twenty years he is distinctly remembered as a dull-eyed, flaxenhaired prevaricating boy—noted only for his indolent and vagabondish character, and his habits of exaggeration and untruthfulness. A person of questionable character, of intemperate habits, and latterly a money-digger." [^2] Again his enemy: "The extreme ignorance and apparent stupidity of this modern Prophet, were by his early followers, looked upon as his greatest merit, and as furnishing the most incontestable proof of his divine mission—these have ever been the wardrobe of impostors." And yet this same enemy in the same paragraph says:

"But it is obvious that all those deficiencies [i. e., lack of opportunities for education, etc.] are fully supplied by a natural genius, strong inventive powers of mind, a deep study, and an unusually correct estimate of the human passions and feelings. In short, he is now endowed with all the requisite traits of character to pursue most successfully the humbug which he has introduced. His address is easy, rather fascinating and winning, of a mild and sober deportment, when not irritated. But he frequently becomes boisterous by the impertinence or curiosity of the skeptical, and assumes the bravado, instead of adhering to the meekness which he professes. His followers, of course, can discover in his very countenance all the certain indications of a divine mission." [^3]

Another enemy describes him as "wild and intemperate, even dishonest and tricky in his youth." And again the same author: "That he was an immense imposition upon the credulity of man, and knew himself to be such can hardly be questioned." [^4] "Smith is a coarse plebeian person in aspect," says the Rev. Henry Caswall, writing of the Prophet in 1843; "and his countenance exhibits a curious mixture of the knave and the clown. His hands are over-large and awkward, and on one of his fingers he wears a massive gold ring. He has a downcast look, and possesses none of that open and straightforward expression which generally characterizes an honest man." [^5] Stephen S. Harding, who knew the Smith family in Palmyra, and later by the fortunes of American politics was for a brief period governor of Utah during her territorial days (from July, 1862 to June, 1863) wrote, in 1882, the following description of the Prophet:

"He was about six feet high, what might be termed long legged, and with big feet. His hair had turned from tow-colored to light auburn, [Harding was describing the Prophet after several years of his own absence from Palmyra] large eyes of bluish gray, a prominent nose, and a mouth that of itself was a study. His face seemed almost colorless, and with little or no beard. * * * At that time his weight was about one hundred and fifty pounds, he had not a dollar in the world, and his character was such that credit was impossible." [^6]

Gregg in referring to the Prophet, says, "His motives were not honest, nor was he prompted by either revenge or ambition." He ascribes to him in youth "an untutored and feeble intellect" that had grasped at nothing beyond "mere toying with mysterious things;" [^7] and indeed holds that the Prophet's intellectual force had always been overrated. [^8] Yet, even Gregg makes a remark that leads one to believe that the Prophet was an enigma to him. He says: "That such a career as was his, with such results following, could be run in that enlightened nineteenth century, and in a land where christianity and civilization have shed their benign rays, is a mystery which the writer prefers to leave his readers to solve." [^9]

It was to be expected that Governor Ford of Illinois would give a description of the Prophet, and naturally one as unfavorable as his prejudice could draw. He refers to him as the most successful impostor of modern times. "A man who, though ignorant and coarse, had some great natural parts which fitted him for temporary success, but which were so obscured and counteracted by the inherent corruption and vices of his nature, that he never could succeed in establishing a system of policy which looked to permanent success in the future." [^10] It is here where time and the survival of the system of religion and philosophy founded by Joseph Smith, comes to the rescue of the Prophet, and vindicates him from all such estimates of his character and work as are portrayed by Governor Ford. The governor-author continues:

"It must not be supposed that the pretended prophet practiced the tricks of a common imposter; that he was a dark and gloomy person, with a long beard, a grave and severe aspect, and a reserved and saintly carriage of his person; on the contrary, he was full of levity, even to boyish romping; dressed like a dandy, and at times drank like a sailor and swore like a pirate. He could, as occasion required, be exceedingly meek in his deportment; and then again rough and boisterous as a highway robber; being always able to satisfy his followers of the propriety of his conduct. He always quailed before power, and was arrogant to weakness. At times he could put on the air of a penitent, as if feeling the deepest humiliation of his sin, and suffering unutterable anguish, and indulging in the most gloomy foreboding of eternal woe. At such times he would call for the prayers of the brethren in his behalf, with a wild and fearful energy and earnestness. He was full six feet high, strongly built, and uncommonly well muscled. No doubt he was as much indebted for his influence over an ignorant people, to the superiority of his physical vigor, as to his greater cunning and intellect." [^11]

Linn contents himself with quoting some of these alledged descriptions of the Prophet in his youth; and for pen pictures of him later in life uses Josiah Quincy and Rev. Henry Caswall. [^12]

THE VOICE OF THE MYSTIFIED

This brings us to the second class who have described Joseph Smith and attempted some estimate of his character, but find him an unsolvable riddle. A writer in the Christian Reflector, referring to his life and character speaks of the Prophet as having been "born in the very lowest walks of life, reared in poverty, educated in vice, having no claims to even common intelligence, coarse and vulgar in deportment." And yet this writer is compelled to admit, for he does admit, that this man to whom he ascribes these defects of character, nevertheless—

"Succeeded in establishing a religious creed, the tenets of which have been taught throughout the length and breadth of America. The Prophet's virtues have been rehearsed and admired in Europe; the ministers of Nauvoo have found a welcome in Asia; and Africa has listened to the grave sayings of the seer of Palmyra. The standard of the Latter-day Saints has been reared on the banks of the Nile, and even the Holy Land has been entered by the emissaries of this wicked imposter. * * * He founded a city in one of the most beautiful situations in the world, in a beautiful curve of the 'father of waters,' of no mean pretensions, and in it he has collected a population of twenty-five thousand, from every part of the world. He planned the architecture of a magnificent temple, and reared its walls nearly fifty feet high, which, if completed, will be the most beautiful, most costly, and the most noble building in America." [^13]

Remarkable achievements these for one "reared in poverty," "educated in vice," having no "claims even to common intelligence, coarse and vulgar in deportment!"

Smucker, one of the fairest of all non-"Mormon" writers, says:

"Joseph Smith was indeed a remarkable man; and, in summing up his character, it is extremely difficult to decide, whether he were indeed the vulgar imposter which it has become the fashion to consider him, or whether he was a sincere fanatic who believed what he taught. But whether an imposter, who for the purposes of his ambition, concocted the fraud of the Book of Mormon, or a fanatic who believed and promulgated a fraud originally concocted by some other person, it must be admitted that he displayed no little zeal and courage; that his tact was great, that his talents for governing men were of no mean order, and that however glaring his deficiencies in early life may have been, he manifested, as he grew older, an ability both as an orator and writer, which showed that he possessed strong natural gifts, only requiring cultivation to have raised him to a high reputation among better educated men. * * * But whether knave or lunatic, whether a liar or a true man, it cannot be denied that he was one of the most extraordinary persons of his time, a man of rude genius, who accomplished a much greater work than he knew; and whose name, whatever he may have been whilst living, will take its place among the notabilities of the world." [^14]

JOSIAH QUINCY'S PEN PORTRAIT

The most noted of this second group of commentators upon Joseph Smith, however, is Josiah Quincy, a member of the famous Quincy family of Massachusetts, a graduate of Harvard, 1821: mayor of Boston from 1845-1849. Mr. Quincy visited Nauvoo in May, 1844, forty-three days previous to the Prophet's martyrdom, and though his Figures of the Past was not published until 1882, the year of his death, yet his recollections of the Prophet and his impressions of Nauvoo were drawn from his journal, written at the time of that visit, and from numerous letters written to his friends about that same period. Mr. Quincy places his pen portrait of "Joseph Smith at Nauvoo" with similar portraits of such eminent Americans as John Adams, Daniel Webster, John Randolph, Andrew Jackson and the French soldier and statesman, Lafayette.

Mr. Quincy opens his article on Joseph Smith at Nauvoo in the following remarkable passage:

"It is by no means improbable that some future textbook for the use of generations yet unborn, will contain a question something like this: What historical American of the nineteenth century has exerted the most powerful influence upon the destinies of his countrymen? And it is by no means impossible that the answer to that interrogatory may be thus written: Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet. And the reply, absurd as it doubtless seems to most men now living, may be an obvious commonplace to their descendants. History deals in surprises and paradoxes quite as startling as this. The man who established a religion in this age of free debate, who was and is today accepted by hundreds of thousands as a direct emissary from the Most High,—such a rare human being is not to be disposed of by pelting his memory with unsavory epithets. Fanatic, impostor, charlatan, he may have been; but these hard names furnish no solution to the problem he presents to us." [^15]

After giving an account of his arrival at the "Mansion" early in the morning, and in a rainstorm, and getting his first view of the Prophet under not very favorable conditions, he says:

"Pre-eminent among the stragglers by the door stood a man of commanding appearance, clad in the costume of a journeyman carpenter when about his work. He was a hearty, athletic fellow, with blue eyes standing prominently out upon his light complexion, a long nose, and a retreating forehead. He wore striped pantaloons, a linen jacket, which had not lately seen the washtub, and a beard of some three days growth. This was the founder of the religion which had been preached in every quarter of the earth. * * * A fine looking man is what the passer-by would instinctively have murmured upon meeting the remarkable individual who had fashioned the mould which was to shape the feelings of so many thousands of his fellow-mortals. But Smith was more than this, and one could not resist the impression that capacity and resource were natural to his stalwart person. I have already mentioned the resemblance he bore to Elisha R. Potter, of Rhode Island, whom I met in Washington in 1826. The likeness was not such as would be recognized in a picture, but rather one that would be felt in a grave emergency. Of all men I have met, these two seemed best endowed with that kingly faculty which directs, as by intrinsic right, the feeble or confused souls who are looking for guidance. This it is just to say with emphasis; for the reader will find so much that is puerile and even shocking in my report of the Prophet's conversation that he might never suspect the impression of rugged power that was given by the man."

Mr. Quincy spent the day in Nauvoo, chiefly in the company and in constant conversation with the Prophet. Of Nauvoo itself he said:

"General Smith ordered a capacious carriage, and we drove to that beautiful eminence, bounded on three sides by the Mississippi, which was covered by the holy city of Nauvoo. The curve in the river enclosed a position lovely enough to furnish a site for the Utopian communities of Plato or Sir Thomas More; and here was an orderly city, magnificently laid out, and teeming with activity and enterprise."

Mr. Quincy presents no solution to the riddle that Joseph Smith's character presented to him. "I have no theory to advance respecting this extraordinary man," he tells us early in his chapter on the Prophet; and in closing it he says:

"Born in the lowest ranks of poverty, without book-learning, and with the homliest of all human names, he had made himself at the age of thirty-nine a power upon earth. Of the multitudinous family of Smith, from Adam down (Adam of the 'Wealth of Nations,' I mean), none had won the hearts and shaped human lives as this Joseph. His influence, whether for good or for evil, is potent today, and the end is not yet. * * * If the reader does not know just what to make of Joseph Smith, I cannot help him out of the difficulty. I myself stand helpless before the puzzle." [^16]

THE TESTIMONIES OF FRIENDS—"INTERESTED PARTIES"

We come now to the third class who have left on record their report of Joseph Smith, his appearance and his character, viz., his immediate friends and disciples. I know it behooves one to be guarded both in setting down and in accepting the report of a great character from his disciples who come under the magic spell of his personality. These are as apt to magnify his virtues and overlook his defects as his opponents are to magnify his defects and overlook or deny the existence of his virtues. Both love and hate can be blind, but to opposite things, one to faults, the other to virtues. On the whole, however, love can be trusted to be truer than hate, since to the latter malice lends its venom, and recognizes no limits in its desire to destroy that which it has marked for destruction. [^17]

JOHN TAYLOR

What Joseph Smith was to his immediate disciples may be gathered somewhat from the reflections of Elder John Taylor, who was with the Prophet in his martyrdom; who also succeeded Brigham Young in the presidency of the church and who himself was a strong character. When lying wounded in Carthage jail and Willard Richards brought to him the final word which confirmed his worst fears—Joseph Smith was dead—he experienced the following sensations and indulged in these reflections:

"I felt a dull, lonely, sickening sensation at the news. When I reflected that our noble chieftain, the Prophet of the living God, had fallen, and that I had seen his brother in the cold embrace of death, it seemed as though there was a void, a vacuum in the great field of human existence to me, and a dark, gloomy, chasm in the kingdom, and that we were left alone. Oh, how lonely was that feeling! How cold, barren and desolate! In the midst of difficulties he was always the first in motion; in critical positions his counsel was always sought. As our Prophet he approached our God, and obtained for us his will: but now our Prophet, our counselor, our general, our leader was gone, and amid the fiery ordeal that we then had to pass through, we were left alone without his aid, and as our future guide for things spiritual or temporal, and for all things pertaining to this world or the next, he had spoken for the last time on earth!" [^18]

Later, when on a mission in France, 1850, in a public discussion with ministers of different denominations, who assailed the character of the Prophet, Elder Taylor said:

"I was acquainted with Joseph Smith for years. I have traveled with him; I have been with him in private and in public; I have associated with him in councils of all kinds; I have listened hundreds of times to his public teachings, and his advice to his friends and associates of a more private nature. I have been at his house and seen his deportment in his family. I have seen him arraigned before the courts of his country, and seen him honorably acquitted, and delivered from the pernicious breath of slander, and the machinations and falsehoods of wicked and corrupt men. I was with him living, and with him when he died; when he was murdered in Carthage jail by a ruthless mob with their faces painted, and headed by a Methodist minister named Williams—I was there and was myself wounded in my body. I have seen him under all these various circumstances, and I testify before God, angels and men that he was a good, honorable, virtuous man—that his doctrines were good, scriptural and wholesome—that his precepts were such as became a man of God—that his private and public character was unimpeachable—and that he lived and died as a man of God, and a gentleman." [^19]

BRIGHAM YOUNG

Brigham Young, the successor of Joseph Smith in the presidency of the church, said of the Prophet:

"From the first day I knew Brother Joseph to the time of his death, a better man never lived upon the face of the earth. * * * Joseph Smith was not killed because he was deserving it, nor because he was a wicked man. I know that to be so, as well as I know that the sun shines. * * * I know for myself that Joseph Smith was the subject of forty-eight lawsuits, and the most of them I witnessed with my own eyes. But not one action could ever be made to bear against him. He was innocent and virtuous; he kept the laws of his country and lived above them; out of the forty-eight law suits, not one charge could be substantiated against him. He was pure, just and holy as to the keeping of the law." [^20]

Of the immediate disciples of Joseph Smith who have left pen portraits of him, and estimates of his character, Parley P. Pratt, one of the earliest converts to "Mormonism"—joining the church when it had been organized less than six months—is, perhaps, the most conspicuous. In his Autobiography occurs the following:

PARLEY P. PRATT'S PEN PICTURES OF JOSEPH SMITH

"President Smith was in person tall and well built, strong and active; of a light complexion, light hair, blue eyes, very little beard, and of an expression peculiar to himself, on which the eye naturally rested with interest, and was never weary of beholding. His countenance was ever mild, affable, beaming with intelligence and benevolence; mingled with a look of interest and an unconscious smile, or cheerfulness, and entirely free from all restraint or affectation of gravity; and there was something connected with the serene and steady penetrating glance of his eye, as if he would penetrate the deepest abyss of the human heart, gaze into eternity, penetrate the heavens, and comprehend all worlds.

He possessed a noble boldness and independence of character; his manner was easy and familiar; his rebuke terrible as the lion; his benevolence unbounded as the ocean; his intelligence universal, and his language abounding in original eloquence peculiar to himself—not polished—not studied—not smoothed and softened by education and refined by art; but flowing forth in its own native simplicity, and profusely abounding in variety of subject and manner. He interested and edified, while, at the same time, he amused and entertained his audience; and none listened to him that were ever weary of his discourse. I have even known him to retain a congregation of willing and anxious listeners for many hours together, in the midst of cold or sunshine, rain or wind, while they were laughing at one moment and weeping the next. Even his most bitter enemies were generally overcome, if he could once get their ears.

I have known him when chained and surrounded with armed murderers and assassins who were heaping upon him every possible insult and abuse, rise up in the majesty of a son of God and rebuke them, in the name of Jesus Christ, till they quailed before him, dropped their weapons, and, on their knees, begged his pardon, and ceased their abuse. [^21]

In short, in him the character of a Daniel and a Cyrus were wonderfully blended. The gifts, wisdom and devotion of a Daniel were united to the boldness, courage, temperance, perseverance and generosity of a Cyrus. And had he been spared a martyr's fate till mature manhood and age, he was certainly endowed with powers and ability to have revolutionized the world in many respects, and to have transmitted to posterity a name associated with more brilliant and glorious acts than has yet fallen to the lot of mortal. As it is his works will live to an endless age, and unnumbered millions yet unborn will mention his name with honor, as a noble instrument in the hands of God, who, during his short and youthful career, laid the foundation of that kingdom spoken of by Daniel, the prophet, which should break in pieces all other kingdoms and stand forever." [^22]

This, of course is the language of eulogy, but one feels that it is honest eulogy; for Parley P. Pratt was intimately associated with Joseph Smith for fourteen years; he shared his toils, labors, persecutions, and imprisonment while the Prophet lived, and afterwards continued to preach the gospel taught by that Prophet until the close of his own sad, toilsome, and eventful life. Parley P. Pratt's pen portrait of Joseph Smith, more than any other passage in "Mormon" literature, represents what Joseph Smith was and is to his people, no matter what the world may think him to be; and in their abiding affection for him is seen the fulfillment of one of the promises he received of God, namely: "Thy people shall never be turned against thee by the testimony of traitors." [^23] This was given out from Liberty prison in March, 1839, while the saints were being expelled in a body from Missouri. And the singular fulfillment of it up to the present, and the absolute certainty of its fulfillment in the future justifies belief in the inspiration of that prediction.

THE PROPHET'S SELF-REVEALMENT TO THE INTELLIGENT DISCIPLE

There is, however, a view of the Prophet that may be taken other than that of the uncritical and perhaps fanatical personal disciples who knew him, and saw and felt only his virtues and his strength in those virtues. A view that would in itself be truer and even more just to the Prophet than unreasoning adulation; and that is the view of the intelligent believer in the Prophet and his mission. Such a view would exclude the report of the Prophet's enemies since it would recognize the fact that they spoke from malice and are unworthy of belief. But such a view would also modify the mere adulation of the enthusiasts among the disciples who see only the perfection of the object they adore. This last view would keep in mind that it is not given to mortal man to live an utterly blameless life nor stand forth before his fellows a character perfect throughout. It would hold in constant remembrance that it had been given to the Christ alone to present to the world the one perfect character, and live the one sinless, and perfect life; and that the Christ was not merely man but was super-man; he was not only divine but Deity; and one great purpose of his earth-mission was to reveal Deity to the world, and hence, indeed, through him, "God was manifested in the flesh." [^24]

It is but just also to the Prophet to say that he made no claim for himself of either impeccability or infallibility. "Where is the man that is free from vanity?" he asked on one occasion. "None ever was perfect but Jesus," he continued; "and why was he perfect? Because he was the Son of God, and had the fulness of the Spirit, and was greater than any man." [^25]

Referring to this subject upon another occasion he said:

"I do not think there have been many good men on the earth since the days of Adam; but there was one good man, and his name was Jesus. Many persons think a prophet must be a great deal better than any one else. Suppose I would condescend—yes, I will call it condescend!—to be a great deal better than any one of you, I would be raised up to the highest heaven; and who should I have to accompany me? [^26] I love that man better who swears a stream as long as my arm yet deals justice to his neighbors, and mercifully deals his substance to the poor, than the long, smooth-faced hypocrite. I do not want you to think that I am very righteous, for I am not." [^27]

The sentence "many persons think a prophet must be a great deal better than anybody else," will bear further consideration. President Smith relates that once when he was in conversation with a brother and sister from Michigan, who thought that "a prophet is always a prophet," he told them to the contrary. "But I told them," are his words, "that a prophet was only a prophet when acting as such." [^28]

These two remarks linked together, disclaim for the Prophet impeccability; and limit his words and actions to which sanctity and inerrancy are to be attributed, to his official or ex cathedra actions and utterances.

Again in disclaiming perfection for himself, the Prophet said:

"Although I was called of my Heavenly Father to lay the foundation of this great work and kingdom in this dispensation, and testify of his revealed will to scattered Israel, I am subject to like passions as other men, like the prophets of olden times." [^29]

Not only in these personal disclaimers of perfection, and of unusual sanctity or inerrancy may we see the admitted defects of deportment and character in the Prophet, but in the revelations he proclaimed are frequent reproofs of the Prophet. In these revelations he is never shielded, never justified when he steps aside from the path direct; reproof, chastisement, and warnings are administered to him. God in these revelations deals with him indeed as with a son whom he loves, if it be true—and we have warrant of holy writ that it is—that "God chasteneth whom he loveth, and scourgeth every son he receiveth." [^30]

Because of these reproofs and corrections of the Prophet in the revelations, however, or because of the disclaimers of unusual sanctity made by himself, it must not be thought that there was any act of great unrighteousness, or deed outrageously wicked in his life; much less that any habit of sinfulness is here admitted. None of these things can be successfully maintained against him. His defects, such as they were, may be gathered from the reproving revelations themselves, and from the facts set forth in this History. [^31]

THE LIMITATIONS OF A PROPHET

In brief these may be set down as a disposition to be over persuaded by men, as against the strict requirements of the commandments of God; the dangerous weakness of too readily accepting men at their own valuation; a too implicit trust in their protestations of repentance when overtaken in their sins; a too great tenacity in friendship for men he had once taken into his confidence after they had been proven unworthy of that friendship, and by which taint of their sins, in hypercritical minds, attached somewhat to him; and, perhaps, a too fierce disposition to give way to reckless denunciation when once he really broke the ties of friendship—his anger was terrible, all agree upon that. There was also at times, perhaps, a too great inclination to levity, the intellectual playfulness natural to him not always remaining within proper bounds. It arose from the abounding fulness and perfection of physical life which so wonderfully sustained him in the trying ordeals of his career, and from his youthfulness. Men called him "Old Joe Smith," yet he was but a young man at the time of his death, thirty-eight years old—still a youth. Then it must be borne in mind that some things which the sectarian world had denominated as sin by their creeds, or their ethical systems, the Prophet did not recognize as sins at all. "What many people call sin," he remarked, on one occasion, "is not sin. I do many things to break down superstition, and I will break it down." [^32] Again, in complaining of those who judged of his acts he said: "The only principle upon which they judge me is by comparing my acts with the foolish traditions of their fathers and the nonsensical teachings of hireling priests." [^33]

The result of these views of the Prophet has been to enlarge the liberty of the saints in many respects; to remove the somber hues supposed to be essential to a religious life; and more especially in the matter of innocent amusements. In things not harmful or sinful in themselves, but only in their abuse, the ban was by him largely removed, leading to a wider social life, and greater freedom of enjoyment. Until the violin is not regarded by the saints as an instrument of satan; nor the ball room, when properly safeguarded, as the antechamber of hades; nor the theater as the broad highway to damnation; hence the enjoyment of these innocent amusements and pleasures was allowed to the saints by the Prophet—and by the church since his day—to the scandal, perhaps, of some sections of orthodox christendom.

THE TENDENCY TO AUTOCRACY

There remains one other characteristic of the Prophet's to be noticed, and one which was the cause of some of his troubles—of most of his troubles, in fact, so far as they were self-induced. This was a tendency in him to autocracy, the natural tendency of nearly all strong characters. This tendency, of course, was as much due to the conditions in the midst of which he labored, as to any inherent disposition of his own. The revelations he had received made him prophet, seer, and revelator, or lawgiver, to the church; also he was president of the high priesthood, which carried with it also presidency of the church; in him centered law-making, lawdetermining, and executive authority. The church was admonished from the beginning to give heed unto all his words and commandments which he should give, as he received them, walking in all holiness before the Lord. "For his word ye shall receive as if from mine own mouth," said the Lord, "in all patience and faith." The very safety and progress of the church was made to depend upon her obedience to this law. "For thus saith the Lord God, him have I inspired to move the cause of Zion, in mighty power for good." [^34] These powers, however, relate to the church and her affairs; not to the affairs of civil government. "Behold, the laws ye have received from my hand," said the Lord, subsequently—and the fact declared existed before and holds universally as to the revelations given—"are the laws of the church, and in this light ye shall hold them forth. Behold, here is wisdom." [^35] But the position he held in the church, naturally begot in him the tendency to autocracy to which reference is made. Moreover the Prophet, possessed as he was of a strong sense of natural justice, and conscious of no limits to his own strength when standing for what he conceived to be truth and justice, was impatient of the law's delays, and would fain by short cuts and disregard of formalities execute justice as he conceived it, regardless of consequences. This tendency to autocracy is the point at which the Prophet's career and character are most vulnerable to adverse criticism.

THE SUMMARY

We may say, then, of Joseph Smith that he claimed for himself no special sanctity, no faultless life, no perfection of character, no inerrancy for every word spoken by him. And as he did not claim these things for himself, so can they not be claimed for him by others; for to claim perfection for him, or even unusual sanctity, would be to repudiate the revelations themselves which supply the evidence of his imperfections, whereof, in them, he is frequently reproved.

Joseph Smith was a man of like passions with other men; struggling with the same weaknesses; subjected to the same temptations; under the same moral law, and humiliated at times, like others, by occasionally, in word and conduct, falling below the high ideals presented in the perfect life and faultless character of the Man of Nazareth.

But though a man of like passions with other men, yet to Joseph Smith was given access to the mind of Deity, through the revelations of God to him; and likewise to him was given a divine authority to declare that mind of God to the world. Is that true? And does what he announced, ex cathedra, as word of God, stand such tests of truth as men and time may apply to it? These are the questions which most concern men in reference to this Prophet of our age; and that brings us to the consideration of this Prophet's work.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] I Corinthians, iii:11
[^2] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xviii. Revelation given in June, 1829, cf, also Book of Mormon, Mosiah iv; and I Nephi x:17-20.
[^3] Early in his experience as a religious teacher, the Prophet received divine instruction that water, as well as wine, would be acceptable in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xxvii, and History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, ch. xi) and water is quite generally used in the church for this purpose.
[^4] Titus i:2.
[^5] Gal. iii, cf. Hebrews iii:12-19, and iv:1-2. Also I Cor. x:1-4. See also Introduction, this History.
[^6] Isaiah xxiv:1-6.
[^7] Acts xx:27-30; II Tim. iv:1-4; II Peter ii:1-3; II Thess. ii:1-17. Latter-day Saint literature upon this subject is very full; see the works of Orson Pratt, Remarkable Vision, also the Kingdom of God; Parley P. Pratt's Voice of Warning, chapters iii and vii; also his Key to Theology, chs. ii, iii and iv; Spencer's Letters, ch. vi. Dr. James E. Talmage has written a special work upon the subject, under the title The Great Apostasy, 1910. A treatise will be found on the same them in the present writer's New Witnesses for God, vol. i, second edition, 1911; also in his Outlines of Ecclesiastical History, and a more thorough historical treatise of the theme in his Introduction to the first volume of the History of the Church, Period I. See also ch. vi of this History, and The Falling Away, 16 Radio Addresses, this writer, 1929.
[^8] Eph. i.
[^9] I Peter, iv:6.
[^10] I Peter, iii:18-20.
[^11] I Cor, xv:29.
[^12] Seven temples have now been erected by the church in which these sacred ordinances may be administered: four in Utah, one in Canada, province of Alberta; one in the Hawaiian Islands, and one in Arizona. The amount of work done in these temples will be stated in a later volume of this work—in the last.
[^13] See Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cvii: "It must needs be that one be appointed of the high priesthood to preside over the priesthood, and he shall be called president of the high priesthood of the church: or, in other words, the presiding high priest over the high priesthood of the church. * * * And again, the duty of the president of the office of the high priesthood is to preside over the whole church, and to be like Moses. Behold, here is wisdom; yea, to be a seer, a revelator, a translator, and a prophet, having all the gifts of God which he bestows upon the head of the church."
[^14] This means the first quorum of seventy—comprised of sixty-three men—and the first seven presidents of the seventy, who preside directly over their own quorum, the first, and exercise a general presidency over all the other quorums of seventy, numbering now, 1929, 220 quorums.
[^15] The office of bishop of right belongs to the first born of the seed of Aaron and properly descends from father to son of the chosen seed. A bishop of this lineage can act without counselors—except in a case where a president of the high priesthood is tried; in that event he must be assisted by twelve counselors of the high priesthood—but when no literal descendants of Aaron can be found, then a high priest of the Melchizedek priesthood is to be chosen for a bishop, and two other high priests to act as counselors. (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxiv and cvii.)
[^16] In the absence of his counselors the president of the stake has power to preside over the council without an assistant; and in case that he himself is absent, his counselors have power to preside in his stead, both or either of them. In the absence of all the presidency then the senior member of the council may preside. (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cii.)
[^17] The term "abroad" as here used means merely outside the organized stakes of the church.
[^18] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cvii:82-84.
[^19] St. Matt. xx:20-28.
[^20] I Peter v:2-5.
[^21] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxi.
[^22] Chs. xvi and xxxviii.
[^23] The exercise of this principle of common consent in the election of officers in the church is by popular acceptance rather than by popular choice. The right to nominate is held to be in the priesthood, and chiefly in the presiding authorities thereof; but the nomination made must be ratified by the church, or the subdivision of it affected, before the one nominated is qualified to function in the office. But because the elective principle operates by acceptance it is none the less real on that account; the elective principle in government or societies is not only carried out by direct means, it may be carried out by indirect means. It may be just as much a fact under the form of popular acceptance as of popular choice.
[^24] Vindication of the English Constitution, 3rd edition, 1833-1835, pp. 48, 49.
[^25] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. i.
[^26] Of course this remark was in humorous vein, though humor is a quality quite generally, but erroneously, denied the Prophet. The above is closely akin to the remark he made to Josiah Quincy on the occasion of that gentleman's visit with him at Nauvoo. They had been discussing the concentration of power in the hands of the Prophet—by far too much power, in Mr. Quincy's view, to be entrusted to one man. "'In your hands or that of any other person's,' was the reply, 'so much power would no doubt be dangerous. I am the only man in the world whom it would be safe to trust it with. Remember, I am a Prophet!' The last in a rich, comical aside, as if in recognition of the ridiculous sound they might have in the ears of a Gentile" (Figures of the Past, p. 397).
[^27] History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, p. 401.
[^28] History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, p. 265.
[^29] History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, p. 516.
[^30] Heb. xii:6-8. The reproofs and corrections of the Prophet from the revelations are collected and published in the introduction of the History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, pp. 36 and 37.
[^31] See especially this History, ch. vii.
[^32] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, p. 445.
[^33] Ibid, vol. v, p. 517.
[^34] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xxi.
[^35] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lviii.
