B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LXII

THE PROPHET'S WORK—THE RELIGION HE FOUNDED—THE CHURCH HE ESTABLISHED

IT was not the aim of Joseph Smith in his life's work to found a new religion. Throughout he presupposes the truth of the Christian religion, and accepts it. He realized that "other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Christ Jesus." [^1]

JESUS CHRIST THE SOLE MEANS OF SALVATION—CHRISTIAN FUNDAMENTALS

"Behold, Jesus Christ is the name which is given of the Father, and there is none other name given whereby man can be saved," [^2] are the words of the Prophet before the organization of the church. Hence Joseph Smith sought to build on no other foundation than that of Jesus Christ. He accepted the Christian fundamentals; the Lord and Father of Jesus Christ, as God, the Father, Creator of heaven and earth by Jesus Christ; Jesus Christ as the Son of God and the Redeemer of the world, through the atonement; the Holy Ghost as the Witness of the Father and the Son, the medium of union between God and the saints; and these three, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, constitute, for the New Dispensation of the gospel, the Godhead, the grand creative, redeeming and presiding council of heaven and earth, whom man must worship by submission of his will to their will, his mind to their mind; in a word, be in union with them, in which union man finds his spiritual life.

Joseph Smith accepted the atonement of Jesus Christ, as the all-sufficient ground work for the reconciliation of man with God; as rendering due satisfaction to the justice of God for the violation of his just and holy laws, also as being an efficient means of bringing into the earth-scheme of things the mercy of God, born of his love; by which repentance and remission of sins could be made possible for man; and also through which, by the power in the Christ, comes to man the resurrection from death. So that all that was lost by the fall of Adam and the sins of men, is made possible of restoration by the atonement of the Christ. Such the plan of man's redemption, the plan of salvation, which only awaits man's acceptance and cooperation with God by obedience, to make it effective.

THE MEANS OF ACCEPTANCE PROVIDED

This acceptance is signified by man receiving the Christian sacraments, which are but symbols of the atonement of the Christ: the rite of water baptism, in which is shown forth the death, burial, and resurrection of the Christ; the rite of confirmation—by which the Holy Ghost is imparted—a spiritual baptism, reestablishing direct, spiritual union with God—the new spiritual birth; the rite of the Lord's Supper, or sacrament—the sign of man's communion with God—in which are given again used symbols of the Christ's atonement—the broken body, emblemed in the broken bread; the spilled blood, emblemed in the sacramental wine or water; [^3] and the eating and drinking of these in remembrance of the Lord until he come, is the visible sign of the communion of the saints with God—their continuing union with him, and with each other.

The foregoing, in brief, is the New Dispensation conception, from the teaching of Joseph Smith, of the gospel of Jesus Christ—the "everlasting gospel"—the plan on which was based the "hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the world began;" [^4] and from time to time, dispensations of this gospel, under the counsels of God, together with authority to administer its ordinances, have been given to the world. Not always a fulness of that gospel, not always a completely ordered priesthood; but such measure of the truth was given, and such portion of the priesthood, or divine authority, as would be suitable to the age and to the people to whom the dispensation was sent. Thus dispensations of the gospel were given to Adam, to Enoch, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham; to Moses, before the law of carnal commandments was given. [^5] Of course there came a dispensation of the gospel with the herald of the Christ, John the Baptist; and a more complete one with the earth-mission of the Christ. Then was revealed the fulness of the gospel; and with it was established the church to administer its ordinances. Yet with the gospel thus fully revealed, the atonement for a world's sins made, the resurrection from the dead—a demonstrated reality, the church of God founded in plentitude of power—yet from the gospel, thus revealed in its fulness, and the church of Christ founded, the world turned away in wicked apostasy from God, "transgressed the laws, changed the ordinances, broke the everlasting covenant," [^6] in fulfillment of many and various predictions of the scriptures themselves—predictions in the New, as well as in the Old Testament. [^7] It was this apostasy in the early Christian centuries from the true Christian religion and the church of Christ, that made the work of Joseph Smith necessary—to him was given a New Dispensation of this old and everlasting gospel, the true Christian religion, with ordination to divine authority to reestablish the church of Jesus Christ, and commission to send the gospel, in the authority of the Christ, to all the world.

In this New Dispensation will be "gathered together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are in earth, even in him;" [^8] and further, as in said dispensation God will consummate his work in relation to the redemption and the salvation of the world, it is called the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. Into it flow all the former dispensations; in it are revealed all knowledge of the principles to be believed, and the ordinances to be obeyed; all keys of authority and all powers held by former prophets and men of God who have ministered in the things of God, have been brought back and given to the Prophet of the New Dispensation. It is a dispensation which contemplates the fulfillment of all the hopes and promises of salvation, one in which all the ends of the earth meet. It contemplates the gathering and restoration to their lands of promise, scattered Israel; the rebuilding of Jerusalem, to become once more a holy city; the founding of a great and holy city in the North American continent, the capital of the spiritual empire of the Christ in the Western World—the City of Zion.

The New Dispensation not only contemplates saving men of the present age by a proclamation of the gospel to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, but also men of past ages, by the application of the gospel to them in the spirit world through the vicarious work that may be performed for them by their representatives on earth; the possibility of which is foreshadowed in the following scriptures:

"For, for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit." [^9]

For Christ * * * being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit: * * * went and preached unto the spirits in prison; which sometime were disobedient when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah." [^10]

Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why then are they baptized for the dead?" [^11]

So much is quoted from the Christian scriptures to show that the gospel was preached to the departed dead, and the ordinances thereof administered for them in the dispensation of the gospel established by the Christ, and hence the work inaugurated in the New Dispensation by Joseph Smith for the salvation of the dead, is in harmony with what has gone before; though, because of the nature of the dispensation in which he wrought, greater emphasis is placed upon that work, and more elaborate preparations are made for carrying it into effect that in any previous dispensation; as is witnessed by the erection of costly temples dedicated largely to that service. [^12]

THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CHURCH

To effectively administer the gospel that was restored by this New Dispensation, a church became necessary, and hence its organization. This was not accomplished by the enactment of a single organic law or constitution to which the church in her development was made to conform. "Governments," remarks Herbert Spencer, "are not made, they grow." A remark which is as true of ecclesiastical as of civil governments: and although the growth of the church government founded by Joseph Smith was rapid, it was, nevertheless, a growth, a development; it was not made. Before the church was organized a divine authority had been conferred on Joseph Smith, but the only officers known to the church at its organization, April 6th, 1830, were elders, priests, teachers, and deacons. It was not until the 4th of February, 1831, that a bishop was appointed and then, of course, by revelation. In November following it was made known that other bishops were to be appointed. The first high council in the church (of which more presently) was not organized until February 17th, 1834. The quorum of the twelve apostles and quorums of seventy were not organized until the winter of 1835. Thus throughout, an officer was appointed today and his duties defined; another officer was appointed tomorrow or next year and an explanation given of his duties and perhaps a limit fixed to his authority. Thus line was given upon line, precept upon precept; the Prophet and those cooperating with him being apparently unconscious that they were gradually developing a system of government, each part of which was beautifully adjusted to every other part and to the whole as it developed.

Let us consider this organization more nearly, and as it was finally completed. Also with reference to the purposes for which it was instituted—and this last, first. The church has two high duties to perform, two great functions to fulfill. These are (1) to make proclamation of the truth God has deposited with her—the gospel—to all the world—"to every nation, kindred, tongue and people;" and (2) to perfect the lives of those who receive that truth, by instruction, and discipline. In doing these two things, the church will perform her whole duty to the world. From the nature of things and men it will be an endless task.

THE PRIESTHOOD

The church officers and church organization founded by Joseph Smith grew out of the priesthood, which is the power of God delegated to man—authority to act in the name of God and for him. While there is of necessity a unity in this power, that is, it is all one power, yet in the exercise of its functions divisions are recognized, and there is gradation among its officers. First a division into what is called, respectively, the Melchizedek and Aaronic priesthood, the former of which is the greater and devoted more especially to spiritual things, while the latter has most to do with temporal concerns.

Within each of these divisions there are officers whose functions vary, and who stand in an order of gradation. The officers of the Melchizedek priesthood, are elders, high priests, seventies, apostles, seers and prophets. The officers of the Aaronic priesthood are deacons, teachers, priests, bishops—the bishopric is the presidency of and embraces the fulness of this lesser priesthood.

The respective offices in these divisions of the priesthood while possessing much in common, are limited in some respects to the performance of special duties or functions. While the deacon and teacher, for instance, may teach and expound scripture, persuade and exhort men to come unto Christ, in common with other officers of the church; and the teachers may visit the homes of the members of the church, watch over them and see that there is no iniquity in the church, yet neither deacon nor teacher may baptize the people nor administer the sacrament. While the priest may teach and expound doctrine, baptize and administer the sacrament and assist the elder in the performance of his duties, when necessity requires, yet he cannot lay on hands for imparting the Holy Ghost. So in the Melchizedek priesthood, each order of officers has its specific duties assigned to it, but the greater always includes the lesser, and the greater may, on occasion, officiate in all the offices below its own.

THE PRESIDING COUNCILS AND OFFICERS OF THE HIGH PRIESTHOOD

I now proceed to consider the officers in their relation to each other in the church. First and highest of all the officers stands the presidency of the high priesthood, consisting of three presiding high priests; and who always constitute the first presidency of the church. [^13]

Their jurisdiction extends over all the affairs of the church as well in temporal as in spiritual things; as well in the organized stakes of Zion as in the missions and branches of the church abroad. In that presidency are legislative, judicial and executive powers. That is to say, the president of the church is the mouthpiece of God to the church, and he alone receives the law from the Lord by revelation and announces the same to the people for their acceptance or rejection; for all things are to be done by "common consent in the church," even to accepting the law of the Lord. From all high councils, the judicial courts of the church, except where the twelve apostles sit as a high council abroad, there lies an appeal to the first presidency, which finally determines the matter, and also defines the law of the church, hence here is judicial power. The proof that in the presidency is executive power, is witnessed in the fact of their universal presidency, and administrative authority over all the affairs of the church.

The quorum of the twelve apostles are equal in power and authority to the first presidency. The first quorum of the seventy [^14] is equal in authority to the quorum of the twelve; and, of course, indirectly equal in authority to the first presidency, since things equal to a common thing must be equal to each other. But these arrangements are manifestly but emergency provisions and though the power is there and may be used when occasion requires, yet for the most part it lies dormant. That is to say, the powers above described as belonging to the first presidency, may only be exercised in full by the quorum of the twelve apostles in the event of the first presidency becoming disorganized by death or from other causes; and by the seventy, only in the event of the destruction or absence of the first presidency and the twelve. But these powers of the presidency without diminution would be exercised by the quorum of the twelve or the seventy, should occasion arise for it; and the arrangement renders the church well nigh indestructible at its head. But, as already remarked, those are but emergency provisions, and it is my desire to set before the reader the beauty and harmony of the church organization when its councils are all in place.

The great powers already enumerated, then,—legislation, judicial, and executive powers—center in the first presidency. On the right of the first presidency may be said to be the twelve apostles, clothed with the authority to officiate in the name of the Lord, under the direction of the first presidency, to build up the church and regulate all the affairs of the same in all the world. Flanking them stand the seventies as their assistants in the great work of the ministry assigned to them, preaching the gospel abroad—in all the world. To these quorums of the priesthood, the twelve and the seventy, more especially, is assigned the responsibility of the foreign ministry of the church. The twelve are witnesses for the Lord Jesus Christ in all the nations of the earth; and in addition they are a traveling, presiding high council, possessing the authority, and charged with the duty of regulating the affairs of the church in all the world, under the direction of the first presidency.

On the left of the first presidency may be said to stand the high priests, to which quorums of priesthood belongs the right of general and local presidency in the church. From their ranks patriarchs, presidents of stakes, high councilors, and bishops and their counselors are chosen; [^15] and next to the high priests stand the elders, who are to assist them in the performance of their duties. These quorums of priesthood constitute the standing ministry for the stakes of Zion, upon whom more especially devolve local presidency, and the duty of preaching and administering the gospel within the stakes of Zion.

THE PRESIDENCY OF THE LESSER PRIESTHOOD AND OTHER OFFICERS

The presidency of the Aaronic priesthood centers in the presiding bishopric of the church, which presides over all traveling and local bishops. The former are bishops appointed to preside over large districts of country and who travel from place to place therein, setting in order the temporal affairs of the church; the latter are bishops appointed to preside over regularly organized wards, and whose jurisdiction is confined within such wards respectively.

To aid the bishops in the duties of their several bishoprics are the quorums of priests, teachers and deacons.

The duty of the priest is to visit the homes of the saints, to teach the people, to expound the scriptures, baptize believers, and administer the sacrament. Forty-eight priests form a quorum of which the bishopric is the presidency.

The duty of the teachers is to be the standing ministers in the respective wards where they reside, to see that there is no iniquity in the church, and that the members perform their duties. Twenty-four of them constitute a quorum, which is presided over by a president and two counselors chosen from the members.

The duty of the deacons is to assist the teacher, and they may also expound, teach, warn and invite all to come unto Christ. Twelve of them form a quorum, and from their number a president and two counselors are chosen to preside.

TERRITORIAL DIVISIONS AND SUBDIVISIONS OF THE CHURCH

Before proceeding to a description of the judiciary system of the church it may be well to briefly explain the territorial divisions of it. A "stake of Zion" is a division of the church territorially that embraces several villages or towns that are ecclesiastical wards. A stake is presided over by a presidency, consisting of a president and two counselors, all of whom must be high priests. The presidency of the stake is also the presidency of the high council, the highest judicial tribunal in the stake. The stakes are divided into ecclesiastical wards, presided over by a bishopric, assisted in its labors by the quorums of the lesser priesthood as already explained.

THE JUDICIARY SYSTEM OF THE CHURCH

The judicial powers of the church are vested in the ordinary bishop's courts, the standing high councils of the stakes of Zion, temporary high councils of high priests abroad, the traveling presiding high council, which is also the quorum of the twelve apostles, and a special court consisting of the presiding bishop of the church and twelve high priests—of which more is to be said presently—and finally in the presidency of the church.

CHURCH DISCIPLINE

Church discipline requires that in case of difficulty between members, every effort shall be made by the parties aggrieved with each other to become reconciled. Failing in this they are required to call in others to bring about reconciliation, but if through that means a settlement of the case is impossible the matter goes to the bishop's court on the complaint of the party aggrieved, and there the case is heard on testimony and a decision rendered. Where immorality is the offense, wherein the church is scandalized, or where some violation of church discipline is involved, then a complaint may be made by members or officers of the church cognizant of the sin, and whose duty it is to guard the church from reproach, either that the offender might be brought to reformation by repentance, or removed from the fellowship of the church. The bishop's court is the first or lowest court of record in the church, and the bishop is known as the common judge. In the event of the parties or either of them being dissatisfied with the decision of the bishop, an appeal lies to the high council of the stake, where a rehearing is given to the case. The organization of the high council is worthy of consideration. It is composed of twelve high priests, presided over by the presidency of the stake. [^16] The high council cannot act unless seven of its members are present; but seven have the power to call upon other high priests to act temporarily in the place of absent councilors. Whenever a high council is organized, the twelve members draw lots for their places in the council. Those who draw the even numbers two, four, six, eight, ten, twelve,—are to stand in behalf of the accused; those drawing the odd numbers in behalf of the accuser. In every case the accused has a right to half the council, to prevent injury or injustice. The councilors who represent the accused and accuser respectively do not become partisans bent on winning a case irrespective of righteousness or justice; on the contrary every man is to speak according to equity and truth; and aside from that is merely to see that each party to the issue involved has justice accorded him and that he be not subjected to insult or injury.

Whenever the council convenes to act on any case, the mode of procedure is for the twelve councilors to consider whether it is very difficult or not. If it be not a difficult case, then only two of the councilors, one for the accused and one for the accuser respectively are appointed to speak. But if the case is accounted difficult, then four are appointed to speak; if still more difficult, six; but in no case are more than six to speak. In all cases the accuser and accused are to have the privilege of speaking for themselves. After the evidence is all in, and the councilors appointed for the accused and the accuser having spoken, as also the accused and the accuser, the president gives a decision according to the understanding that he has of the case and calls upon the twelve councilors to sustain it by vote. But should the councilors who have not spoken, or any one of them, discover an error in the decision of the president, they have the right to manifest it and the case has a re-hearing, and if additional light is thrown upon the case, the decision is altered accordingly. But if no additional light is given the first decision stands unaltered. Such are the general outlines of the organization of a high council and the manner of the procedure before it.

In addition to being used as a judiciary body, however, the high councils in the stakes of Zion are sometimes employed in administrative and ministerial functions. Questions of administrative policy are sometimes submitted to their deliberations, and very often the high councilors are employed as home missionaries within their respective stakes to preach the gospel. The traveling high council, or quorum of apostles is used in the same way by the first presidency throughout the organized stakes of the church.

HIGH COUNCILS OF THE CHURCH

There are three kinds of high councils in the church. They are similar in organization and the manner of procedure is practically the same before all except as to the traveling high council, or quorum of apostles—but they differ in authority and jurisdiction.

I. The Traveling High Council. This council consists of the twelve apostles of Jesus Christ. They are a traveling, presiding high council; and laboring under the directions of the first presidency of the church, they have the right to build up the church and regulate all the affairs of the same in all the world. Whenever they sit as a high council abroad there is no appeal from their decisions—that is, they can only be called in question by the general authorities of the church in the event of transgression.

II. The Standing High Councils at the Stakes of Zion: The church is divided into branches or wards with appropriate officers; and these branches, wards, and settlements of the saints are grouped into stakes of Zion. In each stake there is a standing high council, limited in its jurisdiction to the affairs of that particular stake where it is located, and all these high council in the respective stakes are equal in their power and authority.

III. Temporary High Councils Abroad. The high priests abroad, [^17] whenever the parties to a difficulty, or either of them, demand it and the high priests abroad deem the case of sufficient importance to justify such action, are authorized to organize a temporary high council to try the case. The council is to be organized after the pattern and proceed in the same manner as those at the stakes of Zion; but in all cases these temporary high councils abroad, must send the record of their proceedings to the council of the presidency of the church. If the decision of any high council—except that of the traveling, presiding high council—is unsatisfactory, an appeal lies to the first presidency, who take such steps in the case as wisdom and the Spirit of the Lord may indicate as proper. But whatever their decision is, it is final.

SPECIAL COUNCIL FOR THE TRIAL OF THE PRESIDENTS OF THE CHURCH

The special court referred to above consists of the presiding bishop of the church and twelve high priests especially called for each occasion. This special court is called into existence for the purpose of trying presidents of the high priesthood, who are also the presidents of the church, if they, or any one of them, should be found in transgression, said council may investigate the conduct of the president, subject him to rigid examination, and if the evidence should show him to be in transgression, the court would condemn him and its action would be final, from its decision he would have no appeal. [^18]

Thus none, not even the highest, is beyond the operation of the laws and councils of the church. However great and exalted any single officer of the church may be, the church and its system of government is still greater and more exalted than he; for though the president of the church is God's mouthpiece—God's vicegerent on earth—yet he may be tried and his conduct inquired into by this court to which I have called attention. Therefore if the time should ever come that the church should be so unfortunate as to be presided over by a man who transgressed the laws of God and became unrighteous, a means in the church system of government is provided for deposing him without destroying the church, without revolution, or even disorder.

THE NATURE OF ECCLESIASTICAL PUNISHMENTS

Of course the only punishment which is within the power of the church to inflict, is to disfellowship or excommunicate offenders. The punishment of suspension of fellowship may be inflicted by the bishop, until satisfaction is made to the church. In the latter case,—excommunication—the person absolutely loses his membership in the church, with all the priesthood he holds; together with every other right and privilege that accompanies that membership; and if he regains a standing it must be by baptism and confirmation as at the first. To those who hold lightly their standing in the church, suspension of fellowship, or excommunication has no special terror; but to the man of faith, whose full hopes of eternal life with all its advantages stand or fall with his standing in the church of Christ, no greater punishment can threaten him, and since man in his imperfect state is influenced to righteousness by his fear of punishment, as well as by his hope of reward, the punishment of suspended fellowship and of excommunication has a salutary effect in preserving the discipline of the church.

THE SPIRIT OF THE CHURCH GOVERNMENT

The spirit of the church government evolved by the revelations to Joseph Smith is in beautiful harmony with the spirit of the church government instituted by the personal ministry of the Christ. "Ye know," said Jesus, "that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you; but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant: even as the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life as a ransom for many." [^19]

In line with this spirit Peter, about thirty years later, said:

"Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre but of a ready mind: neither as being lords over God's heritage, but being ensamples to the flock. And when the chief shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away." [^20]

Any church government that shall be established in the earth must of necessity reflect this spirit, or it will contradict the idea of its divine origin. How well the spirit of government in the church founded by Joseph Smith meets this requirement will be seen in the following passage on the manner in which authority is to be exercised in the church:

"The rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and * * * the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness. That they may be conferred upon us it is true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control, or dominion, or compulsion, upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, amen to the priesthood, or the authority of that man. * * * No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness, and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile, reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost, and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy; that he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the bands of death." [^21]

It has already been pointed out in this chapter, as also in previous chapters, [^22] that the principle of common consent enters into this system of government, and has done so from the beginning; that no officer could hold any position in the church or in any subdivision of it, from the president of the church to the humblest officer in the remotest branch thereof, except by the vote of the church, or such subdivision of it as would be affected by the administration of said officer; [^23] that, as representing God, the church must reflect God's spirit and methods in her government. God's government, in his church, it is conceded, is moral government; and any ecclesiastical society or organization claiming divine authority, must exercise moral suasion and must not attempt government by compulsion; for that would stamp it as man's government—"human, all human, and not at all divine."

This kind of a government is not the kind likely to be founded by a man ambitious of power and authority over his followers; nor that of a man bent on establishing the unrighteous dominion of priestcraft. Knowledge, persuasion, patience, meekness, long-suffering, brotherly kindness, love unfeigned, are not sources whence those ambitious of place and power are content to draw their authority. The effort to lord it over their fellows by the direct exercise of effective authority, which arises from the advantage of an exalted position, or the possession of great vigor of mind, firmness of resolution, daring, activity or the possession of transcendant abilities nearly always characterize your imposter. Teaching correct principles, and then allowing people to govern themselves is not at all the method of government adopted by self-appointed leaders or imposters. They are ever impatient of restraints and always over-anxious to arrive at exalted stations. Hence it comes that the spirit of government which obtains in the church of Jesus Christ, founded by Joseph Smith, since it finds its sources of power and authority in the imparting of knowledge, in persuasion, and love unfeigned bears testimony not only that the Prophet was not actuated by vulgar ambition, but is also a strong testimony in favor of the divine origin of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and, of course, a testimony also to the divine authority of him who was, under God, its founder.

"The formation of a free government on an extensive scale," remarked Disraeli, Earl of Beaconsfield, "while it is assuredly one of the most interesting problems of humanity, is certainly the greatest achievement of human wit. Perhaps I should rather term it a superhuman achievement; for it requires such refined prudence, such comprehensive knowledge, and such perspicacious sagacity, united with such illimitable powers of combination, that it is nearly in vain to hope for qualities so rare to be congregated in a solitary mind." [^24] It is true that his lordship makes these remarks respecting a secular government, but I see no reason why such reflections do not apply as well to an ecclesiastical government, especially to that brought into existence by the life's labor of Joseph Smith; for it is both free and founded on an extensive scale, and presents all the difficulties that would be met in the creation of a secular government.

Joseph Smith in fact, in organizing this church, whose history we are here writing, was, under God's direction, building better than he knew. He as well as others associated with him were called upon to "lay the foundation of a great work—how great they knew not." [^25] One may stand so close to a mountain that he perceives neither the vastness of the pile nor the grandeur of its outlines. Not until one recedes from the mountain some distance does the magnificence of its snow-capped peaks, the solemnity of its rugged cliffs, and deep ravines stir the sensibilities of the soul. So with this work established through the labors of Joseph Smith and his associates. They stood too close to it to comprehend its greatness; too absorbed in its parts to contemplate much less fully understand the meaning and harmony of the whole. It was not until the work was well advanced towards its present completion, and men had receded some distance from it in time, that they began to be aware that out of the parts given to them at sundry times and under varying circumstances, there was gradually being developed so sublime a system of ecclesiastical government, the like of which was not to be found elsewhere in all the world.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Jamieson, Fausset and Brown's Commentary on St. John, xviii:38.
[^2] John W. Draper, Conflict Between Religion and Science, p. 201-2.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xciii:24.
[^4] Religious Beliefs, vol. ii, p. 41.
[^5] First Principles, p. 141, Appleton, 1896 edition.
[^6] The phrase is used by the late John Jacques, a most devout Latter-day Saint, in his hymn on "Truth."
[^7] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxviii.
[^8] See Haeckel's Riddle of the Universe, McCabe's translation, 1900, treating on the "Law of Substance," p. 42.
[^9] See note 11, ch. xxi; and Note to ch. xxx, this History.
[^10] One of the most distant of the so-called "fixed" stars. So named in the Abrahamic System of astronomy. See ch. xlvii, this History.
[^11] Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses, ch. i.
[^12] Riddle of the Universe, p. 242. So John W. Draper: "From the contemplation of isolated suns and congregated clusters we are led to the stupendous problem of the distribution of matter and force in space, and to the interpretation of those apparent phantoms of self-luminous vapor, circular and elliptic discs, spiral wreaths, rings, and fans, whose edges fade doubtfully away, twins and triplets of phosphorescent haze connected together by threads of light and grotesque forms of indescribable complexity. Perhaps in some of these gleaming apparitions we see the genesis, in some the melting away of universes. There is nothing motionless in the sky. In every direction vast transformations are occurring, yet all these things proclaim the eternity of matter and the undiminished perpetuity of force." (Intellectual Development of Europe, vol. ii, p 280, revised edition, 1875.)
[^13] Evolution in Science and Religion, Robert Andrews Millikan, 1928, pp. 16, 17. Note that the same idea, however, is expressed by Draper in his remarks on the far off distribution of gleaming matter in the form of nebulae—"we see the genesis in some, the melting away of universes"—and this in 1875! (See note 12). And Sir Oliver Lodge in 1908 said: "From everlasting to everlasting the material universe rolls on, composing worlds and disintegrating them." (Science and Faith, pp. 16, 17.) Yet Millikan, Einstein, et al, would have us believe that these ideas have been suggested by them in the years of grace 1927-1928!
[^14] Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses, ch. i:37-38.
[^15] Pearl of Great Price, Book of Abraham, ch. iii.
[^16] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xciii.
[^17] See discourse at the April, conference, 1844, known as the "King Follett Sermon," Times and Seasons, vol. v, p. 612 et seq. It was never completed in the Times and Seasons, however, but was published in full in the Millennial Star, vol. xxiii, pp. 245-280. It is also published in Journal of Discourses, vol. vi, pp. 1-11.
[^18] Pearl of Great Price, Book of Abraham, ch. iii:15-19.
[^19] See footnote 17.
[^20] Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses, ch. i.
[^21] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxx.
[^22] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxviii.
[^23] Newcomb's Astronomy, 1893, p. 531. In an article to the American Press a few years ago, Sir Robert Ball discussed the "Possibility of Life on Other Worlds," in which he but conservatively—as becomes a scientist—admits the possibility of life on other worlds. He concludes, however, that "no reasonable person will, I think, doubt that the tendency of modern research has been in favor of the supposition that there may be life on some of the other globes."
[^24] Pearl of Great Price, Book of Abraham, ch. iii.
[^25] Pearl of Great Price, Book of Abraham, iii:19.
