B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LXIII

THE PROPHET'S WORK—THE NEW DISPENSATION A SYSTEM OF PHILOSOPHY

THE New Dispensation is a system of philosophy as well as a religion. Indeed every religion that is worth while must be a philosophy. It must give some accounting of things if it is to be of any permanent service in the world. Religion must appeal to the understanding as well as to the emotional nature of man. It must measurably satisfy his rational mind as well as fill his spiritual and ethical longings—his thirst for righteousness. I know there are those who think that the important thing in religion is to live it, rather than to understand it; just as there are those who think it better to live rather than to understand life. But as a matter of fact religion in its most exalting phases cannot be "lived" without making reasonably clear to the understanding the problems of existence; just as life cannot be truly "lived" without some knowledge at least of the near purposes of life. So much by the way of introduction. Allow me to add that in presenting merely in outline the chief principles of the New Dispensation philosophy, brought forth in the teachings of Joseph Smith, I shall use the ideas, doctrines, philosophies, science principles, translations or interpretations that I find brought to the knowledge of the world through Joseph Smith, directly or indirectly. For while doctrines herein referred to are in some cases found in the Book of Mormon and properly should be referred to the prophets among ancient American peoples for their origin, still the world today owes its knowledge of these things to the translation of the Book of Mormon by Joseph Smith. So also in relation to the Book of Moses and the Book of Abraham. So also as to the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants; such philosophy and religious principles as are here found are given, as Latter-day Saints believe, by the inspiration of God, but Joseph Smith received and published them, and for the purpose of what is here to be set forth shall stand as his doctrines and philosophy, as well as those utterances that come from his discourses, and direct revelations.

JOSEPH SMITH TAUGHT NO SYSTEMATIZED PHILOSOPHY

The reader should understand that Joseph Smith himself made no attempt to create a "system" of philosophy. His philosophical utterances were flung off without reference to any arrangement or orderly sequence. In the main they were taught in independent aphorisms of which the following are examples:

"The Glory of God is Intelligence."

"It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance."

"Whatsoever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life will rise with us in the resurrection."

"The elements [i. e. of matter] are eternal, yea, the elements are the tabernacle of God. Man is the tabernacle of God, even temples."

"The elements are eternal; and spirit and element inseparably connected receive a fullness of joy."

"Jesus was in the beginning with the Father. * * * Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made neither indeed can be."

"This is the work and the glory of God: to bring to pass the immortality and the eternal life of man."

"Adam fell that men might be; and men are that they might have joy."

"The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end."

"Truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come."

Reign of Law: "All kingdoms have a law given and there are many kingdoms [worlds and system of worlds] and there is no space where there is no kingdom. And to every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds and conditions, etc., etc.,"

These utterances were given out at various times, and were often separated by long intervals of time. These are statements of truth without qualification, and constitute a literature of power. It is our present task to put some of these and other independent utterances into something like orderly arrangement that will suggest a system of thought or philosophy in the teachings of the Prophet of the New Dispensation.

JOSEPH SMITH'S DEFINITION OF TRUTH

Undoubtedly the quest of philosophy is truth. And again, undoubtedly, philosophy would be greatly helped in its search for truth if it had but a clear conception of what it was trying to find; hence the importance of a clear and accurate definition. It is at this point, however, that the greatest difficulty arises for the human intellect. It is quite generally conceded that up to the early decades of the nineteenth century no satisfactory definition of truth had been found. When Jesus stood bound before Pilate's judgment seat, and testified that he was born to bear witness of the truth, Pilate—whether in mockery or in earnest curiosity we may not know—asked the question: "What is truth?" But the Divine Man made no answer. One set of commentators, referring to Pilate's question, say to him: "Thou stirrest the question of questions, which the thoughtful of every age have asked, but never man yet answered." [^1]

A Secular writer presents the same incident as follows:

"'What is truth?' was the passionate demand of a Roman procurator, on one of the most momentous occasions in history. And the Divine Person who stood before him, to whom the interrogation was addressed, made no reply—unless, indeed, silence contained the reply. Often and vainly had that demand been made before—often and vainly has it been made since. No one has yet given a satisfactory answer." [^2]

I make these quotations to show that no satisfactory definition of truth, either in ancient or modern times, either in religion or philosophy, has been given, and also to call attention to the fact that if Joseph Smith has given a definition of truth that appeals with irresistible force to the understanding of men, it must be a strongly original utterance; a revelation of the utmost importance. Such a definition, I believe, he has given. In 1833 he said:

"Truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." [^3]

This I hold to be the completest definition of truth found in human literature. It deals with relative truth, absolute truth, and truth unfolding or becoming.

It may be objected that Joseph Smith's definition is defective in that it appears to make truth depend upon knowledge. "Truth," says the definition, "is knowledge of things as they are," etc. This part of the definition deals with relative truth merely. "Truth as it appears to us," says S. Baring-Gould, "can only be relative, because we are relative creatures, have only a relative perception and judgment. We appreciate that which is true to ourselves, not that which is universally true." [^4]

In other words, and using the language of Herbert Spencer—

"Debarred as we are now from everything beyond the relative, truth, raised to its highest form, can be for us nothing more than perfect agreement throughout the whole range of our experience, between those representations of things which we distinguish as ideal and those presentations of things which we distinguish as real." [^5]

That is to say, to each individual, "knowledge of things as they are, and as they were" will be to him the truth, and the fulness thereof, though not necessarily all the truth that is. There is truth which does not depend upon knowledge; existences beyond and independent of any human knowledge, at least. To illustrate: America existed, though all Europe was without knowledge of it for ages; until, in fact, it was discovered by Columbus. The power of steam always existed, but men did not know it until modern times. So, also, with the mysterious force electricity; it always existed, but not until recent years did man know it as a force that could be utilized; and so as to many other forces and truths in God's universe that are now existing, and always may have existed, but man, as yet, has no knowledge of them.

And yet it may be that running parallel with those existences, substances and relations unknown to man, there exist intelligences that cognize such existences and relations. America existed though all Europe was without knowledge of it until discovered by Columbus; but America had inhabitants, intelligences of her own, that knew of the existence of these western continents. And so it may be if one could be transported to Mars; while there is much that we do not know about Mars—has it an atmosphere and oceans? Has it great continents and mountain ranges? These may all be existences, realities on Mars, but we do not know of them, but there may be intelligent inhabitants on Mars who know all these things and a thousand more that are unknown to us. And so as to the most distant planets and planet-systems conceivable. Everywhere that things exist, they may be paralleled by intelligences that cognize them.

Then, again, if there are varying degrees of intelligences, as it seems necessary from the facts in the case to admit, it may be that there are intelligences so exalted as to comprehend all things, even "the sum of existence" [^6]—the absolute truth. And so in the last analysis of the matter, wheresoever there are existences to be known, even though they stretch to infinity, there are also intelligences in numbers sufficient to parallel such existences; as also intelligences so exalted as to be universal consciousness to the universe—to comprehend all things, to control them, dominate them, and through them work out their sovereign will.

It may be said that the absolute truth is beyond the grasp of the finite mind. That is conceded. But because finite minds cannot comprehend the "sum of existence," or absolute truth, it does not follow that the definition we are discussing is at fault, or that it can be displaced by one meaning more or less. Reflection upon the definition will develop the fact that it contains a self-evident proposition of the same nature as the statement, "duration is eternal—without beginning, without end"; or "space is limitless"—there is no point beyond which it does not extend. It is vain to say that the finite mind cannot comprehend the realities presented by these statements. The thing is greater than any symbol we can fashion of it by word or otherwise it is true, but we cannot conceive the opposite of these statements, i.e. that space has boundaries; that duration has limits; that absolute truth is less than the sum of existence. In the definition here set forth is all that is; and if in any definition of truth there is failure to include the sum of existence, by so much would the definition be defective. As to relative truth; every individual man's truth, that is every man's knowledge of so much of the sum of existence as he can make his own, as already pointed out.

One other reflection on this definition. Note the words. "Truth * * * is knowledge of things * * * as they are to come." This presents a view of truth with which one seldom if ever meets. It gives to truth the idea of movement, unfolding, development. Truth in this view is not a stagnant pool, but a living fountain; not a Dead Sea without tides or currents; on the contrary it is an ocean, immeasurably great, vast, co-extensive with the universe—it is the universe — bright heaving, boundless, endless and sublime, moving in majestic currents, uplifted by tides in ceaseless ebb and flow; variant but orderly; taking on new forms from ever-changing combinations; new adjustments; new relations; multiplying itself in ten thousand times ten thousand ways; ever reflecting the intelligence of the Infinite; and declaring alike in its whispers and in its thunders, the hived wisdom of the ages and of God.

AS TO THINGS—THE UNIVERSE

We are next to consider the universe in which men, angels, arch-angels—intelligences all—live.

"There are many kingdoms * * * and there is no space in the which there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in the which there is no space." [^7]

This was said by Joseph Smith in 1832. The context of the passage makes it clear that "kingdoms" here are not groups of men or nations over which a monarch reigns; but substance, spirit, matter, worlds, and world-systems, under the dominion of law. It is the doctrine of the eternal and everywhere existence of matter and space. It is a description of the universe as far as it is describable.

That the extent of the universe is infinite and unbounded; that it is empty in no part, but everywhere filled with substance; that the duration of the universe is equally infinite and unbounded; that it has no beginning and no end; that it is eternity, may be said to be the settled and universal conviction of science today; [^8] but it was far from being such conviction in 1832 when Joseph Smith said the same thing in the passage here under consideration.

The doctrine was nobly embodied in verse by W. W. Phelps, one of the early converts to the faith of the New Dispensation, and already referred to in these pages [^9] as the author of a number of hymns the most characteristic of Latter-day Saint thought and aspiration. The one here quoted is one of these, that could well be entitled—

"ETERNALISM" If you could hie to Kolob, fn In th' twinkling of an eye, And then continue onward, With that same speed to fly— D'ye think that you could ever, Through all eternity, Find out the generation Where Gods began to be? Or see the grand beginning, Where space did not extend? Or view the last creation, Where Gods and matter end? Methinks the Spirit whispers, "No man has found 'pure space,'" Nor seen the outside curtains Where nothing has a place. The works of God continue, And worlds and lives abound; Improvement and progression Have one eternal round. There is no end to matter, There is no end to space, There is no end to "spirit," There is no end to race. * * * * * *

CHANGE AND ITS TENDENCY

As to the movement and change in this infinite universe, our Prophet represents God as saying (1830).

"Worlds without number have I created. * * * Behold, there are many worlds that have passed away by the word of my power, and there are many that now stand, and innumerable are they to man. * * * The heavens, they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man: but they are numbered unto me, for they are mine. And as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof, even so shall another come, and there is no end to my works, neither to my words." [^10]

This passage implies constant movement in this infinite universe. The statement, "As one earth shall pass away and the heavens thereof, even so shall another come," corresponds somewhat to the modern scientist's notion of "evolution and devolution." "Substance" says Haeckel, "is everywhere and always in uninterrupted movement and transformation; nowhere is there perfect repose and rigidity; yet the infinite quantity of matter and of eternally changing force remains constant." [^11]

Of late (1927-1929) it has been emphasized by scientists that if matter may be resolved into "radiant energy" then said energy may be brought back to matter; thus constituting a cycle from matter to "radiant energy," and from "radiant energy" back to matter; devolution to energy; evolution from energy to varied forms of matter and life. "What a shock it would be to Lord Kelvin (1824-1907) if he should hear the modern astronomers talking about the stars radiating away their masses through the mere act of giving off light and heat! And yet this is now orthodox astronomy. And, again, if they do so in accordance with the Einstein equation, then is it not more than probable that the process is also going on somewhere in the opposite sense, and that radiant energy is condensing back into mass, that new worlds are thus continually forming as old ones are disintegrating?

These are merely the current speculations of modern physics." [^12]

Later Professor Millikan, at the request of a reporter on the Los Angeles Examiner, January 6th, 1928, wrote out his above thought in the following formula:

"It is a legitimate speculation, that since we now have evidence that the sun and stars are actually radiating away their masses in the form of heat and light somewhere in the universe, the reverse of that process is going on, and light and heat are condensing back again into ordinary matter, new stars thus being in the process of forming as old ones disappear."

For this suggestion Professor Millikan receives high praise as a daring, original thinker—moving in the vanguard of discovery and thought! But what of him, the Prophet of the New Dispensation, who published as a revelation from God in 1830, the following:

"The heavens they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man; * * * and as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof, even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works, neither to my words." [^13]

This is a case surely where the inspiration of the Prophet of the New Dispensation outran the slow, dragging footsteps of scientific discovery, and tardy admission of physical conditions in the universe.

PURPOSE OF GOD IN THE EARTH-LIFE OF MAN

"This is my work and my glory," Joseph Smith represents the Lord as saying, (again 1830 in the same revelation last quoted), to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." Then he represents God as dwelling among intelligences that were organized, but of varying degrees of intelligence, soul greatness and moral quality, yet equal in eternity, for they are all proclaimed "gnolaum," or eternal. For the progress of these intelligences God is represented as proposing the creation of an earth, "where on these may dwell;" and God said to those who were with him:

"We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell. And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them. And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads forever and ever." [^14]

Progress, then, for intelligences, to which movement and change are necessary—is the purpose of God's creations; and progress can only come through change from good to better; from lower to higher, and ever higher; but never highest; for in the scheme of progress in the infinite there are no ultimates, of which more in paragraphs under another heading.

THE ETERNAL EXISTENCE OF INTELLIGENCE

The Prophet represents the Christ as saying:

I was in the beginning with the Father * * * Ye [meaning the brethren present when the revelation was given] were also in the beginning with the Father, that which is Spirit. * * * Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be." [^15]

Joseph Smith taught not only the eternal existence of intelligence, but of intelligences. These may be manifested as "spirits," "men," "angels," "arch-angels," "Deities," according to the state of progress to which they have attained; and they may be of infinitely varying degrees of intelligence, moral quality, and soul greatness; yet all are equal in their eternity. Regarded as intelligences, whatever estates or changes they may have passed through, whatever their present status or whatever progressive estates may await them in the future, there is a something in them not only uncreated, but from the nature of it uncreatable, and indestructible—without beginning and without end.

In the passages in which the Prophet more especially teaches this doctrine he sometimes uses words interchangeably "intelligence," "mind," "spirit," "soul"; but notwithstanding this it is not difficult to discern from the Prophet's discourse that he is seeking to assert the truly eternal nature of man. [^16]

In the Book of Abraham, put forth by the Prophet, the following occurs—The Lord is represented as saying to Abraham:

"If two things exist, and there be one above the other, there shall be greater things above them. * * * Now, if there be two things, one above the other, and the moon be above the earth, then it may be that a planet or a star may exist above it; * * * as also if there be two spirits, and one shall be more intelligent than the other, yet those two spirits notwithstanding one is more intelligent than the other, have no beginning; they existed before, they shall have no end, they shall exist after, for they are gnolaum, or eternal * * * These two facts do exist, that there are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other: there shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all." [^17]

To this may be added the following excerpt from a noted discourse of the Prophet's, delivered less than three months before his death:

"The soul—the mind of man—the immortal spirit—where did it come from? All learned men and doctors of divinity say that God created it in the beginning; but it is not so: the very idea lessens man in my estimation. I do not believe the doctrine. I know better. Hear it, all ye ends of the world, for God has told me so, if you don't believe me, it will not make the truth without effect. * * * * We say that God himself is a self-existent being. Who told you so? It is correct enough, but how did it get into your head? Who told you that man did not exist in like manner upon the same principles? Man does exist upon the same principles. * * * The mind or the intelligence which man possesses is co-equal [co-eternal, see above] with God himself. I know my testimony is true. * * * The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end. * * * The first principles of man are self-existents with God." [^18]

The intelligence in man, then, according to the Prophet's philosophy, is not created, but is self-existent, one of the eternal things, not created, really uncreatable, as also indestructible. Not of earth-origin, but existing in heavens without number, always existing.

I have already noted that intelligences differ in degree of intelligence, moral quality, and greatness, hence also they differ in power, standing, and appointment.

It is these differences in intelligences that lead to order in the universe. Those more advanced governing, controlling, devising, organizing, forming societies, making governments, civilizations—all which shall tend to increase the glory and power and joy of all: "Men are that they might have joy," is a Book of Mormon passage. "This is my work and my glory," Joseph Smith represents God as saying, "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." [^19] To this end Divine Intelligences bring into existence worlds and world systems, sustain and guide them through immense cycles of time, and through processes that lead from chaos to cosmos, from telestial to celestial, and when attaining a point beyond which they may not be exalted in their present forms, breaking those forms, disintegrating them, to bring them forth again to reach a grander cosmos—worlds without number have thus passed away, by the word of God's power, and many now stand, innumerable unto man; and as one earth and its heavens shall pass away, so shall another come, and there is no end to this work to this evolution, and this devolution. And so the eternal drama proceeds. Intelligences meanwhile standing indestructible amidst this organization and disorganization of worlds; this integrating and disintegrating of things. This movement is from lower to higher estates, from little to greater excellences; yet this without attaining to "highest" or "perfect," because, to repeat, advancement in the infinite knows no ultimates. Meanwhile intelligences, amid these changes, under the law of eternal progress, are ever increasing in power, glory, might, dominion, benevolence, charity, justice; and all else that can make for the increase of their power and glory. In which strivings and achievements eternal evil is always potentially, and sometimes actively, present. Indeed it makes necessary and possible, in fact, the very strivings and achievements; and is the "foil on which good produces itself, and becomes known."

OTHER WORLDS AND WORLD-SYSTEMS THAN OUR OWN INHABITED BY INTELLIGENCES

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that these worlds and world-systems, of which we have spoken, that make up the universe, are or will be inhabited by sentient beings. This is assumed in all his revelations. It is everywhere taken for granted. Answering a question submitted to him—"Is not the reckoning of God's time, angel's time, prophet's time, and man's time according to the planet on which they live," he answered: "Yes; but there are no angels who minister to this earth but those who do belong or have belonged to it." [^20] In an important revelation given in December, 1832, and which, because of its beauty and the spirit of peace it breathes is called the "Olive Leaf," the existence of other worlds than ours is dwelt upon at length. Indeed it is from this revelation that I have already quoted the doctrine of the co-extension of infinite space and substance. "There are many kingdoms"—meaning worlds and world-systems, as we have seen. "Unto what shall I liken these kingdoms that ye may understand?" Says the Lord. Then he likens them unto a man having a field into which he sends forth his servants to labor, and promises them a personal visit, at the appointed time, "to make them glad with the joy of his countenance." "Therefore unto this parable will I liken all these kingdoms and the inhabitants thereof; every kingdom in its hour and its season; even according to the decree which God hath made." [^21]

The learned scientists of today in dealing with the question, "are the innumerable worlds in the universe, revealed by the powerful telescopes and other instruments, inhabited?" can only give as an answer a doubtful "perhaps." One leading astronomer thus gives his conclusions after a long review of the question:

"It seems, therefore, so far as we can reason from analogy, that the probabilities are in favor of only a very small fraction of the planets being peopled with intelligent beings. But when we reflect that the possible number of the planets is counted by hundreds of millions, this small fraction may be really a large number, and among this number many may be peopled by beings much higher than ourselves in the intellectual scale. Here we may give free rein to our imagination with the moral certainty that science will supply nothing tending either to prove or disprove any of its fancies." [^22]

This is the best that science can do. The habitability of other worlds, to science, is a proposition more or less probable; but the teachings of Joseph Smith are clear and positive upon the subject as far back as 1832.

THE RELATIONSHIP OF INTELLIGENCES—THE CONGREGATION OF THE MIGHTY

It is seen that our Prophet taught the eternity of intelligence; also the existence of intelligences in other worlds than ours. The Presiding Intelligence to that order of things and beings to which we belong, is represented as standing among the intelligences appointed to life on our earth, "and among these were many of the noble and great ones." And the Presiding Intelligence said: "These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and He saw that they were good." [^23] The noble and great ones are made rulers then; and doubtless the principle here operating in respect of those intelligences appointed to our earth, operates in all worlds and world-systems. Some of the "good and the noble and the great ones" stand at the head of worlds and world groups, forming grand presidencies, in order and gradation, based upon their power and their appointment, which in turn depend upon their character, their nobility, greatness, and their worthiness, measured by their capacity to serve. Each one of such "rulers," and each "intelligence," independent in the sphere in which he is appointed to act, yet, nevertheless, acts in harmony—through the attainment of knowledge, of truth—with all other exalted and sanctified intelligences. These are the "rulers" in the universe, the Divine Beings who make up David's "congregation of the mighty," in which God, "more intelligent than them all," [^24] standeth and judgeth "among the Gods." [^25] And to these, in their several stations, other intelligences owe loyalty—call it worship if you like; at any rate it must be unshaken loyalty, in order to attain the ends proposed in all "plans of salvation," "gospels," "societies," "kingdoms of God," and the like; in which "plans," "gospels" and the rest, each spirit agreed and covenanted to accept, as also to obey and honor those appointed to direct and bring to pass that which was ordained in the councils of Divine Intelligences. "At the first organization in heaven," said Joseph Smith, speaking with reference to matters pertaining to our earth, and the probation of spirits upon it in earth-life—"at the first organization in heaven, we were all present, and saw the Savior chosen and appointed, and the plan of salvation made, and we sanctioned it." [^26] This, doubtless, the meaning of "man was also in the beginning with God." And as to the "rulers,"—they are not "rulers" in the worldly sense of those words. "Government" here, "office" in the "kingdom of God," means opportunity for service, not of mastery. "Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them," said the Savior to his disciples, "and they that are great exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you. But whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant; even as the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many." [^27]

So Joseph Smith:

THE SPIRIT OF THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN'S GOVERNMENT

"The powers of heaven can only be controlled upon the principle of righteousness. When men undertake * * * to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men in any degree of unrighteousness, the heavens withdraw themselves, the spirit of the Lord is grieved, and when it is withdrawn, amen to the priesthood, or the authority of that man. No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness, and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul, without hypocrisy, and without guile." [^28]

This the principle of heavenly rule among Divine Beings.

When it is conceded, as it is in the foregoing, that among intelligences there are varying degrees of intelligence, also degrees of greatness, and nobility, and moral quality; then it must follow that at the last we come to One who is the most intelligent of all, greatest, noblest, best; most wise, and most powerful. And how far this greatest and best may rise above the other intelligences, who may say? There are no terms of comparison beyond the superlative. It rises above all comparisons, and how far above that to which it stands next none can say. It may be that the "Most Intelligent One" may be not only more intelligent than any other "one" of the mass, but more intelligent than all of the "ones" combined.

"These two facts do exist, that there are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other; there shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all!" [^29]

That is, than "all" combined, and for that reason is he God. And doubtless this is the Being to whom Joseph Smith makes reference when he says—speaking of the fulness of knowledge yet to be revealed to the saints—"according to that which was ordained in the council of the Eternal God of all other Gods, before this world was;" [^30] which conveys the thought of many Divine Intelligences; but also of One Supreme Intelligence, more intelligent than all.

Yet to this Supreme Intelligence are the other intelligences necessary. He without them cannot be perfect, nor they without him. There is community of interest between them; also of love and brotherhood; and hence community of effort for mutual good, for progress, for attainment of the highest possible. Therefore are these eternal, Divine Intelligences drawn together in oneness of mind and purpose—in moral and spiritual unity; [^31] until the moral and spiritual force of the universe—the Absolute Power over all things exists in the harmonized Will of all Divine Intelligences, guided and instructed by the One more intelligent than all—"the Eternal God of All other Gods."

THE IMMANENCE OF GOD

It is also the doctrine of Joseph Smith that from the presence of these Divine Beings proceeds an essence or substance (perhaps like unto ether) variously called "spirit," "light," "light of truth," "light of Christ," corresponding somewhat to what other teachers regard as "vital force" or "energy" which permeates all nature and constitutes the immanence of God in the universe; through which the purposes of the Divine Intelligence are impressed upon other minds and also upon matter, and hence the orderly creations and their maintenance—the cosmos. This conception is derived from the revelations to Joseph Smith which said—"the elements are the tabernacle of God." [^32] Also that other revelation which represents this divine indwelling power in the world for us men as being the "light of Christ." The passage follows:

"THE LIGHT OF CHRIST"

"This is the light of Christ [i.e. "the light of truth," which is "in all and through all things"]. As also he [the light of Christ] is in the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made. * * * As also the light of the stars and the power thereof by which they were made. And the earth also, and the power thereof; even the earth upon which you stand. And the light which now shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes which is the same light that quickeneth your understanding. Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space. The light which is in all things; which giveth life to all things; which is the law by which all things are governed; even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne. who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things."

Again:

"The earth rolls upon her wings, and the sun gives his light by day, and the moon gives her light by night, and the stars also give their light, as they roll upon their wings of glory, in the midst of the power of God. * * * Behold all these are kingdoms, and any man who hath seen any or the least of these, hath seen God moving in his majesty and power." [i.e. has seen a manifestation of God.] [^33]

According to The New Dispensation doctrine, then. God is in the world—permeates the world—by his Spirit; and the thought rises to the sublime and inspired conception of David of the every-whereness of God, when he said:

"Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there; if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea: Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night shall be light about me. Yea, the darkness hideth not from thee; but the night shineth as the day: the darkness and the light are both alike to thee." [^34]

The erroneous idea of the Christian world with reference to God will pass away, and will be supplanted by a grander conception, one in harmony with the foregoing teachings of Joseph Smith, one more worthy of the character of God. It will hold that Divine Being will be expressed as Divine Immanence in the universe. As of old it will be "God * * * and the spirit of God." [^35] God the harmonized community of Divine Intelligences of the universe and the immanent spirit of God in and throughout that universe, which spirit of God proceeds forth from those Divine Personal Intelligences to fill the immensity of space." [^36]

Also the conception will obtain that God is just as near to modern man as he ever was to man in ancient times; that spiritual union and fellowship with Deity is as possible for the moderns as it ever was for the ancients. Such pre-eminently was the view of Joseph Smith, and is the very ground work of his numerous revelations and the all but constant union and communion with God throughout his life.

THE REIGN OF THE LAW

"There are many kingdoms * * * and to every kingdom is given a law; and to every law there are certain bounds also, and conditions. All beings who abide not in those conditions [i.e. abide not within the law] are not justified." [^37]

Also—

"There is a law irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundation of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated; and when we [men] obtain any blessings from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." [^38]

This was said in 1832 and 1843, respectively. These passages proclaim the reign of law throughout the infinite universe—through all space, through all time; in all kingdoms; but implies the possibility of departure from "law." But "to every law there are certain bounds also and conditions."

A bold conception this; especially three-quarters of a century ago; yet it is approved by man's experience. The power of ocean currents and the winds to carry with them objects in the direction of their movement is overcome by another force or law, the power of steam; the force of gravitation, by the levitating power of gas; the natural tendency of water to seek its level, by the levitating power of heat converting water into vapors and the absorbing power of the atmosphere—are examples of this truth. This idea of law itself "having metes and bounds," or "laws themselves being subject to law," Henry Drummond, declared to be "One of the most striking generalizations of recent science." [^39] This, however, more than fifty years after Joseph Smith's doctrine was published. John Fiske said, "In order to be always sure that we are generalizing correctly, we must make the generalizing process a subject of generalization." Which is but a recognition of Drummond's idea that "laws have their law;" and Joseph Smith's idea that "To every law there are certain bounds also and conditions."

Already I have noted above the implied possibility of disorder, which must result in the event of a violation of law. But our Prophet said:

"That which is governed by law is also preserved by law, and perfected and sanctified by the same. That which breaketh a law, and abideth not by law but seeketh to become a law unto itself, and willeth to abide in sin, and altogether abideth in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice, nor judgment." [^40]

There may be at times apparent departure from law in some of the phenomena within man's experience; but when all the data is known, it will be found that all things take place in conformity with fixed and eternal principles—in conformity with law, by which the universe is everywhere governed.

THE DOCTRINE OF OPPOSITE EXISTENCES—GOOD AND EVIL

Respecting good and evil the Prophet taught:

"There must needs be an opposition in all things. If it were not so, righteousness could not be brought to pass; nor wickedness, nor holiness, nor misery; neither good nor bad, therefore, all things must needs be [in the absence of these opposite existences] a compound in one." [^41]

Good implies its opposite, evil. Law, which carries with it the idea of order, implies disorder, and takes measures against it. We become conscious of the truth of the doctrine here announced at every turn. In the astronomical order it is seen in the centripetal and centrifugal forces—the holding together and the flying apart forces. In chemistry it is manifest in the composing and decomposing forces; in positive and negative electricity. It is seen in light and darkness; heat, cold; movement, repose; joy, sorrow; pleasure, pain; and so following. The Prophet's teaching on this line runs to the extent that existence itself is made to depend upon this antinomy of things.

"And if ye shall say there is no law, ye shall also say there is no sin. If ye shall say there is no sin, ye shall also say there is no righteousness. And if there is no righteousness nor happiness, there is no punishment nor misery. And if these things are not, there is no God. And if there is no God, we are not, neither the earth; for there could have been no creation of things; neither to act, nor to be acted upon." [^42]

What a dreadful world this would be without this quality—the opposite existences here contended for? Imagine all things in the world to be white! No contrast in coloring! Universal insanity must result. The "dread of sinking into naught" is matched by the dread of having things resolved into a "compound in one." [^43]

Good and evil then, in Latter-day Saint philosophy, are not created things. Both are eternal, just as duration is, and space. They are as old as law—old as truth, old as this eternal universe. Intelligences must adjust themselves to these eternal existences; this, the measure of their duty.

THE MORAL FREEDOM OF INTELLIGENCES

Joseph Smith taught the moral freedom of men and of all intelligences:

"All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also, otherwise there is no existence. Behold, here is the agency of man and here is the condemnation of man, because that which was from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them, and they receive not the light. And every man, whose spirit receiveth not the light, is under condemnation, for man is spirit." [^44]

The fact of free moral agency for intelligences runs through all the Prophet's revelations in similar spirit. Indeed, in one scripture he represents the chief sin of Lucifer as being an attempt to "destroy the agency of man;" and for that he was driven forth from heaven. [^45] The effect of these two doctrines, (1) the recognition of the spirit of man as an eternal being; and (2) his being a free moral agent, is tremendous in accounting for things. As matters now stand, the usually accepted orthodox Christian doctrine on the matter of man's origin is that God of his free will created men. That they are as he would have them, since in his act of creation he could have had them different had he so minded. Then why should he—being infinitely wise and infinitely powerful, and infinitely good, for so the creeds represent him—why should he create by mere act of volition, beings such as men are, not only capable of, but prone to, moral evil? Which, in the last analysis of things—if indeed God absolutely created man, spirit and body—and in spite of all special pleadings to the contrary, leaves responsibility for moral evil with God. For not to prevent that which is preventable—which one can have otherwise if he but wills it so—is to be responsible fort it as it is. Viewing God's creative acts, then, as orthodox creeds represent them, the next pertinent questions are: Then what of the decreed purpose of God to punish moral evil? And what of the much vaunted justice of God in that punishment? Wherein lies the just responsibility of man if he was so created as to love evil and to follow it? It is revolting to reason, as it is shocking to piety, to think that God, of his own free will, created some men, not only inclined to wickedness, but desperately so inclined; while others he, of his own volition, created with dispositions naturally inclined toward goodness. In like manner stands it with man in relation to his inclinations to faith, and to unbelief; and yet, under orthodox christianity all are included under one law for judgment! On the other hand, under the conception of the existence of eternal intelligence in men, who by the inherent nature of them are of various degrees of intelligence and moral quality, yet all capable of advancement, of improvement and alike in their eternity and their freedom; and God proposing the betterment of their conditions,—progress to higher levels of being and power through change—under this conception of things, I ask, how stand matters? And the answer comes that ever present through all changes, through all movements, upward or downward; in all the processes of betterment as in all relapses into degeneracy, the "intelligence," with the tremendous fact of consciousness and moral freedom, and indestructibility—has his choice of moving upward or downward in every estate he occupies; often defeating, for a time at least, even the benevolent purposes of God respecting him through his own perverseness; he passes through dire experiences, suffers terribly, yet learns by what he suffers, so that his very suffering becomes a means to his improvement; he learns swiftly or slowly—according to the inherent nature of him—obedience to law; and is perfected and sanctified by the same; while that "intelligence" which breaketh the law, and abideth not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself, and willeth to abide in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice nor judgment. Therefore must remain filthy still.

This conception of things relieves God of the responsibility for the nature and status of intelligences in all stages of their development; their inherent nature and their volition make them primarily what they are, and this nature they may change, slowly, perhaps, yet change it they may. God has put them in the way of changing it, by enlarging their intelligence through change of environment, through instruction and through experience. The only way God effects these beings is favorably; he creates not their inherent nature; he is not responsible for the use they make of their freedom; nor is he the author of their sufferings when they fall into sin; that arises out of the violations of law, to which the intelligence subscribed, and must be endured until the lessons of obedience to law are learned.

ETERNITY OF RELATIONSHIPS

Matching these eternal things; an eternal universe; eternal intelligence; eternal good, with its background of eternal evil, potential or active; eternal law; free agency and the like, is the Prophet's doctrine of eternal relationships. Spirits are begotten men and women; these after passing through death become resurrected and exalted personages, spirit and element in them being eternally united, whence proceeds a fulness of joy, and glory, and power. [^46] The Prophet taught that these relations in which intelligences participate, the joy and glory of endless lives, in celestial worlds, are themselves eternal. The marriage covenant which unites immortal beings is eternal, hence the eternity of the marriage covenant which Joseph Smith introduced in our dispensation, called the "New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage;"—sometimes called "Celestial Marriage"—by which marriages under the law of God, are made in sacred places for time and eternity. [^47] Thus the relationship of exalted intelligences is a thing regulated and sanctified by law; and from these relations come the family, a permanent, eternal institution; the foundation of which is fatherhood and motherhood, whence spring, also, all other relationships existing among the exalted intelligences of all worlds and world-systems; until, indeed, all are found and united together in bonds of relationships founded on mutual covenants and agreements, and sanctified by love.

CLASSIFICATION OF THE NEW DISPENSATION PHILOSOPHY

As a philosophical system the New Dispensation philosophy may not be classified under any of the titles used to designate the various schools of philosophy. It is "dualistic" but not in the sense that "it breaks up the universe into two entirely distinct substances, the material world and an immaterial God, who is represented to be its Creator, Sustainer and Ruler." [^48] Its dualism is that which recognizes infinitely extended substance—the universe, "unbounded and empty in no part, but holds nevertheless that within this universe, and co-extensive with it, is intelligence, or spirit, or mind; whose essence is of finer quality than gross matter; which, while possessing some qualities in common with matter—necessarily extension—in other respects distinct, and chiefly in the power of thought and action. This conception—speaking broadly, and taking no note of a thousand details, for the New Dispensation philosophy, divides the universe into the two grand divisions spirit and the grosser matter, the Book of Mormon's "things to act, and things to be acted upon." [^49]

The New Dispensation philosophy in a certain sense also is monistic, in that it believes all substances to be matter, that there is no such thing as immaterial substance. That even "spirit," which is generally regarded by most philosophies as "immaterial," is material; but, as explained in foregoing paragraphs, it is of a finer or purer essence than gross matter that is tangible to the senses. [^50] The monism, then, of New Dispensation thought is not of the kind that recognizes no distinctions in matter; that holds that all substances are fused into one inseparable "sole substance" which is at once "God and nature," as taught by the Haeckle school of monists. [^51]

New Dispensation thought in some of its effects may resemble pantheism. Yet it is not pantheism, either in the form which sinks all nature into one substance and then regards the one substance as God—the purest monism; or in the form that expands the one substance into all the variety of objects to be seen in nature, and regards those various objects as but so many parts of God—God expanded into nature—leading to gross idolatry. But New Dispensation thought does conceive of the every-whereness of God, by the indwelling of his Spirit in nature, and the every-whereness of his power and authority by his Spirit, and by the agencies of angels, and of men called and authorized to act for and in the name of the Godhead. But New Dispensation philosophy makes sharp distinction between nature and Deity, and hence is not pantheism.

While Joseph Smith's philosophy holds to the reality of "matter," it so far conforms to "idealism" as to maintain that mind is superior to matter and dominates it. To say that intelligence dominates matter, and produces all the ceaseless changes going on in the universe, both of creation and demolition (or evolution and devolution) is simply to say that the superior dominates the inferior; that that which acts is greater than that which is merely acted upon; that mind is the "eternal cause" of the ever becoming in the universe—the "cause" and "sustainer" of the cosmic world. It is also to say that mind is power, and will, and life, and love.

The New Dispensation conception of the universe is undoubtedly pluralistic; but with advanced thinkers such as the late Professor William James of Harvard, [^52] Professor Rogers, [^53] and other leading thinkers maintaining that view of the universe, it is not necessary to defend it here. It should be said, however, that while this philosophy conceives the world as divided into material elements and intelligence, it does not regard all manifestation of intelligence as divine, and hence an object of worship or adoration. Only those intelligences that have by reason of their progress attained unto the "Divine Nature" are accounted divine, and become "parts" of God—members of David's "congregation of the mighty," where God "judgeth among the Gods." [^54]

As to methods of thinking, New Dispensation philosophizing is bound by no rules prescribed by any of the schools of thought. Both idealistic and empirical methods it employs; it recognizes both experience and thought as avenues to knowledge; and "both channels of knowledge as mutually complementary and indispensable." That is to say, it holds that "knowledge is not all produced by the action of outward things upon themselves, but partly arises from the natural adaptation of the mind to think things that are true"—and so far accepts what is known as rationalistic methods.

Eternalism is the term I would select as the best descriptive word for New Dispensation philosophy; for that term best represents its concepts: an eternal universe, with no beginning and no end: [^55] Eternal intelligence, working in eternal duration, without beginning or ending, and without ultimates, and hence eternal progression running parallel with eternal lives; and an eternal or "everlasting" gospel, offering eternal opportunities for righteousness; eternal existence of mercy, justice, wisdom, truth and love; all accompanied by eternal relations, associations, unions—eternal youth, and eternal glory!

Such the doctrines and principles given out in the teachings of Joseph Smith, and which here I have undertaken to set somewhat in order. I am not unmindful of the fact that the system of thought suggested by our Prophet's doctrines, like other philosophies, may have its difficulties, growing out of the weakness of the human mind, with all its limitations, to apprehend things as yet too large and elusive for man's intellectual powers, and his all too inadequate symbols to represent truth. But these difficulties are not greater in New Dispensation thought than those inherent in the teleology of other systems. Indeed not so great. Meantime the New Dispensation philosophical doctrines afford a noble coign from which to view life, and furnish the noblest incentives to earnest strivings for right living, which is the true end of thinking and of all human endeavor; for now, as of old, to "Reverence God and keep his commandments— * * * this is the whole duty of man." [^56]

It is this work of Joseph Smith's, this promulgation of a New Dispensation of the Christian religion; the development of a priesthood; the organization of the wonderful system of ecclesiastical government—the church he founded; the announcement of physical and metaphysical principles dealing with the profoundest subjects of intellectual investigation and thought; and which, when they are finally arranged in proper order, will constitute a system of philosophy worthy of the enlightened age in which it was brought forth—it is this work, and the whole volume of it, that constitutes Joseph Smith's vindication before the world, and justifies his followers in believing that his life's work was a super- human achievement; and hence there was in him a divine inspiration that wrought the work of his great though brief career; the inspiration of the Almighty gave him understanding—He was a Prophet of God.

Footnotes

"Then say what is truth? 'Tis the last and the first,

For the limits of time it steps o'er;

Though the heavens depart, and the earth's fountains burst,

Truth, the sum of existence, will weather the worst,

Eternal, unchanged, evermore."

And Sir Oliver Lodge: "Solar systems can (or, rather do) by collision or otherwise resolve themselves into nebulae, and nebulae left to themselves can condense into solar systems,—everywhere in the spaces around us we see a part of the process going on; the formation of solar systems from whirling nebulae lies before our eyes, if not in the visible sky itself, yet in the magnified photographs taken of that sky. * * * From everlasting to everlasting the material universe rolls on composing worlds and disintegrating them." (Science and Faith, 1908, pp. 16, 17.)

Later, however, Sir Robert Ball grew bolder and said: "It is most improbable, almost impossible that these great centers of light (the fixed stars) should have been created to light up nothing, and as they are far too distant to be of use to us, we may fairly accept the hypothesis that each one has a system of planets around it like our own. Taking an average of only ten planets to each sun, that hypothesis indicates the existence, within the narrow range to which human observation is still confined, of at least 300,000,000 of separate worlds, many of them doubtless of gigantic size, and it is nearly inconceivable that those worlds can be wholly devoid of living and sentient beings upon them. Granting the, to us, impossible hypothesis that the final cause of the universe is accident, a fortuitous concourse of self-existent atoms, still the accident which produced thinking beings upon this little and inferior world, must have frequently repeated itself; while if, as we hold, there is a sentient Creator, it is difficult to believe, without a revelation to that effect, that he has wasted such glorious creative powers upon mere masses of insensible matter. God cannot love gasses! The probability at least is that there are millions of worlds—for after all what the sensitized paper sees must be but an infinitesimal fraction of the whole—occupied by sentient beings."

Still later, 27th of August, 1910, the Associated Press announced that in a lecture before the Popular Educational Society, known as the "Materialistic Association," Prof. J. J. See declared the completion of his researches in Cosmic Evolution to which he had devoted ten years. The Associated Press dispatch continued: "Professor See stated his conviction that the planets revolving about the 'fixed stars' are inhabited by some kind of intelligent beings. He cited the address delivered at Philadelphia in 1897 by Professor Newcombe, [quoted above] in which similar views were held, and said that the proof is much more complete now than at that time. Life flourishing on the earth and believed to exist on Mars and Venus is but a drop in the Pacific ocean as compared to that flourishing on the thousands of billions of habitable worlds, now definitely proved to revolve about the fixed stars."

"Bodily existence on other planets is probable, not necessarily on any planet of our solar system, but that is a trifle in the visible universe; it is as our little five-roomed house among all the dwellings of mankind." (Sir Oliver Lodge, Science and Faith, pp. 37.)

"Evil exists in the balance of natural forces. * * * It is also the background of good, the incentive to good, and the trial of good, without which good could not be. As the virtue of courage could not exist without the evil of danger, and as the virtue of sympathy could not exist without the evil of suffering, so no other virtue could exist without its corresponding evil. In a world without evil—if such a world be really conceivable—all men would have perfect health, perfect intelligence, and perfect morals. No one could gain or impart information, each one's cup of knowledge being full. The temperature would stand forever at 70 degrees, both heat and cold [in excess] being evil. There could be no progress since progress is the overcoming of evil. A world without evil would be as toil without exertion, as light without darkness, as a battle without an antagonist. It would be a world without meaning." (A Short View of Great Questions, Orlando J. Smith, sec. xi.)

---
Notas:
[^1] "Thy days are known," said the Lord to him, in Liberty prison, March, 1839, "and thy years shall not be numbered less; therefore, fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and forever" (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxii:9). It was this word, doubtless, that made the Prophet confident that he would not die until his work was completed. When several of the twelve were en route for Nauvoo from the east, Elder Wilford Woodruff, referring to a conversation that was had among them about the Prophet's death, wrote in his journal: "Elder [Lyman] Wight said that Joseph told him, while in Liberty jail, Mo., in 1839, he [Joseph] would not live to see forty years, but he [Wight] was not to reveal it till he [the Prophet] was dead." Millennial Star, vol. xxv, p. 135. "I defy all the world to destroy the work of God; and I prophesy they never will have power to kill me till my work is accomplished and I am ready to die." (Joseph Smith, in a discourse on the 15th of Oct., 1843. Millennial Star, vol. xxii, p. 263).
[^2] The Life of Brigham Young, Tullidge, 1877, p. 106.
[^3] Historians' Second Compilation of Data, Millennial Star, vol. xxv, p. 201.
[^4] The number in attendance is not known, but there were several hundred high priests in Nauvoo and the surrounding districts.
[^5] This appointment was made on the 12th of October, 1833. See Doctrine and Covenants, sec. c.
[^6] Historians' Second Compilation of Data, Millennial Star, vol. xxv, p. 215.
[^7] Referring to the foundress of the American Society of Shakers, seceders from the "Society of Friends."
[^8] Historians' Second Compilation of Data, Millennial Star, vol. xxv, p. 215.
[^9] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cviii:32.
[^10] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxiv:127-30. "I give unto you my servant Brigham Young to be a president over the twelve traveling council. * * * They are Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Orson Hyde, William Smith, John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff, Willard Richards, George A. Smith." Of these apostles thus appointed by revelation from God, seven, a majority, as already noted, were present and participated in the above meeting; Orson Hyde, William Smith, and John E. Page were the absentees.
[^11] Historians' Second Compilation of Data, Millennial Star, vol. xxv, pp. 216, 231, 232, where a full synopsis of Brigham Young's speech will be found.
[^12] Life of Brigham Young, Tullidge, 1877, pp. 115, 116. The testimony to the fact of the transfiguration is abundant. In the journal of Elder Wm. C. Staines, of that date, Aug. 8th, the following statement is recorded: "Brigham Young said—'I will tell you who your leaders or guardians will be—the twelve—I at their head.' This was with a voice like the voice of the Prophet Joseph. I thought it was he, and so did thousands who heard it. This was very satisfactory to the people, and a vote was taken to sustain the twelve in their office, which, with a few dissenting voices, was passed."
[^13] That is, the vote was so overwhelming in favor of sustaining the twelve by the whole body assembled, that it was not necessary to call upon the quorums to vote separately upon the question. (Church Historians' Second Compilation of Data, Millennial Star, vol. xxv, pp. 199-201; et seq).
[^14] "Permitted to go," would be more exact, see later paragraphs.
[^15] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cvii:23-26.
[^16] Ibid, verses 27-33.
[^17] Minutes of October Conference, Nauvoo, 1843. (History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, pp. 47, 49).
[^18] Amasa M. Lyman, a prominent figure in the church for many years, was the third son of Boswell Lyman and Martha Mason. He was born on the 30th of March, 1813, in Lyman township, Grafton county, New Hampshire. He received the gospel under the ministry of Orson Pratt and Lyman E. Johnson, in April, 1832, and in August of the same year he was ordained an elder and began his work in the ministry of the church. During a brief suspension of Elder Orson Pratt from the quorum of the twelve, 1842, owing to a misunderstanding between Elder Pratt and President Joseph Smith, Elder Lyman had been ordained an apostle to take Elder Pratt's place; this on 20th Aug. 1842; but Elder Pratt having made satisfaction to President Smith was restored to fellowship in his quorum, Jan. 1843; this let Elder Lyman out of the quorum of the twelve; but Elder Lyman was taken by President Smith into the first presidency (History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, pp. 255-6); but he was never formally presented to the people in that capacity. After this appointment, however, Elder Lyman was always honored by the twelve both before and after the demise of the Prophet, as one of the leaders of the church; and some time later—Aug. 12, 1844—was received into the apostles' quorum.
[^19] Tract Sidney Rigdon, by Jedediah M. Grant, pp, 15, 16; also 34, 35. Times and Seasons, vol. v, pp. 663, 664.
[^20] There is one other incident connected with the matter of succession in the presidency that ought to be stated. Mr. Edward Tullidge, in his life of Joseph the Prophet—(the "Reorganized Church" edition)—quotes the Prophet Joseph as saying: "I told Stephen Markham, that if I and Hyrum were ever taken again, we should [would] be massacred, or I was not a Prophet of God. I want Hyrum to live and lead the Church, but he is determined not to leave me" (p. 491). Mr. Tullidge quotes this passage differently from what it is written in the History of the Church, Period I. What authority he has for doing so he does not say. In the Prophet's own history it is written: "I want Hyrum to live to avenge my blood, but he is determined not to leave me." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 546). But though Mr. Tullidge quotes this passage differently from what it appears in the Prophet's own account, there is evidence in addition to his word that President Smith did desire Hyrum Smith to succeed him and even ordained him to that end. At the October conference following the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum. President Young in a discourse said: "If Hyrum had lived he would not have stood between Joseph and the twelve, but he would have stood for Joseph. Did Joseph ordain any man to take his place? He did. Who was it? It was Hyrum. But Hyrum fell a martyr before Joseph did." (Times and Seasons, vol. v, p. 638).
[^21] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cvii:107-8.
[^22] Millennial Star, vol. xxv, pp. 278-9.
[^23] Pamphlet on Sidney Rigdon, Elder J. M. Grant, p. 18.
[^24] "And inasmuch as a president of the high priesthood shall transgress, he shall be had in remembrance before the common council of the church, who shall be assisted by twelve councilors of the high priesthood; and their decision upon his head shall be an end of controversy concerning him." (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cvii, 82, 83).
[^25] Minutes of the Trial of Sidney Rigdon, published in Times and Seasons, vol. v, pp. 647-655, and 660 to 667, and 658-687.
[^26] Psalms, lxxxii.
[^27] See Gems from the History of Joseph Smith, in Richards and Little's Compendium, p. 288, 3rd edition, 1898. The Prophet says substantially the same thing in his discourse at the obsequies of his friend, James Adams, October 9th, 1843: "The organization of the spiritual and heavenly beings was agreeable to the most perfect order and harmony: their limits and bounds were fixed irrevocably, and voluntarily subscribed to in their heavenly state by themselves, and were by our first parents subscribed to upon the earth." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 51.)
[^28] St. Matt. xx:25-28.
[^29] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxi.
[^30] Pearl of Great Price, Book of Abraham, ch. iii.
[^31] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxi.
[^32] It was into this unity that the Christ would have his disciples inducted, when he prayed that all those who might be led to believe in him might "be one." "As thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us; * * * that they may be one, even as we are one; I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one." (St. John xvii).
[^33] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xciii.
[^34] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. 88.
[^35] Psalms, cxxxix.
[^36] Gen. i:1, 2. "In the beginning God created * * * and the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters," etc.
[^37] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxviii:6-12.
[^38] 38. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxviii.
[^39] 39. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxx.
[^40] 40. "One of the most striking generalizations of recent science is that even laws have their law. Phenomena first, in the progress of knowledge, were grouped together, and nature shortly presented the spectacle of a cosmos, the lines of beauty being the great natural laws. So long, however, as these laws were merely great lines running through nature, so long as they remained isolated from one another, the system of nature was still incomplete. The principle which sought law among phenomena had to go further and seek a law among the laws. Laws themselves accordingly came to be treated as they treated phenomena, and found themselves finally grouped in a still narrower circle. That inmost circle is governed by one great law, the law of continuity. It is the law for laws." (Natural Law in the Spiritual World, Introduction, 1893, p. 37.)
[^41] 41. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxviii.
[^42] 42. II Nephi ii.
[^43] 43. Book of Mormon, II Nephi ii.
[^44] 44. The absence of this necessary "opposition in all things" is well put, by a recent philosophical writer, in these terms:
[^45] 45. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xciii. The last sentence is a noble conception. It is as if the Lord would say, truth is native to the spirit of man, when unrestrained by man's perverse will—when he has not reached the point where he chooses darkness rather than light because his deeds are evil—then truth is native to the spirit of man and will, when unrestrained, intuitively rise to meet it as flame leaps toward its kindred flame and unites with it. And it is because the spirit of man refuses to live true to this attribute of his spirit that he comes under condemnation when rejecting truth.
[^46] 46. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxvi.
[^47] 47. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xciii.
[^48] 48. See chapter xliv, this History.
[^49] 49. Such is Haeckle's description of dualism. (Riddle of the Universe, McCabe's translation, 1900, p. 20.) The above is, of course, the modern Christian or realistic dualism, not the old Persian dualism.
[^50] 50. II Nephi ii.
[^51] 51. "All spirit is mater, but it is more fine or pure [i. e. than gross matter] and can only be discerned by purer eyes. We cannot see it; but when our bodies are purified, we shall see that it is all matter." (Joseph Smith, Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxxi.)
[^52] 52. "Monism * * * (taken in its widest sense) recognizes one sole substance in the universe, which is at once 'God and nature,' 'body and spirit' (or matter and energy) it holds to be inseparable. * * * The intra-mundane God of the monist, leads to pantheism." (Riddle of the Universe, p. 20.)
[^53] 53. See the Professor's A Pluralistic Universe, 1909.
[^54] 54. See the Professor's Religious Conception of the World, passim, MacMillan Co. 1907.
[^55] 55. Psalms cxxxix, Orson Pratt refers to the existence of a revelation which is most illuminating on this great theme. He says: "There is one revelation that this people [i. e. the Latter-day Saints] are not generally acquainted with. I think it has never been published, but probably it will be in the Church History. It is given in questions and answers. The first question is: 'What is the name of God in the pure language?' The answer says: 'Ahman.' 'What is the name of the Son of God?' Answer, 'Son Ahman, the greatest of all the parts of God, excepting Ahman.' 'What is the name of men?' 'Sons Ahman,' is the answer. 'What is the name of angels in the pure language?' 'Anglo-man.' This revelation goes on to say that 'Sons Ahman' are the greatest of all the parts of God excepting 'Son Ahman,' and 'Ahman;' and that 'Anglo-man' are the greatest of all the parts of God excepting 'Sons Ahman,' 'Son Ahman,' and 'Ahman.' * * * What is the conclusion to be drawn from this? It is that these intelligent beings are all parts of God." (Journal of Discourses, vol. ii, p. 342.)
[^56] 56. "Beginnings" and "endings" for New Dispensation thought have reference to local events within the universe. Such as the creation of a planet, or planetary system; or the peopling of a planet. The opening verse of the Bible for instance—"In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth"—has no reference to any "absolute beginning" or creation from "nothing," but refers to the "beginning" connected with our earth and the order of worlds with which it is connected. An important contribution by Joseph Smith to the nature of the Mosaic revelations, whence comes our Bible story of creation, is that those revelations are local, that they pertain to our earth and its heavens or associated worlds, and chiefly pertaining to our earth; "I will speak unto thee concerning this earth on which thou standest," said the Lord to Moses: "I reveal unto you concerning this heaven and this earth," said the Lord again to him, "write the words which I speak"—then follows the creation story. (Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses, chs. i and ii.)
