B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LXIV

THE QUESTION OF SUCCESSION IN THE PRESIDENCY OF THE CHURCH—ASPIRANTS TO LEADERSHIP

THE church was thrown into momentary confusion by the martyrdom of the Prophet. His death had not been contemplated by the body of the people, though he himself had several times referred to it, but always in connection with the confident assertion that he would not be taken from the earth until he had accomplished his work. [^1] Now that this calamity had befallen them, the saints were for the moment as sheep without a shepherd; they had not yet learned that ample provision had been made in the church for its own perpetuation. Brigham Young's mind seemed to be the first to grasp that important truth. He and Orson Pratt were together at Peterboro, New Hampshire, when the confirmation of the death of the Prophet reached them. Then Elder Young said:

"The first thing that I thought of was whether Joseph had taken the keys of the kingdom with him from the earth. Brother Orson Pratt sat at my left; we were both leaning back in our chairs. Bringing my hand down on my knee, I said, 'the keys of the kingdom are right here with the church.'" [^2]

SELF-PERPETUATION OF THE CHURCH

A divine institution had been established, greater than any man or officer in it, and capable of self-perpetuation, but the saints were to learn that truth only by experience.

Elder Sidney Rigdon arrived at Nauvoo from Pittsburg on the third of August. This fell upon Saturday. Three members of the apostles' quorum, then in Nauvoo, waited upon Elder Rigdon and arranged for a council meeting with him for the following morning, Sunday, at eight o'clock. This meeting Elder Rigdon failed to attend upon the plea that he was engaged with a lawyer. He manifested a disposition to avoid meeting with the apostles. At ten o'clock on Sunday, the saints assembled, and Elder Rigdon addressed them at great length, relating a pretentious vision he had received while at Pittsburg concerning the situation of the church which led him to advocate the appointment of "a guardian" to build up the church to the Prophet Joseph, who had begun it. Another meeting was called for the following Thursday, the 8th of August, for the purpose of appointing the aforesaid "guardian" for the church. Elder Rigdon and his friends had urged the appointment for Tuesday, but there were those present who opposed this seeming haste; and out of deference to their wishes, the meeting was appointed for the 8th.

Fortunately for the welfare of the church, Brigham Young and the members of the apostles' quorum excepting Wm. Smith, brother of the Prophet, John E. Page, and Orson Hyde, arrived in Nauvoo on the evening of the 6th of August, and the following morning held a council meeting at the house of John Taylor, that he might be present, as he was not yet recovered from his wounds. The saints "considered it very providential for the twelve to arrive at this particular junction," says the chronicle. [^3]

In the afternoon of the 7th, a meeting was held at which were present all the apostles that were in Nauvoo, excepting John Taylor. The high council of the Nauvoo stake of Zion was present; the president of the stake, William Marks, and the high priests. [^4] The meeting was held in the Seventies' Hall.

RIGDON'S EFFORT AT ESTABLISHING LEADERSHIP

Brigham Young called upon Elder Rigdon to make a statement concerning his message to the saints, "the vision and revelation he had received." In substance Elder Rigdon replied that the object of his visit was to offer himself to the saints as a "guardian" that it had been shown to him in vision at Pittsburg, that the church must be built up to Joseph, the martyr; that all the blessings the saints could receive would come through their late Prophet; that no man could be a successor to Joseph Smith. Elder Rigdon seemed to lay much stress upon the fact that he had been appointed and ordained a "spokesman" to Joseph Smith, [^5] and appeared to claim the right to speak for him even now that he was dead. He held that the church was not disorganized, though the head was gone. He had been commanded to come to Nauvoo and see that the church was governed properly, and propose himself as "guardian" to the people. "In this I have discharged my duty, and done what God has commanded me," he concluded, "and the people can please themselves whether they accept me or not." [^6]

To this Elder Brigham Young replied:

"I do not care who leads this church, even though it were Ann Lee, [^7] but one thing I must know, and that is what God says about it. I have the keys and the means of obtaining the mind of God on the subject. * * * Joseph conferred upon our heads all the keys and powers belonging to the apostleship which he himself held before he was taken away. * * * How often has Joseph said to the twelve, I have laid the foundation and you must build thereon, for upon your shoulders the kingdom rests'." [^8]

The next day was the one appointed by Sidney Rigdon for the church to assemble and choose a "guardian." The attendance was large, as intense interest had been awakened upon the subject to be considered. In the forenoon Sidney Rigdon addressed the assembly, setting forth his claim to the "guardianship" of the church. He had full opportunity to present his case, and for an hour and a half spoke without interruption; but despite his reputation as an "orator," he failed to convince the saints that "he was sent of God."

At the afternoon meeting appointed by Brigham Young and his fellow apostles, the quorums of the priesthood were grouped about the stand in the order of a general assembly of priesthood; that is, the quorums of the Melchizedek priesthood were grouped together as high priests, seventies, elders; and the quorums of the Aaronic priesthood as priests, teachers, deacons. Questions to be settled by vote on such occasions are presented to each of these quorums of priesthood separately; and this general assembly of the quorums constitute the highest spiritual authority of the church. Such a general assembly of the quorums may even pass upon the decisions of the three great presiding councils of the Melchizedek priesthood, the first presidency, the quorum of the apostles, and the first quorum of the seventy, if the decision of these councils are made in unrighteousness.

"And in case that any decision of these quorums is made in unrighteousness, it may be brought before a general assembly of the several quorums, which constitute the spiritual authorities of the church, otherwise there can be no appeal from their decision." [^9]

BRIGHAM YOUNG FOR THE TWELVE

The following of the apostles' quorum were present on the above occasion; Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith—seven, a majority of the quorum. Amasa M. Lyman was also present, whose close association with the twelve at this period will be noted later. The opening services of the afternoon ended, Brigham Young arose—

"Attention all!"

And his voice rang out over the great multitude assembled, and hushed them into silence. Then, he continued:

"For the first time in my life, for the first time in your lives, for the first time in the kingdom of God in the 19th century, without a Prophet at our head, do I step forth to act in my calling in connection with the quorum of the twelve, as apostles of Jesus Christ unto this generation. Apostles whom God has called by revelation [^10] through the Prophet Joseph, who are ordained and anointed to bear off the keys of the kingdom of God in all the world. * * * The first position I take in behalf of the twelve and the people is, to ask a few questions. I ask the Latter-day Saints: Do you, as individuals, at this time, want to choose a prophet or a guardian. * * * All that want some person to be a guardian, a spokesman, or something else, signify it by raising the right hand. [No votes].

* * * All that want to draw a party from the church after them, let them do it if they can, but they will not prosper.

If any man thinks he has influence among this people to lead away a party, let him try it, and he will find out that there is power with the apostles which will carry them victorious through all the world, and build up and defend the church and kingdom of God. * * *

There has been much said about President Rigdon being president of the church, and leading the people, being the head, etc. Brother Rigdon has come 1,600 miles to tell you what he wants to do for you. If the people want President Rigdon to lead them they may have him; but I say unto you that the quorum of the twelve have the keys of the kingdom of God in all the world. The twelve are appointed by the finger of God. * * * Brother Joseph, the Prophet, has laid the foundation for a great work, and we will build upon it; you have never seen the quorums built one upon another. There is an almighty foundation laid, and we can build a kingdom such as there never was in the world. * * *

Do you want the church properly organized, or do you want a spokesman?* * * Elder Rigdon claims to be spokesman to the Prophet. Very well, he was; but can he now act in that office? If he wants now to be spokesman to the Prophet, he must go to the other side of the veil, for the Prophet is there, but Elder Rigdon is here. * * *

Now, if you want Sidney Rigdon or William Law to lead you, or anybody else, you are welcome to them; but I tell you, in the name of the Lord, that no man can put another between the twelve and the Prophet Joseph. Why? Because Joseph was their file leader, and he has committed into their hands the keys of the kingdom in this last dispensation for all the world. * * *

Now, all this does not lessen the character of President Rigdon; let him magnify his calling, and Joseph will want him beyond the veil—let him be careful what he does, lest that thread which binds us together is cut asunder." [^11]

There was much more said by President Young on this occasion, but the foregoing paragraphs represent the principal items of his position.

THE TRANSFIGURATION OF BRIGHAM YOUNG

It was upon this occasion that, according to the testimony of many prominent brethren, and very many of the saints, that Brigham Young was transfigured into the likeness of Joseph Smith—voice, person, and manner. The late Elder George Q. Cannon, who was present on the occasion, said:

"If Joseph had arisen from the dead and again spoken in their hearing, the effect could not have been more startling than it was to many present at that meeting; it was the voice of Joseph himself; and not only was it the voice of Joseph which was heard, but it seemed in the eyes of the people as if it were the very person of Joseph which stood before them. A more wonderful and miraculous event than was wrought that day in the presence of that congregation we never heard of. The Lord gave his people a testimony that left no room for doubt as to who was the man chosen to lead them." [^12]

After Brigham Young's speech Amasa Lyman spoke in support of the twelve. Opportunity was given to Sidney Rigdon to speak; he declined, but requested W. W. Phelps to speak in his behalf. Elder Phelps was evidently desirous of saying kind things to Elder Rigdon, but at the same time he sustained the twelve in their claims to being the proper authorities, under the circumstances, to preside over the church. There were further remarks but all to the same effect. Finally Brigham Young arose to put the question as to whether the church would sustain the twelve or Sidney Rigdon. Before doing so he remarked:

"I do not ask you to take my counsel or advice alone, but every one of you act for yourselves; but if Brother Rigdon is the person you want to lead you, vote for him as you did for Joseph. * * * And I would say the same for the twelve, don't make a covenant to support them unless you intend to abide by their counsel. * * * I want every man before he enters into a covenant, to know what he is going to do, but we want to know if this people will support the priesthood in the name of Israel's God. If you say you will, do so."

Elder Young was then about to put the question to the assembled quorums as to whether or not they wanted Elder Rigdon for a leader, but at the request of the latter, the question on supporting the twelve as the presiding quorum in the church was first put in the following manner:

"Do the church want and is their only desire to sustain the twelve as the first presidency of this people? * * * If the church want the twelve to stand as the head, the first presidency of the church, and at the head of this kingdom in all the world, stand next to Joseph, walk up into their calling, and hold the keys of this kingdom—every man, every woman, every quorum is now put in order, and you are now the sole controllers of it—all that are in favor of this in all the congregation of the saints, manifest it by holding up the right hand. (There was a universal vote.) If there are any of the contrary mind—every man, every woman, who does not want the twelve to preside—lift up your hands in like manner. (No hands up). This supercedes the other question, and trying it by quorums." [^13]

This disposed of Sidney Rigdon's claims. He had full opportunity to present his case before the church. The saints had full opportunity and liberty to vote for him had they wanted him for their leader; but they rejected him and sustained the twelve.

Brigham Young, however, expressed kindly feelings toward Elder Rigdon on this occasion. "We feel as though we could take Brother Rigdon in our bosom along with us," said he; "we want such men as Brother Rigdon. He was sent away [^14] by Brother Joseph to build up a kingdom; let him keep the instruction and calling; let him raise up a mighty kingdom in Pittsburg, and we will lift up his hands to Almighty God." And later: "We are of one mind with him and he with us. Will this congregation uphold him, in the place he occupies, by the prayer of faith and let him be one with us and we with him?" The vote was unanimous in the affirmative.

William Marks, notwithstanding he was in sympathy with Sidney Rigdon, was retained as president of the Nauvoo stake of Zion.

THE ORGANIZED PRIESTHOOD—THE QUORUMS BUILT ONE UPON ANOTHER

Thus was the matter of leadership in the church determined by action of the proper authorities. The position taken by Brigham Young was much stronger than really appears in the proceedings of the church on the 8th of August. The church was called upon to deal with a new situation and there is only a partial view of the real strength of the organization for self perpetuation in those proceedings. The remarks of Brigham Young, "You have never seen the quorums built one upon another; there is an almighty foundation laid, and we can build a kingdom such as there never was in the world"—hints at it however.

In the church there are three general presiding councils of equal authority. These are the first presidency; the traveling, presiding high council, or twelve apostles; and the first quorum of seventy. I quote the Doctrine and Covenants:

"Of the Melchizedek priesthood, three presiding high priests, chosen by the body, appointed and ordained to that office, and upheld by the confidence, faith and prayer of the church, form a quorum of the presidency of the church.

The twelve traveling councilors are called to be the twelve apostles, or special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world; thus differing from other officers in the church in the duties of their calling. And they form a quorum, equal in authority and power to the three presidents previously mentioned.

The seventy are also called to preach the gospel and to be especial witnesses unto the Gentiles and in all the world. Thus differing from other officers in the church in the duties of their calling; and they form a quorum equal in authority to that of the twelve special witnesses or apostles just named." [^15]

It is the law of God that the twelve act under the direction of the first presidency; and the seventy under the direction of the twelve. It is also provided that in the decisions of either the twelve or the seventy, those quorums must be unanimous—"every member in each quorum must be agreed to its decisions," in order for said decisions to be entitled to the same blessings that the decisions of a quorum of three presidents receive. A majority of the members may form a quorum when circumstances render it impossible to have full quorums.

The decisions of these quorums or either of them are to be made in all righteousness, in holiness, and lowliness of heart, meekness and long-suffering, and in that event their decisions are final. But if their decisions are unrighteous they may be brought before a general assembly of the several quorums which constitute the spiritual authorities of the church—in no other way can there be an appeal from their decisions. [^16]

And now in the case of absence, destruction or rejection of the first of these three great councils, upon whom does the duty and responsibility of presidency fall? Undoubtedly upon the quorum next in authority; and especially when that quorum "next" in authority, is declared to "form a quorum equal in authority and power to the three presidents previously named"—hence possessed of power to do whatever the first presidency could do—preside over the church with the rest—in the absence of the first presidency.

STATUS OF THE FIRST PRESIDENCY AT THE DEATH OF THE PROPHET

Let us consider the situation as to the first presidency at the death of the Prophet. Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon and William Law constituted the first presidency of the church from January, 1841, to April, 1844, Hyrum Smith having been taken from the position of counselor in the first presidency to become the presiding patriarch to the church. On the 18th of April, 1844, as stated in a previous chapter, William Law was excommunicated and had begun the organization of a rival church. At the October conference in 1843, President Joseph Smith had tried to get rid of Sidney Rigdon as his counselor. On that occasion the Prophet represented to the church that such had been the course of Elder Rigdon for some time that he considered it no longer his duty to sustain him as a counselor. Hyrum Smith, however, pleaded the cause of Sidney Rigdon, and so strongly urged the saints to deal mercifully with him, that when the question of sustaining him was presented to the conference, the saints voted in favor of Elder Rigdon's retention as a counselor in the first presidency. "I have thrown him off my shoulders, and you have put him on me,". said President Smith. "You may carry him, but I will not." [^17] And so confident was he that Sidney Rigdon would continue to fail in the performance of his duty, that he ordained Elder Amasa M. Lyman [^18] to succeed him, both as counselor and "spokesman." "Some of the elders did not understand how Elder Lyman could be ordained to succeed Elder Rigdon, as the church had voted to try him another year. Elder [President] Joseph Smith was requested to give an explanation. 'Why,' said he, 'by the same rule that Samuel anointed David to be king over Israel, while Saul was yet crowned. Please read the 16th chapter of I Samuel.' Elder Smith's explanation, though short, proved a quietus to all their rising conjectures." [^19]

Notwithstanding all his fair promises of amendment, Sidney Rigdon continued neglectful of his high duties, and if for a while his old-time enthusiasm revived—as it seemed to at the April conference of 1844—it was but the flickering of an uncertain flame. He longed to return to the east, and notwithstanding the Lord had commanded him to make his home at Nauvoo, he frequently talked with President Smith about going to Pittsburg to live, and finally obtained his consent to go there, and take his family with him. He was instructed to preach, write, and build up the church in that city.

Such was the standing and the course of the man who after the martyrdom of the Prophet was the first to claim the right to lead the church!

Evidently, since President Smith was dead; since William Law, once a counselor in the presidency, was now excommunicated; since Sidney Rigdon was discredited by the Prophet, and only retained on probation in his office by the sufferance of the saints; and since the man whom the Prophet had selected to succeed Sidney Rigdon—Amasa M. Lyman—had not been presented to and accepted by the people—hence his appointment was not completed—there was no first presidency in existence, and hence by every rule of construction and of reason the twelve apostles being the next general presiding quorum of the church, and possessed of equal authority and power with the council of the first presidency—they were the proper authorities to exercise the functions of the general presiding authority in the church at that time. [^20]

Nor is that the end of the matter; but if the quorum of the twelve was for any cause destroyed, the quorum next in authority, the first quorum of the seventy—which is declared to be equal in authority to the twelve, and impliedly equal in authority to the first presidency, since things equal to a common thing, must be equal to each other—would be competent to exercise the functions of presidency until the time came to reconstruct and complete the organization; and they would be the proper authorities to take the initiative in such work of reconstruction. The matter can logically be carried beyond even this; and the disorganization or destruction of the first quorum of the seventy be supposed as well as the destruction of the quorum of the twelve and of the first presidency; but if one member of the quorum should remain, it would be possible for him to ordain others until a quorum was called into existence, and then proceed as a quorum to do whatever would be necessary in order to place the church in a position to exercise its functions.

It is also held that a high priest could proceed in like manner; that since "the Melchizedek priesthood holds the right of presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the church, in all ages of the world, to administer in spiritual things," [^21] it would seem that so long as that priesthood remains in the earth, it would have power and authority (under commandment from God, of course) to do whatever might be necessary to create an organization—the church—through which could be granted to men the spiritual blessings essential to their salvation.

"If all the quorums of the church were slain," said Brigham Young at the 8th of August meeting, except the high priests, they would rise up with the keys of the kingdom and have the power of the priesthood upon them, and build up the kingdom." [^22]

THE DOUBLE DEALING OF SIDNEY RIGDON

Sidney Rigdon himself outwardly seemed to acquiesce in the decision of the church with regard to himself. The Sunday following the meeting above described, he addressed the saints at great length. He "blessed them in the name of the Lord," telling them emphatically that he was with the twelve. He wished to know the mind of the church in relation to his returning to Pittsburg, they said, "Go in peace." [^23] Yet all the while he was thus seemingly accepting the decision of the church and seeking its counsel, secretly he was holding meetings with men of questionable integrity in the church, telling them that it was revealed to him before leaving Pittsburg that the church would reject him; but, nevertheless, he was the proper person to lead the church—to be its "guardian;" for to that position he had been called of God, and held the keys of authority higher than any conferred upon the Prophet Joseph—"the keys of David," which, according to his representations, gave him power to open and no man could shut; to shut and no man could open; and the power to organize armies for the destruction of the Gentiles. In fact his fervid imagination pictured himself a great military chieftain, and by his prowess all the enemies of God were to be subdued. He secretly ordained men to be prophets, priests and kings to the Gentiles. He also chose and appointed military officers to take command of the armies that were to be raised ere long to fight the battles of the great God. Meantime, while in public he had spoken in the highest terms of the virtues and honor of the martyred prophets, Joseph and Hyrum, in his secret meetings he had begun to cast reflections upon their conduct, and hint at the existence of grave iniquity among the twelve and in the church.

As soon as the twelve learned of these proceedings on the part of Elder Rigdon, they called upon him to explain by what authority he held secret meetings and ordained men to the aforesaid offices. He sought to evade the question, but finding that he was dealing with men not to be trifled with, he at last confessed to both holding the meetings and ordaining the officers. His brethren sought to convince him of his error, but at this point he refused to be corrected. The quorum of the twelve, with the presiding bishop of the church held a council meeting to consider his conduct, and concluded to demand Elder Rigdon's license. He refused to surrender it, saying that he had not received it from the twelve and he would not give it up to them. He was then cited before the council of the church which has the right to try a president of the high priesthood, viz., the presiding bishop of the church, assisted by twelve high priests. [^24]

He refused to appear before this council, and therefore, after giving him due notice and an opportunity to appear and defend himself, the council convened in the presence of a large congregation of the saints on the 8th of September, 1844, and proceeded to hear evidence in the case. The evidence established the insubordination of Elder Rigdon and the irregularity of his course, and a motion that he be excommunicated from the church until he repented was carried both by the council composed of the bishop and the twelve high priests, and also by a great congregation of the saints. Ten only, and they of Rigdon's following, voting in the negative. [^25]

After his excommunication Rigdon made an attempt to organize a church, choosing twelve apostles, etc., but his effort amounted to but little. He soon retired from Nauvoo to Pittsburg, Pennsylvania, which he established as his headquarters and began the publication of the Messenger and Advocate—reviving the name of the second periodical published by the church. He sent missionaries to many branches of the church to represent his claims to the presidency, but they succeeded in getting only slight support, and that for the most part from among those weak in the faith. His "church," never strong, either in numbers or in men of strong character, soon crumbled into decay; Sidney Rigdon sank-out of sight and in 1876 he died in obscurity in Allegheny county, state of New York.

The fate of Sidney Rigdon and the fate of the organization which he founded prove the prophetic character of the words of Brigham Young, in his 8th of August speech—

"All that want to draw away a party from the church after them, let them do it if they can, but they will not prosper."

Footnotes

President Wilford Woodruff, describing the event says: "When Brigham Young arose and commenced speaking, * * * if I had not seen him with my own eyes, there is no one that could have convinced me that it was not Joseph Smith, and any one can testify to this who was acquainted with these two men." (Deseret Evening News, March 12th, 1892).

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xliii:4.
[^2] For promulgating this forged letter and spurious revelation, and attempting to establish a stake at Voree, "thereby leading the saints astray" both James Strang and Aaron Smith were excommunicated from the church by the council of the twelve apostles, on the 26th of August, 1844. (Times and Seasons, vol. v, p. 631).
[^3] See letter of Crandal Dunn, who was presiding over the branches of the church in western Michigan at the time. (Millennial Star, vol. viii, p. 93).
[^4] Millennial Star, vol. viii, p. 94. It may be remarked in passing that it is a little singular that Bennett, who according to his own claims never had any faith in "Mormonism," and only joined the church in order to disclose the schemes of its leaders, (See Bennett's History of the Saints, An Expose, etc.—Reasons for Joining the Mormons, pp. 5-10) should be found, after that "Expose" had been published, meddling with affairs of succession in the presidency of said church.
[^5] John E. Page was disfellowshiped from the quorum of the twelve, February 9th, 1846; and excommunicated from the church June 27, 1846. He died in obscurity in Illinois, 1867. (Latter-day Saint Biographical Encyclopedia, pp. 92-3, Andrew Jenson, one of the assistant historians of the church, and author of very reliable and valuable chronological works. I own myself much indebted to his works. Also Millennial Star, vol. xxvii, pp. 103-4).
[^6] Times and Seasons, vol. vi, p. 904, issue of May 15th, 1845. Two months later at a Smith family reunion given by the church to the family, and at which the twelve apostles and Bishops Whitney and Miller were the hosts, Wm. Smith proposed the following toast "in pure water:"
[^7] Times and Seasons, vol. vi, No. 9 and No. 10, article "Patriarchal." 30 Vol. 2
[^8] See Conference Minutes in Times and Seasons, vol. vi, pp. 1008-9.
[^9] See Notice in Times and Seasons, vol. vi, p. 1019.
[^10] See Jason W. Briggs, quoted by Tullidge in his supplement to the Life of Joseph, [i. e. the Prophet] "Josephite" edition, p. 577. It is not certain that Lyman Wight authorized the use of his name in this attempt at organization.
[^11] Nauvoo Neighbor, 4th December, 1844.
[^12] Succession in the Presidency of the Church, 2nd edition, p. 28 and note.
[^13] See two communications from Lyman Wight, et al, Black River Falls, Wisconsin Territory, February 15th, 1844, Millennial Star, vol. xxiii, pp., 103-4, and 117-119.
[^14] See also affidavit of Gideon Carter, Succession in the Presidency of the Church, 2nd edition, p. 122, et seq, for further movements of Lyman Wight.
[^15] "I attended public meeting in Great Salt Lake City on the 3rd when the hand of fellowship was withdrawn from Elders Lyman Wight and George Miller. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 3rd Dec., 1848, p. 85). Previous to this, namely at the 6th of April conference of the church, 1845, the following action had been taken with reference to Lyman Wight:
[^16] The facts concerning origin of this organization will be found in a pamphlet called The Ensign, published at Pittsburg, Penn., 1863.
[^17] A fuller account of the faction will be found in The History of Western Iowa, published by the Western Publishing Co., Sioux City, Iowa, 1882.
[^18] History of the Church, Period I, vol, v, p. 214.
[^19] Ibid, p. 214.
[^20] Olive Branch, vol. i, pp. 82-3.
[^21] The main facts on the origin and progress of the Brewster faction may be learned from the Olive Branch, of which there are three and a half volumes, August, 1848 to January, 1852.
[^22] For the character of Gladden Bishop see discourses of Brigham Young and Parley P. Pratt. Both personally knew Bishop and his career in the church. For remarks of the former see Journal of Discourses, vol. i, pp. 81-84; and vol. ii, pp. 125-7; and the latter, Ibid, vol. i, pp. 86-87. Gladden Bishop, it appears, came to Utah with some pretensions to leadership of the church, but could make no headway with his pretensions, and was severely denounced by President Young, et al, who represented him as a very disreputable character. For which see above citations.
[^23] According to "Josephite" authority, Mr. Hedrick attended a conference of these factions held at Zarahemla, Wisconsin, Oct. 6, 1857, where he was given the right hand of fellowship by the conference, and was received together with one Jedediah Owens as representative of the saints of Woodford county, Illinois, and assigned on a committee with J. W. Briggs to set forth the position of these factions. (History of the Church—"Reorganized"—vol. iii, pp. 233-4, and p. 638).
[^24] The Truth Teller, August 18, 1864.
[^25] The facts concerning this organization may be found, passim, in the Truth Teller, the Search Light, the Evening and Morning Star, published in succession, but intermittently, as the organs of "The Church of Christ." The last being put forth as the resuscitation of the paper published by the church at Independence, in the early "thirties" of the 19th century.
