B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LXVI

FORWARD MOVEMENTS—THE WORK IN THE EASTERN STATES, CANADA AND GREAT BRITAIN

WITH the question of the presiding authority over the church settled by the acceptance of the quorum of the twelve apostles as such presiding authority, renewed activity began in all the departments of church work. There was no other purpose than to build upon the foundation which Joseph Smith, working under the inspiration of God, had laid. "The foundation is laid by our Prophet," said Brigham Young, in his 8th of August speech, "and we will build thereon; no other foundation can be laid but that which he has laid. * * * Joseph has finished his work, and all the devils in hell and all the mobbers on earth could not take his life until he had accomplished his work." [^1]

RESUMPTION OF WORK ON THE WHOLE LINE OF ACTIVITY

The saints voted unanimously at the 8th of August meeting to be "tithed until the temple was finished as they had hitherto been. It was also voted unanimously that the twelve should appoint two bishops to act as trustees for the church," and a few days later Bishops Newel K. Whitney and George Miller were appointed by the twelve to be trustees in trust "to manage the financial concerns of the church." [^2]

An epistle to the church was issued by the twelve to the saints in all the world, announcing that the twelve were standing in their place and were directing the affairs of the church. [^3]

Nauvoo was continued as the place of gathering for the saints; those with capital were urged to come and establish industries in order to give employment to the poor. "Let the capitalists hasten here," said the epistle, "and they may be assured we have nerves, sinews, fingers, skill and ingenuity sufficient in our midst to carry on all the necessary branches of industry."

The temple was to be completed by "a regular system of tithing, according to the commandments of the Lord * * * given as a law to the church by the mouth of his servant Joseph." [^4]

The United States and Canada were to be immediately organized by the twelve into proper ecclesiastical districts, as had already been done in the British mission, and high priests appointed to preside over the same, to call quarterly conferences for the representation and regulation of the branches within said districts, "and for the furtherance of the gospel;" for "the gospel in its fulness and purity" must now be proclaimed in "every neighborhood of this widespread country, and to all the world," said the epistle. Doubtless the twelve and all the saints felt that the recent martyrdom of the Prophet and Patriarch of the church had added increased value and sanctity to the New Dispensation of the Gospel, hence this fresh impetus in making proclamation of it.

POLITICS AND THE SAINTS

Relative to politics the epistle urged that inasmuch as none of the candidates who were before the public for the high office of president of the United States had "manifested any disposition or intention to redress wrong and restore liberty, and law," the saints were advised to stand aloof from corrupt men and measures, "and wait at least till a man is found, who, if elected, will carry out the enlarged principles, universal freedom and equal rights and protection, expressed in the views of our beloved Prophet and martyr." [^5] "We do not, however," said the epistle, "offer this political advice as binding on the consciences of others; we are perfectly willing that every member of this church should use his own freedom in all political matters; but we give it as our own rule of action, and for the benefit of those who may choose to profit by it." [^6]

The epistle concluded with this general admonition:

"Now, dear brethren, to conclude our present communication, we would exhort you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ to be humble and faithful before God, and before all the people, and give no occasion for any man to speak evil of you; but preach the gospel in its simplicity and purity, and practice righteousness, and seek to establish the influence of truth, peace and love among mankind, and in so doing the Lord will bless you, and make you a blessing to all people." [^7]

Thus admonished the saints resumed their activities in all departments of the work with the most gratifying results; and those who expected to see "Mormonism" collapse with the death of the Prophet and the Patriarch, began to discover they were doomed to disappointment.

THE FAST AND LOOSE POLICY OF GOVERNOR FORD

Brigham Young was elected lieutenant general of the Nauvoo Legion, and received his commission from Governor Ford on the 27th of September, 1844, the very day that Governor Ford visited Nauvoo in company with a number of prominent state militia officers and about five hundred of the state militia mustered into service to defeat the purpose of the "wolf hunt," proposed by the anti-"Mormons" of Hancock and surrounding counties as already detailed in this History, chapter lix.

Under date of October 9th, Governor Ford issued the following order to Lieutenant General Young:

"STATE OF ILLINOIS, EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT,

SPRINGFIELD, Oct. 9th, 1844.

To Lieutenant General Brigham Young, of the Nauvoo Legion:

SIR: It may be probable that there may be further disturbances in Hancock county by those opposed to the prosecutions against the murderers of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. They may combine together in arms to subvert justice and prevent those prosecutions from going on. They may also attack or resist the civil authorities of the state in that county, and they may attack some of the settlements or people there with violence.

The sheriff of the county may want a military force to guard the court and protect it, or its officers or the jurors thereof, or the witnesses attending court, from the violence of a mob.

In all these cases you are hereby ordered and directed to hold in readiness a sufficient force, under your command, of the Nauvoo Legion, to act under aforesaid; and also to suppress mobs which may be collected in said county, to injure the persons or property of any of the citizens.

In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and affixed the seal of state, the day and year first herein above written.

THOMAS FORD,

Governor and Commander-in-Chief."

This general order, so frank, and fair, and adequate for preserving the peace in Nauvoo and in Hancock county, if followed up in good faith by the executive, was accompanied by private suggestions which went far towards rendering the open orders nugatory. The governor in his private instructions said concerning his public order:

"The enclosed order is one of great delicacy to execute. I have conversed with Mr. Backenstos and others, and my opinion is the same as theirs, that employing the legion, even legally, may call down the vengeance of the people against your city. If it should be the means of getting up a civil war in Hancock, I do not know how much force I could bring to the aid of the government. A force to be efficient would have to be called out as volunteers; a draft would bring friends and enemies alike. I called for twenty-five hundred before; and, by ordering out independent companies, got four hundred and seventy-five. Three of those companies, the most efficient, have been broken up, and would refuse to go again. I should anticipate but a small force to be raised by volunteers. I would not undertake to march a drafted militia there. Two-thirds of them would join the enemy. The enclosed order is more intended as a permission to use the legion, in the manner indicated, if upon consideration of the whole matter it is thought advisable, than a compulsory command.

Your most wise and discreet counselors and the county officers will have to act according to their best judgment.

[Signed] "THOMAS FORD."

The fact seems to be that Governor Ford had lost faith in the power and virtue of government in Illinois to meet the emergencies arising from the presence of the Latter-day Saints in that state. On a former occasion, viz., the 22nd of July, 1844, he had said:

"In the present temper of the public mind I am positively certain that I cannot raise a militia force in the state who would be willing to fight on your side, or to hazard their lives to protect you from an attack of your enemies."

Again, in the same communication, he said:

"A voluntary submission and obedience was supposed as the basis of government, for this reason no adequate provision was made in our state Constitutions for coercing this submission, when the laws were to be trampled upon by the concerted action of large numbers. The states are prohibited from maintaining standing armies; the only military force at their command, without aid from the general government, is the militia; and, as I have already shown you, this force can only be relied on to do effectual service where that service is popular and jumps with their inclinations." [^8]

Governor Ford must have thought that he was addressing himself to a very ignorant people when putting forth such views on government, especially when he adds:

"You may be disposed to ask, what use is there for law and government if these things be so? I answer you, that cases like the present do not seem to be fully provided for by our Constitution; they were not anticipated to occur." [^9]

Under that view of things government would indeed be a failure; and it is not surprising, in view of the governor's attitude, that mobs and anarchy were triumphant in Illinois in the next two ensuing years. But the governor's viewpoint was not the true one. That government which cannot employ force for the protection of its citizens in their rights is not worthy of respect.

If the governor was doubtful of the integrity of the militia of Illinois, he still had the alternative of the Nauvoo Legion, a body of between three and four thousand men, well organized, well armed, well drilled, and willing to serve the state. Governor Ford had anticipated such a suggestion as this and in his letter to Mr. Phelps said:

"I am afraid to rely on the militia in the present temper of the public mind. To call on the Nauvoo Legion would be suicidal to any effort as [of] pacification of existing troubles, and for that reason would fail to bring about an enforcement of the laws. * * * To call in one party to put down and subdue the other, would lead to the most disastrous consequences; all the pride of conquest and victory; all the shame of defeat by, and submission to an adversary; all the fury and unconquerable hate and exasperated feeling would necessarily be mingled with the contest, and render it bloody and bitter beyond anything we know of in this country." [^10]

THE RIGHT OF THE RESPECTIVE STATES TO REPUBLICAN GOVERNMENT

But even if this contention be granted, and the unwisdom of calling upon the Nauvoo Legion to assist in the execution of the laws, and the suppression of insurrection and rebellion be allowed, the governor had still another resource not yet appealed to, and of undoubted efficiency. This was the general government of the United States. It is provided in the federal Constitution that "The United States shall guaranty to every state in this Union a republican form of government; and shall protect each of them against invasion; and, on application of the legislature, or of the executive, when the legislature cannot be convened, against domestic violence." [^11]

On this section Judge Story, associated justice of the supreme court, remarks:

"The people of each state have a right to protection against the tyranny of a domestic faction, and to have a firm guarantee, that their political liberties shall not be overturned by a successful demagogue, who shall arrive at power by corrupt arts, and then plan a scheme for permanent possession of it. On the other hand, domestic violence by popular insurrection is equally repugnant to the good order and safety of the Union; and one of the blessings arising from a national government is the security which it affords, against a recurrence of evils of this sort. Accordingly, it is made an imperative duty of the general government, on the application of the legislature or executive of a state, to aid in the suppression of such domestic insurrections; as well as to protect the state from foreign invasion." [^12]

FROM STATE TO CHURCH AFFAIRS—REVELATION

But now to turn from these purely secular matters. The October conference of the church was very important, being the first general conference at which the Prophet Joseph Smith had not been present. President Brigham Young reaffirmed and emphasized the doctrine of a revelation-led church. "The Lord," said he, "will not cease to give revelations to his people unless the people trample on his laws and reject him. * * * This church has been led by revelation, and unless we forsake the Lord entirely, so that the priesthood is taken from us, it will be led by revelation all the time. * * * You are not going to be led without revelation." Relative to the person through whom revelation should be given to the church, he said: "If you don't know whose right it is to give revelations, I will tell you. It is I." [^13]

It is held by some that there was "uncertainty" in President Young's mind on the subject of revelation, [^14] after the death of Joseph Smith. The foregoing quotations from his conference remarks give no evidence of uncertainty. But in addition to laying down this principle that the church would still be led by the revelations of God, and that to prevent disorder there could be but one man at a time who would receive revelations, and as he was the president of the apostles' quorum then acting as the presiding quorum of the church, necessarily that one man was himself—in addition to this, I say, President Young taught, as was taught from the beginning, that all men holding the priesthood in their several capacities and duties have the right to inspiration and the revelations of God for their personal guidance, but not for the guidance of the church. At this conference President Young also said:

"Every member has the right of receiving revelations for himself, both male and female. It is the very life of the church of the living God, in all ages of the world. * * * No man preached a gospel discourse, nor ever will, unless he does it by revelation. You will do it by the Holy Ghost, or when you tell the history of the gospel, the gospel will not be there. * * * It is the right of an individual to get revelations to guide himself. It is the right of the head of a family. It is the right of an elder when he has build up a church to get revelations to guide and lead that people until he leads them and delivers them up to his superiors." [^15]

THE PLACE OF JOSEPH SMITH IN THE CHURCH

President Young in his discourse at this conference honored the memory of his predecessor, and in way of answer to those who were defaming President Smith's character and decrying him as a fallen prophet, [^16] he said:

"Every spirit that confesses that Joseph Smith is a prophet, that he lived and died a prophet, and that the Book of Mormon is true, is of God, and every spirit that does not is of anti-Christ. It is the test of our fellowship to believe and confess that Joseph lived and died a prophet of God in good standing; and I don't want anyone to fellowship the twelve who says that Joseph is fallen." [^17]

The conference sustained "Brigham Young, the president of the quorum of the twelve, as one of the twelve and first presidency of the church," [^18] thus ratifying the action of the special conference of the 8th of August. Each of the twelve was sustained by separate vote of the conference, as were all the general officers. Elder John Smith, uncle of the Prophet, was sustained as president of the Nauvoo stake of Zion, displacing William Marks who had strongly sympathized with Sidney Rigdon; though later in a signed statement he declared that after candid deliberation he was convinced that Sidney Rigdon's claims to the presidency were not founded in truth; "and that the twelve were the proper persons to lead the church." [^19]

The conference appointed each of the congressional districts within the United States, a missionary district, and set apart a high priest to preside as pastor over the branches in said districts. Eighty-five high priests were set apart to this work; and it was explained that their appointment was not a temporary one of a few months, but they were to take their families with them and establish stakes of Zion in their respective fields of labor.

INCREASING THE SEVENTY'S QUORUMS

The seventy's quorums, which constitute the foreign ministry of the church, [^20] were increased in these days from two to eleven full quorums, and forty members were ordained towards the twelfth. Within the next two years the number of these quorums was increased to thirty; and such was the enthusiasm in this branch of the organization that the seventy even in these troublous times built a large public hall in which to hold their meetings. The public dedication of this hall extended through an entire week, the twelve participating in the dedicatory services. [^21] It was during this week-long seventy's conference that Elder John Taylor, of the council of the twelve brought forth, and had sung for the first time his heroic hymn to the memory of Joseph Smith, "The Seer," and it was dedicated by the author to Brigham Young. The hymn was first published in the Times and Seasons for January 1st, 1845.

THE SEER "The Seer;—the Seer;—Joseph the Seer— I'll sing of the Prophet ever dear, His equal now cannot be found,— By searching the wide world around. With Gods he soared in the realms of day; And men he taught the heavenly way. The earthly Seer! the heavenly Seer, I love to dwell on his mem'ry dear;— The chosen of God, and the friend of men, He brought the priesthood back again, He gazed on the past, on the present too;— And ope'd the heavenly world to view. Of noble seed—of heavenly birth, He came to bless the sons of earth; With keys by the Almighty given, He opened the full rich stores of heaven, O'er the world that was wrapt in sable night, Like the sun he spread his golden light. He strove,—O, how he strove to stay, The stream of crime in its reckless way— With a mighty mind, and a noble aim He urged the wayward to reclaim; 'Mid the foaming billows of angry strife— He stood at the helm of the ship of life. The saints;—the saints; his only pride, For them he lived, for them he died! Their joys were his;—their sorrows too;— He lov'd the saints;—he lov'd Nauvoo. Unchanged in death, with a Savior's love He pleads their cause, in the courts above. The Seer;—the Seer—Joseph the Seer! O, how I love his memory dear, The just and wise, the pure and free, A father he was, and is to me. Let fiends now rage in their dark hour;— No matter, he is beyond their power. He's free;—he's free;—the Prophet's free! He is where he will ever be Beyond the reach of mobs and strife, He rests unharm'd in endless life. His home's in the sky;—he dwells with the Gods Far from the furious rage of mobs. He died; he died—for those he lov'd, He reigns;—he reigns in the realms above, He waits with the just who have gone before, To welcome the saints to Zion's shore; Shout, shout ye saints—this boon is given, We'll meet our martyr'd Seer in heaven." [^22]

A seventy's library was also begun, which caused the editor of the Times and Seasons to exclaim—"Ten years ago but one [quorum of] seventy, and now fourteen [quorums of] seventy, and the foundation for the best library in the world!" [^23]

DEVELOPMENT OF THE WORK IN THE EASTERN STATES AND ENGLAND

The conference was vigorous in tone throughout. Lightmindedness and iniquity were severely denounced, [^24] and greater spiritual enlightenment and power promised to the ministry on condition of increased faithfulness. "You are all apostles to the nations," said President Young to the seventy, in his concluding remarks, in relation to their ministry "and when we send you to build up the kingdom, we will give you the keys, and power and authority. * * * I would exhort all who go from this place to do right and be an honor to the cause. Inasmuch as you will go forth and do right, you shall have more of the Spirit than you have [had] heretofore."

Before the close of the year 1844, Elder Parley P. Pratt of the twelve was sent to New York to take charge of the work in the New England and middle eastern states, and to take charge of The Prophet, an imperial folio sheet published weekly by the Society for the Diffusion of Truth, of which G. T. Leach was president. The first number of The Prophet was issued Saturday, May 18th, 1844; and was proclaimed to be an Advocate and Herald of the Faith of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. [^25]

With the advent of Elder Pratt in the east the work received fresh impetus, and The Prophet took on a more vigorous tone. [^26]

About the same time that Elder Pratt was sent to preside over the Eastern States Mission, Wilford Woodruff, also of the twelve, was sent to take charge of the work in the British Mission. Elder Reuben Hedlock and Thomas Ward had been in charge of that mission for some time, and Elder Woodruff took them as his counselors, and with them constituted the presidency of the British Mission. Elder Woodruff issued a "Proclamation," which was published in the Millennial Star for February, 1845, in which he reviewed the chief historical events in the church from the time he had departed from England with other members of the apostles' quorum in 1841, until his return. He urged the right of the twelve to act as the presidency of the church in the absence of the first presidency; and admonished the ministry to prepare for a more vigorous prosecution of their labors.

Elder Woodruff was accompanied by a number of elders from Nauvoo, some of whom brought with them their wives—the party numbered twelve all told; and among the elders was Dan Jones, who came in fulfillment of the prediction of Joseph Smith to him while in Carthage prison that he would live to fill a mission in Wales, his native land. [^27]

The advent of Elder Dan Jones was not the introduction of the New Dispensation into Wales; [^28] but his coming gave a great impetus to the work. In the next three years several thousand were baptized, [^29] and branches of the church were multiplied in various parts of the principality. Elder Jones published a periodical called Udgorn Seion—Zion's Trumpet [^30]—in the Welsh language; and also a number of tracts, some original and others that were translations from the English. [^31]

The membership of the church in Great Britain had been greatly reduced by reason of the large emigration of the past three years. At the general conference of the mission held in April, 1844, the number of members and officers reported in the organized conferences made a total of 6,646. Although the emigration continued, during the intervening years, a general conference held in January, 1846, which marked the close of Elder Woodruff's mission in the British Isles, the members reported numbered 10,956, and the officers 1,291, [^32] a total of 12,247.

NUMBER OF THE CHURCH MEMBERSHIP AT THE DEATH OF THE PROPHET

Here it may not be out of place to consider the numerical strength of the church throughout the world about the time of the Prophet Joseph's death, since it is a question of some uncertainty, and the data upon which a judgment must be formed is somewhat conflicting.

Answering the question in 1896, "what the approximate or exact numerical strength of the church was at the time of the death of Joseph and Hyrum Smith," Elder Franklin D. Richards, then historian of the church, said: "The nearest we can approximate, the number was about 26,000 or 27,000 souls."

Unfortunately there are some utterances of leading brethren very much at variance with this statement of the church historian quoted above. First, President Joseph Smith himself, in a letter to I. Daniel Rupp, giving an outline statement of the chief historical events of the church, said: "There are no correct data by which the number of members composing this now extensive and still extending church, can be known. * * * Should it be supposed at 150,000 it might be short of the truth." [^33] It should be observed that the Prophet admits that there are no correct data upon which to base his roughly stated estimates.

Again in his letter to Henry Clay, discussing a suggestion of that statesman that the Latter-day Saints remove to Oregon, Joseph Smith declared that "To transport 200,000 people through a vast prairie over the Rocky Mountains to Oregon * * * would cost more than four millions" [of dollars]. [^34]

Clay's letter was written on the 15th of November, 1843; the Prophet's answer May 13th, 1844. At that time, it will be remembered, the Prophet had pending before the national congress a memorial, petitioning that body to authorize him to raise a body of 100,000 armed volunteers to police the intermountain and Pacific coast west from Texas to Oregon, and it was unquestionably this number of men, with the families who would doubtless go with them, as well as the saints, that the Prophet had in mind when he named 200,000 as the number likely to be moved to Oregon. [^35]

Wilford Woodruff at a conference in Manchester, England, April, 1845, declared that he "represented about twenty-eight states in the American Union, above one hundred thousand saints, a quorum of twelve apostles," etc. [^36] Not-withstanding these statements of President Smith and Elder Woodruff—not based upon any actual knowledge of the numbers in the church at the time they spoke, the number given by them was simply not in the church. The great body of the church in the winter of 1838-9 was driven from Missouri, where the saints had been gathering since 1831; but the very highest estimate of those expelled from that state has been from twelve to fifteen thousand; and there was no such fruitfulness of the ministry which swelled this number in the branches scattered throughout the United States, in Canada and in England, to one hundred and fifty thousand during the next four years, nor to one hundred thousand. In a communication from George J. Adams to the Boston (Mass.) Bee, copied into the Times and Seasons of March 15th, 1843, Adams gives the membership of the church "throughout the vast republic" (the United States), as 50,000; and the number in the British Islands as 20,000; which the editor of the Times and Seasons, in a footnote corrects as to the numbers in Great Britain by saying "about ten thousand." [^37]

NOTE

JOSEPH SMITH'S OREGON MEMORIAL BEFORE CONGRESS

It was on the 25th of this very month of May, 1844, that the Prophet's memorial was introduced into the national house of representatives by Mr. John Wentworth, a representative from northern Illinois, to "be read by the clerk for the information of the house." The Congressional Globe of the above date reports the matter as follows:

"MORMONS"

"Mr. Wentworth asked permission to present a memorial from General Joseph Smith, the head of the Mormons, and required that it might be read by the clerk for the information of the House.

The clerk commenced the reading of the memorial.

Before the reading was concluded—

Mr. J. R. Ingersoll interposed, and objected to the reception at first, and still objected.

Mr. Weber observed that if memorials of this kind were to be read, he was intrusted with the presentation of one of a peculiar character, from certain citizens of Frederick county, Md.

Mr. Wentworth said he would move a suspension of the rules to enable him to have the paper read; and he wished to inquire of the chair whether it would be in order for him to assign his reasons for making such a motion.

Mr. Duncan observed, if the gentlemen would yield him the floor, he would move to suspend the rules, to go into committee of the whole on the Oregon bill.

Mr. Wentworth said that, as the had the floor, he would make the motion. Mr. Wentworth then moved that the rules be suspended, for the purpose of going into committee of the whole on the Oregon bill. The speaker said that the question would be put on suspending the rules to go into committee of the whole. If that motion prevailed, the gentleman could move to take up any bill he pleased.

Mr. Vance called for the yeas and nays on the question; which were ordered.

Mr. McKay inquired if the House should refuse to go into committee of the whole, if it could by postponement of the previous orders, take up the naval appropriation bill which had been reported from the committee of the whole.

The speaker said a motion to that effect would require a vote of two-thirds.

The question was put on suspending the rules and regulations; yeas 79, nays 86." [^38]

Footnotes

"Thus nobly fell our worthy founder and leader in the very bloom of life; and thus the responsibility of bearing off the kingdom triumphantly, now rests upon the twelve.

He has organized the kingdom of God.—We will extend its dominion.

He has restored the fulness of the gospel.—We will spread it abroad.

He has laid the foundation of Nauvoo.—We will build it up.

He has laid the foundation of the temple.—We will bring up the top-stone with shouting.

He has kindled a fire.—We will fan the flame.

He has kindled up the dawn of a day of glory.—We will bring it to its meridian splendor.

He was a 'little one,' and became a thousand. We are a small one, and will become a strong nation.

In short, he quarried the stone from the mountain; we will cause it to become a great mountain and fill the whole earth.'" (Millennial Star, vol. v, p. 151.)

---
Notas:
[^1] BABBITT'S FIRST SPEECH AGAINST THE REPEAL OF THE NAUVOO CHARTERS History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 498, for the address.
[^2] BABBITT'S SECOND SPEECH Owens' letter is given in extenso in The Church Historians' Second Compilation of Data, Millennial Star, vol. xxv, pp. 39, 40.
[^3] OF THE RISE AND PROSPERITY OF NAUVOO The governor's letter is published in extenso in The Church Historians' Second Collection of Data, Millennial Star, vol. xxv, pp. 103; 105; 119-121.
[^4] BACKENSTOS' SPEECH—CHARGES AGAINST THE ANTI-"MORMONS" OF ILLINOIS See Ante, ch. lix and footnote 4 that chapter.
[^5] SPEECH OF MR. ROSS, OF FULTON COUNTY—NON-"MORMON"—AGAINST THE REPEAL OF THE NAUVOO CHARTERS The proceedings of the city council are published in the Times and Seasons, vol. vi, pp. 773, et seq. The day before the city council's action—Sunday—at a meeting in the Seventy's Hall, Brigham Young proposed the selection of a few men to go into the adjoining counties, "To forestall our enemies in their designs to prevent the trial of the murderers of Brothers Joseph and Hyrum Smith in the spring. They intend to charge the thefts which have been committed around here upon the Mormons. * * * His advice would be for the saints to look out for thieves, he would like to catch such men. If they want a method to detect them give them a ball of lead, it would show who were the thieves. Mormons or anti-Mormons." John Taylor in favoring President Young's suggestion, said: "The anti-'Mormons' wish to publish the thefts and charge them to the 'Mormons,' and thus raise an excitement to bring ruin and desolation upon this people." (All the above from Elder John Taylor's Journal, Ms., entry date of 12th of January, 1845). Twenty-four men were selected from among the seventy to go into surrounding counties to disabuse the minds of the people. In the afternoon of the same day a meeting was held with the high priests for the same purpose—i. e., choosing men from among the high priests to go into surrounding counties to set forth true conditions at Nauvoo. John Taylor said: "Our object is to select men to clear up the misrepresentations of our enemies. Some men go out under the cloak of 'Mormonism' and steal when they have a chance, and lay it up to the 'Mormons.' Some would intimate that these are the 'mysteries of the kingdom,' there are not any mysteries of this kind." Brigham Young said: "A natural born thief or liar will never enter the celestial kingdom, they may try till doomsday." Forty-seven high priests were chosen for the mission, the names are also given. (Taylor's Journal, Ms. entry for Jan. 12th, 1845).
[^6] THE FIVE OFFICIAL PROCLAMATIONS OF J. B. BACKENSTOS, SHERIFF OF HANCOCK COUNTY, SEPTEMBER, 1845 See Times and Seasons, vol. vi, p. 774, for action of public meeting.
[^7] Governor Ford's message is published in full in the Nauvoo Neighbor for Jan. 1st, 1845. It is a special message dealing exclusively with "The Disturbances in Hancock County." Much of this message, nearly all of it, in fact, is incorporated in Ford's History of Illinois, ch. x.
[^8] Times and Seasons, January 15, 1845. Report in full.
[^9] The original letter is on file at the Historian's Office, Salt Lake City, Box vii, No. 100.
[^10] These were Almon W. Babbitt, a member of the "Mormon" church and a lawyer; and Jacob B. Backenstos. The latter was a "new comer" into Hancock county; "imported," it is said by Judge Stephen A. Douglas from Sangamon county to take the office of circuit court clerk, which he had held for some time previous to his election to the legislature. (History of Hancock County., Gregg, p. 336). Their speeches against repeal, Babbit two and Backenstos one, were very able. (See Notes 1 to 5, inclusive, end of this chapter.)
[^11] "I see very strong indications on the part of both houses, to make an entire repeal of all these charters. I do not see how ten or twelve thousand people can well do in a city without some chartered privileges. I would advise, that all the obnoxious parts of these charters should be repealed; and an ample provision made against any future abuses of power, thus leaving all the really useful parts of their city charters; and placing them upon grounds of some equality with other citizens. This is republican and cannot be denied without injustice." (Ford's Message to the Illinois Legislature, 1845, closing paragraph, Nauvoo Neighbor of January 1st, 1845).
[^12] The speech is given in extenso in the Nauvoo Neighbor of Feb. 19, 1845; see Note 5, end of chapter.
[^13] History of Hancock County, Gregg, p. 336. Again I refer to Notes from to 5, at the close of this chapter, and urge that attention be given them.
[^14] The Nauvoo Neighbor, April 16, 1845.
[^15] Nauvoo Neighbor, impression of May 8th, 1845.
[^16] Ibid, anti-"Mormon" writers ever since those days have made much of the Neighbor editorial (See Linn's Story of the Mormons, p. 333), but none make mention of the repudiation of the editorial by the church officials and the practical retraction on the part of the editor himself.
[^17] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for 8th Feb., 1857. From Ms. Journal of Wilford Woodruff, of the above date of entry.
[^18] Taylor's Journal, Ms., entry of May 24th, 1845.
[^19] Wm Clayton's Journal, May 24, 1845. Also Times and Seasons, June 1st, 1845.
[^20] The Morley Settlement was situated in Lima township, Adams county, just over the south line of Hancock county, and about 25 miles due south of Nauvoo. It is a neighborhood where quite a number of saints resided in 1839 to 1846. Most of these at the Morley Settlement, however, located northeast of Lima, in the extreme south end of Hancock county, in what is now Walker township, on and around a townsite which they had surveyed and named Yelrome. (Historical Record, Jenson, Index, Morley Settlement).
[^21] Ford's History of Illinois, p. 406. The historian of Hancock county, Gregg, p. 341, says: "It is proper to state that the Mormons and their friends have charged the firing on the schoolhouse of Green Plains to have been a sham previously arranged by the mobbers to create a sympathy in their favor. This has been denied; whether true or not, we do not know." It will be observed that Gregg makes no mention of the fact that Ford in his History of Illinois, also makes the charge that members of the mob fired upon their own meeting.
[^22] John Taylor's Journal, entry of 11th of September, 1845.
[^23] Meaning anti-"Mormons."
[^24] Brief History of the Hancock County Mob, Josiah B. Conyers, pp. 5, 6.
[^25] See Gregg's History of Hancock County, p. 339.
[^26] Deming was never brought to trial. "He was stricken with congestive fever no doubt brought on or aggravated by excitement, and he died on the tenth of September and was buried at Quincy." (History of Hancock County, p. 339).
[^27] Taylor's Journal, Ms., Sept. 13th, 1845, p. 123.
[^28] Proclamation II, published in Nauvoo Neighbor of 17th of September.
[^29] Quoted by the Nauvoo Neighbor, Oct. 1st, 1845.
[^30] The Neighbor, Sept. 24, 1845.
[^31] See History of Hancock County, p. 340.
[^32] Ibid, pp. 340-341.
[^33] They are published in the Nauvoo Neighbor in the impressions of that paper the 10th, 17th and 24th of September, respectively, and the 1st of October. They constitute important historical documents for the period they cover. They are also published in Millennial Star, vol. vi, No. 12; and because of their unique historical value are reproduced in the Notes at the end of this chapter.
[^34] History of Hancock County, p. 341.
[^35] See Historical Record, Jenson, pp. 814-5; also Cannon's History of the Church, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xvii, p. 68.
[^36] See History of Hancock County, Gregg, pp. 341-2.
[^37] History of Hancock County, p. 336.
[^38] This doubtless had reference to the use of the habeas corpus powers of the city of Nauvoo, by invoking those powers in cases other than those arising under city ordinances; and also to the assumed "right" of a prisoner personally to determine, if not what justice he will consent to appear before, at least determine that he will not appear before the one issuing the writ, because by doing so his life would be put in jeopardy.
