B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LXVII

REPEAL OF THE NAUVOO CHARTERS—THE TEMPLE CAPSTONE—MOB VIOLENCE AND HOUSE-BURNING—THE PATIENCE OF SAINTS

ON THE 18th of June, 1841, President Joseph Smith said these words to the Nauvoo Legion:

"It is thought by some that our enemies would be satisfied with my destruction; but I tell you that as soon as they have shed my blood, they will thirst for the blood of every man in whose heart dwells a single spark of the spirit of the fulness of the gospel. The opposition of these men is moved by the spirit of the adversary of all righteousness. It is not only to destroy me, but every man and woman who dares believe the doctrines that God hath inspired me to teach in this generation." [^1]

THE WORK MORE THAN THE PROPHET THE OBJECT OF ASSAULT

The action of the old citizens of Hancock and the surrounding counties subsequent to the murder of the Prophet, prove how truly he had spoken: for no sooner did they discover that the work which Joseph Smith had begun gave promise of surviving him, than they renewed hostilities, and sought by every means they could devise to harass and destroy those who devoted their energies to the work the Prophet had founded.

As early as July 1st, 1844, Thomas H. Owen, Esq., of the staff of General Minor R. Deming, Illinois militia, wrote Elder Willard Richards that undoubtedly the mobocrats of Warsaw and Green Plains were making strong exertions to raise forces sufficient to mob and drive the people of Nauvoo from their homes. He advised that a steady watch be kept upon their movements; "for it seems," said he, "that the cold-hearted murder of Generals Joseph and Hyrum Smith in Carthage jail has not satisfied the blood-thirsty dispositions of those demons, but they desire to prosecute their wretched purpose still further." As a member of General Deming's staff Mr. Owen had opposed calling out a large force to be stationed at Carthage lest they should be influenced to join with the mob in making war upon the "Mormons." [^2]

On the 22nd of July Governor Ford in his letter to Elder W. W. Phelps, reviewing the situation growing out of the murder of the Smith brothers, declared the "naked truth" to be "that most well informed persons condemn in the most unqualified manner the mode in which the Smiths were put to death; but nine out of every ten of such accompany the expression of their disapprobation by a manifestation of their pleasure, that they are dead. The disapproval is most usually cold and without feeling. It is a disapproval which appears to be called for, on their part, by decency, by a respect for the law and a horror of mobs, but does not flow from the heart." [^3] And to the shame of Illinois, history, in the light of subsequent events, must affirm the correctness of Governor Ford's statement of the case.

It has already been said, on the authority of Governor Ford, that when the military movement against the saints in Hancock county under the guise of "a wolf hunt," was projected, the anti-"Mormon" papers, "in aid of the movement," commenced anew the most awful accounts of thefts and robberies and impending "Mormon" outrages. [^4] This afforded thieves and blacklegs generally an opportunity of having their crimes charged upon the saints, and accordingly they established themselves in the vicinity of Nauvoo, though principally on the Iowa side of the river; and all the thefts and acts of violence committed by those renegades and others along the river were charged up to the account of the citizens of Nauvoo, and too gladly believed by the people in the surrounding counties.

Not only were charges of theft and robbery made against the saints, but they were also accused of hiding from justice any and all criminals who came into their midst; that Nauvoo, in short, was a rendezvous for outlaws, counterfeiters and desperate men generally. These charges led the city council to make a thorough investigation; and, on the 13th of January, 1845, to pass a series of resolutions stating that the charges of theft for the most part were fabrications of their enemies bent on ruining the reputation of the city, and challenged those who made the charges to sustain with proof a single case where the citizens of Nauvoo had screened criminals from justice. [^5]

ACTION OF THE CITY COUNCIL AND THE CHURCH TO CORRECT MISREPRESENTATIONS

The city council also extended an invitation to all who had reasons to believe that their stolen property was concealed in Nauvoo to come and make diligent search for it, and pledged them the assistance of the city administration to hunt out crime and put away everything that could give rise to even a suspicion of concealing criminals. The mayor was authorized to increase the force of police if necessary to five hundred; and the people were called upon to redouble their diligence in preventing criminals from coming among them, and all such persons as soon as discovered were to be given up to the officers of the law.

The next day the action of the city council was submitted to the citizens of Nauvoo in mass meeting assembled, and they approved of the course taken. [^6] Fifty delegates were chosen and sent into the surrounding counties to disabuse the public mind relative to the false accusations made against the saints, and to ask the cooperation of the counties surrounding Hancock in ridding the country of the counterfeiters and thieves which infested it. But all these efforts were fruitless. The falsehoods of their enemies outweighed the truths of the saints, a cruel prejudice hardened the hearts of the people of Illinois against the appeals of the citizens of Nauvoo, and made them deaf or indifferent to all entreaties for justice.

Twice during the summer of 1845, Governor Ford himself went to Nauvoo to investigate these charges against her people; and when he came to deal with the "Mormon troubles" in his message to the legislature that fall, after speaking of the charges made, he said:

"It was a fact also, that some larcenies and robberies had been committed, and that Mormons had been convicted of the crimes; and that other larcenies had been committed by persons unknown but suspected to be Mormons. Justice, however, requires me to say that I have investigated the charge of promiscuous stealing, and find it to be greatly exaggerated. I could not ascertain that there were a greater proportion of thieves in that community than in any other of the same number of inhabitants, and perhaps if the city of Nauvoo were compared with St. Louis, or any other western city, the proportion would not be so great." [^7]

The prejudice, not to say bitterness, of Governor Ford against the saints would rob his statement of any suspected exaggeration favorable to them.

The deputy sheriff of Hancock county, Joseph A. Kelting, a church member, however, be it admitted, exonerated the "Mormon" people from any participation in the thefts perpetrated in the surrounding country. He testified that stolen property was brought through the country via Nauvoo, passed over the river to the Iowa side and taken into the interior, where it was concealed. He also stated that there were some five or six persons in Nauvoo who were assisting in this nefarious business. "But," said he, "they are not 'Mormons,' nor are they fellowshipped by them." [^8]

Notwithstanding all this, misrepresentation so far succeeded in prejudicing the minds of the public and the leading men in the state, that in January, 1845, the city charter of Nauvoo and the charter authorizing the organization of the Nauvoo Legion were both repealed, and thus the protecting aegis of a city government was snatched away from her citizens, when most they needed it, and left them exposed to the fury of their enemies.

LEGISLATURE REPEAL OF NAUVOO CHARTERS

Of this act on the part of the state legislature, the state's attorney, Josiah Lamborn, in a letter to Brigham Young, dated at Springfield, Ill., Jan., 1845, [^9] said:

"I have always considered that your enemies have been prompted by political and religious prejudices, and by a desire for plunder and blood, more than the common good. By the repeal of your charter, and by refusing all amendments and modifications, our legislature has given a kind of sanction to the barbarous manner in which you have been treated. Your two representatives [^10] exerted themselves to the extent of their ability in your behalf, but the tide of popular passion and frenzy was too strong to be resisted. It is truly a melancholy spectacle to witness the lawmakers of a sovereign state condescending to pander to the vices, ignorance and malevolence of a class of people who are at all times ready for riot, murder and rebellion."

Senator Jacob C. Davis was one among those who had been indicted for the murder of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and of him the attorney-general said:

"Your senator, Jacob C. Davis, has done much to poison the minds of members against anything in your favor. He walks at large in defiance of law an indicted murderer. If a Mormon was in his position, the senate would afford no protection, but he would be dragged forth to jail or the gallows, or be shot down by a cowardly and brutal mob."

Two propositions were before the legislature respecting the Nauvoo charters: one for absolute repeal; the other for the repeal of the supposedly mischievous features. Governor Ford in his special message on Hancock county affairs had recommended the latter action. [^11] This view of the matter was also upheld in an able speech in the lower house of the legislature by Mr. Ross, of Fulton county, [^12] a non-"Mormon," and was also favored by a few others, but to no purpose; absolute repeal of all the chartered rights of Nauvoo was demanded by the anti-"Mormon" party in the legislature; and upon the question of absolute repeal coming to a vote in the lower house, on the 21st of January, 1845, the repeal act was passed by a vote of 76 to 36; and subsequently it passed the senate by a large majority. [^13]

A "CITY" WITHOUT CHARTERS

The repeal of the Nauvoo charters was inimical to the interests of the city, and disintegration of society and a reign of lawlessness must have ensued but for the fact that peace and order was maintained by virtue of the law abiding habits of her citizens, the Latter-day Saints; and the further fact that the church organization operated in lieu of the city government, which led the editor of the Nauvoo Neighbor in commenting upon the subject at the close of the annual conference of the church held in April, 1845, to say:

"One thing further: having no charter with municipal authority to protect the rights of an innocent people, a city of at least twenty thousand people, presented the glorious sight of being protected by the counsel of God; and watched over by the trustworthiness of bishops and deacons." [^14]

Of course the action of the legislature in repealing the Nauvoo charters stirred some feelings of resentment among the citizens of Nauvoo; that was inevitable; and some of that resentment was voiced in the editorial utterances of the Nauvoo Neighbor.

"The state of Illinois granted the city of Nauvoo a charter of perpetual succession, and that body had no more right to repeal it than the United States would have to abrogate and make void the Constitution of the state. * * * If the legislature granted a charter of perpetual succession [i. e. to the city] and they had no such power they were a class of knaves in high places: if they had the power, then the legislature that repealed the charter of 'perpetual succession' were a set of licensed robbers, plundering on innocent people with impunity. Each body is welcome to the honor or disgrace, hang upon which horn of the dilemma they please. The act of repealing the Nauvoo charter was an assumption of might not a prerogative of right."

Unfortunately the editorial did not stop at this point, but went on to say that until the blood of Joseph and Hyrum Smith had been atoned by the execution of their murderers, no Latter-day Saint should give himself up to the law, under the presumption that he would be murdered as the Brothers Smith had been. Nor should civil process "come into Nauvoo," until the wrongs endured by the saints both in Missouri and Illinois had been redressed.

This editorial brought forth very severe criticism by the press of Illinois; especially on the part of the State Register, published at Springfield. That paper declared that the editorial in question advocated "resistance to law;" and undoubtedly it did. But while that is true it is also true that the church promptly repudiated responsibility for that editorial in the following number of the Nauvoo Neighbor. Under a black display caption, "A Voice From Nauvoo," "a general council of the authorities of the church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," said:

"And, whereas, it is reported that certain individuals are trying to raise an excitement on the editorials of the Nauvoo Neighbor, we, therefore, in behalf of the church we represent, do hereby publish to all men, that as a people and council, we have no knowledge of the Nauvoo Neighbor until we read it as do others, and therefore cannot be responsible for it. * * * We do not wish to be brought in collision with our neighbors, and we are determined to abide by the law." [^15]

Over the nom de plume of "Americus," the editor of the Nauvoo Neighbor commented upon the strictures of the State Register as follows:

"The editor of that paper thinks the Nauvoo Neighbor advocates resistance to laws. I have not so considered it. But we are surrounded by those who not only advocate that doctrine, but are practicing it all the time: and if we have dipped our pen in their bloody inkstand, we will call for a pen wiper immediately. * * * It is not the sentiment of the citizens of Nauvoo to resist the law." [^16]

CAPSTONE OF THE TEMPLE LAID

In the meantime the twelve apostles, sustained by the saints, put forth every exertion to carry out the designs of their martyred Prophet respecting Nauvoo. Work on the Nauvoo House was hastened, and the walls were growing rapidly under the constant labor of the masons. Work, too, was vigorously prosecuted on the temple.

The following incident pertaining to these days was many years afterwards related by President Brigham Young, for which we are indebted to the Journal of Wilford Woodruff, under date of Feb. 8th, 1857:

"President Young preached in the tabernacle followed by H. C. Kimball. In the afternoon at a prayer circle the president spoke of a blank in the History of the Church, and related the following: 'A few months after the martyrdom of Joseph the Prophet, in the autumn and winter of 1844 we did much hard labor on the Nauvoo temple, during which time it was difficult to get bread and other provisions for the workmen to eat. I counseled the committee who had charge of the temple funds to deal out all the flour they had, and God would give them more; and they did so; and it was but a short time before Brother Toronto came and brought me twenty-five hundred dollars in gold. The bishop and the committee met, and I met with them; and they said, that the law was to lay the gold at the apostles' feet. Yes, I said and I will lay it at the bishop's feet; so I opened the mouth of the bag and took hold at the bottom end, and gave it a jerk towards the bishop, and strewed the gold across the room and said, now go and buy flour for the workmen on the temple and do not distrust the Lord any more; for we will have what we need." [^17]

At the time of President Smith's death the Nauvoo temple was but one story high, yet on the tweny-fourth of May, 1845, eleven months after his martyrdom, about six o'clock in the morning, the capstone was laid amid the general rejoicing and shouts of "Hosanna" from the assembled thousands of the saints.

The reason why the capstone of the temple was laid so early in the morning was because the twelve were kept in an enforced semi-seclusion to avoid the officers who sought to serve writs upon them for trumped-up charges against the law, some of the alleged offenses extending back to the Expositor case before the death of President Joseph Smith and Hyrum; and some extending back to "Kirtland Bank" affairs. Writs were out for about twenty of the brethren on this Kirtland debt, President Young among the number. Taylor's Journal account of the laying of the capstone of the temple is interesting:

"On the morning of Saturday, May 24th, 1845, we repaired to the temple with great secrecy, for the purpose of laying the [cap] stone. There were but few that knew about it, [but] the band playing on the walls, and the people hearing it, hurried up. About six o'clock a. m., the brethren being assembled, we proceeded to lay the stone; at a quarter past six the stone was laid; after which Brother Young prayed, his voice being heard distinctly, by the congregation below; and the congregation shouted 'Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna to God and the Lamb, Amen and Amen!' Brother Kay sung a song, composed for the occasion by W. W. Phelps, called 'The Capstone.' Although there were several officers watching for us to take us, yet we escaped without their knowledge; when the singing commenced we left unnoticed, and they had not an opportunity of seeing us." [^18]

As President Brigham Young finished laying the capstone he then stood upon it and said:

" 'The last stone is laid upon the temple, and I pray the Almighty in the name of Jesus to defend us in this place, and sustain us until the temple is finished and we have all got our endowments.'

The whole congregation then following the motion of President Young and shouted as loud as possible: 'Hosanna! Hosanna! Hosanna! to God and the Lamb! Amen! Amen! and Amen!'

'So let it be, thou Almighty God,' solemnly concluded President Young." [^19]

Thus the world began to understand that "Mormonism" was not born to die with its first Prophet. And it began to be whispered that the Prophet Joseph dead was even more potent than when living. His testimony had been sealed with his blood, and it gave to his life and his labors an additional sanctity in the eyes of his followers, as well as making his testimony more binding upon the world.

RENEWAL OF MOB VIOLENCE

Seeing then the continued prosperity of Nauvoo and her citizens, the people in the immediate vicinity and in the surrounding counties again commenced hostilities, if, indeed, it may be said that they had ever ceased from them. Early in September, 1845, mobbing the scattered families of the saints began in earnest. A meeting was held by anti-"Mormons" near what was called the "Morley Settlement," [^20] to devise means of getting rid of the saints settled there. During the meeting guns were fired at the house where it was being held, and the assault charged upon the saints, though it was done by some of the mob's own party—that they might have an excuse for their meditated acts of violence upon the people of Nauvoo. Such was the general belief at the time; and Governor Ford in his History of Illinois, speaking of this circumstance, says:

"In the fall of 1845, the anti-Mormons of Lima and Green Plains, held a meeting to devise means for the expulsion of the Mormons from their neighborhood. They appointed some persons of their own number to fire a few shots at the house where they were assembled; but to do it in such a way as to hurt none who attended the meeting. The meeting was held, the house was fired at, but so as to hurt no one; and the anti-Mormons suddenly breaking up their meeting, rode all over the country spreading the dire alarm, that the Mormons had commenced the work of massacre and death." [^21]

An attack was made upon the Morley Settlement, and on the eleventh of the month—September, 1845—though the burnings began on the 10th, [^22] twenty-nine houses were burned down, while their occupants were driven into the bushes, where men, women, and children laid drenched with rain through the night, anxiously awaiting the breaking of day.

Speaking of this outrage, the editor of the Quincy Whig, Mr. Bartlett, said:

"Seriously, these outrages should be put a stop to at once; if the Mormons have been guilty of crime, why punish them; but do not visit their sins upon defenseless women and children. This is as bad as the savages. * * * It is feared that this rising against the Mormons is not confined to the Morley Settlement, but that there is an understanding among the 'anties' [^23] in the northern part of this (Adams) and Hancock counties to make a general sweep, burning and destroying the property of the Mormons wherever it can be found. If this is the case, there will be employment for the executive of the state, and that soon. * * * Still later news from above [referring to Hancock county] was received late on Monday night. The outrages were still continued. The flouring mill, carding machine, etc., of Norman Buel, a Mormon, one mile and a half west of Lima is now a heap of ashes. Colonel Levi Williams, of Green Plains has ordered out his brigade, it is said, to aid the anti-Mormons. The anti-Mormons from Schuyler [county] and the adjoining counties, are flocking in and great distress of life and property may be expected. Heaven only knows where these proceedings will end. It is time the strong arm of power was extended to quell them."

This was the last utterance of Mr. S. M. Bartlett, editor of the Quincy Whig, on this side of the question. By the time the next week's issue of his paper was due he had attended an anti-"Mormon" meeting and went over to the other side—to the side of mobocracy; all of which led Mr. Josiah B. Conyers, M. D., (a non-"Mormon") to say in his Brief History of the Hancock County Mob, 1846, that in the above comment on the outrageous acts of the mob, the editor in the Quincy Whig had spoken like himself:

"The remarks Mr. Bartlett here makes in connection with the account given of the house burnings, were such as truly comported with the dignity and candor of a respectable editor of the press. He here spoke himself, and spoke in behalf of humanity and the law. He here spoke out boldly, that violence was resorted to, and that helpless women and children were thrown out into a storm; 'and,' said he, 'seriously, these outrages should be put a stop to at once;' that 'it was as bad as the savages;' and called on 'the strong arm of power to quell them.' We repeat, again, that S. M. Bartlett here spoke himself, uninfluenced by the demagogues of the day. He spoke as a philanthropist and patriot; and had he been left to himself, in all probability he would never have appealed to any other power than the strong arm of law; and our beloved country would have been saved from the deep and damnable disgrace of banishing from our land, by mob violence, innocent women and children. But here this unfortunate editor took leave of his senses on this subject—never more to return. He fell into the hands of professed friends, to become their organ of mob violence; * * * In our opinion Mr. Bartlett will ever have just cause to regret, to the latest day of his existence, that he stooped from the proud and high toned dignity, put forth in the above article, to become the organ of a foul and unprincipled mob." [^24]

THE DEMING-MARSHALL TRAGEDY

In the midst of the exciting scenes which followed, the sheriff of Hancock county, Mr. J. B. Backenstos, proved himself a friend to law and order. This was the Mr. Backenstos who had represented Hancock county in the lower branch of the Illinois legislature, and who had defended the people of Nauvoo so fearlessly. He had been elected sheriff to succeed Minor R. Deming in August. Mr. Deming unfortunately, on the 24th of June, had engaged in an altercation with Dr. Samuel Marshall, county clerk of Hancock county. The cause of the trouble was never clearly ascertained, but it is supposed to have been "in regard to some mistake in official business." [^25] In the struggle that took place between the two men, Deming shot Marshall, killing him instantly. The case at Deming's request, was at once brought before a grand jury, and an indictment was found, but Deming was admitted to bail in the sum of $5,000. [^26] Though the quarrel of these two county officials had nothing to do with affairs at Nauvoo, yet because one—Deming—was pro-"Mormon" in sentiment, and Dr. Marshall, anti-"Mormon," the case is usually mentioned in connection with "Mormon" history. Mr. Deming immediately resigned his office as sheriff; and in the special election held in August, Mr. Backenstos was elected to fill the unexpired term by a vote of 2,334 as against 750 votes cast for John Scott an anti-"Mormon."

Mr. Backenstos did all in his power to arrest the spread of violence and called upon all law-abiding citizens to act as a posse comitatus, but announced it as his opinion that the citizens of Nauvoo had better take no part in suppressing the mob-violence, since that might lead to a civil war. At the same time he told the people of Hancock county that "The Mormon community had acted with more than ordinary forbearance, remaining perfectly quiet, and offering no resistance when their dwellings, their buildings, stacks of grain, etc., were set on fire in their presence. They had forborne until forbearance was no longer a virtue."

It would almost seem past belief that this statement of "non-resistence" of their enemies could be true; and yet it is confirmed by the evidence of anti-"Mormon" witnesses. Mr. Gregg, both in his Prophet of Palmyra and in his History of Hancock County, 1880, confirms it. In the second work mentioned above (p. 374), speaking of the manner in which the burnings were carried on in the Morley Settlement, he says:

"From a very respectable old gentleman (now deceased); who was a witness of some of the house-burning operations in the fall of 1845, we have the following statement received from him verbally, during the last year (1880). He says that for such lawless and outrageous acts, they were done in such a quiet and orderly manner as to be astonishing. He resided not far from some of the houses that were burned; and hearing what was going on he mounted his horse and rode to where the work was in progress. * * * The manner was to go to a house and warn the inmates out, that they were going to burn it. Usually there would be no show of resistance; but all hands, burners and all, would proceed to take out the goods and place them out of danger. When the goods were all securely removed, the torch would be applied and the house consumed. Then on to another."

As a matter of fact the brethren at Morley Settlement, after the first few cases of burning, acted under instructions from the twelve at Nauvoo. In his journal under date of September 11th,—the burnings began on the 10th—Elder John Taylor, after noting the arrival of the news of the burnings, says:

"We (the twelve) held a council and thought it advisable, as we were going west in the spring, to keep all things as quiet as possible and not resent anything. Thinking by these pacific measures that they would be likely not to molest us; and to show the surrounding country that we were orderly disposed people and desirous of keeping the peace. It was also counseled that the brethren from the surrounding settlements should come into Nauvoo with their grain. After the trouble we had had to finish the temple to get our endowments, we thought it of more importance than to squabble with the mob about property, seeing that the houses were not of much importance and no lives were lost!"

It should be remembered that this was said when the first few cases of house-burning was reported. Later the matter took on a more serious aspect, and under date of September 13th, Elder Taylor makes this entry in his journal:

"A number of the brethren were rendered houseless and homeless by a few reckless desperadoes in consequence of their adherence to the gospel. What rendered it more trying for them was that they had it in their power to destroy their persecutors, and yet in consequence of our counsel endured it patiently, and looked tamely on to see their houses and property destroyed for the gospel and the kingdom of heaven's sake; they are good and faithful men or they would not have done it." [^27]

HEROIC STAND OF SHERIFF JACOB BACKENSTOS OF HANCOCK COUNTY

The sheriff's appeal to citizens outside of Nauvoo for a posse to suppress mob violence was all in vain, none responded; and as the house-burning continued, he perforce, had to call upon the citizens of Nauvoo to suppress it. From these he formed a posse comitatus and by vigorous measures dispersed the rioters, and soon had the situation well in hand.

His efforts had so far succeeded that in a Proclamation issued on the 20th of September he said:

"Since firing upon the mob at Bear Creek on the 16th instant, [they were in the act of burning houses, two were killed and others were wounded], there has been no burning of any houses, barns, grain stacks, nor anything else, that has come to my knowledge. The mobbers, rioters, and other outlaws, have principally fled without the limits of this county. Peace and quiet, law and order have been restored in Hancock county,

Therefore, I, Jacob Backenstos, sheriff of Hancock county, hereby proclaim the county of Hancock in peace; that the rioters have dispersed and gone to their homes, or fled this county and state. Let all good citizens who were expelled by the mobbers, from their homes, and those who fled from the county for security against mob violence, return to their homes, they shall be protected. I have an armed force stationed in the courthouse at Carthage for the protection of the officers of the county, who are compelled by law to reside at the county seat, and for the protection of all persons having business at, or who may desire to visit Carthage and the surrounding country. I have a number of small scouting parties reconnoitering the county to keep peace and protect the settlements, and make arrests of those that are known to be guilty of riot, in whose hands writs have been placed. I desire that the citizens will aid them in ferreting them out, that they may be arrested and brought to justice."

And on the 25th of the same month he said in another Proclamation:

"There seems to be a continuance of peace throughout Hancock county. There has been no burning of houses or other property since a party of my posse pursued the mob and fired upon them. In my last proclamation I stated that the mobbers had fled the country; as yet they have not returned; they are brawling about the adjoining counties, state of Missouri, and Iowa territory, circulating all kinds of falsehoods and misrepresentations, for the purpose of getting aid, in order to recommence burning and mobbing, etc. As yet they have not been able to raise any considerable force to march into Hancock under arms, against the Constitution and the law."

The course of the anti-"Mormons" at Carthage, however, had been such that Chauncy Robinson, postmaster and county recorder was compelled to flee from the place with his family; so did Captain Rose, treasurer and assessor of the county. The sheriff's (Mr. Backenstos') home was surrounded, admittance for the purpose of searching it demanded, and Mrs. Backenstos was informed that her husband must leave the county "under the penalty of consequences which meant death," says Mr. Backenstos. [^28] In consequence of these conditions prevailing the sheriff took possession of the courthouse at Carthage and stationed a company of his posse there, promising protection to all classes of its citizens, and the force remained at Carthage until the sheriff was relieved by a posse under military officers appointed by the governor.

Naturally the success of the sheriff gave great satisfaction to the citizens of Nauvoo; and the editor of the Neighbor heartily congratulated him in the following editorial utterance:

"We feel it our duty to say that Sheriff Backenstos is entitled to the highest encomium of every American patriot, for the prompt and energetic measures, and his unceasing vigilance, which so successfully put to flight the blood-thirsty, pestilential, and property-wasting mob of Hancock county, and vicinity."

Even the State Register, so strongly anti-"Mormon," published at Springfield said: "Sheriff Backenstos deserves great credit for his exertion in quelling the mob of Hancock county." [^29] Still this victory of an officer honestly seeking to bring peace to the community was not to be used in visiting retaliation in kind upon the rioters. Their offenses were merely to be laid open to the law. In the same editorial in which the course of Mr. Backenstos was praised, the editor of the Neighbor said:

"Let every sufferer and every honest man be ready with precepts when one of the rioters or burners is recognized, to take him and hand him over to the law, that he may receive his reward. But let no man attempt to settle his own claims. Magnify the law." [^30]

On visiting Warsaw on the 16th of September friends warned Sheriff Backenstos of plotters against his life in that place and advised him to conceal himself from them. Deeming this incompatible with his duties as a public officer, Mr. Backenstos left Warsaw accompanied by a friend in his buggy, but on reaching the open prairie, he continued alone towards Nauvoo. Some distance further on he saw eastward of him on the Carthage road a body of about twenty mounted men, also a buggy and wagon, evidently en route for Warsaw. A detachment of four men left the main body with the intention, it would appear, of intercepting him; and when he whipped up his horse to avoid them, they then pursued him, the chase continuing for two miles. At this point Sheriff Backenstos overtook three men with teams en route for Nauvoo whom he summoned as a posse to aid him in resisting his pursuers. The sheriff himself took a position in the road pistol in hand and shouted to the approaching horsemen to halt. Instead of doing so one of the horsemen raised his gun either to intimidate or shoot the sheriff, when one of the newly drafted posse fired upon and killed him. The fallen man, who died before his party could reach Warsaw with him, was Frank A. Worrell who was in charge of the guard of Carthage Greys at the prison when Joseph and Hyrum Smith were murdered.

Gregg, in his History of Hancock County, gives a different version of this incident, claiming that the purpose of the horsemen who followed the sheriff was merely to get information about the burnings and riots; and that neither Worrell nor any of his associates had made any demonstration of violence. [^31] Gregg also claims that the whole Worrell party numbered but nine; that they were en route for Warsaw "to ascertain the facts as to the disturbances at Green Plains," south of Warsaw, in Walker township; and that the twohorse wagon contained the arms of the party. [^32] The character of Worrell, however, as a bitter anti-"Mormon," the part he took in the murder of the Smith brothers, the fact that after he and his party failed to intercept the sheriff they gave chase to him for two miles, will scarcely stand against Sheriff Backenstos' account of the affair given publicly in his Proclamation No. II, which appeared in the Nauvoo Neighbor of 17th of September, the day following the killing of Worrell. Sheriff Backenstos issued five official proclamations in all between the 10th of September and the 25th of the same month. [^33]

Subsequently Sheriff Backenstos and Orrin P. Rockwell were indicted and later placed on trial for the "murder" of Worrell; the sheriff at Peoria, and Rockwell at Galena, each having taken a change of venue; both were acquitted.

Gregg says concerning the killing of Worrell: "Who was the actually guilty party may never be known." [^34] There certainly was no occasion for keeping the matter secret, since the killing was altogether justifiable, under the circumstances, and it became a matter of common knowledge both in Nauvoo and Utah that it was Orrin Porter Rockwell—acting under orders of Sheriff Backenstos—and John Redder, who saved the officer's life. [^35]

While Backenstos was rapidly bringing the affairs of Hancock county into order, he of necessity was doing it by a "Mormon" posse comitatus, since no other citizens would respond to his call for aid, although most earnestly appealed to by the sheriff. It was held by the anti-"Mormon" part of the community that the sheriff was carrying affairs with a very high hand, which called for executive interference. Accordingly Governor Ford sent a detachment of four hundred militia into Hancock county under command of General John J. Hardin, who was accompanied by J. A. McDougal, attorney general of the state, and also by Judge Stephen A. Douglas and Major W. B. Warren as advisors. [^36] When Sheriff Backenstos first received the news of the governor's action to supercede him in the control of affairs in Hancock county by General Hardin's military posse, he gave it no credence, and in his 5th proclamation declared the alleged action of Governor Ford to be "a forgery or fraud," so sure was he of the governor's support in his procedure to suppress the riots in Hancock county. The governor's action in superceding the sheriff, however, (in which act also he superceded the civil by the military authority) was a reality; that part of the sheriff's posse stationed at Carthage was dismissed and sent to their homes, and thereafter but little is heard of Mr. Backenstos in the affairs of Hancock county, as civil government was now abdicated in that county until after the expulsion of the saints from Nauvoo.

After his activity in the suppression of mob violence, which threw him into the attitude of defending and protecting the Latter-day Saints, residence for Sheriff Backenstos in Hancock county was of course out of the question. He therefore sought other scenes of activity; according to Gregg he obtained an appointment through Congressman Hoge to an office in the lead mines, and later was made captain in the forces sent against Mexico. [^37]

NOTES

Mr. Babbitt's first speech was a plea for justice for the "Mormon" leaders and people, in the course of which he said:

"Did the 'Mormons' ever resist the execution of the law? If in some instances they resorted to unjustifiable subterfuges [^38] to keep out of the hands of their prosecutors, it was but to escape a certain and summary death, with which they had been publicly threatened. What had they to expect from men who openly avowed their nefarious designs and even said they had their bullets run for twelve months for the express purpose of shooting 'Mormons,' if they did not leave their possessions and their homes, and take refuge with the Indians in the recesses of the Rocky Mountains, or in the wilds of the west?

I say would any man be expected to go to Carthage under such circumstances, when he had nothing to expect but an unrelenting persecution and a violent death? Among men who acknowledge no law, would not obey the commands of the executive of our state, and said in derision of his power, 'we have no governor, he is a Mormon governor?'"

In concluding he said:

"Other cities had transcended their chartered rights as well as Nauvoo, even in the city of Springfield a public lecturer has been fined by the common council for daring to lecture upon science without a license; had this been done in the city, and under the authorities of illfated Nauvoo, the cry would have gone out, and unmerited censure heaped upon the 'Mormons.' Be just then, regard the principles of equal rights, and deal out to the citizens of every portion of our state evenhanded justice, forget not your duties in the madness of prejudice. If the privileges of the Nauvoo charter are too extensive, if it grants power exceptionable, repeal those provisions, and leave them in possession of their just rights." [^39]

In his second speech Mr. Babbitt grew bolder in the defense of his constituents, concerning the destruction of the Expositor press he said:

"The destruction of a press in Nauvoo was sounded as the token of alarm to awaken the people to a sense of apparent danger from 'Mormon' violence. Sir, I do not wish to palliate the offense, but is that the only press that has been destroyed? The very first one to my knowledge was a 'Mormon' press in the state of Missouri; they were first sufferers then, and why was it not trumpeted to the ends of the earth—made the subject of public investigation, and visited by the work of legislative condemnation? Presses have been destroyed in our own state, and passed unnoticed by the public. Mr. Speaker, why are these invidious distinctions made? Disguise it as we may, make such imputations as we please, charge it upon this or upon that, it is but the base and unhallowed spirit of religious intolerance, and the workings of unsatisfied political ambition. The press in Nauvoo was established for political purposes by the Whigs, who even made propositions to divide our representation upon this floor, which being refused them, they commenced a tirade of abuse, made their press obnoxious, and detrimental to the best interests of that people, who by their city authorities declared it a public nuisance and ordered it to be abated, which was done. If contrary to law, an action of trespass might have been sustained and a remedy found in courts of law—but instead of that a hue and cry commenced—a mob was raised—violence threatened—warnings sent out—and the surrounding country excited by rumors and false reports, which fanned by the constant breeze of prejudice resulted in the difficulties and disgraceful scenes which occurred in Hancock county.

Mr. Speaker, why this continued opposition? Why are we brought up here to be the object of vindictive legislation, when the very cause of all complaint is removed? It was Joseph Smith the Prophet of the 'Mormon' people who was alleged to be the sole cause of all difficulties. He is no more—they have wreaked their vengeance upon his head—they have murdered him. And must it now be, as in olden times, because the fathers have eaten sour grapes the children's teeth are set on edge?"

Of Nauvoo and her people Mr. Babbitt said:

"Perhaps he [Mr. Logan of Sangamon county] [^40] does not know that Nauvoo is on the Mississippi river—that a large and respectable city has sprung up in four years containing about 12,000 inhabitants—that farms have been improved and made productive—that manufactories have been commenced—a rich and growing trade encouraged, and wealth increased by the rapid development of the national resources of our country. Perhaps he does not know that the 'Mormon' citizens of our state are engaged in the common associations of life—that they like other men—are honest and industrious in their pursuit after happiness and wealth. Yet sir, his ignorance of the fact, makes it no less true. For increase of population and advancement in wealth, the 'Mormon' city of Nauvoo is without a parallel in the annals of our country. It has become the object of universal notice and admiration. It has excited the curiosity of the civilized world." [^41]

Mr. Backenstos in his speech against the repeal of the Nauvoo charters boldly arraigned the anti-"Mormons" of Illinois in such manner as to create against him a very bitter feeling. So little has been said upon that side of the subject, however, that it is proper to give the statement that was made upon the floor of the lower house of the Illinois legislature.

"Mr. Speaker, inasmuch as the gentlemen on the other side of the question have been charging all manner of crimes against the Mormons, they have [been] indiscriminately impeached, indicted, and found guilty of every possible crime known to our laws—such have been the declarations of gentlemen upon this floor. All the disturbances in Hancock [county] have been packed upon the Mormons. This is not only untrue and unjust, but it is also calculated to mislead the public mind; one general impeachment has been made against the Mormons. Now sir, I have drawn up an impeachment with specifications against these self-styled 'law-abiding anti-Mormons.' I do not design to say anything which is not susceptible of the clearest proof; in the first place, I will state that the enemies of the citizens of Nauvoo formed a conspiracy to provoke them into an outbreak." [Here Mr. Backenstos made sundry charges of crimes and misdemeanors against the anti-"Mormons" as follows]:

"I charge them of having called public meetings and loudly and strongly threaten the extermination of the Mormon population, and of all those who would not join in their wicked schemes.

I charge them with having reported that their property was stolen by Mormons, when there was not the slightest evidence to that effect.

I charge them with having torn down the dwelling of a peaceable citizen, because he would not join them in their crusade against the Mormons, and [of having] driven him and his family from their homes.

I charge them with having driven from the county seat of Hancock [county], peaceable and quiet citizens, some of whom were amongst the first settlers of that county, charged with no other crime, and guilty of no other offense, than that they were Mormons.

I charge them with having threatened and resisted the sheriff and his deputy, when acting under and by authority of law.

I charge them with openly resisting a constable when in the lawful discharge of his official duty, by assembling an armed force, and at the point of the bayonet preventing the arrest of a man charged with crime.

I charge them with having posted upon the doors of the dwellings of peaceable and unoffending families at the hour of midnight, written notices warning them to leave their home in a given time, threatening them with vengeance and destruction if they did not comply; filling even the hearts of men with consternation and dismay, and distracting defenseless women and children.

I charge them with having made base and false representations to his excellency Governor Ford, through some of their safety committees, and of endeavoring to inflame the public mind with the free circulation of falsehoods.

I charge them with having sent emissaries to the state of Missouri, to procure aid to carry out their base and wicked designs.

I charge them with having undertaken to revoke a contract through one of their kind committees, between one of the first settlers and a peaceable quiet Mormon.

I charge them with having assembled with dirks, pistols, bowieknives, and clubs, to intimidate and resist the county commissioners' court of Hancock, when in due exercise of their public functions.

I charge them with having called out the militia of the neighboring counties in the name of the governor and commander-in-chief without his authority or consent.

I charge them with having leveled their cannon and fired their muskets into steamboats, when on their way up the great Mississippi river, compelling them to land at the town of Warsaw, there to be detained to undergo a search.

I charge them with having hanged our governor in "effigy" because he would not join them in their oppression of the Mormons.

I charge them with having committed murder without a parallel for its atrocity and cowardice in the annals of American history. [^42]

Mr. Speaker, these are crimes and misdemeanors, which I charge upon the anti-Mormons in and about Hancock county; and sir, these charges are substantially true, and I defy anyone to controvert them; they are susceptible of proof and cannot be denied; those outrages which I have enumerated have been committed by that portion of the anti-Mormon party, which we might well denominate as 'the mob portion;' there are many who style themselves anti-Mormons, yet at the same time they look upon this mob action with alarm and indignation. Then, sir, if you are in search of crimes and criminals in Hancock county, you need not go amongst the Mormons, for you will find them as thick as hail amongst that very class of citizens who style themselves anti-Mormons, who are asking this legislature to repeal the Nauvoo city charters in order more successfully to oppress that people and drive them from our state. Do the citizens in the surrounding counties of Hancock ask or petition for the repeal of the Mormon charters, as some are pleased to term them? Does your table groan under the petitions which have come up from the people praying for unconditional repeal of the city charter of Nauvoo? No; not a single petition has made its appearance. No voice has been heard demanding this hasty action. It would be regarded as an act of oppression unprecedented in this country and without parallel in the history of legislation, to repeal a city charter, against the known and expressed will and wishes of the people who reside under the operation of the chartered privileges. If the charter is repealed it will be regarded, and I fear too truly, the legitimate offspring of religious persecutions." [^43]

The value of the speech of Mr. Ross as an historical document seems to have been overlooked both by "Mormon" and fair-minded non-"Mormon" writers, as nowhere is it referred to by either class, and of course the anti-"Mormon" writers would find nothing in his utterances that would give them or their cause aid or comfort. Mr. Ross' speech was against absolute repeal of the Nauvoo charters and in favor of either so amending the existing charters as to take away its alleged mischievous features, or enacting for the city a modifical charter which would reserve for the city the necessary powers for a normal city government.

(a) Personal Attitude of Mr. Ross Towards the "Mormons" and their Faith: "With the Mormons, as a people, I am no way connected, I have nothing to expect from them in a political point of view; they constitute no part of my constituency. And as for their religion, I hold it in utter diregard, and think it one of the shallowest devices, which for centuries past has been imposed upon the intelligence of christendom."

(b) Would Do Justice in Order Not to Aid "Mormonism" by Persecution: "Another reason, Mr. Speaker, why I am opposed to the unconditional repeal, but in favor of the amendments to the bill granting them a modified charter, is, that I believe Mormonism is a shallow device, and the history of all ages goes to prove that persecution will ever increase religious fanaticism. Some men may say, and honestly think, the passage of this bill will not be persecution; but sir, it will go before the world under no other color. It will be received by all christendom as an act of religious intolerance. Sympathy will be aroused, and by its willing influence bring thousands to their standard."

(c) Too Much Credence Should Not be Given to Charges Against the "Mormon" Leaders:A tirade of abuse has been heaped upon the Mormon leaders. It is easy to make attacks and prefer charges against any man or set of men who occupy a considerable station in the community. But sir, it is no part of my nature to endeavor to traduce and blacken the character of any individual, neither is it just or generous to make distinctions or give preferences upon the grounds urged against that people; we should recollect they are a part and portion of our common state; just as much entitled to the privileges of our institutions, and the protection of our laws as any other. Too much credit should not be given to the stories and reports so rife in this community. They originated in excitement, and have teemed upon our public journals; many of them are without foundation in truth, and not worthy even a serious consideration in truth, and should not for one moment be entertained by this house to influence their action upon the subject matter of this debate."

(d) Reasons for Opposing Absolute Repeal: "I will give some of the reasons why I am of the opinion the bill should not pass, repealing unconditionally the charter of Nauvoo. One of which is, by so doing we shall take part in and prejudice the judicial proceedings now pending in Hancock county [i.e. the trial of the accused murderers of the Smith brothers]. Cases have been brought into existence by the difficulties there, men have been arrested, and stand charged with crime of murder, who look with more anxiety, and depend more upon the action of the house than they do upon legal proceedings, or the justice of their cause. By repealing that charter, we throw the mantle of public sanction over their acts of violence, screen them from the just punishment of their crimes, and give our legislative endorsement to murder of the deepest and darkest hue.

And upon what information are we called to act in this matter? Is it from vague rumors or reports which have circulated throughout the length and breadth of our state? Do not gentlemen know that they originated in excitement, and were borne out upon the wings of scandal against that people? Prejudice kindled and enlivened the coals of calumny, passion fanned them to flame, and the Mormons have been the victims of the devouring elements.

Is it from information from the executive, who was forced to visit the scenes, to maintain inviolate public peace and who is conversant with the facts, and knows full well the history of the Hancock difficulties? What does all information go to prove? He tells us the Mormons were not the sole offenders, but that there was an attempt made to drive and exterminate them from the state.

The gentleman from Macon [Mr. Benedict] has been pleased to say, that the governor's message, in relation to 'military encampments' and 'wolf hunts' are all an 'idle tale,' but I think sir, this house will bear me out when I say it is an able, impartial document, and worthy of our confidence and respectful consideration. Does he recommend the unconditional repeal of their charter? No sir, but of its modification."

(e) On the Destruction of the Nauvoo Expositor: "We are told that the citizens of Nauvoo destroyed a press, and in this country where freedom of speech and liberty of the press are held sacred, it is not strange that our feelings of indignation should be aroused at such a gross outrage upon the rights of any people. That, however, was not the only press that has been destroyed in our state. Two were destroyed in the city of Alton, [^44] and the owner put to death for promulgating his doctrines of political economy, and did any proposition come up here for the repeal of their city charter in consequence of that act? An attack has been made here in this town of Springfield upon a printing office on account of political differences, and yet the legislature did not vent their spleen upon its act of incorporation.

They seek and single out one city to punish the crimes for which others go free. Excitements will sometimes arise, and the rage of heated passions rise above all law; but this to my mind is no reason why laws should be abolished."

(f) A Plea for Justice: "Mr. Speaker, so far as my constituents are concerned, they do not wish me to act the cringing slave to any religious denomination for political or any other purposes, but are willing to extend equal rights and privileges to all. They ask nothing for themselves but what is just and right, and will grant to others all that is reasonable. I do hope, sir, we may be candid, and act with deliberation upon this matter. Remove preconceived prejudices from our minds and deal out evenhanded justice to all." [^45]

The historical value of these official proclamations is such, as showing forth the condition of things on the eve of the departure of the Latter-day Saints from Nauvoo, and the spirit of those lawless conditions, that it is thought proper to publish the proclamations in full, that they may be available for all time to come as undoubted testimonies of an official character of the abdication of government in the state of Illinois, so far as affecting the Latter-day Saints was concerned. It is no marvel that the saints fled from such conditions as are represented in these proclamations. And when men ask how it is the Latter-day Saints have not been able to live in peace with their neighbors in Ohio, Missouri and Illinois, let them also ask, how can a people settle themselves to acceptance of such conditions as these official proclamations disclose?

No. I

TO THE CITIZENS OF HANCOCK COUNTY

Whereas, a mob of from one to two hundred men under arms, have gathered themselves together in the S. W. part of Hancock county, and are at this time destroying the dwellings and other buildings, stacks of grain and other property, of a portion of our citizens, and in the most inhuman manner compelling defenceless children and women to rise from their sick beds, and exposing them to the rays of the parching sun, there to lie and suffer, without the aid and assistance of a friendly hand to minister to their wants in their suffering condition.

The riotous spare not the widow nor the orphan; and while I am writing this proclamation, the smoke is rising to the clouds, and the flames are devouring four buildings which have been just set on fire by the rioters. Thousands of dollars worth of property have already been consumed; an entire settlement of about sixty or seventy families laid waste, the inhabitants thereof fired upon, narrowly escaping with their lives, and forced to flee before the mob.

By the revised laws of our state, under the criminal code, sixth division, 58 section, page 181, the crime of arson is defined as follows:— Every person who shall wilfully and maliciously burn, or cause to be burned, any dwelling house, kitchen, office, shop, barn, stable, store-house, c. shall be deemed guilty of arson, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment in the penitentiary for a term not less than one year, nor more than ten years; and should the life or lives of any person be lost in consequence of any such burning aforesaid, such offender shall be guilty of murder, and shall be indicted and punished accordingly.

And, whereas, the laws of this state makes it my duty as a peace officer of this county to suppress all riots, routs, c., c., and all other crimes.

Therefore, I, Jacob, B. Backenstos, sheriff of the county of Hancock, and state of Illinois, in the name of the people of the said state, and by the authority vested in me by virtue of my office, hereby solemnly command the said rioters and other peace-breakers to desist forthwith, disperse, and go to their homes, under the penalty of the laws. And I hereby call upon all the law-abiding citizens as a posse commitatus of Hancock county, to give their united aid in suppressing the riotous and in maintaining the supremacy of the laws.

J. B. BACKENSTOS, Sheriff of Hancock County, Illinois.

P. S. It is a part of my policy that the citizens of Nauvoo remain quiet, and not a man from that city leave as a posse, until it be made manifest that the law and order citizens, without the city, have not force sufficient to suppress the rioters of this disgraceful outrage, but that two thousand effective men hold themselves in readiness to march at a moment's warning to any point in Hancock county.

J. B. BACKENSTOS, Sheriff, c.

Green Plains, Hancock County, Illinois, Sept. 13th, 1845.

No. II.

TO THE CITIZENS OF HANCOCK COUNTY, ILLINOIS, AND THE SURROUNDING COUNTIES

It is truly painful that my first proclamation had not the desired effect of quelling the mob in Hancock county. I was strong in the hope, that when men engaged in such fiendish and wicked purposes, came to reflect after the excitement of the moment, that they would cease and go to their homes.

The burning and destruction of houses and other property was commenced on the tenth day of September instant, by a body of armed men who gathered in the southwest part of this county, headed, it is said, by the notorious Levi Williams. The mob is spreading itself in different directions; some of the mob have been in pursuit of me since Wednesday afternoon about three o'clock: they have pursued me on the public road and threatened my life, they levelled their arms at me, and desisted only when fired upon, and the fear of death put them in mind of their illegal mob proceedings. On yesterday an armed force undertook to take me: I became apprised of their intentions—evaded them and fled to Bear Creek, where I had a posse commitatus, and from thence I repaired for the second time to Warsaw, to ascertain if any reliable force could be procured in that place. I became satisfied that I could get no aid from that place.

I became further satisfied that my life was sought by some of the mobbers lurking about the town. This information was communicated to me by some personal friends with whom I had free intercourse, and in confidence I was apprised of the secret intentions of these desperadoes. My friends of Warsaw considered my life in danger, and advised me not to go out, but to remain secreted in some safe place; but my business, as an officer of the peace, demanded my departure from that place.

I procured the aid of a personal friend to guard me out of that place into the prairie some three or four miles. All my friends advised me, should I see or meet men with arms, that I had better evade them, and under no consideration to get into their hands. After parting with the gentleman who so kindly escorted me thus far, and having traveled about a mile and a half further, I discovered an armed body of some twenty or more men on the Warsaw and Carthage road, two or three miles eastward of me and going towards Warsaw. I watched them, and on discovering that four men of the force, mounted on horses, left the main body apparently to strike a point in advance of me, with all the speed of their horses, and finding that they were in pursuit of me, I put the whip to my horse, for I was in a buggy, they taking a nearer cut, evidently gained on me.

The chase lasted for a distance of two miles, when I fortunately overtook three men with teams. I immediately informed them that armed men were in pursuit of me, evidently to take my life. I summoned them as a posse to aid me in resisting them. I dismounted, took a position in the road with pistol in hand. I commanded them (the mobbers) to stop, when one of them held his musket in a shooting attitude, whereupon one of my posse fired, and, it is believed, took effect on one of the lawless banditti. We remained and stood our ground, prepared for the worst, for about ten minutes. The mobbers retreating some little distance, made no further assault but finally retreated. I then made my way for the city of Nauvoo, where I am at this time. Knowing the plans and designs of the mob faction in our county, I am induced to be thus full and minute in detailing the particulars of those seeking my life, because I dare take steps as a peace officer, to put an end to the proceedings of the most lawless, disgraceful, and inhuman banditti that ever infested our state, inasmuch as I have in vain applied to the citizens of this county, without the limits of the city of Nauvoo, therefore,

I, Jacob B. Backenstos, Sheriff of the county of Hancock and state of Illinois, in the name of the people of the said state, and by virtue of the authority in me vested, hereby again solemnly command the mobbers and rioters throughout this county to disperse, desist, and forthwith go to their homes, under the penalty of the laws of our country, and such consequences as may follow:—

And I hereby call upon, and likewise command every able-bodied man throughout the county, to arm himself in the best possible manner, and to resist any and all further violence on the part of the mob, and not to permit a further destruction of property, and to arrest all those engaged in this wicked proceeding and destruction of property, and threatening of lives; and, I further command that the posse commitatus repair to the nearest points invaded by the rioters, and to defend at the point of the bayonet, and at all hazards, the lives and property of the peaceable citizens, and again reinstate the supremacy of the laws.

J. B. BACKENSTOS, Sheriff of Hancock County, Illinois.

Sept. 16th, 1845. Half-past two o'clock.

P. S. It is proper to state that, the Mormon community have acted with more than ordinary forbearance—remaining perfectly quiet, and offering no resistance, when their dwellings, other buildings, and stacks of grain, c., were set on fire in their presence, and they have forborne until forbearance is no longer a virtue.

The notorious Colonel Levi Williams, who is at the head of the mob, has ordered out the militia of this brigade, comprising Hancock, M'Donough, and Schuyler counties; but it is to be hoped that no good citizen will turn out and aid him or others in the overthrow of the laws of our country, and it is certain that no good citizen will cross the Mississippi river with a design to aid the rioters.

J. B. B., Sheriff.

No. III.

TO THE CITIZENS OF HANCOCK COUNTY AND THE SURROUNDING COUNTRY

Whereas, the community at large may and do expect at my hands, a fair and impartial statement of facts, with regard to the riot which has been raging and is still continuing its ravages with the firebrand and otherwise.

Since the issuing of my second proclamation, the mob have become more infuriated than ever. The postmaster at Carthage, Chauncey Robinson, Esq., who is also county recorder, was compelled to flee from Carthage with his family, in order that their lives might be spared. Captain Rose, the treasurer and assessor of Hancock county, was also expelled from his residence in Carthage, and obliged to flee to some secure place, with his family, for safety. At Warsaw, Edward A. Bedell, Esq., postmaster of that place, and a justice of the peace of the Warsaw precinct, was obliged to flee to save his life, giving him but half a minute's time to prepare to go. These gentlemen have been driven from their homes by force of arms, and threats of immediate death, if they offered any resistance.

Messrs. Bedell and Robinson are well known by very many citizens of the adjoining counties; and they are favourably known too, and are amongst our very best citizens in Hancock, and (if there be any merit in it) they rank among the oldest settlers of this county. Captain Rose is much respected by all honourable men with whom he is acquainted. On the night of the 15th instant, an armed mob surrounded my residence, at Carthage, in search of me as they said, and greatly terrified my wife and children, demanding entrance to search my house, and informing Mrs. B. that I must leave Hancock county immediately, under the penalty of consequences which meant death.

On the night of the 16th I raised an armed force of mounted men, and marched to Carthage to rescue my family and others threatened. On entering the town we were fired upon by some of the mobbers, who instantly fled. My heart sickens when I think of the awfully distressed state in which I found my family, in the hands of a gang of black-hearted villains, guilty of all the crimes known to our laws. It is, however, due, to say, that there are a few of the Carthagenians and Warsaw people who have heretofore acted with the mob faction, who are opposed to this riot, yet, up to this time, they have not joined the standard of law and order. The families which I designed to rescue had all fled, with the exception of Mrs. Deming, the widow of the late General Deming, who was of opinion that she might escape their vengeance, inasmuch as the recent death of her husband it was thought, would have appeased their wrath against that family.

After we had entered the town, persons were seen running about the streets with firebrands. Anticipating their intention of firing their own buildings in order to charge the same upon the posse commitatus under my command, we immediately took steps to prevent this, by threatening to put to the sword all those engaged in firing the place.

We then directed our march towards Warsaw, and on reaching a point midway to that place, I was informed of new depredations by the mob. I sent my family to Nauvoo for safety, under a small guard, and took up a line of march in the direction of the rising smoke. On reaching a point about three miles from the rising flames, I divided the posse commitatus in order to surround those engaged in burning; we were discovered by them. On our approach the mobbers fled, the posse pursuing, with directions to arrest them if possible, and to fire upon them if they would not be arrested. The house-burners retreated towards one of their strong places at the speed of their horses, a part of the posse pursuing at full speed, and firing upon them, killing two and wounding, it is believed, others. This occurred on Beaver Creek, about two o'clock this afternoon.

I commanded one of the detachments in person, and authorized the person who commanded the other. As I was then satisfied that the burners had fled from that place, we directed our line of march northwardly, when we were informed of the approach of a reinforcement of mounted men, who were ordered to reconnoitre, raise people to defend, and aid them in defending the settlement against the depredations of the mob. We then directed our course to Nauvoo, performing a forced march of about sixty-five miles in the space of twenty hours. This expedition is the first effort at resistance to mob violence in the county, since the outbreak. I have now a posse commitatus numbering upwards of two thousand well armed men, firm and ready, to aid me in suppressing the riot, and in arresting them [the rioters]. I am happy in informing the citizens that two thousand additional armed men hold themselves in readiness to be called out when necessary.

To those honourable and worthy citizens in the adjoining counties, who have proffered their aid in quelling this disgraceful mob, I will say, after returning my grateful acknowledgments for the kind interest which they have manifested in defence of the rights of American citizens, the Constitution, and the laws of our beloved country, that, as yet, I have confidence that I can command force sufficient within this county, to arrest, or, if that fails, to put to the sword, every villain engaged in this inhuman outrage; I am sanguine of success, whether my life be spared or not. Gladly will we receive aid from any of the adjoining counties, for the suppression of the rioters, in the event of the force in this county being insufficient. If no considerable numbers of mobbers gather from without Hancock, success will crown my efforts. I am well advised that no considerable number from any of our adjoining counties will come and act with any mob; and I now declare if the mob shall fire their own buildings, grain, or other property, for the purpose of charging the same on the posse, I shall deal with the same as though they destroyed the property of others, and arrest or put to the sword all such incendiaries.

Since my second proclamation, I have learned further particulars of the scoundrels who were in pursuit of me on the highway on the 16th instant, the facts of which were fully set forth in the said proclamation, so far as were in my possession. I now inform the public, that Franklin A. Worrell was one of the four who, on that occasion, pursued me; was shot by one of the four posse whom I summoned on the spot to protect my life. Worrell died the same day.

J. B. BACKENSTOS, Sheriff of Hancock County, Illinois.

Hancock County, Illinois, Sept. 17th, 1845.

No. IV.

TO THE CITIZENS OF HANCOCK COUNTY, ILLINOIS, AND THE SURROUNDING COUNTIES

Since issuing proclamation No. 3, new things have transpired in which the public at large feel a deep and abiding interest, who expect from me a full and unvarnished statement of facts, as they exist with regard to the rioters, if within my knowledge, as well as of my proceedings in attempting to suppress the same, with all the important facts as they occur during my progress.

On the evening of the 18th instant, I proceeded with 200 well armed mounted men, for the second time, to the southwest part of the county, which has sustained nearly all the suffering and destruction by the mob, to join the detachment which I had previously detailed to reconnoitre, make arrests, and prevent further burning. My intention was to attack the encampment of the rioters on the following day and rout them. I received intelligence that they had changed their position, which caused me to countermand a previous order for a reinforcement of 800 infantry, and two pieces of ordinance. I also received intelligence that the mob were encamped in the bottom near the Mississippi river, near Warsaw, with at least 800 armed men, and one piece of artillery. As I had previously determined to march into the camp of the rioters, and arrest or disperse them, I again ordered a reinforcement of four hundred infantry and one piece of artillery, with the intention of attacking the camp; this gave me the command of a posse with 700 men and one piece of ordinance.

Knowing the courage, bravery and skill of the forces under my command, I was willing to make an attack upon the enemy entrenched behind their fortifications. I then took up a line of march to Carthage, the county seat of Hancock, the residence of nearly all the notorious Carthage Grays, and the headquarters of a band of the most infamous and villainous scoundrels that ever infested any community, who have, for the last two years, abandoned labour and the ordinary avocations of good citizens; they are generally poor; a few have been trading upon borrowed capital, but they are selfish and will not even trust their own mob friends. Many of those have considerable large families—they must live and do live. How, I would ask, do such men get a living? men without means and with families too, and who do nothing but brawl about grog shops, cursing and abusing better citizens than they can be; men who are openly upholding mob violence, aiding and abetting the extermination of the very best and oldest settlers in this county, because, forsooth, they have the independence of differing with them in opinion. Did not the community in this and the surrounding counties already know the names of those heaven-daring land pirates, I should publish their names at full length. I entered the town of Carthage about the setting of the sun, as I had a large number of writs for the arrest of those accused of burning houses, barns, and stacks of grain. I ordered my posse to surround the town and permit none to escape, but to bring every man to the courthouse in order that I might arrest such persons as I had writs against, and detain such other persons in custody as are accused by respectable persons until writs could be procured, that they might be dealt with according to law. All those against whom I had writs fled before I could have them surrounded, except one Anthony Barkman.

Colonel Gettis was arrested on suspicion of being one of the ring leaders; he is charged with having ordered out his regiment in order to join the mob, orders signed by him directed to and commanding the captains of companies under his command, requiring them immediately to call out their respective companies being in existence; this Colonel Gettis admits, but claims that he was commanded to do so by a superior officer, viz, Colonel Levi Williams, who claims to hold and have the command of this brigade, comprising Hancock, M'Donough and Schuyler counties, by virtue of seniority by commission.

Colonel Gettis agreed to remain under arrest until morning, when I informed him that he would not be detained, as I was unable to get positive testimony that he was engaged in burning, or that he advised others so to do: however, there are several suspicious circumstances connected with the conduct and acts of Colonel Gettis. For several days previous to my entrance into Carthage, for instance, Colonel Levi Williams, John M'Cauley (a notorious advocate of mobbers), several others of the same gang, and the same Colonel Gettis, held a secret meeting in Carthage on the 16th instant. Colonel G. is a strong advocate for the extermination of a portion of the community of this county. Some of the law and order citizens of Carthage and vicinity felt disposed to censure me for not putting him under arrest, as it is believed he is a co-partner of the notorious Colonel Levi Williams.

After the posse was put in motion in the direction of Carthage, I addressed a communication to Colonel Levi Williams and others in the words and figures following, to wit:—

Two o'Clock p. m., Sept. 18th, 1845.

"Head quarters of the Sheriff of Hancock county, commanding the posse commitatus of the southern detachment in said county.

To the mob gathered in the southwest part of Hancock county, Illinois, commanded and directed by Colonel Levi Williams and a few others, who, as it is said, have a strong force under their influence and guidance, and who are also strongly fortified, as I am informed, and who have, as I know, destroyed much property with force of arms, by going about this county shooting at, and compelling peaceable citizens to leave their homes, and applying firebrands to their buildings, grain, c., and otherwise by all manner of inhuman treatment to the sick and helpless women and children. It is unnecessary for me again to remind you of the magnitude of the crimes of which you already stand charged. Some of the sick women and children who were compelled to leave their sick beds under your wicked and fiendish fiat have since died, as it is believed, in consequence of exposure to the inclemency of the weather and the rays of the sun, thus adding murder to the lesser crime of arson. My duty as an officer is defined by law. Your mob proceedings require of me an effort to quell you in your mad career, if possible, without the shedding of blood. You will all do me the justice to say that I have spared no pains in endeavouring to accomplish such a desirable result, having issued proclamations and taken pains that copies were sent to your mob camps. You know my duty. You were advised openly of my determination and policy which were fully set forth in my proclamations. You have not desisted in your depredations, but on the other hand you became more emboldened than before.

In the mean time I have raised a posse commitatus in order to arrest all engaged in this riot if possible, and in case they should not submit to law and be arrested, to fire upon them or put them to the sword.

The painful necessity of firing upon a part of your depredators, became apparent on the 16th inst., at which time several of the burners were killed, and we caught them in the act of burning buildings. I will close this communication by again appealing to you in the name of humanity, the law, and the good of yourselves and our country, that you instantly desist your mobbing and burning, and deliver yourselves into my hands, to be dealt with according to law; that is to say, you the leaders; and to surrender into my hands the ordinance which you procured by fraud and deception, and that you also deliver into my hands the state arms which you have twice heretofore refused to surrender upon the demand of the executive of the state to his authorized agent, and forthwith disperse each and all of you to your houses, and pursue the ordinary avocations of good and peaceable citizens. Such a course will be honourable to you, and save the shedding of much blood.

I am authorized to receive and take charge of all the public arms in this county. It is expected that you will comply with the above reasonable requests. I hereby pledge myself to protect you in all your constitutional rights, and that you shall be dealt with according to the laws of our country. Should you see fit to submit to the requirements as set forth above, you will, on the part of the mob, communicate to me in writing at the Chapman Place, midway between Carthage and War-saw, on to-morrow at twelve o'clock. Should you not submit, or refuse to reply, your silence will be taken as a refusal to surrender to the laws, when you must expect the consequences.

Respectfully yours, c.

J. B. BACKENSTOS, Sheriff, Hancock County."

I am directed by Governor Ford to collect the public arms which have been demanded in vain twice before from the mobbers; to wit, the arms of the Carthage Grays, and the arms in the hands of Captains Grover and Davis at Warsaw. Under this order and instruction I directed my posse at Carthage to collect all the public arms which were so unfortunately placed in the hands of officers and privates who have on many occasions used them as a means to terrify, insult, and abuse the peaceable citizens of our county. I have collected nine stand and a part of the accoutrements, and will endeavour to get the balance. I have them in my possession, subject to the order of the commander-in-chief of the Illinois militia; they are not and shall not be used by the posse under my command, as I have no authority from the governor for so doing.

The posse under my command have been prompt and obedient to all my orders, with the exception of one order in relation to the collection of the state arms in Carthage. I ordered the posse to ask for and receive from any person in possession of any arms of the Carthage Grays, and to deliver them to me at the courthouse. This order was disobeyed or misunderstood, by two of the posse bringing three guns, the private property of citizens; and one man quarrelled with a lady, and used in her presence ungentlemanly language. I ordered the three men under arrest, placed them under guard, sent them home, and returned the guns.

After leaving a sufficient force to defend the place against the mobbers, both within and without the town of Carthage, at about twelve o'clock on the 20th instant, we took up our line of march to the place of rendezvous at Chapman Place, between Warsaw and Carthage, thence to proceed against the mob encampment, with a design to arrest or rout them from their hiding place; before I reached midway to Warsaw, I received positive intelligence that the mob had fled the county and state by crossing the Mississippi river at Warsaw, with all their arms, cannon, c., to Missouri. I marched the posse to Warsaw for the purpose of making arrests, remained a short time, when I directed the infantry and artillery northwardly, on the prairie road, and I proceeded up the bottom road with the mounted forces; I am now on the bank of the Mississippi river, near Montebello.

Since firing upon the mob at Bear Creek on the 16th instant, there has been no burning of any houses, barns, grain, stacks, nor any thing else, that has come to my knowledge. The mobbers, rioters, and other outlaws, have principally fled without the limits of this county. Peace and quiet, law and order, have been restored in Hancock county.

Therefore, I, Jacob B. Backenstos, Sheriff of Hancock County, hereby proclaim the county of Hancock in peace; that the rioters have dispersed and gone to their homes, or fled this county and state. Let all good citizens who were expelled, by the mobbers, from their homes, and those who fled from the county for security against mob violence, return to their homes, they shall be protected. I have an armed force stationed in the courthouse at Carthage, for the protection of the officers of the county, who are compelled by law to reside at the county seat, and for the protection of all persons having business at, or who may desire to visit Carthage, and also to protect from insult and mob violence the inhabitants of Carthage and the surrounding country. I have a number of small scouting parties reconnoitering the county to keep peace and protect the settlements, and make arrests of those that are known to be guilty of the riot, in whose hands writs have been placed. I desire that the citizens will aid them in ferriting them out, that they may be arrested and brought to justice.

J. B. BACKENSTOS.

Bank of the Mississippi River, near Montebello, September 20th, 1845.

P. S.—The Warsaw Signal extra, of the 18th Sept. contains its usual amount of wilful and malicious falsehoods. It is unnecessary for me to deny any one statement. I pronounce the entire extra one tissue of lies from beginning to end, so far as they purport to give the news of the killing of Worrell and M'Braty, and the balance set forth in relation to the difficulties in our county, and I hold myself responsible to prove the same false, by men of the best standing.

J. B. B.

No. V.

TO THE CITIZENS OF HANCOCK COUNTY AND THE SURROUNDING COUNTRY

In issuing this my fifth proclamation, I shall be obliged to omit many things which have transpired in this county since the 20th instant, (the date of proclamation No. 4), nevertheless I shall endeavour to give all the important facts that may be interesting to the community. There seems to be a continuance of peace throughout Hancock county. There has been no burning of houses or other property since a party of my posse pursued the mob and fired upon them

In my last proclamation I stated that the mobbers had fled the country; as yet they have not returned; they are brawling about the adjoining counties, state of Missouri, and Iowa territory, circulating all kinds of falsehoods and misrepresentations, for the purpose of getting aid, in order to recommence burning and mobbing, c. As yet they have not been able to raise any considerable force to march into Hancock under arms, against the Constitution and the laws, and I am certain that unless the mob faction can succeed in deceiving the people without this county by fraud, and forgery of militia orders, and proclamations purporting to emanate from the executive and commander-in-chief of the Illinois militia, that they cannot get force sufficient to recommence their depredations. Let me entreat the people abroad not to act in haste.

There are many complaints made to me by Mormons and anti-Mormons, about stealing cattle, c. I have used every exertion in the power of man to ferrit out the truth concerning these complaints and reports. Many Mormons who were burnt out in the southwest part of this county, were employed for the last ten or twelve days in removing their household furniture, other moveables, and grain to Nauvoo city. After they had finished hauling their goods, proceeded to gather and drive their cattle from the infested district to Nauvoo, but could not find them. There are many who are willing to make affidavit that their cattle were left in the hands of the mob when they were exterminated, and when they went in search of their cattle afterwards could not find them. More than 200 head of cattle are missing in this way according to complaints made to me. There are also complaints by several Mormons that horses have been stolen from them. There are also many articles of minor importance reported to me as having been stolen from the Mormons. Some 50 head of cattle are reported to have been stolen from the settlement about five miles east of Warsaw, and about the same number near Carthage. The cattle which are said to have been stolen from near Carthage and Warsaw, belong mostly to B. F. Marsh, Esq., and the Messrs. Chandlers, near Warsaw, and to Messrs. Mullen and Fails, and Mr. Alex. Barnes, near Carthage. There were also stolen from Ebenezer Rand, Esq., of Carthage, two bee gums; a Mrs. Hawley reports some clothing missing.

Every one of those persons who report property stolen, who are not Mormons, are by no means regarded as enemies by them; but on the other hand, they have all denounced this mobbing and burning as a most infamous act. It is nothing more than reasonable to suppose that men who will burn houses, barns, grain and other property, and who will drive and exterminate United States postmasters and other officers, from their offices and homes with force of arms, under the penalty of death, are none too good to steal cattle, horses, and sheep too. Men who are guilty of such damnable outrages are hardened against all the tender feelings of human beings; the savages would shrink with horror it such base and cowardly acts as are characteristic of this mob faction. Again, why is it that the stealing of cattle and horses is confined nearly in every instance to those who are opposed to the mobocrats? If the Mormons are guilty of these depredations complained of, is it not a remarkable circumstance that not a single hoof of all the cattle and horses that are alleged to have been stolen, were taken from any of those engaged in the mobbing; in every case, so far as I can learn, they were taken from persons opposed to this wicked proceeding of the mob party.

That infamous black-hearted and murderous scoundrel Thomas C. Sharp, editor of that treasonable paper called the Warsaw Signal, himself guilty of all the crimes known to our laws, is at the head of this band of mobbers and exterminators. Are the people in Hancock county and the surrounding country prepared that such a debased heaven-daring villain as Sharp, shall give tone to public opinion. I ask, will an honest and honourable community for a moment seriously entertain any thing that may emanate from such a fountain of corruption? For the honour and perpetuity of our glorious republican institutions, it is to be hoped not. Sharp openly and boldly calls upon the citizens of this and the adjoining counties and other places, to come into Hancock to overthrow the law. Fellow citizens, will you take the advice of such a scape-gallows as Sharp, the author of our difficulties and troubles; a murderer, and the apologist of murderers, house-burners, c.

Sharp's rule of moral principle is exemplified as follows by his own writings:—If men in the custody of the law, and under promise of protection, be murdered in cold blood, Sharp is found the apologist of the murderers, and would take a hand himself. If men pursue one another on our highways with muskets and swords, at the speed of horses, for miles, with the intention of killing or arresting, without process, an officer of the county, against whom no charge is or was alleged, and one of the villains should be killed, murder is the cry of this Sharp; or if a gang of villains, burning and continue to burn for six days, the dwellings, barns and stacks of grain and hay—expelling sick women and children from their sick beds, and exposing them to the inclemency of the weather, and die in consequence of such cruel and fiendish treatment; and after having been warned, time and again by the proper officer, of what they might expect in case they should not desist; and when caught in the act of burning houses, flee and refuse to be taken, are fired upon—a few killed, Sharp's cry of murder, murder is again raised at the top of his voice. What a poor scamp—for he certainly does not know how contemptible he is in the eyes of all honourable men. He has no associates except those who are particeps criminis with him.

Sharp in his last Signal has made comments upon, and attempts to prove some statements false, which I made in proclamations numbered two and three. How does he get his information as to the killing of Worrell to be untrue? His informants can be no other than those guilty with Worrell in pursuing me for my life on the highway, and who are ready to say and swear any thing that may clear them from punishment which they so richly deserve; and as to firing upon the mob, he relies upon men for testimony, guilty of crimes which will secure them a safe place in our state penitentiary for years, and others are candidates like himself, for the gallows. Such is the character of Sharp's informants, upon those subjects which he speaks of in his Signal; none others of the mob were in sight or hearing at the time the occurrence took place.

Fellow-citizens, a proclamation was handed to me this moment, purporting to be from Governor Ford of our state; it certainly is a forgery or fraud. You will observe that it is simply dated, "Executive Department, Springfield, Sept. 21st, 1845." It does not state whether it comes from Springfield, Ohio, Kentucky, or any other state. The proclamation also states that Colonels Baker and Merriman, had volunteered to command, c. And also the proclamation is signed Thomas Ford, governor and commander-in-chief. In order to make such a document official, it should be signed as Governor of Illinois, and commander-in-chief of the Illinois militia. I pronounce it a base fraud, I hope no armed men will come into Hancock county, under such circumstances. I shall regard them in the character of a mob, and shall treat them accordingly. I am personally acquainted with Major Baker and Captain Merriman, and I am warranted in saying that they would, under no circumstances, aid or countenance a mob. I will again say, that from the general phraseology of the proclamation, I pronounce it a fraud upon the people. Let no man turn out under it, as it is evidently one of Sharp's latest acts of rascality and one of the last dying efforts to raise a mob.

I will herewith submit a few affidavits, they speak for themselves. [^46] One of these affidavits fully shows whether Worrell and his blood hounds knew me or not when they pursued me on the prairie, it also speaks to the point as to the course the anti-Mormon mob intended to pursue; it explains something about taking horses, and (as Tom Sharp would have it) about the lesser crimes of killing and slaying and burning. I have only to say that as to the character of John Harper, Esq., as a good citizen and honest man, he is honourable and independent; he has no superior in our section of country, and as to Captain Rose, he is respected by all; his standing and character is proof against all base men. As to the other gentleman, I am not acquainted with him.

Men engaged in burning houses for six long days, have fled this county to avoid an arrest; they are now using their utmost endeavours to raise help in the neighbouring counties, and in the state of Missouri, to re-commence burning and mobbing.

Will honest men be influenced by such characters? We will see. Every thing has remained quiet for nine successive days, and unless the mob will again re-assemble in Hancock county, peace will continue.

I would say to the citizens of Augusta in this county, that as I have been informed by good authority, that some of you had fled the county by crossing into the county of Schuyler, and there made an encampment for the gathering of the mob; if such is the fact, let me remonstrate against such an act, and entreat you to come to your homes, and aid in the maintainance of peace.

Some of the mobbers said that I refused to submit to law, there being a writ out against me for killing Worrell, sworn out by one of the parties in company with Worrell when they pursued me. This is false; I twice offered to surrender myself into the hands of the constable, who said that he did not care any thing about it, that he considered it all a mistake in the boys in taking out the writ. I am at all times ready to be tried by the laws of my country.

J. B. BACKENSTOS, Sheriff, Hancock County.

Footnotes

Carthage, Sept. 25th, eleven o'clock a. m., 1845. [^47]

---
Notas:
[^1] Mr. Browning afterwards held the position of United States senator from Illinois. He was appointed to that position in 1861 to fill the unexpired term of Stephen A. Douglas. He was instrumental with his friend, Abraham Lincoln, in organizing the Republican party in Illinois. He entered President Andrew Johnson's cabinet in March, 1868, as secretary of the interior; and also for a time was designated by the president to perform the duties of attorney general, in addition to those of secretary of the interior. (History of Illinois, in History of Hancock County, Gregg, p. 164).
[^2] Gregg's Prophet of Palmyra, pp. 336-7.
[^3] Gregg's History of Hancock County, p. 342.
[^4] Nauvoo Neighbor, Oct. 29, 1845, where the communication in full will be found.
[^5] The governor of Illinois made a still franker confession than the above on the failure of civil government in Hancock county; and really the failure was the whole state's failure; for the governor admitted the state's inability to stop rioting and civil war in one of its counties. Following is the passage: "No one would be convicted of any crime in Hancock; and this put an end to the administration of the criminal law in that distracted county. Government was at an end there, and the whole community were delivered up to the dominion of a frightful anarchy. If the whole state had been in the same condition, then indeed would have been verified to the letter what was said by a wit, when he expressed an opinion that the people were neither capable of governing themselves nor of being governed by others. And truly there can be no government in a free country where the people do not voluntarily obey the laws." (Ford's History of Illinois, p. 369).
[^6] I know of nothing more plaintive in "Mormon" literature than a hymn composed by Wm. Clayton, celebrating the martyred dead of the church and expressing the assurance of a glorious resurrection for them. One verse is devoted to the dead at Nauvoo:
[^7] At the 6th of April, 1845, conference of the church, it was moved by President Brigham Young and carried by vote of the conference "that henceforth and forever, this city shall be called the 'City of Joseph.'"
[^8] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry of Sept. 25, 1845, p. 99.
[^9] Hancock County Mob, Conyers, 1846, p. 13. It should be remembered that the authority here cited, and which will frequently be quoted covering the brief period of which he treats, is not a "Mormon" authority, but Dr. Josiah B. Conyers, of Quincy—a non-"Mormon." Dr. Conyers could be prompted by no other motive than the love of truth and a hatred of mob violence in publishing his little work on the Hancock County Mob. It is so replete with trustworthy facts, reports of committees, and copies of official documents, as to make it altogether reliable a source of information upon the movements of the Hancock county mob.
[^10] Ibid, p. 14.
[^11] Nauvoo Neighbor, Oct. 1st, 1845.
[^12] "There was grain enough growing within ten miles of Nauvoo, raised by the Mormons, to feed the whole population for two years if they were to do nothing but gather it in and feast upon it:" (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1845, p. 134, quoted by Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 211, note 38). In his journal, John Taylor, one of the twelve, describes a feast held out on the open prairie east of Nauvoo in the "Big Field," a cooperative enterprise, that was very successful. "The Big Field," Elder Taylor explains, "is organized according to the laws of the state and covers six sections, or three thousand eight hundred and forty acres of land. We understood from the officers of the company, that about thirty thousand bushels of corn, and nearly the same amount of wheat had been raised the first season. Sixty thousand bushels of wheat and corn, without wanting an abundance of oats, barley, buckwheat, potatoes and other vegetables, do not indicate indolence, poverty and famine, but rather carries an idea that God helps them that help themselves." Then, as showing the temperate character of the people of Nauvoo, and the principles and hopes by which they were inspired, he continues:
[^13] The following committees were announced in a printed circular:
[^14] Nauvoo Neighbor of Oct. 1st, 1845; see also History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry of Oct. 1, 1845, p. 134-5.
[^15] The communication of Hardin et al is published in extenso in the Nauvoo Neighbor of Oct. 29th, 1845. The last impression of that periodical, by the way. Its editorial utterance on discontinuing the publication opened as follows: "As we are making all the preparation in our power to leave the United States next spring, because we are compelled by mobocracy, on account of the weakness of the law and the stupidity or hypocrisy of its executors, to quit the 'asylum of the oppressed,' we thought it advisable to discontinue the Neighbor at this number."
[^16] Nauvoo Neighbor, Oct. 29, 1845, where the communication is published in full.
[^17] See chapter lxvii and note 7.
[^18] Ford's Message to the Illinois Legislature is published in Nauvoo Neighbor, Jan. 1st, 1845. Further describing this system of agitation the governor says: "A system of excitement and agitation was artfully planned and executed with tact. It was planned and executed very much upon the principle adopted by the Jacobins in revolutionary France. It consisted in spreading reports and rumors of the most fearful character. As examples: On the morning before my arrival at Carthage, I was awakened at an early hour by the frightful report which was asserted with confidence and apparent consternation that the Mormons had already commenced the work of burning, destruction, and murder, and that every man was instantly wanted at Carthage for the protection of the country. We lost no time in starting; but when we arrived at Carthage we could hear no more concerning this story." (Ford's Message to the Legislature, 1845). The governor also gives other instances of misrepresentations.
[^19] This is the number as usually stated, Gregg says: "For a week the burning continued until the whole of Morley-Town was in ashes, with many other residences in the Bear Creek region and that of Green Plains. In all it is stated that as many as 100 or 125 houses were burned and their occupants driven off." (History of Hancock County, p. 340). Ford puts the number at 175, "houses and hovels" that were burnt, "the inmates having to flee for their lives" (History of Illinois, p. 407). "Hovels,"—hence of little value. "As much as to say," remarks Dr. Conyers, commenting on a similar statement—"they were poor people, therefore of little consequence. But which was truly the greater shame!" (History of the Hancock County Mob, p. 77).
[^20] Here might be asked the same questions that were propounded to the "Quincy Meeting" by Dr. Conyers when that meeting adopted a similar resolution: "An army to be raised! And by whose orders—by what law—and for what purpose? We answer without orders, without law, and to drive free citizens, men, women, and children, from their homes and their country, as the sequel will clearly show." (History of the Hancock County Mob, p. 14).
[^21] The resolution embodying this statement received special sanction of Mr. Gregg (who was in attendance at the convention) both in his Prophet of Palmyra (pp. 337-8), and also in his History of Hancock County, where he says that this particular resolution "is as much as the most ardent anti-Mormon could ask (Sicl), and should forever shut the months of those Mormon apologists, who have regarded them as a persecuted people, only needing to be let alone." Of coursel for have not their persecutors told them they were not persecuted? Considered from such premises there never has been such a thing in this world as persecution. No one has ever yet admitted he persecuted anybody. Every persecution named in history has either been denied or justified by the persecutors, and hence not persecution.
[^22] On this action Dr. Conyers comments as follows: "Instead of appealing to the legal tribunals of the country, and lending their influence to aid the court in enforcing the law against all offenders whomsoever, here are learned members of the bar preparing resolutions, calling upon judicial court to step aside, and give full sway to the lawless, to be adopted by acclamation by hundreds of men, many of whom were just out of a mob of house-burners, the smoke of which had not yet passed out of view" (Hancock County Mob, p. 22). These same incendiaries demanding, it might be added, through one of the resolutions passed by the convention (No. 4), "as an indispensable condition to the pacification of the county that the old citizens of the county be permitted to return to their homes, unmolested by the present sheriff, and the Mormons, for anything alleged against them;" and this under the threat of "renewal of the late disorders"—mob-violence and houseburning!
[^23] The fact of the destruction of other property than the burning of houses being involved in assaults upon the saints in Hancock county is proven from the Proclamation of Sheriff Backenstos, No. v. See Note 6 in preceding chapter.
[^24] History of Illinois, Ford, pp. 411-412.
[^25] See Gregg's History of Hancock County, p. 339.
[^26] Deming was never brought to trial. "He was stricken with congestive fever no doubt brought on or aggravated by excitement, and he died on the tenth of September and was buried at Quincy." (History of Hancock County, p. 339).
[^27] Taylor's Journal, Ms., Sept. 13th, 1845, p. 123.
[^28] Proclamation II, published in Nauvoo Neighbor of 17th of September.
[^29] Quoted by the Nauvoo Neighbor, Oct. 1st, 1845.
[^30] The Neighbor, Sept. 24, 1845.
[^31] See History of Hancock County, p. 340.
[^32] Ibid, pp. 340-341.
[^33] They are published in the Nauvoo Neighbor in the impressions of that paper the 10th, 17th and 24th of September, respectively, and the 1st of October. They constitute important historical documents for the period they cover. They are also published in Millennial Star, vol. vi, No. 12; and because of their unique historical value are reproduced in the Notes at the end of this chapter.
[^34] History of Hancock County, p. 341.
[^35] See Historical Record, Jenson, pp. 814-5; also Cannon's History of the Church, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xvii, p. 68.
[^36] See History of Hancock County, Gregg, pp. 341-2.
[^37] History of Hancock County, p. 336.
[^38] This doubtless had reference to the use of the habeas corpus powers of the city of Nauvoo, by invoking those powers in cases other than those arising under city ordinances; and also to the assumed "right" of a prisoner personally to determine, if not what justice he will consent to appear before, at least determine that he will not appear before the one issuing the writ, because by doing so his life would be put in jeopardy.
[^39] Nauvoo Neighbor, Jan. 29, 1843.
[^40] This passage in Mr. Babbitt's remarks is preceded by the following characterization of Mr. Logan's speech: "He [Logan] assails their [the 'Mormons'] church, he abused their Prophet, he falsified their doctrines, charged them with every crime, and endeavored to blacken with infamy and disgrace the character of innocent persons, on account of their religion. Notwithstanding his loud protestation against the spirit of prejudice and intolerance, they were most manifest in his speech."
[^41] Nauvoo Neighbor, March 5th, 1845.
[^42] The murder of the Smith brothers.
[^43] Spoken in open session of the Illinois legislature and printed in the Nauvoo Neighbor, March 12, 1845.
[^44] Mr. Ross here refers to the destruction of the Rev. Elijah P. Lovejoy's presses at Alton in 1837; and, by the way, there were three presses destroyed, by the mob throwing them into the Mississippi (See Ford's History of Illinois, chapter viii). As a side light upon the spirit of the people of Illinois in those days with reference to mob proceedings, the statement of Governor Ford in regard to the settlement of this Lovejoy affair is interesting. He says: "After the violence of feeling somewhat subsided, both parties were indicted for their crimes arising out of these transactions [the destruction of the presses, and the killing of Mr. Lovejoy, and one of the opposite party]; and were all acquitted; making it a matter of record that in fact the abolitionists had not provoked an assault; that there had been no mob; and that no one had been killed or wounded." (!) (Ford's History of Illinois, p. 245).
[^45] Nauvoo Neighbor, Feb. 19, 1845. These affidavits give accounts of house, barn and stack burnings, and other acts of mob violence referred to by the sheriff in his proclamation. They were signed separately by John Harper, E. B. Rose, and Jas. Gellows. (Nauvoo Neighbor, Oct. 1st, 1845).
[^46] These proclamations were published as they were issued in the Nauvoo Neighbor for September, 1845; the first four of them are reproduced in the Neighbor of Sept. 21st, 21st, and the fifth in the issue following, Oct. 1st, 1845. The whole series are reproduced in Millennial Star, vol. vi, no. 12, Dec. 1st, 1845.
[^47] 47. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xciii.
