B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LXVIII

THE AGREEMENT OF THE CHURCH AUTHORITIES TO LEAVE ILLINOIS—PREPARATIONS FOR DEPARTURE

IN the midst of the tumultuous scenes described in the preceding chapter, the citizens of Quincy convened on the twenty-second of September, 1845. It was generally known that the Prophet Joseph had contemplated going west with the main body of the church, and it was one of the objects of this meeting to appoint a committee to confer with the church authorities and learn what their present intentions were as to leaving the state. It was expressed as the opinion of the meeting that the only basis upon which the Latter-day Saint troubles could be settled would be the removal of the saints from Illinois. "It is a settled thing," said Mr. Bartlett, editor of the Quincy Whig, in his issue following the meeting of the above date—

"It is a settled thing that the public sentiment of the state is against the Mormons, and it will be in vain for them to contend against it; and to prevent bloodshed, and the sacrifice of many lives on both sides, it is their duty to obey the public will, and leave the state as speedily as possible. That they will do this we have a confident hope—and that too, before the last extreme is resorted to—that of force."

THE VOICE OF ILLINOIS—"THE SAINTS MUST GO"

We are sorry to say that many of the leading men of Quincy, principally prominent members of the bar, who before had been kindly disposed towards the citizens of Nauvoo, now turned against them, and became the advocates of their expulsion from the state, and indirectly though unintentionally, perhaps, lent the weight of their influence to the support and spread of mob law. Among such men we are sorry to mention Stephen A. Douglas, Major W. B. Warren, and O. H. Browning. The latter had defended the Prophet Joseph on more than one occasion when unjustly charged with crime before the courts of the country. Eloquently reciting the wrongs of the saints when they were expelled from Missouri, he said their suffering would have enlisted the sympathy of adamantine hearts; and now to see him leagued with those bent upon bringing about a repetition of those sorrows and hardships, only on a much larger scale, is an event to be truly deplored. [^1]

On the first and second of October a great anti-"Mormon" convention met in Carthage. Nine counties were represented, Hancock county excepted and excluded. Fifty-eight delegates reported to the convention; representing, it is said, fifty or sixty thousand people in the nine counties. [^2] Isaac N. Morris, of Adams county, was chosen chairman, three more from other counties were chosen secretaries and three from each county represented constituted the committee on resolutions. [^3] The purpose of the convention was to take into consideration the affairs of Hancock county, especially with reference to the effect those affairs were having upon the peace of the surrounding counties and the peace of the state. The series of resolutions reported and adopted reviewed the situation from the anti-"Mormon" standpoint, and arrived substantially at the same conclusions as the before mentioned convention at Quincy, expressed in the following resolution:

"Resolved, That it is the settled and deliberate conviction of this convention that it is now too late to attempt the settlement of the difficulties in Hancock county upon any other basis than that of the removal of the Mormons from the state; and we therefore accept and respectfully recommend to the people of the surrounding counties to accept the proposition made by the Mormons to remove from the state next spring, and to wait with patience the time appointed for removal."

Governor Ford through Messrs. Hardin, Warren, Douglas, and McDougal conveyed a message to the church leaders in which he advised them to leave the state. The body of the communication follows:

GOVERNOR FORD'S ADVICE TO THE CHURCH

"I wish you to say to the Mormons for me, that I regret very much, that so much excitement and hatred against them should exist in the public mind. Nevertheless, it is due to truth to say that the public mind everywhere is so decidedly hostile to them that public opinion is not inclined to do them common justice. Every bad report against them is greedily swallowed, whilst nothing can be heard in their favor; under these circumstances, I fear that they will never be able to live in peace with their neighbors of Hancock and the surrounding counties. There is no legal power in the state to compel them to leave, and no such power will be exercised during my administration.

The spirit of the people, however, is up and the signs are very evident that an attempt will be made by the surrounding counties to drive them out. Such an attempt may fail once or even twice, but if undertaken in earnest and persevered in, it must finally succeed. Those who may think it wrong to drive out the Mormons cannot be made to fight in their defense, and indeed the people of the state will never tolerate the expense of frequent military expeditions to defend them. The Mormons may think themselves strong enough to defend themselves; but do they want to live in a state of continued war? They may overcome their enemies; but those enemies will rally again, and murders will be committed and mischief done from this time out, as each party may find itself able.

I desire that you will impress these facts upon the Mormons, and that you will counsel and promote peaceable means of accommodation whereby the Mormons may be induced to leave the state. It is acknowledged by me that the state has no power to insist upon their removal, that it is a great hardship on them to remove from their comfortable homes and the property which they have accumulated by years of toil; but is it not better that they should do so voluntarily than to live in a state of continual war?" [^4]

CONFESSED IMPOTENCY OF ILLINOIS' GOVERNMENT

This presentation of the case could well be called Governor Ford's Confession of the Failure of Civil Government in the State of Illinois. Induce the "Mormons" "to leave the state," for while it is confessed that "there is no legal power in the state to compel them to leave," "those who may think it wrong to drive out the Mormons cannot be made to fight in their defense;" the "Mormons" may think themselves strong enough to defend themselves; but had they not better leave "than to live in a state of perpetual war?" [^5] But where may one look for the dignity, and power of the sovereign state of Illinois in the presence of this pusillanimous attitude of her executive? He begs a deeply injured people to leave the state, notwithstanding "it is a great hardship on them," to use the governor's own words above, "to remove from their comfortable homes and the property which they have accumulated by years of toil." To this he might have added: And sacrifice their temple within which they had just begun to worship God, and administer that ritual which would have stood to them as the daily sacrifice did to ancient Israel, making sacred the place of God's sanctuary; also the graves of their martyred Prophet and Patriarch, and many other martyrs' graves, for here were interred hundreds of the victims of Missouri's relentless persecution; [^6] also the sacrifice of all those hopes of the future greatness and glory of the "City of Joseph." [^7] These things are more dear to the hearts of a sincere people than the merely material sacrifices involved, and should not have been left out of the governor's catalogue of things to be surrendered to the inability of a sovereign state to maintain government.

Respecting those several demands made upon them by the Quincy committee, Messrs. Hardin, Douglas et al, and the governor himself, the twelve, as the responsible church leaders, took the following course:

Answering the Quincy committee's communication of the 22nd of September, they said, under date of 24th, the same month:

PROPOSITION OF THE CHURCH LEADERS IN RESPECT OF REMOVAL

"Whereas, a council of the authorities of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, at Nauvoo, have this day received a communication from Henry Asbury, P. Robbins, Albert J. Pearson, P. A. Goodwin, J. N. Ralston, M. Rogers, and E. Conyers, Messrs. Committee of the citizens of Quincy, requesting us to 'communicate in writing our disposition and intention at this time, particularly with regard to removing to some place where the peculiar organization of our church will not be likely to engender so much strife and contention as so unhappily exists at this time in Hancock and some of the adjoining counties;'

And, whereas, said Committee have reported to us the doings of a public meeting of the citizens of Quincy, on 22nd inst., by which it appears there are some feelings in that place concerning us as a people, and in relation to which sundry resolutions were passed, purporting to be for the purpose of maintaining or restoring peace to the country;

And, whereas, it is our desire, and ever has been, to live in peace with all men, so far as we can, without sacrificing the right of worshipping God according to the dictates of our own consciences, which privilege is guaranteed to us by the Constitution of these United States;

And, whereas, we have, time and again, and again, been driven from our peaceful homes, and our women and children been obliged to exist on the prairies, in the forests, on the roads, and in tents, in the dead of winter, suffering all manner of hardships, even to death itself, as the people of Quincy well know; the remembrance of whose hospitality in former days still causes our hearts to burn with joy, and raise the prayer to heaven for blessings on their heads;

And, whereas, it is now so late in the season that it is impossible for us, as a people, to remove this fall, without causing a repetition of like sufferings;

And, whereas, it has been represented to us from other sources, than those named, and even in some communications from the executive of this state, that many of the citizens of the state were unfriendly to our views and principles;

And, whereas, many scores of our homes in this county have been burned to ashes, without any justifiable cause or provocation, and we have made no resistance, till compelled by the authorities of the county to do so, and that authority not connected with our church;

And, whereas, said resistance to mobocracy, from the legally constituted authorities, appears to be misunderstood by some, and misconstrued by others, so as to produce an undue excitement in the public mind;

And, whereas, we desire peace above all other earthly blessings—

Therefore, we would say to the committee above mentioned and to the governor, and all the authorities and people of Illinois, and the surrounding states and territories; that we propose to leave this county next spring, for some point so remote, that there will not need to be a difficulty with the people and ourselves, provided certain propositions necessary for the accomplishment of our removal, shall be observed, as follows, to wit:

That the citizens of this, and the surrounding counties, and all men, will use their influence and exertions, to help us to sell or rent our properties, so as to get means enough that we can help the widow, the fatherless and destitute to remove with us;

That all men will let us alone with their vexatious law suits, so that we may have the time, for we have broken no law; and help us to cash, dry goods, groceries, good oxen, milch cows, beef cattle, sheep, wagons, mules, harnesses, horses, c., in exchange for our property, at a fair price, and deeds given at payment, that we may have the means to accomplish a removal, without the suffering of the destitute, to an extent beyond the endurance of human nature;

That all exchanges of property be conducted by a committee or committees of both parties, so that all business may be transacted honorably and speedily;

That we will use all lawful means, in connection with others to preserve the public peace while we tarry, and shall expect decidedly that we be no more molested with house-burning, or any other depredations, to waste our property and time and hinder our business;

That is a mistaken idea that we 'have proposed to remove in six months;' for that would be so early in the spring, that grass might not grow nor water run, both of which would be necessary for our removal, but we propose to use our influence, to have no more seed time nor harvest among our people in this county, after gathering our present crops. And that all communications to us be made in writing.

By order of the Council.

[Signed] "BRIGHAM YOUNG, Prest.

Willard Richards, Clerk." [^8]

REACTION OF THE QUINCY COMMITTEE

On receipt of this communication the Quincy committee reported to a mass meeting of the citizens of that city the propositions of the "Mormon authorities," which were regarded as satisfactory in part, but it was thought they were not as full or decisive as was necessary. The mass meeting to which they reported, however, accepted the propositions and decided to recommend the people in the surrounding counties to do the same. "But," said one of the resolutions:

"We accept it [the proposition of the church authorities] as an unconditional proposition to remove. We do not intend to bring ourselves under any obligation to purchase their property or furnish purchasers for the same, but we will in no way hinder or obstruct them in their efforts to sell; and will expect them to dispose of their property, and remove at the time appointed." [^9]

Commenting upon this resolution Dr. Conyers in his Hancock County Mob, says with just indignation and sarcasm:

"The first one [i. e. the first resolution] in our opinion, is unique. They accepted and recommended to the people of the surrounding counties to accept an unconditional proposition to remove. But understand, Mr. Mormon, though we accept it and recommend the surrounding counties to do so, likewise, (reprobate you, unconditionally) we do not intend to bring ourselves under any obligation to purchase your property, or to furnish purchasers; but we will be very kind and obliging, and will in no way, hinder or obstruct you in your efforts to sell, provided, nevertheless, this shall not be so construed as to prevent us from running off the purchaser. But we expect this small favor of you, viz., that you must dispose of your property and leave at the appointed time." [^10]

On the first of October, Messrs. Hardin, Warren, Douglas and McDougal had a consultation with the twelve and other leading brethren of the church in respect of the saints moving to the west, and on the same day asked that the intention of the brethren to move be stated in writing in order that they might present it to the governor and people of the state. Following is the note addressed to the brethren upon the subject:

"Nauvoo, Oct. 1st, 1845.

To the First President and Council of the Church at Nauvoo:—

Having had a free and full conversation with you this day in reference to your proposed removal from this [Hancock] county, together with the members of your church, we have to request you to submit the facts and intentions stated to us in said conversation to writing, in order that we may lay them before the governor and people of the state. We hope that by so doing it will have a tendency to allay the excitement at present existing in the public mind.

We have the honor to subscribe ourselves,

Respectively yours, c.,

John J. Hardin,

W. B. Warren,

S. A. Douglass,

J. A. McDougall." [^11]

In answer the twelve through President Brigham Young presented to the above gentlemen a copy of their answer to the Quincy Committee of the 24th of September; and then extended their communication as follows:

RESPONSE OF THE TWELVE

"In addition to this we would say that we had commenced making arrangements to remove from this county previous to the recent disturbances;

That we now have four companies organized of one hundred families each; and six companies more now organizing of the same number each; preparatory to a removal;

That one thousand families, including the twelve, the high council, the trustees and general authorities of the church, are fully determined to remove in the spring, independent of the contingency of selling our property; and that this company will comprise from five to six thousand souls;

That the church, as a body, desire to remove with us, and will, if sales can be effected so as to receive the necessary means.

That the organization of the church we represent is such that there never can exist but one head or presidency, at any one time, and all good members wish to be with the organization, and all are determined to remove to some distant point where we shall neither infringe or be infringed upon, so soon as time and means will permit.

That we have some hundreds of farms, and some 2,000 or more houses for sale in this city and county, [^12] and we request all good citizens to assist in the disposal of our property.

That we do not expect to find purchasers for our temple and other public buildings, but we are willing to rent them to a respectable community who may inhabit the city;

That we wish it distinctly understood that although we may not find purchasers for our property, we will not sacrifice or give it away, or suffer it illegally to be wrested from us;

That we do not intend to sow any wheat this fall, and should we sell, we shall not put in any more crops of any description;

That as soon as practicable we will appoint committees for this city [Nauvoo], La Harpe, Macedonia, Bear Creek, and all necessary places to give information to purchasers. [^13]

That if all these testimonies are not sufficient to satisfy any people that we are in earnest, we will soon give them a sign that cannot be mistaken; we will leave them!

In behalf of the council,

Respectively yours, c.,

BRIGHAM YOUNG, President.

Willard Richards, Clerk." [^14]

QUINCY COMMITTEE'S SOULLESS ADDRESS TO THE SAINTS

These declarations were reported to the Carthage convention by Messrs. Hardin, Douglas et al, and upon the reception of them by the Carthage convention and the public generally, these gentlemen wrote the church leaders as follows:

"Since we made public the statement made by you to us, there seems to be a general acquiescence in it by the citizens of other counties and of this [Hancock], so far as to agree to return and withhold all further violence, and that you be permitted to depart in peace next spring.

We are convinced that affairs have reached such a crisis that it has become impossible for your church to remain in peace in this county.

After what has been written and said by yourselves, it will be confidently expected by us and the whole community, that you will remove from the state, with your whole church, in the manner you have agreed in your statement to us.

Should you not do so we are satisfied, however, much we may deprecate violence and bloodshed, that violent measures will be resorted to, to compel your removal; which will result in most disastrous consequences to yourselves and your opponents, and that the end will be your expulsion from the state. * * *

By carrying out in good faith your proposition to remove, as submitted to us, we think you should be, and will be permitted to depart peaceably next spring for your destination west of the Rocky Mountains. * * *

With many wishes that you may find that peace and prosperity in the land of your destination, which you desire, we have the honor to subscribe ourselves," etc. [^15]

SAME COMMITTEE'S ADDRESS TO THE ANTI-"MORMONS"

Messrs. Hardin, Douglas et al also addressed a communication to the "anti-Mormon citizens of Hancock county," in which they state the intentions and pledges of the Latter-day Saint leaders to leave Illinois in the spring for the west, and added:

"These measures, we think, ought to satisfy you. All that some of you might demand cannot be granted consistently with the rights of others, you should be satisfied with attaining that which is practicable and probable. * * *

It cannot be denied that the burning of the houses of Mormons in your county, by which a large number of women and children have been rendered homeless and houseless in the beginning of winter, was an act criminal in itself and disgraceful to its perpetrators. And it should also be known, that it has led many persons to believe, that, even if the Mormons are as bad as they are represented, they are no worse than those who have thus burned their houses.

Whether your cause is just or unjust, the acts of these incendiaries have thus lost for you something of the sympathy and good will of your fellow citizens; and a resort to, or persistence in such a course under existing circumstances will make you forfeit all the respect and sympathy of the community." [^16]

REVIEW OF THE CARTHAGE CONVENTION'S ACTION

The Carthage convention of October 1st and 2nd, representing the citizens of nine counties adjacent to Hancock county adopted a preamble and a series of resolutions which reflected all the prejudice, bitterness, and untruthfulness of the anti-"Mormons" of Hancock county. The preamble took for granted that the alleged "depredations of the Mormons upon the persons and property of the other citizens of Hancock county and the surrounding counties," were true; and this in face of the fact that after a careful investigation of the matter the governor of the state in his special message to the legislature, only in the preceding December, declared that these reported "Mormon depredations" were greatly exaggerated; that there was not a greater proportion of thieves in the "Mormon" communities than in other communities; that if Nauvoo were compared with St. Louis, or any western city, "the proportion would not be so great;" [^17] that many of the charges against the saints were unfounded, of which he gives several examples, some of which have already been quoted in these pages. He refers to disappointed aspirants to political offices as among those who were active "in blowing up the fury of the people, in hopes that a popular movement might be set on foot which would result in the expulsion or extermination of the Mormon voters." "For this purpose," he continues, "public meetings had been called; inflammatory speeches had been made; exaggerated and unfounded reports had been extensively circulated; committees had been appointed and rode night and day to spread the reports and solicit aid of the neighboring counties." [^18]

As this preamble to the resolution adopted by the Carthage convention assumed that the Latter-day Saints were guilty of all that their enemies alleged against them, so did it give a clear bill of acquittal to the "old citizens" of Hancock county. From "long acquaintance with the old citizens of Hancock county," said convention, claimed "an intimate knowledge of their honor, integrity, and strict observance of the laws of their country!" And this in face of the fact of that lawless agitation, and desperate conspiracy, which resulted in the cold-blooded murder of Joseph and Hyrum Smith at Carthage prison while under the especially pledged faith of the state of Illinois! A murder which involved a very large number of the old settlers of Hancock county, of the officers of the state and the county, both in the direct fact of the killing, and as accessories either before or after the fact of the murder; and for which crime there had been no vindication of the law by punishment of the guilty.

The bill of acquittal for responsibility of wrong doing given to the "old citizens of Hancock county," in the matter of the "Mormon" troubles, and this affirmation of their "honor, integrity, and strict observance of the laws of their country," was also made in the face of the fact that without provocation, and without even pretended justification, the anti-"Mormons" among these "old citizens," commencing within three weeks and continuing up to within one week of the convening of that Carthage convention, pounced upon the "Mormon" settlements in the south part of Hancock county, set fire to Buel's flouring mill and carding machine; and then commenced to burn the houses of the people, their stacks of hay and grain together with their stables and everything that the incendiary could destroy, continuing the work until about one hundred and twenty-five houses were thus destroyed. [^19] In this diabolical work helpless women and children, as well as the men, were rendered homeless at the beginning of winter; and turned out upon the open prairie without food or shelter—and for what?

Even Messrs. Hardin, and Douglas et al, in their address to the "anti-Mormon citizens of Hancock county," as we have seen, denounced this house burning as "an act criminal in itself, and disgraceful to its perpetrators," and had led many persons to believe that if the "Mormons" were as bad as they were represented, "they were no worse than those who burned their houses." Yet this Carthage convention could vouch for "the honor, integrity, and strict observance of the laws of their country, of the old citizens of Hancock county!"

If all the "old citizens of Hancock county" were not directly guilty of these crimes, and all did not approve of what was done, none of them had the virtue to stand up in vindication of the law, and the honor of their state.

In the body of the Carthage resolutions it was declared that it was too late to settle the difficulties in Hancock county upon any other basis than that of the removal of the "Mormons" from the state; that the convention would seek to prevent any thing that might operate against the removal of the "Mormons," but they would expect equal good faith on their part in the matter of moving; if the "Mormons" did not comply with "their own proposition, the consequences must abide with themselves;" that the convention would recommend to the people it represented "immediately to adopt a military organization to act in relation to Hancock county affairs, as future exigencies may require;" a subsequent resolution, the 8th, appointed a committee to report on an efficient plan for organizing volunteer companies in compliance with the resolutions of the convention; [^20] that as an indispensable condition to the pacification of the county the "old citizens"—[this had reference to those recently engaged in house-burning]—"be permitted to return to their homes unmolested by the present sheriff [Backenstos] and the Mormons for anything alleged against them; and that any 'attempt to arrest or prosecute such citizens for pretended offenses,' will, inevitably, lead to the renewal of the late disorders;" that as the "Mormons" are under control of a few leaders, "and beyond the reach of law," the whole body should be held responsible for all lawless acts against persons or property of "our citizens;" that the convention "utterly repudiates the impudent assertion" that the "Mormons" are "persecuted for righteousness sake"—"do not believe them to be a persecuted people"—whatever grievances they suffered were the necessary consequences "of their illegal, wicked and dishonest acts;" [^21] that the convention recommend the stationing of a small military force in Hancock county until spring to prevent depredations on private property and preserve the peace; "that the Hon. N. H. Purple, judge of this judicial circuit be requested not to hold a court in Hancock county this fall;" as such court could not be holden without producing collision between the "Mormons" and anti-"Mormons" and renewing excitement and disturbances. [^22]

The remaining resolutions related to providing for the publication of the convention's proceedings, and for "an extensive military organization" throughout the nine counties represented.

It will be observed from the whole proceedings of this Carthage convention that those recently guilty of mob violence, house-burning and otherwise destroying and confiscating the property of the saints, [^23] were to be protected from prosecution before the courts; and those who might have the temerity to prosecute them and vindicate the law, were threatened with a renewal of that same lawless violence from which they had already suffered so much.

Governor Ford seems to have acted upon the suggestions of the Carthage convention. The pledges given by the church leaders to the Quincy committee, and renewed to the governor's committee, Messrs. Hardin, Douglas et al, to leave the state in the ensuing spring, was apparently deemed sufficient to pacify the county, and the troops which General Hardin brought with him, numbering four hundred, were withdrawn, except one hundred, principally from Adams county, which were left under command of Major Warren, to keep the peace and maintain order. According to Governor Ford, Warren's policy was not satisfactory to either side to the controversy. Warren "was ready to enforce arrests of criminals for new offenses on either side," says Ford, "and this pleased neither the "Mormons" nor the anti-"Mormons." Civil war was on the point of breaking out more than a dozen times during the winter. Both parties complained of Major Warren." [^24]

Footnotes

"And in Nauvoo, the city where

The temple cheered the brave,

Hundreds of faithful saints have found

A cold, yet peaceful grave;

And there they now are sleeping

Beneath the silent clay,

But soon they'll share the glories

Of a resurrection day.

The conference also took the following action: "President Brigham Young then arose * * * and said he wanted to know if the saints are satisfied that Joseph Smith lived and died as a prophet, seer, and revelator to this church, whereupon.

Elder Phelps moved that we accept the labors of Joseph Smith as a prophet, seer and revelator to the nineteenth century; and that we are satisfied that he lived according to his profession, and died a martyr to the truth.—Carried unanimously.

Elder Phelps moved that we accept the labors of Hyrum Smith, believing that he lived according to his profession, and died a martyr to the truth. Carried unanimously." (Times and Seasons, vol. vi, p. 869).

The following comment follows the conference minutes as setting forth conditions prevailing at the time the change of names occurred: "Never have we seen the time before when the people were more willing to receive and listen to counsel than now. The high council have only had one case in about seven weeks. Our magistrates have nothing to do. Every man is doing his best to cultivate the ground, and all are anxious to provide things honestly in the sight of all men—to honor our God, our country, and its laws. Whenever a dispute or difficulty arises, a word from the proper source puts all to rights, and no resort to law. May God ever save us from this snare of men, this drainer of the purse, and this fruitful source of contention and strife." (Times and Seasons, vol. vi, p. 871).

"This public demonstration of the bounty of providence, goes to show that the people of that section are willing to make others happy as well as themselves.

It is a fine thing for the bishops of the several wards to remember the poor; and we think this 'feast upon the prairies,' was a kind of token of times to come.

It is also worthy of remark that this band of brethren, under the broad canopy, spent the day most happily, without strong drink, or swearing or gambling; feasting as all honest people ought to, to be healthy, upon the simple luxuries that sustain life, with pure water, peace and union, praying and praising God who hath so liberally rewarded their labor and begun to make the prairies blossom as the rose." (Taylor's Journal Ms., entry for 5th Sept., 1845).

LIST OF COMMITTEES.

Appointed at the general conference, for the sale of lands in Hancock county. Nauvoo.—Winslow Farr, Edward Hunter, Rufus Beach, A. W. Babbitt, Joseph L. Heywood, John Benbow and Daniel Russell.

La Harpe.—Lyman Coray, John Clark and John L. Bartolph.

Macedonia.—Wm. G. Perkins, Isaac Clark and Andrew H. Perkins.

Camp Creek.—Nelson Higgins, Samuel Shepherd and Daniel Allen.

Knowlton's Settlement.—Sidney A. Knowlton, Eleazer Brown, and James Rawlins.

Highland Branch.—James Duncan, Wm. A. Duncan and John Loveless.

Montebello.—Eleazer Miller and Jesse Spurgin.

Yelrome.—Solomon Hancock and Horace Rawson.

In Iowa, every man is appointed to act as a committee of the whole for the sale of lands.

---
Notas:
[^1] Journal of John Taylor, above date of entry.
[^2] For above three entries see History of Brigham Young, Ms., on respective dates.
[^3] On this head the document said: "To crown the climax of these bloody deeds, the state has repealed all those chartered rights by which we might have defended ourselves against oppressors. If we defend ourselves hereafter against violence, whether it comes under the shadow of the law or otherwise—for we have reason to expect it both ways—we shall then be charged with treason, and suffer the penalty; and if we continue passive and non-resistant, we must certainly expect to perish, for our enemies have sworn it."
[^4] Journal of John Taylor, pp. 46-50.
[^5] History of Brigham Young, or Utah and Her Founders, Tullidge, 1877, pp. 129-133; and in Whitney's History of Utah, vol. i, pp. 241-2.
[^6] The original letter is on file at the Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City.
[^7] Linn charges that this manner of getting rid of "undesirables" was employed against those who came to inquire for stolen goods (Story of the Mormons, p. 261). There is no evidence that the action was particularly directed to such persons, certainly none that it was confined to such cases. The fact was that the city was helpless in the presence of such evils as were being forced upon it, and the "whistling and whittling brigade" was a device for protection against such persons as a police force, under normal conditions, would have controlled.
[^8] Journal of Discourses, vol. v, p. 78; also vol. ii, p. 317; also Historical Record, Jenson, p. 10.
[^9] Taylor's Journal, Ms., entry under April 13th, 1845. These declarations led Major Warren in the winter of 1846 to interview the brethren and upbraid then for what he called their "resistance to law."
[^10] Life of John Taylor, ch. xviii. The original of this speech is on loose leaves of Taylor's Journal for 1846, which is in the possession of the writer who is the Biographer of the late President John Taylor.
[^11] See closing paragraphs of Brigham Young's answer to Quincy Committee, also made part of answer to Messrs. Hardin, Douglas, et al, ante, this chapter; also Carthage Convention Resolutions, No. 4.
[^12] Nauvoo Neighbor, Oct. 29, 1845. Following the paragraph in the text is this notice, and it deals with events occurring after the "Mormon" agreement to leave in the spring, and after the preservation of peace had been committed to Major Warren and his troops:—"We understand some eight or ten buildings have been burned by the mob, in the south part of the county, but Major Warren said he would probably be there in a few days, with the governor's troops!"
[^13] Governor Ford makes reference to this threatened arrest of the twelve by military authority. (Ford's History of Illinois, p. 413).
[^14] Governor Ford is utterly unwarranted in this assertion by any evidence that may be referred to in the history of the Latter-day Saints in Illinois.
[^15] See circular of the high council in full, bearing date of 20th January, 1846, in Times and Seasons, vol. vi, pp. 1096-7.
[^16] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Sunday, 4th January, 1846, p. 6.
[^17] The quotations from the Sun and the Union will be found in the Times and Seasons, vol. vi, pp. 1051-1052.
[^18] The governor is mistaken as to the temple being converted into a workshop. The workshops of the temple, however, were used in making preparations for the move West.
[^19] Ford's History of Illinois, p. 412.
[^20] Well's Narrative, Ms., 37.
[^21] Richards' Reminiscences, Ms., Bancroft's Utah, pp. 216-217.
[^22] Times and Seasons, vol. vi, Nov. 1st, 1845, pp. 1013-1014, also Millennial Star, vol. vii, p. 23.
[^23] Nauvoo Neighbor, Oct. 29th, 1845.
[^24] In the Times and Seasons for 15th of November, 1845, p. 1031, it is reported that "at a meeting held in the 'Music Hall,' it was stated that 3,285 families were making ready with 1,508 wagons on hand, and 1,892 building."
