B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 2 ( 1930)

CHAPTER LXIX

THE CHURCH AUTHORITIES PLANNING THE WESTERN MOVEMENT

IT HAD for some time been evident to the leading church authorities that it would be impossible for the saints to remain in Nauvoo or in any part of Illinois. As early as August 28th, 1845, at a council meeting of the twelve in the temple, it was voted that an expedition be sent to California in the ensuing spring. A little later, viz, September 9th, at the council meeting of the twelve in the temple a resolution was adopted providing for the selection of fifteen hundred men to go to "Great Salt Lake Valley," to find a location for the saints. A committee was also appointed to gather information with reference to emigration. The twelve themselves while in seclusion in the temple on account of the activities of their enemies gave attention to the reading of books published on the subject of explorations of the west, and routes of travel therein, as witness the following Journal entries:

"Thursday, Aug. 28th, 1845. In council with the twelve, wherein we made arrangements, and voted for an expedition of a number of persons to go to California in the ensuing spring. After which we had our quorum meeting." [^1]

"Tuesday, Sept. 9th, 1845. * * * 2 p. m. General council meeting Resolved that a company of 1500 men be selected to go to Great Salt Lake Valley, and that a committee of five be appointed to gather information relative to emigration and report same to the council. * * *

Saturday, Dec. 20th, 1845. * * * I dictated the arrangements for the day (i. e. in the Nauvoo temple). Afterwards with a few of the twelve and others, heard F. D. Richards read Fremont's Journal giving an account of his travels to California."

"Sunday, Dec. 27th, 1845. * * * After prayers (in the temple) a general conversation ensued, in which the twelve and bishop [Whitney], J. M. Grant and several others took part. The visit of the marshal [U. S.] and the emigration to California were the prominent topics. Elder Parley P. Pratt read from Hasting's account of California." [^2]

APPEAL OF THE SAINTS TO THE GOVERNORS OF RESPECTIVE STATES

As early as March a document had been drafted by John Taylor, making an appeal to the governors of all the states of the American Union, excepting Missouri and Illinois, for protection, counsel, and asylum for the Church of the Latter-day Saints in this its hour of trial. After briefly reciting the injustice inflicted upon the church community in the states of Missouri and Illinois, the martyrdoms and the loss of property inflicted upon them, and their present helpless condition in consequence of the repeal of the charter of their chief city and the secret combinations forming against them for their destruction, [^3] the petition proceeded as follows:—

"With these facts before you, Sir, will you write to us without delay, as a father and friend, and advise us what to do? We are, many of us, citizens of your state, and all members of the same great confederacy. Our fathers, nay, some of us, have fought and bled for our country and we love her Constitution dearly.

In the name of Israel's God, and by the virtue of multiplied ties of country and kindred, we ask your friendly interposition in our favor. Will it be too much to ask you to convene a special session of your state legislature, and furnish us an asylum where we can enjoy our rights of conscience and religion unmolested? Or will you in a special message to that body when convened, recommend a remonstrance against such unhallowed acts of oppression and expatriation, as this people have continued to receive from the states of Missouri and Illinois? Or will you favor us by your personal influence, and by your official rank?

Or will you express your views concerning what is called the Great Western Measure, of colonizing the Latter-day Saints in Oregon, the Northwestern Territory, or some location, remote from the states, where the hand of oppression shall not crush every noble principle, and extinguish every patriotic feeling?

And now, Honored Sir, having reached out our imploring hands with deep solemnity, we would importune with you as a father, a friend, a patriot, and a statesman; by the Constitution of American liberty—by the blood of our fathers, who have fought for the independence of this Republic; by the blood of the martyrs which has been shed in our midst; by the wailings of the widows and orphans; by our murdered fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters, wives and children; by the dread of immediate destruction, from secret combinations now forming for our overthrow, and by every endearing tie that binds men to men, and renders life bearable, and that, too, for aught we know, for the last time, that you will lend your immediate aid to quell the violence of mobocracy and exert your influence to establish us as a people in our civil and religious rights, where we now are, or in some part of the United States, or at some place remote therefrom, where we may colonize in peace and safety as soon as circumstances will permit.

We sincerely hope that your future prompt measures towards us will be dictated by the best feelings that dwell in the bosom of humanity; and the blessings of a grateful people, and of many ready to perish, shall come upon you.

We are sir,

With great respect, your obd't serv'ts,

[Signed] "Brigham Young,

Willard Richards,

John Taylor,

George Miller,

W. W. Phelps,

Orson Spencer,

L. R. Foster, Committee.

In behalf of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, at Nauvoo, Illinois."

A postscript discloses the wretched conditions obtaining at Nauvoo in respect of the mail service, so far as the community of the Latter-day Saints of that city was concerned, and renders their appeal all the more pathetic:—

"P. S. As many of our communications postmarked at Nauvoo have failed of their destination, and the mails around us have been intercepted by our enemies, we shall send this to some distant office by the hand of a special messenger."

AN APPEAL TO THE EXECUTIVE OF THE UNITED STATES

The document as prepared for the governors of the respective states appears in the Journal of John Taylor for 1845, [^4] with the following introductory remark: "Engaged in writing a document to the governors of the different states. The following is a copy." Then follows the document. The document is dated "March, 1845," slightly modified in order to meet national conditions in its requests, it was addressed to President James K. Polk, asking him if he would not "convene a special session of congress and furnish us an asylum where we can enjoy our rights of conscience and religion unmolested," said the petition. "Or will you, in a special message to that body, when convened, recommend a remonstrance against such unhallowed acts of oppression and expatriation as this people have continued to receive from the states of Missouri and Illinois:" The personnel of the committee signing this appeal to the president was slightly different from the one sent to the governors, being as follows:

Brigham Young, Orson Pratt,

Willard Richards, W. W. Phelps,

Orson Spencer, A. W. Babbitt,

J. M. Bernhisel

The document sent to the president bears date of April 24th, 1845, and will be found in extenso in Tullidge's History of Brigham Young. [^5]

Nothing came of these petitions. Neither President Polk or any of the governors took notice of it, excepting Thomas S. Drew, governor of the state of Arkansas, who wrote a very polite and thoughtful answer to the committee, showing how helpless the governor of Arkansas was to interfere with the internal affairs of another state, "where its operations do not distract or in any way affect the good order of the citizens of the state of Arkansas;" and wisely suggesting the removal of the saints to the west and waiting upon and trusting to time for a vindication of themselves and their system—where, if they were wrong, their wrongs would be abated with many degrees of allowance, and if right, migration will afford opportunity to make it manifest in due season to the whole civilized world. The document is somewhat unique, and being the only answer made to this appeal of the church of the Latter-day Saints to the governors of the states of the Union, it is worthy of a place in these pages in extenso. [^6]

GOVERNOR THOMAS S. DREW'S LETTER TO PRESIDENT YOUNG AND COUNCIL

"Executive Office, Little Rock, Ark.

May 27th, 1845.

Hon. Brigham Young, Pres. of the Com. of Twelve of Christ's Church of Latter-day Saints, at Nauvoo, Ill:

Sir: Your letter of the 1st inst., has been received and claims my earnest attention. I must acknowledge my inability to serve your people by calling an extra session of the general assembly of this state for the object contemplated; and although I do not know that prejudice against your tenets in Arkansas would weigh aught against the action of that body, in refusing to furnish within our borders an asylum from the oppression of which you sorely complain; yet I am sure the representatives of the people would long hesitate to extend to any class of citizens exclusive privileges, however innocent their motives, aims, objects or actions might appear, when the prospects of collision from causes of which in your case I know nothing, appear so evident from the two very recent manifestations presented in the states of Missouri and Illinois. I have no doubt Illinois, prompted by the kindest of sympathies for your people in the late struggle and overthrow they encountered in Missouri, extended a liberal helping hand but to repent her supposed folly. Could Arkansas, after witnessing the same scene reenacted in Illinois, calculate on anything short of a like catastrophe?

I am not sufficiently informed of the course taken against you by the authorities of the state of Illinois in the difficulties detailed in your communication, to justify a recommendation from me to the legislature to remonstrate against the acts of Illinois—the detailed statement of facts afforded me by your communication being of ex parte character. But were I regularly informed of all the facts from both parties, and felt able to form a correct opinion as to the justice of the course pursued by the state of Illinois, yet I am of opinion that this state would not have, nor would I have, as its chief executive officer, the right to interfere in the least with the internal concerns or police of the state of Illinois, or of any other neighboring state, where its operations do not distract or in any way affect the good order of the citizens of the state of Arkansas. There are instances, but they are rare, where the interposition of one state to arrest the progress of violence in another would be at all admissible: such, for instance, as where the public authorities of the state affected are palpably incompetent to quell an insurrection within her limits and the violence is likely to extend its ravages and bad influence to such neighboring state; or where a proper call has been made for succor.

Nor can I afford to exercise my official rank as chief executive of this state, in behalf of a faction in a neighboring state: and I humbly conceive that my personal influence would add nothing to your cause unless it should prove to be a just one, in which event public opinion will afford you support of a character more lasting in the eye of an enlightened public, than wiser and greater men than your humble servant, than official rank, or force backed by power. It is true that while prejudice may have the ascendency over the minds of the neighboring community, your people may be exposed more or less to loss of life, and destruction of property: I therefore heartily agree with you in the proposed plan of emigration to the Oregon territory—or to California—the north of Texas or to Nebraska; thereby placing your community beyond the reach of contention until, at least, you shall have had time and opportunity to test the practicability of your system, and to develop its contemplated superior advantages in ameliorating the condition of the human race, and adding to the blessings of civil and religious liberty. That such a community constituted as yours with the mass of prejudice which surrounds and obstructs its progress at this time, can not prosper in that or any of the neighboring states, appears very evident from the signal failures upon two occasions under auspices at least as favorable as you could reasonably expect from any of the states.

My personal sympathies are strong for the oppressed, though my official station can know nothing but what is sanctioned by the strictest justice, and that circumscribed to the limited jurisdiction of my own state: and while I deplore, as a man and a philanthropist, your distressed situation, I would refer you to the emphatic and patriarchal proposition of Abraham to Lot: and whilst I allude to the eloquent paraphrase of one of Virginia's most gifted sons wherein he circumscribed the bounds of our domain within to the great valley of the Mississippi, I would only add that the way is now open to the Pacific without let or hindrance. Should the Latter-day Saints migrate to Oregon they will carry with them the good will of philanthropists and the blessings of every friend of humanity. If they are wrong, their wrongs will be abated with many degrees of allowance, and if right migration will afford an opportunity to make it manifest in due season to the whole civilized world.

With my hearty desires for your peace and prosperity,

I subscribe myself respectfully yours,

[Signed] "Thos. S. Drew."

It must be remembered that during these days, viz, in the summer and fall of 1845, and up to the time of the departure of the saints from the city, Nauvoo was without municipal government, her charters having been repealed by the legislature; and anarchy existed in the county, and, for the saints in the surrounding counties also; for there was no protection of life or property where they were concerned. Under these circumstances it is small wonder if irregularities existed in Nauvoo. Desperate and lawless men, not of the Latter-day Saint faith, flocked to the city as to a rendezvous, because it had been falsely heralded abroad as the gathering place of thieves, counterfeiters and murderers; and it was all too easy to charge their crimes to the saints and have them generally regarded as instances of "Mormon lawlessness."

THE WHISTLING AND WHITTLING BRIGADE

It was in the midst of these conditions, and as some slight means of protection and defense that the somewhat famous "whistling and whittling brigade" of Nauvoo was formed. These consisted of troops of boys armed with strong jackknives or bowie knives and sticks; and who, when a suspected or undesirable stranger was found upon the streets of the city, would gather round him and whistle and whittle vigorously, following him wherever he went. They spoke no word, they answered no questions, they just "whistled and whittled," but constantly gathered closer round the stranger. They were too small individually for him to strike, but too many for him to fight; and finally exasperated and yet helpless the victim would leave Nauvoo. Thus many thieves and otherwise undesirable characters who, under one pretext or another, came to prey upon the city's misfortunes were gotten rid of without any real violence. [^7]

It was from the midst of such conditions also, that is in the absence of a city government, the general reign of anarchy that prevailed in Hancock county, and the almost certainty of death in the event of surrendering themselves to officers of the law, who had become but the agents of mobs, that some of the leading brethren at Nauvoo—notably President Brigham Young [^8] and Elder John Taylor [^9]—declared their determination not to submit to arrest, under illegal processes, only to be dragged into the midst of their enemies to be murdered as were Joseph and Hyrum Smith.

MAJOR WARREN vs. JOHN TAYLOR

It was at this juncture that Major Warren who had been charged by Governor Ford to supervise, in a military way, the affairs of Hancock county and keep the peace, appeared in Nauvoo, to inquire into this alleged determination to "resist the law." Major Warren upbraided the two brethren, President Young and John Taylor for their declared intention of "resistance to law." Whereupon Elder Taylor made the following reply:

"Major Warren, I stand before you as a man who has received deep injury from the citizens of this state, and consequently have some feelings. You talk, sir, about 'the majesty of law, and maintaining the law:' why, sir, the law to us is a mere farce. For years past the law has been made use of only as an engine of oppression. We have received no protection from it. I have suffered under its cruel influence. You talk about your troops being efficient, supporting law and preserving peace. This tale may do to tell some, but it fails to charm us. * * * You talk about the majesty of the law! what has become of those murderers [i. e. of Joseph and Hyrum Smith]? Have they been hung or shot, or in any way punished? No, sir, you know they have not. With their hands yet reeking in blood, having become hardened in their deeds of infamy, knowing that they will not be punished, they are now applying the torch to the houses of those they have so deeply injured? What has been done to them under your administration? Have they been brought to justice, have they been punished for their infamous proceedings? No, sir, not one of them. They are still burning houses under your supervision; and you have either been unwilling or unable to stop them. Houses have been burned since your arrival here, men have been kidnapped, cattle stolen, our brethren abused and robbed when going after their corn. Are we to stand still and let marauders and house-burners come into our city under the real or assumed name of 'governor's troops,' and yet offer no resistance to their nefarious deeds? Are we to be held still by you, while they thrust the hot iron into us? I tell you plainly, for one, I will not do it. I speak now on my own responsibility, and I tell you, sir, I will not stand it, I care nothing for your decrees, your martial law or any other law, I mean to protect myself; and if my brethren are to be insulted and abused in going after their own corn, and pursuing their lawful business—if nobody else will go to protect them I will. They shall not be abused under pretext of law or anything else; and there is not a patriot in the world but what would bear me out in it."

Major Warren saw the storm rising and sought at several points to check Elder Taylor's remarks, but to no purpose, for he continued:

"Where is the spirit of '76? Where is the fire that burned in the bosoms of those who fought and bled for liberty? Is there no one who will stand up in defense of the oppressed? If a man had the least spark of humanity burning in his bosom—if he were not hardened and desperate, he would be ashamed to oppress a people already goaded by a yoke too intolerable to be borne, and that, too, in a boasted land of liberty. Talk about law? Sir, I stand before you as a victim of law. I feel warm on this subject—who would not? I have seen my best friends shot down while under legal protection. What is our governor? These scenes have been enacted under his supervision. What are our generals and judges? They have aided in these matters. * * * What are all these legal men but a pack of scoundrels? And you will talk to us of law and order, and threaten us with punishment for disobeying your commands and protecting our rights! What are we? Are we beasts? I tell you for one, sir, I shall protect myself, law or no law, judge or no judge, governor or no governor. I will not stand such infernal rascality, and if I have to fight it out, I will sell my life as dearly as I can."

A few days after this, Major Warren again rode into Nauvoo with his troops. It was reported that he had writs for the twelve, but he sent word that he wanted an interview with them and pledged his word that no writs should be served. In the interview which followed he read a letter from Mr. Brayman, attorney general pro tem of the state, asking if the statement made by Mr. Young and Mr. Taylor to the effect that they would not be subject to any law and would resist all civil process, was to be looked upon as sincere.

They denied having made such statement. What they complained of was mal-administration and illegal prosecution. They had always been subject to law. They had always sustained it and still felt disposed to do so. "But I wish to make a few remarks concerning my own individual feelings," said Elder Taylor:

"I have endured as much as I feel willing to endure under this government. I feel myself oppressed and wronged. I have never violated any law in the United States, and to be vexed and annoyed continually with vexatious law suits and illegal prosecutions, I do not feel disposed tamely to submit to. If it is not enough for me to be deprived of my rights and my liberty; if it is not enough for me to sacrifice my property and to become an exile; if I can not have the short space of six months to dispose of my effects and to leave the state—if the governor will only tell me, I will leave now; but I cannot and will not endure a continuation of these wrongs. I do not mean to be taken by any unjust requisition and thrust into prison; if I am, I must go there dead; for they shall not take me there alive. I have no personal feelings against you, Major Warren, but I will not put up with these accumulated wrongs."

The Warsaw Signal in speaking of this affair said that the troops had writs to serve on the twelve, and although Major Warren had pledged his honor to the twelve that no writs should be served, yet he was under promise to assist those holding them the day following; but after hearing the remarks of Elder Taylor fear seemed to have seized upon them and they were afraid to make any attempt at serving them. Judge Purple also advised them not to serve the writs as he had no doubt there would be blood shed. Warren accordingly left with his troops. [^10]

Also in connection with all these matters, it must be remembered that it was part of the understanding in connection with the promise of the church leaders to leave Nauvoo in the spring that all hostilities, and vexatious law suits should cease, and to this end the Carthage convention had suggested the suspension of the courts in Hancock county in order to lessen the likelihood of collision between the saints and their enemies, and also in order that the church and its leaders might proceed freely with their preparations for the proposed great exodus in the spring. [^11] Yet in addition to the general record of repeated annoyances on the part of the mob towards the church leaders, and this interference on the part of Major Warren and his posse, an editorial in the Nauvoo Neighbor, under the title "Treachery," could say in truth:

"Treachery!—The most solemn assurance made in the agreement for the Latter-day Saints to leave the United States next spring, was that all hostilities, vexatious law suits should cease; but it is reported, right in the face and eyes of the committees and conventions, that the mob had made complaints and got out writs in Iowa against the twelve in order to demand them of Governor Ford under martial law. If there is anything like stopping the effusion of blood, or any honor in that move, we have forgotten the meaning of confidence. We never have resisted law nor do we mean to, but we leave the world to judge what faith is to be placed in mob promises; or what confidence may be put in committee or convention pledges!" [^12]

Thus while great efforts were being put forth by the people who were about to sacrifice the farms, gardens and homes they had redeemed from a wilderness, and in every way were trying to fulfill their agreement with the mob, the conditions of removal were constantly violated by the mob party of the old settlers, and threats even made of following the church leaders into Iowa to effect their arrest and that by the use of United States troops, in that territory. [^13]

THE THREAT OF USING THE FEDERAL AUTHORITY AGAINST THE SAINTS

This threat of the use of federal authority to affect the arrest of the church authorities, relative to alleged counterfeiting of United States money, and even to prevent the migration of the saints to the west, was wickedly put forth and fostered by Governor Ford (really to play upon the fears of the church and hasten its departure from Illinois) and quite widely discussed in the press of both state and nation.

Relative to the charge of counterfeiting and the threatened arrests of the twelve therefor, Governor Ford said:

"Indictments had been found against nine of them in the circuit court of the United States for the district of Illinois, at its December term, 1845, for counterfeiting the current coin of the United States. The United States marshal had applied to me for a militia force to arrest them; but in pursuance of the amnesty agreed on for old offenses, believing that the arrest of the accused would prevent the removal of the Mormons, and that if arrested there was not the least chance that any of them would ever be convicted, I declined the application unless regularly called upon by the president of the United States according to law. It was generally agreed that it would be impolitic to arrest the leaders and thus put an end to the preparations for removal when it was notorious that none of them would be convicted; for they always commanded evidence and witnesses enough to make a conviction impossible. [^14] But with a view to hasten their removal they were made to believe that the president would order the regular army to Nauvoo as soon as the navigation opened in the spring. This had its intended effect; the twelve, with about two thousand of their followers, immediately crossed the Mississippi before the breaking of the ice. But before this the deputy marshal had sought to arrest the accused without success."

There is not the slightest evidence in existence that "the twelve" were in any way connected with alleged counterfeiting operations at Nauvoo, it was clearly a "trumped up charge," so far as they were concerned. It appears that some counterfeiters had located at Nauvoo but were routed by the diligence of the church leaders against them and their illegal traffic. These were the parties who made the charges of counterfeiting against the brethren at Springfield.

"We venture to say that our brethren have made no counterfeit money," said the circular of the high council of Nauvoo. Then, referring to current rumors on that head, continued: "If any miller has received fifteen hundred dollars base coin in a week, from us [as was charged], let him testify. If any land agent of the general government has received 'wagon loads' of base coin from us in payment for lands, [as was also charged], let him tell it. Those witnesses against us have spun a long yarn; but if our brethren had never used an influence against them to break them up, and to cause them to leave our city, after having satisfied themselves that they were engaged in the very business of which they accuse us, their revenge might never have been roused to father upon us their own illegitimate and bogus productions."

In relation to other charges current against the saints at Nauvoo the high council circular continued:

"We have never tied a black strap around any person's neck, neither have we cut their bowels out, nor fed any to the 'cat-fish.' The systematic order of stealing of which these grave witnesses speak, must certainly be original with them. Such a plan could never originate with any person, except some one who wished to fan the flames of death and destruction around us. The very dregs of malice and revenge are mingled in the statements of those witnesses alluded to by the Sangomon Journal. We should think that every man of sense might see this. In fact many editors do see it, and they have our thanks for speaking of it." [^15]

The passage from Ford's History discloses the fact, that by the subterfuge of making the twelve believe—if they did believe it—the United States army would be sent to Nauvoo in the spring to make arrests and to prevent the movement westward, Governor Ford himself was a party to those annoyances from which the saints suffered while making preparations for their exodus from the United States. The manner in which he sought to create this impression of likely interference by the United States, was by sending a letter to Sheriff Backenstos, generally regarded as a "Jack-Mormon," in which the governor cunningly set forth the probability of intervention by the federal government against the movement of the saints to the west. The letter follows:

FORD'S LETTER

"Springfield, Dec. 29, 1845.

Dear Sir—In the matter of the late attempt to make arrests by the deputy marshal in Nauvoo, you will understand that that was entirely an affair of the United States Government, in which this state took no official part. A demand was made on me by the marshal for troops which was promptly refused. I am not yet advised that the troops under the command of Major Warren took any part. If they did they had no orders from me and I cannot think that they did take any part in assisting the deputy marshal for that would have been contrary to the settled and solemn understanding between Major Warren and myself. I had heard some rumor of the matter before I received your letter, from which I inferred that some of the men may have gone with the deputy marshal as a mere personal guard.

You know that the impression has become pretty general that no officer can go with safety unattended to Nauvoo to arrest any of their principal men. The idea is, that an officer thus exposed would be liable to be murdered. This may be all idle supposition, yet it is sufficient to account for the men going with the marshal without supposing that they went to assist him.

This indictment in the United States court against the leading Mormons puts a new face on the matter. It will bring them and the United States for the first time into collision. It is impossible for me to guess with any certainty, as to the course of Mr. Polk in the matter, but I would think it likely that he will order up a regiment or two of the regular army, and perhaps call on me for the militia, in which event I will be compelled to order them, as you know.

I hope that the administration will not act in the matter this winter. If the Mormons remain in the state, a strong force will be ordered to Nauvoo by the secretary of war, to remain there until arrests can be made. This you know is all guess work, as I have no such official relations with the government at Washington as would enable me to know it certainly. I also think that it is very likely that the government at Washington will interfere to prevent the Mormons from going west of the Rocky Mountains. Many intelligent persons sincerely believe that they will join the British if they go there, and be more trouble than ever, and I think that this consideration is likely to influence the government.

If it should be the case that the government will order and station a large force at Nauvoo—and they can keep their soldiers there with as little expense as anywhere else—and shall interfere to prevent their emigration, it will put the Mormon leaders who are indicted in a worse box than they have yet been.

They will have to separate from their people and become fugitives in the earth, or submit to a trial on their indictments. These are all mere speculations of mine, but it will be for you and them to calculate whether the results guessed at, are not probable.

I am most respectfully,

Your obedient servant,

Thomas Ford."

On this infamous communication, written with intent to deceive, and copied into his Journal, Brigham Young made the following comment:

"Should Governor Ford's speculations and suppositions in relation to United States troops prove correct, and the government send a regular force to arrest us, we will run no risk of being murdered by them as our leaders have been; and as to fearing a trial before the courts it is all gammon; for our danger consists only in being held still by the authorities while mobs massacre us, as Governor Ford held Joseph and Hyrum Smith while they were butchered." [^16]

Some of the great newspapers of the country discussed this subject of preventing the movement of the church to the west. Among these were both the New York Sun and the Washington (D.C.) Union.

Both James Arlington Bennett and William Smith, brother of the Prophet Joseph, had communications in the New York Sun about the intentions of the saints when once removed to the west. The former saying that there would be "a mighty gathering from all nations of the earth to the Mormon empire, now about to be established on the Pacific Ocean! One thing you may rely on—and that is, this people will never annex themselves to any government on earth; nor is it desirable they should, as they are determined to be governed by their own laws." Bennett stated that he had been strongly urged by the saints to go with them as a military leader, "but I am too old," he said, "to settle in the west." Wm. Smith, according to an editorial statement of the Sun is represented as saying that it was the design of the saints "to set up an independent government somewhere in the neighborhood of the Rocky Mountains, or near California." That the plan had been maturing "for a long time;" "and that, in fact, with hate in their hearts, skilfully kept up by the Mormon leaders, whose pockets are to be enriched by their toil, the mass of the Mormons will be alike purged of American feeling, and shut out by a barrier of mountains and church restriction from any other than Mormon freedom. That the design of Brigham Young and the twelve is to build up a sacerdotal tyranny, the spirit of which will be more repugnant to the spread of republican principles than could possibly be the rule of Europe." These are William Smith's views, and it should be remembered he was now excommunicated from the church and bitterly hostile to the twelve and their administration.

To all this the Washington Union said editorially: "We entirely concur with the Sun in the belief that 'our government should look to this matter in season.' With angry and fanatical feelings such as the Mormons would carry with them, our own citizens would find them troublesome customers, let the tide of emigration be diverted to Oregon or to California. We understand that the number of Mormons is already estimated at 57,000." [^17]

THE SACRIFICES OF THE SAINTS IN LEAVING ILLINOIS

Notwithstanding all these vexatious circumstances, however, every exertion by the saints at Nauvoo to be ready for the great exodus in the spring, although it was evident that the movement would be at great sacrifice; and the people of Illinois did not hesitate to take advantage of the situation to secure much for little. Of these sacrifices even Governor Ford says:

"During the winter of 1845-6 the Mormons made the most prodigious preparations for removal. All the houses in Nauvoo, and even the temple, were converted into workshops; [^18] and before spring, more than twelve thousand wagons were in readiness. The people from all parts of the country flocked to Nauvoo to purchase houses and farms, which were sold extremely low, lower than the prices at a sheriff's sale, for money, wagons, horses, oxen, cattle, and other articles of personal property, which might be needed by the Mormons in their exodus into the wilderness." [^19]

Of the sacrifice made by the Latter-day Saints at this time, H. H. Bancroft, in his History of Utah, writes:

"The arbitrary acts of the people of Illinois in forcing the departure of the saints lays them open to the grave charge among others of a desire to possess their property for less than its value. Houses and lots, farms and merchandise, could not be turned into money, or even into wagons and livestock, in a moment, except at a ruinous sacrifice. * * * It was not a noble sentiment which had actuated the people of Missouri; it was not a noble sentiment which now actuated the people of Illinois, thus to continue their persecutions during the preparations for departure, and drive a whole cityful from their homes out upon the bleak prairie in the dead of winter.

There was but little money in circulation throughout the west at that time. Over vast wild sections skins were the only currency, and at the settlements traffic for the most part assumed the form of barter or exchange of labor. It was, therefore, exceedingly difficult, as I have said, for the saints to get their property into portable form, even after selling their lands at half or quarter their value. The Gentiles, of course, could pay what they pleased, being the only buyers, and the saints being forced to sell. Moreover, there was more property thrown upon the market than could be taken at once, and the departure of so large and thrifty a portion of the population was of itself sufficient to depreciate property. The best they could do was to exchange their lands for wagons and horses and cattle, and this they did to as large extent as possible, scouring the country for a hundred miles around in search of livestock.

And now, putting upon their animals and vehicles such of their household effects as they could carry, in small detachments the migratory saints began to leave Nauvoo. Before them was the ice-bound river, and beyond that the wilderness."

In a footnote, Mr. Bancroft quotes from Ms. sources the following: "The Mormons went up and down with their furniture, etc., and traded for anything that could travel, such as an animal or a wagon. * * * Another company went out in May, but they did not sell their property, leaving it in the hands of trustees to sell." [^20] "Their two story brick house, which they had occupied but three months, and which they had denied themselves in every way to build, Mrs Richards says was sold for 'two yoke of half-broken cattle and an old wagon'." [^21]

CONFERENCE IN THE NAUVOO TEMPLE—ITEMS

Previous to their departure it was decided that a conference should be held in the temple and accordingly on the 6th of October, 1845, the conference was convened. Among other things done at this conference was the making of a covenant proposed by Brigham Young and unanimously carried—"That we take all the saints with us, to the extent of our ability, that is, our influence and property." After the motion was carried unanimously President Young remarked: "If you will be faithful to your covenant, I will now prophesy that the great God will shower down means upon this people to accomplish it to the very letter." Elder W. W. Phelps was appointed to make provision for the writing of books for the education of the youth in the new location. It was ordered by the conference that a perfect settlement with the trustees in trust of the church and with the temple committee be made, both as to tithing and temple offerings, that the saints might "not go away indebted to the Lord." It was also voted to discontinue the Nauvoo Neighbor, but continue the publication of the Times and Seasons up to the very time of the departure into the wilderness. This was carried out, the last issue of the Times and Seasons coming from the press under date of the 15th of February, 1846, and the next day the editor, Elder John Taylor, left the city to join his brethren of the twelve in Iowa.

"MOTHER LUCY SMITH" AT THE LAST NAUVOO CONFERENCE

One of the most pathetic incidents in the history of the Latter-day Saints occurred at this conference—the appearance of "Mother Lucy Smith," mother of the now martyred Prophet—upon the stand, and her address to the saints. The account of the incident is published in the minutes of the conference:

"She commenced by saying that she was truly glad that the Lord had let her see so large a congregation. * * * There were comparatively few in the assembly who were acquainted with her family. She was the mother of eleven children, seven of whom were boys [now all but one dead]. She raised them in the fear and love of God, and never was there a more obedient family. She warned parents that they were accountable for their children's conduct; advised them to give them books and work to keep them from idleness; warned all to be full of love; goodness and kindness; and never to do in secret, what they would not do in the presence of millions. She wished to know of the congregation whether they considered her a 'Mother in Israel'—(upon which President Brigham Young said: 'All who consider Mother Smith as a 'Mother in Israel,' signify it by saying yes'—one universal 'Yes' rang throughout the congregation). * * * Here in this city lay my dead, my husband and children; and if so be the rest of my children go with you, (and I would to God they may all go), they will not go without me; and if I go, I want my bones brought back in case I die away, and deposited with my husband and children. (Mother Smith said many more good things, but the rest being inaudible to the reporters, they are lost. Brigham Young explained to the congregation what 'Mother Smith' said, as follows: * * * 'Mother Smith proposes a thing which rejoices my heart; she will go with us. I can answer for the authorities of the church; we want her and her children to go with us; and I pledge myself in behalf of the authorities of the church that while we have anything they shall share with us. * * * And I pledge myself if Mother Smith goes with us and I outlive her, I will do my best to bring her bones back again, and deposit them with her children, and I want to know if this people are willing to enter into a covenant to do the same?'") [unanimous vote in the affirmative]. [^22]

OUTFIT NECESSARY FOR A FAMILY OF FIVE

It will doubtless be of interest for the reader to know the "outfit" considered necessary to reasonably equip a family for the pioneer wilderness journey.

BILL OF PARTICULARS

For the emigrants leaving this government next spring.

Each family consisting of five persons, to be provided with—

1 good strong wagon well covered 1 good musket or rifle to each male

with a light box. over the age of twelve years.

2 or 3 good yoke of oxen between 1 lb. powder.

the age of 4 and 10 years. 4 lbs. lead.

2 or more milch cows. 1 do. Tea.

1 or more good beefs. 5 do. coffee.

3 sheep if they can be obtained. 100 do. sugar.

1000 lbs. of flour or other 1 do. cayenne pepper.

bread, or bread stuffs in good 2 do. black do.

sacks.

1/2 lb. mustard. 1 good seine and hook for each

10 do. rice for each family. company.

1 do. cinnamon. 2 sets of pulley blocks and ropes

1/2 do. cloves. to each company for crossing rivers.

1 doz. nutmegs. From 25 to 100 lbs. of farming and

25 lbs. salt. mechanical tools.

5 lbs. saleratus. Cooking utensils to consist of bake

10 do. dried apples. kettle, frying pan, coffee pot,

1 bush. of beans. and tea kettle.

A few lbs. of dried beef or Tin cups, plates, knives, forks,

bacon. spoons, and pans as few as will

5 lbs. dried peaches. do.

20 do. do. pumpkin. A good tent and furniture to each

25 do. seed grain. 2 families.

1 gal. alcohol. Clothing and bedding to each family,

20 lbs. of soap each family. not to exceed 500 pounds.

4 or 5 fish hooks and lines. Ten extra teams for each company

15 lbs. iron and steel. of 100 families.

A few lbs. of wrought nails.

One or more sets of saw or grist

mill irons to company of 100

families.

N. B.—In adidtion to the above list, horse and mule teams can be used as well as oxen. Many items of comfort and convenience will suggest themselves to a wise and provident people, and can be laid in in season; but none should start without filling the original bill. [^23]

FIRST DEPARTURE FROM NAUVOO

Nauvoo presented a busy scene those days. Men were hurrying to and fro collecting wagons and putting them in repair; the roar of the smith's forge was well nigh perpetual, and even the stillness of the night was broken by the steady beating of the sledge and the ringing of anvils. Committees were seeking purchasers of real estate and converting both that and personal property into anything that would be of service to those just about to plunge into an unknown wilderness; [^24] and purchasers were thronging Nauvoo, intermittently, to take advantage of those bargains in houses and lands which the necessities of the saints threw in their way; and which they could purchase "lower than the prices at a sheriff's sale." [^25]

First and chiefly to give an earnest of the intentions of the saints to leave the state where they had suffered so much, and to thereby remove all occasion for the implacable wrath of their enemies, who were so impatient that they could not wait for spring to come for the sacrifice of their victims; and, secondly, no doubt, to prevent what they may have thought would be federal interference with their movement westward, the twelve and the high council, with about four hundred families, crossed the Mississippi on the ice on the 11th of February, 1846; and were soon lost to view in the wilderness of Iowa. Other companies continued to follow as fast as they could make ready, until by the latter part of April, the great body of the church had left Nauvoo; to them, since the martyrdom, the beloved "City of Joseph."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Journal of John Taylor, above date of entry.
[^2] For above three entries see History of Brigham Young, Ms., on respective dates.
[^3] On this head the document said: "To crown the climax of these bloody deeds, the state has repealed all those chartered rights by which we might have defended ourselves against oppressors. If we defend ourselves hereafter against violence, whether it comes under the shadow of the law or otherwise—for we have reason to expect it both ways—we shall then be charged with treason, and suffer the penalty; and if we continue passive and non-resistant, we must certainly expect to perish, for our enemies have sworn it."
[^4] Journal of John Taylor, pp. 46-50.
[^5] History of Brigham Young, or Utah and Her Founders, Tullidge, 1877, pp. 129-133; and in Whitney's History of Utah, vol. i, pp. 241-2.
[^6] The original letter is on file at the Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City.
[^7] Linn charges that this manner of getting rid of "undesirables" was employed against those who came to inquire for stolen goods (Story of the Mormons, p. 261). There is no evidence that the action was particularly directed to such persons, certainly none that it was confined to such cases. The fact was that the city was helpless in the presence of such evils as were being forced upon it, and the "whistling and whittling brigade" was a device for protection against such persons as a police force, under normal conditions, would have controlled.
[^8] Journal of Discourses, vol. v, p. 78; also vol. ii, p. 317; also Historical Record, Jenson, p. 10.
[^9] Taylor's Journal, Ms., entry under April 13th, 1845. These declarations led Major Warren in the winter of 1846 to interview the brethren and upbraid then for what he called their "resistance to law."
[^10] Life of John Taylor, ch. xviii. The original of this speech is on loose leaves of Taylor's Journal for 1846, which is in the possession of the writer who is the Biographer of the late President John Taylor.
[^11] See closing paragraphs of Brigham Young's answer to Quincy Committee, also made part of answer to Messrs. Hardin, Douglas, et al, ante, this chapter; also Carthage Convention Resolutions, No. 4.
[^12] Nauvoo Neighbor, Oct. 29, 1845. Following the paragraph in the text is this notice, and it deals with events occurring after the "Mormon" agreement to leave in the spring, and after the preservation of peace had been committed to Major Warren and his troops:—"We understand some eight or ten buildings have been burned by the mob, in the south part of the county, but Major Warren said he would probably be there in a few days, with the governor's troops!"
[^13] Governor Ford makes reference to this threatened arrest of the twelve by military authority. (Ford's History of Illinois, p. 413).
[^14] Governor Ford is utterly unwarranted in this assertion by any evidence that may be referred to in the history of the Latter-day Saints in Illinois.
[^15] See circular of the high council in full, bearing date of 20th January, 1846, in Times and Seasons, vol. vi, pp. 1096-7.
[^16] History of Brigham Young, Ms., entry for Sunday, 4th January, 1846, p. 6.
[^17] The quotations from the Sun and the Union will be found in the Times and Seasons, vol. vi, pp. 1051-1052.
[^18] The governor is mistaken as to the temple being converted into a workshop. The workshops of the temple, however, were used in making preparations for the move West.
[^19] Ford's History of Illinois, p. 412.
[^20] Well's Narrative, Ms., 37.
[^21] Richards' Reminiscences, Ms., Bancroft's Utah, pp. 216-217.
[^22] Times and Seasons, vol. vi, Nov. 1st, 1845, pp. 1013-1014, also Millennial Star, vol. vii, p. 23.
[^23] Nauvoo Neighbor, Oct. 29th, 1845.
[^24] In the Times and Seasons for 15th of November, 1845, p. 1031, it is reported that "at a meeting held in the 'Music Hall,' it was stated that 3,285 families were making ready with 1,508 wagons on hand, and 1,892 building."
[^25] Ford's History of Illinois, p. 412.
