James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Preface

I have not presumed to edit these messages because I believe to do so would reduce their value as original and official documents of the presiding authority of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

As each message of the First Presidency was located, either as an original document or in published form in newspapers and periodicals, a xerox copy was made of the message in order to assure accuracy and completeness in the document or message. Each message in this volume has been reproduced complete, where available, from the original manuscripts or printed sources as they stood over the signature of the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Some messages have been located in the search which were not available for publication at this time. I have attempted in this volume, as in the previous volumes in this series, to note the existence of these documents in the hopes that they will become available for publication later in this series.

For volume one and two of this series of Messages a number of standard L.D.S. Church histories were available for use as supplementary references in the notes. As the period towards the end of the nineteenth century is approached, the standard L.D.S. Church histories become fewer and their treatment of L.D.S. history less complete. However we are fortunate that for the last fifteen years of the nineteenth century (1885-1900) the personal diaries, letters and records of men who were confidants and close personal friends and daily companions of members of the First Presidency are available. Paramount among these are the diaries, letter press books and papers of L. John Nuttall, secretary to three Presidents of the Church. His records for the period covered in this volume are on file and available for consultation in the Brigham Young University Library.

The chronological arrangement followed in the two previous volumes in this series has been continued as the most practical and efficient way of portraying the inspired leadership of a dynamic Church which remained flexible in meeting changing conditions.

Perhaps in no period in L.D.S. history were the challenges to the very existence of the Church so great as in the period from 1885 to 1900. Revelations given to the President of the Church during this period and from the First Presidency to the Church came mostly when the Church had its back to the wall. As publicly recognized by both Mormon and anti-Mormon leadership of the period, the real issue was not Mormon polygamy but Mormon Priesthood and authority. Time and again in this volume we will see the anti-Mormon opposition seek to break the back, and authority of the L.D.S. Church and time and time again we will read the answer of the Lord to these challenges through revelations and Messages of the First Presidency.

Once again I wish to acknowledge the interested and continuing assistance of President Joseph Fielding Smith, Church Historian, and of the entire staff of the Office of the Church Historian in locating and assembling additional Messages of the First Presidency which I had overlooked or had not had access to in the early stages of the research. Again, Thomas Truitt and Dean Jesse of the Historian's staff have been particularly helpful. Mr. Chad Flake, special collections librarian of the Brigham Young University Library, has continued to be helpful in placing the resources of that Library at my disposal.

I wish to acknowledge with deepest gratitude the debt I owe to my reading committee, Dr. Daniel H. Ludlow and Dr. David Yarn, Jr. of the faculty of Brigham Young University, for going beyond the call of duty in otherwise busy schedules to read the manuscript of this third volume and for the helpful suggestions they have made from the outset of the publishing of this series.

NOTE: Since the choice was made to reproduce these documents without editing I have been obligated to preserve the spelling, punctuation, word usage and sentence structure of the originals. This may seem to increase the number of errors in the volume, but is justified from the standpoint of accuracy to the originals. JAMES R. CLARK, ED. D. July 1, 1966
