James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Introduction

The fifteen year period from 1885 to 1900 is a particularly important one in the history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It was a period of great stress as the L.D.S. Church literally struggled for its very existence. This era has been characterized by Mormon writers and historians variously as: "The Raid and Aftermath" (Arrington); "Consolidation" (B. H. Roberts); or "The Anti-Polygamy Movement" (Berrett and Burton).

Of this era in Mormon history, Leonard J. Arrington has written in his Great Basin Kingdom: (1954)

"That the Mormon Kingdom should continue as a permanent enclave in the American commonwealth was unthinkable to a large segment of American opinion ... The system of plural marriage, though admittedly practiced by a small minority of Mormons, was an unspeakable vice; the theocratic economy interfered with the spread of capitalistic institutions; and the supposed church control of political life was thought to be inconsistent with democracy ... As Congress sought to end Mormon "peculiarities" with increasingly restrictive legislation, the church fought back with every available weapon... . By the end of the century, the most objectionable-and some of the most praiseworthy-aspects of Mormon life were eliminated. Nevertheless, Mormon life, even today, emphasizes community and cooperative activity ..." (p. 352)

Of this same era, B. H. Roberts, an earlier Mormon historian wrote: (1940) "Out of the fiery conflict waged came forth settlement of questions as made clear the lines upon which procedure for the church was practical, by which is meant, under conditions as they existed. And hence adjustments were made, demands upon the church conceded to, so that statehood was won, deliverance from oppression obtained; the relations of church and state were slowly but surely defined and established; the cause of friction was removed; the mission and sphere of the church clarified; and everything was shaken down to a practical working basis of consolidation; so that now there is on every side freedom of action for the church in promulgating her high mission of conquering the world for truth and righteousness; and this without let or hinderance." (CHC 6: xxiii-xxiv)

Berrett and Burton likewise have pointed out that: (1958)

The history of the Church from 1877 to the present is an account of its people being rejected, and misunderstood at one time, and of being accepted and respected at other periods. This paradoxical situation developed over a period of years, with the leaders and membership of one generation witnessing the vilification, denunciation, and malignant abuse of the Church and its members at one period and at a later date some of these same leaders and members were witnesses to the Church and its members being heralded as honest, upright, God-fearing people (RCH 3: vii)

But if this fifteen-year period was one of stress, the First Presidency or Presidencies who presided over the Church were not inexperienced or immune to such experience President Taylor had been with Joseph Smith when he was martyred in Carthage Jail. Joseph F. Smith, who served as counselor to all three Presidents of the Church during this fifteen-year period, was born in Missouri in 1838 and was six years old at the time his father, Hyrum Smith, was martyred, June 27, 1844. Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon and Lorenzo Snow, the other principals in this historic drama had likewise been through fiery conflicts before.

But the Messages in this volume are not all of conflict. Some are of hope and some of the steady "building of the Kingdom."

JAMES R. CLARK, Ed. D. JULY, 1966.
