James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Epistle to Officers and Members in General Conference, April 4, 1885

1885-1890 1885-April 4-MS 42:290-296

The opening sentence of this Epistle of The First Presidency indicates that John Taylor and George Q. Cannon, who signed the Epistle, could not be personally present at the General Conference and hence were using this Epistle to convey the message that they normally would have delivered orally and in person.

President Taylor and Cannon had "gone on the underground" or into hiding from federal officials the previous February 1st. President Joseph F. Smith, the second counselor had also been in hiding from federal officials during 1884. In January, 1885, he left for the Hawaiian Islands to remain out of federal hands where he supervised the work of the Mission until he was called home in July, 1887 during the final illness of President Taylor who died "in exile" July 25, 1887. Thus during this two and one half year period, all three members of the First Presidency of the Church were in hiding from Federal officials due to the provisions of the Edmunds Law of 1882 which they considered to be unconstitutional.

The Messages of the First Presidency issued during the period from December 1884 until John Taylor's death, July 25, 1887, were issued under extremely tense and stressing conditions.

One of the best pictures from a personal point of view that we have as to the "inside" story of this two and one half years is contained in the Diaries and Letters of L. John Nuttall, Private Secretary to President Taylor. Nuttall went into hiding with President George Q. Cannon in January, 1885, and stayed with Taylor and Cannon until President Taylor's death. The diary of L. John Nuttall for part of this period is lacking from the collection at Brigham Young University, but Nuttall's Letter Press Books and letters to Nuttall in the collection in the Library do cover this period. Some extracts from Nuttall's letters should give the reader a more intimate picture of Presidents Taylor and Cannon during the time when they issued these Epistles of The First Presidency from exile.

The following extracts give a background and feeling not only for the Epistle of April 4, 1885 but also for others issued during this period of extreme stress and persecution.

Daniel H. Wells, Counselor in the First Presidency to Brigham Young and then Counselor to the Quorum of Twelve Apostles, as we have indicated earlier, was "sent" to England to avoid further harassment by federal officials, following the passage of the Edmunds Bill. On May 19, 1885, a short time after the issuance of the Epistle of the First Presidency, L. John Nuttall wrote to President Daniel H. Wells in Liverpool, England. The letter recaptures the mood of the times in a realistic manner and is quoted here at length as an introductory note to the Epistle of April 4, 1885: Prest. Daniel H. Wells

42 Islington, Liverpool

Salt Lake City May 19th, 1885

Dear Brother:

I have felt for some time a desire to write to you, to the place of my birth; but owing to the peculiar circumstances which we have been placed in, and in attending to those daily labors that must be considered, be the circumstances what they may, my time has been fully occupied. I have read with pleasure the letters to the brethren received from you, and learned of the progress of the work under your guidance and direction, and cannot but feel very grateful that you are thus privileged and have your liberty in attending to the labors of the ministry, free from the embarrassment which surrounded you before you left home and which would have followed up with great vigor had you remained. I am also thankful that Bro. J. F. [Joseph F. Smith] got so safely out of the way, for in your absence our enemies have been greatly baffled in their plans and desires. Others of the brethren who labored with you are honest. On the 20th of January it became necessary for Bro. G. Q. [George Q. Cannon] & myself to be not seen of men, when Pres T [President John Taylor] and party were on their tour in Arizona. Yet we stayed at the office and kept the business going until after his return, and until Feby 1st on which day the Pr—-st preached in the Tabernacle, and that evening, he, Pro. G. Q., myself & C. H. Wilcken took up the line of march for quarters unknown, and have been in such quarters ever since, however making such changes as circumstances have dictated. The spirit plainly manifested that these brethren should keep out of the hands of the enemy, for the present at least. That we have been able to do so is very remarkable, and a striking evidence of the care the Lord has had over us. There has not been one day from that time to the present but what we have been enabled to attend to the general duties, just as much so as though we had been in the office, with the exception of conversing orally with the brethren and holding public meetings. Our arrangements have been such that nothing has been neglected. Several counsels have been held with the brethren as circumstances have demanded. The health of the Pr——t has been excellent and his spirits buoyant all the time. In fact we have all been first class all the time. For all these blessings our hearts and souls are drawn out in praise and thanksgiving to Almighty God for His many kindnesses and His preserving care over us in that the eyes of our enemies have been blinded as to our whereabouts and that we have been permitted to attend to His work and the furtherance of His purposes in these trying times, when the wicked rage and the people imagine vain things. We have not felt it any disgrace to hide from the fury of the storm while it rages and while we can be so blessed as we have been. We also feel undismayed at the prospect before us. It is a good time for the faithful to show their faithfulness and for the unfaithful to exhibit themselves in their true colors, good will result from this trial of the people, as it has resulted from every trial we have had to endure in the past. The Lord will add Glory to His name, salvation to His people and greater strength to Zion, by what we are now passing through. Our enemies will gain no advantage over us; of this we feel assured and can bear testimony. If this nation continues to uphold the wicked in their attacks upon us, and pursue the attitude of seeking todestroy this people and trample upon every human right and liberty, God will come forth and hold a controversy with them, and His judgments which have been spoken of will fall upon them, and His wrath be made manifest. God has made promises to us which cannot fail, it only remains with the people to keep His commandments and put their trust in Him.

You will have seen by the newspapers how matters have been going so I need not refer to them. It is true that several indictments have been found but with all the blowing and striking there has only six of our brethren in this Territory been sent to prison and they have been forced there regardless of testimony to convict. The aim is to indict and if possible imprison every man who has more than one wife, and from all appearances it is only necessary to establish presumption that he is in this condition to make conviction certain. This war is upon our religion, for even the proof that no sexual intercourse has existed between the parties accused in their families has any weight in the mind of the prosecutors in favor of the accused. They hold a man is as fully amenable to the penalty of the law who has the wives, and does not have sexual intercourse with them, as the man who lives openly with and treats them in every respect as his legal wives. Yet notwithstanding all this, the good work goes on. The Elders do not abate one single hair, but bravely go on almost as much so, as though there never had been an Edmunds or any Christian courts in the land.

The Epistle delivered at Conference at Logan [this is the Epistle of April 4, 1885] was a step in the right direction. The declaration of grievances and protests adopted at the Mass Meetings was another, and from the press dispatches we learn that President Cleveland received our delegates very cordially and promised that while he must carry out the provisions of the Edmunds law, yet it should be done impartially which is all we ask for. He has not seemed in any hurry to get at the Utah affairs and of course don't know what he may do. There is one thing certain, we are carrying out the requirements of the Lord as given us by Revelation. We are making our appeals and petitions and have got to the President. If we are not now heard; our appeal must next be to God and He has promised to hear and answer us.

Elders B. Young and M. Thatcher are now in Mexico waiting upon the national Authorities in the interest of our people who are desirous of locating in Chihuahua or Sonora in Northern Mexico. Bros. W. W., L. S, and G.T. are comfortably situated. Bros. E. S., F. D. R., A. C., F. M. L., J. H. S., H. J. G and J. W. T. [The persons referred to by initials are in sequence: Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, George Teasdale, Erastus Snow, Franklin D. Richards, Abraham H. Cannon, Francis M. Lyman, John Henry Smith, Heber J. Grant, and John W. Taylor] are around considerably among the people and have not yet been interfered with.

Our young people have been taking a wise course in the firm stand they have as to not dealing with those not of us and the effects are being felt business is very dull in the city and Territory and I look for failures among many of the business men. The course taken by Bros. Angus M. Cannon, A. M. Musser and James C. Watson before the Court, both during their trials and on the day of the sentence, has had a good effect and stiffened the knees of some.

I have not had the pleasure of seeing Bro. John H. Smith since his return. Bro. C——n has seen him several times, he is well and feels well. I am much pleased that Bro. Penrose is with you, for he will be of great assistance, and can do much more good in his present position, than being on the dodge here as he can help you and strengthen the mission and encourage the Saints and Elders.

I never saw such a spirit of calmness and serenity with the Presidency and Apostles as also among the people. There does not seem any degree of alarm or excitement in any quarter. Yet a great many are harassed and put to many inconveniences, but there seems to be an abiding faith in God that He will overrule all these things for the good of all those who love and serve Him and keep His commandments.

It is an evidence that God is with His people, and that in His own due time He will make the wrath of the wicked to praise Him and the remainder, he does and will restrain.

We feel that Zion is upward and onward and that we will exercise patience and fortitude, and put our trust in that God who has delivered his people so often and who does not and will not now forget them. With love to all. I remain your friend and Brother in the Gospel.

(Signed) L. John Nuttall

P. S.-In contemplating the kind of unprincipled wretches we have in our midst, engaged in our present persecutions, and the manner in which they are permitted to walk our streets, and wallow in their filth, whoredoms and debauchery, whilst honorable men and women are deprived of the comforts of home for observing the commandments of God, I long for a Mayor Wells and Barshal Burt instead of the milk and water beings who now control affairs. But such is life.

Bro. Wilcken is here with me and wishes to be kindly remembered to you and the brethren. L. J. N.

Those who may not have ready access to the Nuttall diaries and papers in the Brigham Young University Library may wish to personalize the events of the era from 1885 to 1900 by reading the standard biographies and collections of writings and sermons of the following members of the First Presidency for the period: John Taylor, George Q. Cannon, Joseph F. Smith, Wilford Woodruff, and Lorenzo Snow. For additional background see: CHC 6:1-385: RCH 3:61-270; Leonard J. Arrington, Great Basin Kingdom, pp. 351-412.

EPISTLE of The First Presidency

President's Office, Salt Lake City, April 4, 1885.

To the Officers and Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Conference assembled:

BELOVED BRETHREN AND SISTERS It is eminently proper under the circumstances, not being able to be with you in person at our Annual Conference, that we should address you a few lines and express to you our faith, feelings and hopes concerningthe great work of our God in which we are all mutually interested. Never at any time in our lives have we had more joy and satisfaction in the Gospel, and in the labors thereof, than we have at the present time. Profoundly grateful to our God for His kindness to us in permitting us to have a name and a place among His people, and to be the bearers of His everlasting Priesthood, we are determined with His help to press forward with increased diligence and zeal in doing our part towards the carrying on of His purposes and work. We see His hand marvelously manifested in behalf of His people. We know that His power is with us, that His angels have charge concerning us, and that no affliction can fall upon any one, however humble, without it being fully known to Him. This knowledge that God is near to us, and hears and answers our prayers, is an unceasing cause of thankfulness and praise. For a wise purpose in His providence He permits the wicked, in the exercise of their agency, from time to time to afflict His followers. Since the days of our father Adam this has always been the case, and it will continue to be, so long as Satan has any power over the hearts of the children of men. We are all children of the same Great Parent, and each one has the opportunity and privilege granted to him or her to exercise his or her agency. We have chosen to serve the God of Israel. We have submitted to His laws, have obeyed His Gospel, and have chosen the path which He assures us will bring us into His presence. Others of His children prefer a different course. They yield to a different influence, and under its power, they seek to destroy the work of God and all who are connected with it. This they can do in the exercise of the agency which the Father has given unto them. Not only in times past, but in our own day, the wicked have persecuted, tormented and murdered the Saints of God. But, while in so doing, they bring upon themselves everlasting condemnation, their acts are overruled for the glory and exaltation of His faithful people, and the accomplishment of His purposes in the redemption of the earth.

For a few months past we have seen in these valleys an exhibition of this deadly hostility against the Latter-day Saints. We need not enumerate to you all these acts of oppression and wrong. You are familiar with them. But the best men in the community, men of pure lives, men who have set an example to the people ever since they came to these mountains, and in all their days, who have led in works of righteousness, who have been citizens of the highest type of character, have been selected as victims of a vile persecution, and been assailed and denounced as criminals of the lowest grade. Juries have been selected for the express purpose of convicting men who are prominent in the Church; and their partisan bias has become so thoroughly known in the community, that the common expression is that an accusation in the courts, as now constituted, is equivalent to a conviction. The rule of jurisprudence which has come down for ages past has been, that the accused shall be deemed innocent until proved guilty. In our courts, we are sorry to say, this has been reversed. The burden of proof has rested upon the accused in almost every instance the judge, the jury, equally with the prosecution, appearing to view him as guilty, and that it was his duty to furnish all the proof necessary to exculpate him from the accusation of guilt. Among all the English-speaking people, and for ages past, the jury has been looked upon as the palladium of human liberty. It has been the richest fruit of our civilization. No greater guarantee of fairness could be imagined by our ancestors than that a man accused of crime should have his case submitted to the judgment of his peers his neighbors living in the vicinity and presumably acquainted with his life, and with the motives which may have prompted him to commit the crime of which he was accused. The wisdom of man has failed to devise fairer or more just means than this of deciding upon their fellow-man's guilt or innocence when accused. But in this Judicial District, for a long period past, we do not know of a jury that has been thus constituted. Jurors have been selected for their known enmity to the parties accused, or to the principle involved in the trial.

The result has been that a Latter-day Saint would almost be as safe in seeking for justice in the infernal regions, or at the hands of Algerine pirates, as in courts of this character. Indictments have been found against different parties upon the flimsiest evidence, and in some instances upon evidence which would have no weight with any fair-minded jury. The result has been that a reign of terror has prevailed and still prevails in these valleys. Seeing no prospect of fair trial, men have deemed it better to avoid arrest for a season, or until there was a prospect of receiving impartial treatment by the courts and juries. Prosecution has degenerated into persecution. A law which is in and of itself, as we believe, unconstitutional, and aimed at the practice of religion, and so viewed by a number of our leading statesmen in Congress, is taken advantage of and carried to lengths probably never dreamed of by many of the men who voted for it. We have sometimes thought that it was impossible for men to indulge in such vindictive feelings as have been manifested here; but in searching for a cause we have been forced to the conclusion that these violent prosecutions were only intended to provoke the people to commit some overt act whereby the incoming administration might be embarrassed.

Permit us to refer to our own cases. President John Taylor, at the beginning of this year, hearing of the persecution to which our brethren were subjected in Arizona, determined to visit that region, in company with a number of the Elders. His object in going there was to visit with and, as far as possible, comfort the Saints. Five of our co-religionists had undergone a form of trial, a travesty of justice, and three of them had been sent, under a sentence of imprisonment of three and a half years and $500 fine each, to what may be rightly termed the American Siberia, upwards of 2,000 miles distant from their own homes the House of Correction at Detroit. The other two had been sentenced to six months' imprisonment and $500 fine in the Territorial Penitentiary at Yuma. Every member of our Church was shocked at these outrageous proceedings. For, while all were prepared to endure the legal consequences of the violation of the Edmunds law, they were not prepared for such gross and tyrannical perversions of the law as were involved in these sentences. No man who could by any possibility be accused, any longer dared to submit his case to such treatment. Many of them, therefore, left their homes, to seek in a foreign land that freedom from persecution which was denied them in their own. It was under these circumstances that President Taylor, and the company of Elders referred to, visited Arizona. Upon his return, and while at San Francisco, he received telegrams informing him that it was unsafe for him to come back to Salt Lake City. Disregarding these, however, he did return, and publicly attended to his business for some time; in the meanwhile delivering a discourse to the Saints in the Tabernacle. Seeing, however, how determined certain Federal officers here were to embarrass, arrest and place under bonds every prominent man, and being informed of threats made against his own liberty, he deemed it wise, under the circumstances, to withdraw for awhile to attend to his business in a more private manner than he had been in the habit of doing in his public office. This he has continued to do up to the present writing, receiving and answering letters, giving counsel and instruction, and devoting himself assiduously to all the duties of his calling, except in delivering public addresses from the stand. Neither he, President George Q. Cannon nor President Joseph F. Smith, have had any official notification or reliable information from any officer of the court that process of any kind has been issued against them; at the same time their residences, especially that of Brother Joseph F. Smith, have been invaded and searched, and the Marshal, his deputies and their spotters and spies have displayed a zeal to ascertain the whereabouts of the First Presidency, that has led to the conclusion that they wished to get them into their power and place them under arrest. And not only this anxiety was manifested in their cases, but President Woodruff and several of the Twelve Apostles, besides numbers of other leading men, have been threatened and sought for with assiduity.

In England, upon one occasion, the eloquent Lord Chatham said, in speaking of the rights of the subject, that man's house was his castle; that though it might be so poor that the rains of heaven could penetrate it, and the winds beat through its crevices, yet the King of England himself could not cross its threshold without its owner's permission.

A recent illustration of the zeal of these officials and their creatures has come to light in the case of President George Q. Cannon, who has just returned from the Fast. The railroads and highways have been swarming with Deputy Marshals and their myrmidons to intercept and arrest him. We have yet to learn that it has become necessary for honorable gentlemen in America to report themselves to courts, Marshals, or any civil officer, when they leave home on business, or to ask for passports or to have them vised.

The question has been asked us, how long we intend to pursue this course. In answer we say, that at no time during our existence have we ever shrunk from the investigation of our conduct, our utterances or of our lives by any fair tribunal. We have lived under the gaze of the public, and where every act and expression could be scrutinized. We are as ready today, as ever, to submit our cases to a properly organized court and jury of our peers to decide upon. So confident are we of our innocence of alleged wrong-doing, that we entertain no fears of the result of such a trial. We are willing to meet the issue at any moment. We are fully conscious of our innocence of all violation of the laws of God or of Constitutional laws enacted by man. But if there are laws made to entrap us, because of our belief in and practice of the revelations which God has given to His Church, which a court and jury shall decide we have violated, we desire at least that it shall be upon what all the world calls good evidence and substantial proof, and not upon religious prejudice, and through a determination to convict and punish, evidence or no evidence. We ought, at least, to have the same rights that burglars, thieves and murderers are accorded under the law. In that case, should conviction follow, we should submit to it as martyrs have submitted in every age when God has had a people upon the earth, as persecution inflicted upon us for our adherence to His laws.

Our faith and practice for which we are sought to be condemned and punished, is the faith and practice of the best and holiest of God's children. If we are sinners in this respect, then Abraham, who is distinguished by the Lord himself as the friend of God, was a sinner. If we are sinners, then Jacob and Moses and Elkanah, Solomon and David, and a host of others too numerous to mention, were also sinners. Even Jesus himself, the Being whom we adore as our Redeemer and the Author of our salvation, called the Eternal Father whom He worshiped, and whom we are commanded to worship, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, showing that the God of heaven himself attached no condemnation to these men for their practice of patriarchal marriage, but in many instances commanded it, provided laws for its arrangement, and called those who practiced it His friends and men after His own heart. And, what is still more worthy of remark, that in choosing a lineage from which His beloved Son Jesus should descend, He chose a lineage distinguished in the earth among all nations as polygamic. The most renowned ancestors of the Savior of the world, and to whom He most frequently alluded, were polygamists. Can, therefore, our belief in and practice of this system of marriage be as wrong as our opponents would have it appear? When this noble array of God's favorite children are remembered, and when, in addition, we call to mind the fact that the Bible itself, which has given to the Christian world all the knowledge it has of God and godliness, has principally, under God, polygamists as its authors.

It is averred by some of our enemies that this is not religion. This is not the view, however, of the members of the Utah Commission, for they have said:

"This article of faith is as much as essential and substantial part of their creed as their belief in baptism, repentance for the forgiveness of sins, and the like." And again: "All orthodox Mormons believe polygamy to be right, and that it is an essential part of their creed.

It has also been alleged to Congress, by those who take pleasure in denouncing our system of marriage, that the English government in India has put down the Suttee, and that, therefore, the United States ought to put down plural marriage. If those generable Solons had made themselves a little more acquainted with the action of the Imperial Government of Great Britain, they would have found that, while that government put down widow burning, it protects by law, in all their rights, privileges and franchises, 180,000,000 of polygamists, and places them on an equal footing with others.

The Lord has revealed to us by His special revelations, as clearly and positively as He ever did to any of the ancient Prophets, certain principles associated with the eternity of the marriage covenant, has given definite commands pertaining thereto, and made them obligatory upon us to carry out. He has made manifest to us those great and eternal principles which bind woman to man and man to woman, children to parents and parents to children, and has called upon us in the most emphatic and pointed manner to obey them. These glorious principles involve our dearest interests and associations in time and throughout the eternities that are to come. We are told that this is His everlasting covenant, and that it has existed from eternity; and, furthermore, that all covenants that relate only to time shall he dissolved at death and he no longer binding upon the human family. He has, moreover, told us that if we do not obey those principles we shall be damned. Believing these principles to be of God and from God, we have entered into eternal covenants with our wives under the most solemn promises and in the most sacred manner. Among the rights guaranteed to us in the Constitution of the United States is not only that "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof," but that no State shall enact any "law impairing the obligation of contracts." Ours are contracts of a most sacred character, and of such vital importance for time and eternity, that all worldly obligations and contracts sink into insignificance in comparison with them. Among many of the professors of modern Christianity this is looked upon as an error, and without inspiration or revelation on this subject, all the idea that is ever presented associated with the marital relations, is that they enter into these contracts "until death do them part." The beauties, the glories and perpetuity of those domestic ties, those endearing associations which cluster around the family organization, perish whenever the grim messenger Death approaches. It is now made a crime by uninspired men to possess those hopes and practice those principles which the most virtuous, upright, holy and eminent men of God have esteemed as treasures beyond price. Under an infatuated, mistaken and suicidal policy they seek to blast those hopes which are a solace to the life of the believer in the revelations of God, and to sever those connubial ties which bud in time and will blossom and bear fruit in the Celestial Kingdom of our God in the eternities to come.

The Christianity of to-day cannot offer us anything of an eternal character to compensate us for the abandonment of the truth which is demanded of us. The fact is, mankind, in their endeavor to correct God's system of marriage, have adopted a system which is entirely inadequate to save man from the dreadful evils by which he is surrounded. While there are thousands and millions of honorable, upright men in the world, who have devoted their entire lives to the promotion of mortality and virtue, and the extirpation of every sinful practice, the evils against which they battled have steadily increased around them. The system which they taught was not God's system; it did not, therefore, meet man's wants. Those channels which God has provided for the lawful exercise of the appetites with which He has endowed man, under the system now in vogue, have been dammed up, and the history of Christendom informs us with what terrible results the degradation and prostitution of woman, and the spread of the most terrible scourge known to humanity, the social evil, with its attendant train of loathsome horrors. With our knowledge of God's laws we never can adopt such a system and call it civilization. And we again take this opportunity of warning the Latter-day Saints against those murderous and damning practices of foeticide and infanticide, to introduce which in our midst attempts have been made. These practices are also the horrible fruits of a man-made system of marriage, and so terrible have they become, that many of the leading thinkers of the East have told their people, and brought statistics to prove, that unless these crimes are stopped, it will only be a short time until the primitive Puritanic stock will become extinct and foreigners take their place, their lands, their houses and their homes. These fiendish practices are becoming so common that one of the most reliable historians positively asserts that "millions do them, because they think they cannot afford to raise children."

As the male members of our Church who practice plural marriage are estimated as not exceeding but little, if any, two per cent, of the entire membership of the Church, we consider it an act of great injustice to the ninety-eight per cent to be abused and outraged, and have all their business relations disturbed, values of every kind, unsettled, neighborhoods agitated and alarmed, and the property of the people generally jeopardized, because of this "raid" upon these alleged breaks of the law.

The statement of how small a portion of the males is engaged in this practice, exhibits in the clearest light now destitute of foundation are the charges made against us respecting this institution threatening the monogramic form of marriage, claimed to be the feature of the present civilization.

Need we ask you, Latter-day Saints here assembled: Do the lives and conduct of our present would-be reformers afford you examples that you would choose to adopt, or have your children follow? Again, need we ask you: Who have been the introducers of drinking saloons, gambling dens and brothels into our towns and cities? or who have been their patrons and the aiders and promoters of every form of licentiousness which, when we came to these mountains, we hoped to have left forever behind us? We call upon you to guard and protect yourselves and families against their corrupt and insidious influences. Their ways are the ways of death, and their paths lead down to destruction. We exhort you, therefore, to preserve your bodies and spirits pure, to protect the virtue and honor of your wives and daughters, to live your religion, to deal honestly and honorably with all men, and to maintain inviolate those glorious principles which have been revealed unto you. And, furthermore, do not permit any of these abuses with which we have to cope, to tempt you to retaliate in kind, or to violate any Constitutional law of the land. You will remember that Joseph Smith has said that that sacred instrument was given by inspiration of God, and it becomes our bounden duty to sustain it in all its provisions. And while men may in their blind zeal seek to oppress us and bring us into bondage, we must not be provoked to do as they do; but to maintain the rights, immunities, and seek for the happiness and well-being, as well as to maintain the freedom of all men of every name, color and creed.

In conclusion, we solemnly testify to the Latter-day Saints and to the world, as we have done so often in the past, that God has established His Zion, and His work will roll forth, and that all those who fight against it will perish. You have seen this fulfilled to the letter in the past.

We pray God, the Eternal Father, to bless you in your families, in your fields, and flocks and herds, and in your business and in all your righteous undertakings, and to preserve you from the hands of all your enemies, and to eventually save and exalt you in His Celestial Kingdom, in the name of Jesus Christ, our Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

Your Brethren, JOHN TAYLOR, GEORGE Q. CANNON First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

After the reading of the foregoing Epistle, Apostle Heber J. Grant offered the following resolution:

"In view of the statement in the epistle that we have heard read, that the proportion of the male members of our Church who are living in the practice of plural marriage is but little, if any, more than two per cent of the entire membership of the Church, and the injustice done to the great majority of this community by the action of the Federal officials, I move that a committee be appointed by this Conference to draft a series of resolutions, and a protest to the President of the United States, and to the nation, in which the wrongs the people of this Territory have suffered and are still suffering, from the tyrannical conduct of Federal officials, shall be set forth specifically and in detail.
