James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Defense of the Constitution of the U.S., May 26, 1885

1885-May 26-Original printed circular on file in the Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City.

This Message is even a more emphatic view of the First Presidency than the Epistle of April 4, 1885 on the unconstitutionality of the Court cases resulting from enforcement of the Edmunds Act against the Mormon people.

The opening paragraph refers back to a prediction that Joseph Smith was said to have made that the time would come when the Latter-day Saints would need to "uplift, defend and maintain the Constitution of the United States." The First Presidency in May, 1885 seem to imply if they do not clearly state that this prophecy of Joseph Smith was then nearing fulfillment in 1885. This comment is interesting in light of the feeling of one Latter-day Saint author in 1962 that the prophecy of Joseph Smith has yet to see its ultimate fulfillment.

Duane S. Crowther in Chapter 5 and Appendix I of his Prophecy-Key to the Future (pp. 67-69; 296-300) has assembled some statements and interpretations of this prophecy of Joseph Smith concerning the "Mormon" defense of the Constitution of the United States.

The Message also calls for the setting up of "defense funds" in Utah, Idaho and Arizona to be used for the purpose of legally defending those who were being arrested and tried under the Edmunds Act.

TO THE PRESIDENTS OF STAKES and their Counselors, the Bishops and their Counselors, and the Latter-day Saints generally:

During the lifetime of the Prophet Joseph Smith he predicted that the time would come when it would devolve upon the Latter-day Saints to uplift, defend and maintain the Constitution of the United States. Recent events in our Territory have given great significance to this prediction, and have brought it forcibly to the minds of all who have heard concerning it. These events appear to be forcing us into the exact position so plainly described by the Prophet through the spirit of prophecy. Attempts are now being made to destroy our rights under the Constitution, and to effect this, that instrument which the Prophet Joseph Smith said was given by inspiration of God is being trampled upon by those who should be its administrators and guardians. This compels us to contend for constitutional principles. We must uphold them to the best of our ability. An attack has been made upon our religion, and it appears to be determined that we shall either abandon it or be visited with the most severe pains and penalties. Under the cover of this attack upon the principle of patriarchal marriage, we are denied the most of the rights which belong to freemen, and which our ancestors enjoyed for ages before even they were enunciated in writing in the Constitution of the United States. For proof of this we need but refer to our right to be tried only by a jury of our peers a right which men of our race have enjoyed from the most remote times. Our religion is made the pretext for this deprivation of rights, and for bitter threats against the few remaining liberties which we possess. To preserve these liberties, and to regain the rights of which we are already unjustly deprived, we must contend earnestly, manfully, legally and constitutionally.

The difference between our position to-day and that in which we were placed in the early days of our history, is that we are permitted to fight our battles in the courts by means of legal weapons and processes, while in former days mobs, armed with deadly weapons and backed by a public opinion hostile to us, enabled our enemies to take the lives of many of our friends, to despoil us of our property and homes, to persecute us in the most cruel and shameless manner, and to drive us from our lands; and all this was done without redress. Painful as our situation may be in many respects to-day, it is much to be preferred to that which we formerly occupied. Though we are attacked, the most of us still enjoy our homes. Our land is filled with plenty. There is no suffering for the want of any of the necessaries of life, and though some of our brethren are subjected to fine and imprisonment, still this is no more than we have been led to expect from the beginning would be the case.

But the contest in which we are now engaged requires means with which to conduct it. In defending and maintaining the principles of the Gospel we have been most successful. We have a trained body of theologians who are capable, with God's help, of meeting with and holding their ground against the world. To-day circumstances are rapidly forcing us to study and comprehend legal principles and forms, and their correct application, with the same assiduity and thoroughness that we have those of the Gospel. It is more than probable that at no distant day we shall have among us as thorough a knowledge of the law, and skill in its forms, as we now have of the Gospel. In the meantime, however, it is proper that we should avail ourselves of all the help that is necessary to defend ourselves.

At the beginning of these attacks upon us we formed a defence fund. This was for the purpose of employing legal talent and defraying necessary expenses, so that neither our public right, nor the liberties of any of our brethren, should be lost for the want of proper defence. This fund has been formed by contributions made by the various Stakes, it being the intention to use it for the defence of all who might be assailed on religious grounds in the Territory of Utah, so that the expense of defending himself should not fall upon any individual, but be borne by all in common. The Territorial Central Committee, because of the peculiar circumstances which surrounded some of our brethren outside of this Territory, found it necessary to extend a helping hand in their cases.

In this connection we speak of the defence fund formed in the Territory of Utah; but counsel has also been given to the leading Authorities of the Church in Idaho and in Arizona to form in each of those Territories a defence fund similar to that to which we refer, as existing in Utah, as it is equally necessary that the Saints in each of those Territories should make common cause in defending themselves. The views which we express in this Circular upon this subject to the Saints in Utah, therefore, will apply with equal force to the Saints in Idaho or Arizona, or wherever they may be attacked in violation of the Constitution. Of course the funds collected in each of those Territories will be handled by the committees appointed for that purpose.

It ought not to need any argument to convince Latter-day Saints of the wisdom and propriety of creating and maintaining such a fund. The warfare against us is not upon individuals, but is upon the Church as a body, and upon the religion which we all profess to believe and practice. And, while at the present time the attack is ostensibly made upon our system of plural marriage, it is evident that our persecutors will not be satisfied with the breaking up of the families of all who are open to this charge, but, if unchecked, would proceed from the commission of one outrage to another, until we would be stripped of every human right, including our homes and properties.

The Territorial Central Committee has had the management of this business, under the direction of the Chairman, Bishop John Sharp. Attorneys have been employed and legal help has been furnished to all who, because of their obedience to the law of God, have been assailed. This has required money, for liberty in these United States has become an expensive luxury to enjoy, and today the fund is considerably in debt.

One object in writing this epistle to you is to bring to your attention, that by doing so the Territorial Committee may be relieved from its financial embarrassment. Contributions have been called for from the various Stakes, some of which have been promptly sent; others have not been. Those who have contributed their quota promptly, feel, as a matter of equity, that, before they make further contributions, those who have neglected to assist should be called upon to furnish their portion. This is no more than right. We repeat to you, that it is much better for us to have the privilege of defending ourselves in this way than against mob violence. It is of the utmost importance to us as a people that these cases should be contested before the courts.

We do not think it advisable for brethren to go into court and plead guilty. We must not look at our own cases from individual standpoints, but in the light in which the whole people may be affected by our action, whatever it may be. Every case should be defended with all the zeal and energy possible. Let us contend for our rights, inch by inch, and not yield a particle to the demands of those who are assailing us. We have rights under the Constitution, and however much these may be denied to us, it is still our bounden duty to contend for them, not only in behalf of ourselves, but for all our fellow citizens and for our posterity, and for humanity generally throughout the world. Were we to do less than this, we would fail in performing the mission assigned to us, and be recreant to the high trust which God has reposed in us.

Energy should be used in collecting funds, and in remitting them to Chairman John Sharp. We know that the times are hard, and it is not so easy a matter as it has been to raise money. But by distributing this burden among us, it can be carried with much greater ease than to have it fall upon a few individuals, or upon those who have to defend themselves. The Latter-day Saints should be instructed upon this subject, and be made to see how important it is that we should follow up this course, and when they are thus instructed, no doubt they will respond willingly according to their ability, to the calls that are made upon them.

There is another matter to which we wish to call your attention in this connection. Several of our brethren have been consigned to prison because they will not break their covenants and deny their faith. Some of them have been sentenced in gross violation of law. Others have been compelled much because they are afraid to meet the consequences of their conduct, if they could have a fair trial in the courts, but because they cannot have a fair trial, for we all know that with packed juries, and those of our enemies, it is impossible to obtain justice, and that we are denied the protection which under the forms of law, properly administered, the vilest criminal receives, and that conviction and imprisonment are the almost inevitable results of accusation and arrest. The families of these brethren who are thus imprisoned, and of those who have been compelled to flee, should be looked after. Presidents of Stakes and Bishops should see that there is no suffering among them, and that all their reasonable and necessary wants are supplied. We must not allow the cry of the oppressed to ascend to the Lord, because of any neglect on our part to furnish them with those things necessary for their sustenance, and with which we have been so abundantly blessed. Our land is full of food, and this can be supplied to any extent that may be reasonably required.

In closing this epistle, we say to all the Latter-day Saints, these trials through which we are now passing will have the effect to prove the Saints and those who are only Saints in name. Those who have been careful to keep oil in their lamps, now have the needed light to guide them; and those who have been living in borrowed light, or in that furnished by others, may find themselves in perplexity and uncertain as to the path to pursue. For all these circumstances the Saints should be prepared. They have been faithfully taught and warned to not depend upon man or upon his strength to enable them to stand the trying day. They have been told, "Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him." They have been told that no man can serve two masters; that we cannot serve God and mammon. Those who have observed these teachings, and have diligently kept the other commandments of the Lord, will find themselves in the possession of the needed strength and faith to enable them to bear every trial.

Brethren and Sisters, notwithstanding these slight afflictions the honest-in-heart need not fear, for in God we trust. He is on the side of right, and Zion will most assuredly triumph.

We remain your brethren in the new and everlasting covenant, JOHN TAYLOR, GEORGE Q. CANNON, Of the First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Salt Lake City, May 26, 1885.
