James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Religious Persecution-Address to the Saints, July 24, 1885

1885-July 24-Deseret News, July 25, 1885; also MS 47:529-532 (August 24, 1885)

Issued on the thirty-eighth anniversary of the arrival of the Mormon Pioneers in Great Salt Lake Valley, this Address to the Saints states that the current persecution of the Saints was a test of their loyalty to God. It contains this significant statement: "We can afford to live for our religion, and if needs be, to die for it; but we cannot afford to violate our covenants, nor to perjure our souls before God.

AN ADDRESS to the Latter-day Saints in the Rocky Mountain Region and Throughout the World. (From the Deseret News, July 25, 1885.)

As this is the anniversary of the arrival of the Pioneers in Salt Lake Valley under the direction of President Brigham Young, we have thought it a proper and fitting time to address you briefly.

We came here as exiles thirty-eight years ago, driven from our lands and homes, our Temple and City of Nauvoo. We came to find an asylum in this, the then American deseret, and, far from what is termed civilization, to try to establish homes and seek that protection among the red men of the wilderness that was denied us, because of our religion, in the United States. There was no other reason at that time assigned for our expulsion but our religion. Since then we have been remarkably blessed by the Almighty in the extension of our settlements, in the building of our cities, in the erection of our Temples, in the introduction of education in all its various forms, in our agricultural, manufacturing and mercantile pursuits, and in the general development of the resources of the country. Under the blessing of the Almighty, and through His guidance and protection, we have been enabled to make the wilderness and solitary places glad, and the desert to blossom as the rose; and through a spirit of industry, perseverance and frugality, we have been prospered exceedingly in all our settlements. That which was originally intended has been made, through the blessing of the Almighty, to redound to our peace and happiness, and to our establishment as a happy people throughout these valleys a people from whose family altars continually ascend praise and adoration to the Most High for the great blessings which He has conferred upon us. We feel that unto God alone and to obedience to His laws are we indebted for the rich and varied blessings with which we are surrounded.

On this, the anniversary of the arrival of the Pioneers in this Valley of Salt Lake, it is fitting that we should thus publicly acknowledge the hand of God; and while we at present are in circumstances that are painful, and that have been brought about by the action of inconsiderate, unreflecting and, in many instances, wicked and unscrupulous men, some of whom are officials, yet we have never felt like wavering in our fidelity to our government, nor like ignoring the principles of equal rights guaranteed by that sacred palladium of human liberty-the Constitution of the United States. Our motto always has been, is now, and we hope always will be, as expressed in the declaration of Independence: "That all men are created equal, and are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights;" and that they have the right to "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." We are filled with regret when we see steps taken by those in authority, who ought to know better, to shackle the human mind and thought, to bring American citizens into bondage, and to pass and maintain laws that are violative of every constitutional right. History bears ample testimony to the fact that in past times no man's property, life or liberty was safe in the hands of judges who sat upon the bench and imagined they had a mission to perform, and who, to accomplish their end, had recourse to packed juries.

The history of Utah, during the past few months, illustrates the same truth. The authority of the government is being made use of, not to protect, but to harass, to prosecute, persecute and destroy the most honorable and upright of the land. Families are dissevered and broken up, the most sacred ties are rent asunder, homes are made desolate, and many of our leading men languish in prisons among thieves, murderers and criminals of the worst description. Our cities, towns and villages are infested with spotters, deputy marshals, informers and all those questionable characters who have found employment under tyrannical and despotic governments in other lands and in darker ages. To see the great principles of human liberty thus ruthlessly trampled under foot has caused us to feel sorrowful in our hearts; for this mighty nation cannot follow the example of other powers who have, through pride, maladministration of the laws and a disregard of human rights, fallen into decay and been overthrown, without meeting a similar fate.

It was doubtless with these feelings of sorrow for the degeneracy which could permit such outrages that some of our fellow-citizens thought proper on the 4th of July to place a few flags at half mast. Liberty was stricken down, pierced to her vitals by the hands of those who should be her protectors and guardians. The just, the upright, the virtuous and the honorable have been and are being incarcerated in prisons under the forms and color of law. And without dishonor to the flag, what more fitting mode could citizens adopt of exhibiting their grief at this condition of affairs? To place the flag at half-mast is the recognized symbol of grief throughout Christendom. As free men they thought, we suppose, they had the right to thus exhibit their sorrow for the existence of the evils from which they suffer, and not hypocritically indulge in laudations while upwards of 200,000 American citizens are practically denied the rights contended for in the Declaration of Independence. Must a free people be brought into such a state of servitude that they cannot express their feelings in a customary way? Must they be bound, fettered and chained, and then be gagged so as not to be heard? Must they cover their manacles with flowers, or wrap their fetters with cloths, lest the clanking sound unpleasantly in the ears of their tyrants, or free-men be aroused to revolt at the spectacle? Tyrants and their apologists may attempt to make such action appear disloyal; but we have not so learned the principles of freedom. A condition of affairs exists in this Territory which, when understood, every lover of human rights must condemn; and in behalf of ourselves, in behalf of our wives and children, in behalf of the Constitution of the United States, and in behalf of the principles of human rights and liberty in this land and throughout the world, we enter our solemn protest against such iniquitous acts as are being perpetrated here. While we do this we wish it to be distinctly understood that we have no controversy with the Republic as a nation, but with those who, sitting in high places and administering the laws, are guilty of outrageous acts of oppression towards their fellow-citizens.

Millions of the people of this nation are deceived by the false representations of religious bigots and political tricksters, who, when they shall know the truth, will be as much disgusted at this outrageous crusade against the principles of human freedom as we now are.

In reviewing the past thirty-eight years, what abundant causes we have for thanksgiving and praise! Every conceivable slander and falsehood has been circulated concerning us and our religion. Our enemies have endeavored to make the world believe that we ought to be destroyed, and they have invoked every earthly power within their reach to accomplish this. But, how marvelously God has wrought! Time after time it has seemed to all human vision that our destruction was inevitable, and our enemies have rejoiced at the prospects. But God has not forgotten Zion nor the promises He has made. He permits the wicked to exercise their agency, and their acts are the means of testing and proving His people. But there are limits beyond which they cannot go. They cannot interfere with His designs, nor destroy His work. He controls all their acts for His glory, and out of seeming evil He brings forth abundant salvation. Our very recent experience shows us that there is no cloud but has a silver lining. In our past experience we have often had reason to feel the truth of the words of the poet, that Behind a frowning providence He hides a smiling face.

In our present trials we shall have a similar experience.

Zion will emerge from them stronger and purer, and every way better qualified to cope with and overcome the difficulties and obstacles yet to be encountered. Our trust is not in numbers but in the strength and protection of Israel's God, who controls all the millions of the world, and puts down one and sets up another according to the counsel of His own will.

If we can only manage to observe His law and keep His commandments, He will protect us "while grass grows or water runs," while sun, moon and stars exist, or the earth and heavens endure, and when there shall be a "new heaven and a new earth whereon dwelleth righteousness." The Saints, if faithful to their covenants, their wives and posterity, shall enjoy them again, and possess them while the celestial worlds progress in their eternal spheres.

We have been very much pleased at the heroic conduct and the honorable course of our brethren and sisters who have had to endure the insults and outrages perpetrated by the present crusaders. The conduct of the Saints under these trying circumstances has been eminently proper. If the nation can bear and put up with such infamies as have been witnessed in these mountains, we can. We cannot, however, at the behest of man, lay aside those great principles that God has communicated to us, nor violate those sacred and eternal covenants which we have entered into for time and eternity. It is admitted as a fundamental principle that the States shall make no law "impairing the validity of contracts." If this is a correct principle concerning dollars and cents, how much more is it concerning the eternal happiness and salvation of man!

While we always have a disposition to "render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's," we feel it infinitely more important "to render unto God the things that are God's." We can afford to live for our religion, and if needs be, to die for it; but we cannot afford to violate our covenants, nor to perjure our souls before God; and we call upon the Saints, as we have done heretofore, to lean upon the Lord while passing through these afflictions which are now being so unmercifully heaped upon us by implacable and deadly foes, who are seeking to crush out from our souls the principles of human liberty, and to place us in a condition of serfdom and bondage. Our hope and trust are in the living God, and He will come to our deliverance in His own due time and will scatter the enemies of Israel. Therefore be not faint hearted, for God will defend the right. Live your religion, be humble, be virtuous, be honorable, be honest, preserve your integrity and keep the commandments of God, and He will sustain you in time and throughout all the eternities to come. Zion shall yet arise and shine, and the glory of God will rest upon her. The Saints shall see the salvation of Israel and their enemies overthrown. They shall join in sacred songs and anthems in praise and glory to the Most High, saying, Hallelujah! Hallelujah! for the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth, and will reign until He has put all enemies under his feet. Therefore rally around the standard of freedom, uphold the flag of the Republic, sustain the principles of human liberty, and maintain inviolate the Constitution of the United States and all laws in accordance therewith, and God shall smile upon you, and you and your generations shall be blessed in time and throughout the eternities that are to come. We must still bear the same record that we have heretofore borne to you: woe to them who fight against Zion, for God will fight against them.

Although we have changed our office from time to time, we have been able to perform our duties, with the exception of public addresses, as much as when at home. How long it shall be the good pleasure of God, our Heavenly Father, that we shall continue in our present condition, mattereth not. We hope always to be resigned to His providences, and to accept at His hands all that it may be His good pleasure to call us to endure, whether prosperity or adversity, freedom or imprisonment, life or death.

With kind regards, we subscribe ourselves your brethren and fellow-laborers in the New and Everlasting Covenant., JOHN TAYLOR, GEORGE Q. CANNON, Of the First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

July 24, 1885.
