James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Titles to Church properties, September 13, 1901

1901-September 13-Circular letter, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City.

Again the problem of the Bishops holding legal title to Church property was moved one step closer to solution by the action of the Legislature of Utah.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City, Utah, Sept. 13th, 1901.

President Angus M. Cannon,

DEAR BROTHER:

Since our letter to you, dated October 20th, 1899, referring to titles to Church properties in your stake, a law has been passed by the legislature of Utah authorizing a Bishop or Presiding Elder to incorporate without any Board of Directors or Trustees, and vesting the corporate powers in the Bishop or Presiding Elder, and his successor in office. This has greatly simplified the manner of holding titles to church property. When the property has been deeded to the Bishop or Presiding Elder, and he has taken the necessary steps to incorporate, no further action is necessary. The title then vests in the corporation, and when the Bishop dies, or, for any other cause, ceases to hold the office, his successor, by operation of law, succeeds to all the rights and powers of his predecessor.

The necessary blanks for the organization of ward corporations have been prepared by our attorney, and are in the hands of the Presiding Bishop, who has sent them directly to the bishops of the wards, with full instructions how to proceed to incorporate, and we hope that you will give the matter such personal attention as will insure complete organizations in all the wards of your stake as soon as practicable.

Blanks are also being prepared for the organization of stake corporations, which will be forwarded to you with instructions, it being designed to have the President of the Stake incorporate and hold the title to all stake properties, while the Bishop holds the title to all ward and tithing properties.

Hoping that you will give this matter your prompt and careful attention, we remain, with kind regards,

Your Brethren, LORENZO SNOW, JOSEPH F. SMITH.
