James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Instructions on annual Tithing settlement, November 15, 1886

1886-November 15-Circular of Instructions. On file in Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City.

How early in the Church there had developed a "condensed method of keeping and reporting" tithing accounts cannot be determined from the sources of information available to the author of these notes.

At least as early as July 20, 1854, the First Presidency had said to the Bishops of the Church:

"It is very difficult and unpleasant for us to make calculations to forward the Temple, and other public buildings, without the necessary data upon which to base such calculations; hence we wish each of you, in your respective wards, to forthwith prepare a list of names of all persons in your wards, who pay or should pay Tithing ..." Messages of The First Presidency 2:154

In the Instructions to Presidents of Stakes and others April 9, 1879, President John Taylor:

"Spoke of Statistical and Financial reports that were needed at this office. Said, he intended to instruct the Clerks in the Trustee-in-Trust office to notify each bishop when orders were drawn against them, at the Church office..." Ibid 2:323

Whether this Circular of Instructions (November 15, 1886) was the first ever issued has not been determined. It is the earliest that has come to our attention while making this collection. It seemingly was sent out, at least from 1886 forward, regularly with the annual report blanks and forms to the Presidents of Stakes, Bishop's Agents and Bishops of the Church. Details in these annual Instructions varied somewhat as the Church gradually developed an organized system of collecting and reporting Tithing. The Circular is reproduced in full. Later annual Issues will be mentioned but not reproduced in full unless they contain significant changes in instructions for handling and reporting the Tithing of the Church.

To the Presidents, Bishop's Agents and Bishops of the several Stakes and Wards of Zion: SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH, November 15th, 1886.

DEAR BRETHREN:

The labor involved in making the annual tithing settlement in the various Wards and Stakes of Zion, render it necessary to seek for a condensed method of keeping and reporting these accounts which shall still be capable of furnishing all the information that is required.

Blank No. 1. Ward Tithing Record. Blank No. 2. Ward Account Current. [Page 101] Blank No. 3. Ward Balance Sheet. Blank No. 4. Ward Statement of Cash Valuation. Blank No. 5. Stake Account Current. Blank No. 6. Stake Balance Sheet. Blank No. 7. Stake Statement of Cash Valuation.

Care should be taken to obtain the full name of each tithe-payer correctly spelled, then similar names should be grouped together. This should be especially observed in the case of families, when the seniors or heads should be entered first. This record which is a permanent one should be filled up by the most careful and correct penman in the Ward.

The Bishops will continue as heretofore to itemize the kind of tithing on their Ward books so that any person may be able to ascertain at any time exactly what they may have paid.

It is to be hoped that the Bishops will as soon as possible after December 31st, commence the settlement of their tithing accounts and make full returns to the Bishop's Agent of the Stake not later than February 1st. The Bishop's Agents are requested to assist the Bishops in the discharge of their duties and see that the foregoing instructions are carried out, and also to satisfy themselves personally of the correctness of the Bishop's returns, and render full report of the Stake on or before March 1st.

Respectfully your brethren, JOHN TAYLOR, Trustee-in-Trust.
