James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Report on campaign against religious liberty of the Saints, January 17, 1887

1887-January 17-MS 50:107-109 (1887)

This letter from Presidents Taylor and Cannon was written to acquaint the President of the British Mission with affairs at home including the passage by the U. S. House of Representatives of the Edmunds-Tucker bill which was an even more stringent measure than the Edmunds Act of 1882 under which the Church and its members had been suffering for five years. The letter was written with the expectation that the Edmunds-Tucker bill would pass both houses of Congress and become law. According to Roberts (CHC 6:116-148) the bill passed Congress in February, 1887 and then became law on March 3, 1887 without the signature of the President of the United States. Roberts comments:

"It was the last act of anti-'Mormon' legislation passed by the congress of the United States against Utah. While one rejoices that such an act became a law without the signature of the president of the United States, one can only regret that Grover Cleveland did not veto such a purely un-American thing."

The Dalton case, also mentioned in the letter was evidently fresh on the minds of Presidents Taylor and Cannon. Elder E. M. Dalton had been shot down while driving stock down a street in Parowan, Utah, by a Federal deputy marshal, William Thompson, Jun. The case went to trial January 6, 1887 (Dalton was shot on December 16, 1886) and after a two-day trial Thompson was found "not guilty" by a non-Mormon jury. For details of this affair see CHC 6:116-121.

LETTER from Presidents Taylor and Cannon. SALT LAKE CITY, January 17, 1887.

President Daniel H. Wells.

DEAR BROTHER: We have received a letter from Elder George Teasdale, in which he advises us of his arrival at Liverpool, and of the arrangements that have been made by you and him for the conduct of the MILLENNIAL STAR and the expedition of other business. All these matters are entirely satisfactory to us, and we sincerely trust that the coming of Brother Teasdale may be a great relief to you and an aid to the restoration of your health, by enabling you to place a portion of the responsibilities of your position upon his shoulders, and thus giving you opportunity for needed rest and recuperation. You have our most sincere prayers that your heart may be comforted, your body reinvigorated, and that all things may continue well with you and yours.

Two years have passed since the present crusade against the rights and liberties of the people of God was inaugurated, and we can now review the field and observe how little our enemies have effected. They have endeavored to create terror throughout our borders by the most unprecedented, unjustifiable and tyrannous measures. They have packed juries, they have tortured witnesses, they have employed spies, they have trampled upon law and evidence, they have converted courts of justice into dens of infamy, they have sent a number of innocent, God-fearing men to prison, they have filled the ears of the multitude with false accusation against us, they have derided the principles of the Gospel, and they have mocked at the power of Jehovah. And what have they accomplished? So far as the object assailed is concerned, nothing, absolutely nothing. A few individuals may have faltered, a few turned aside; but the great body of the Saints are stronger in the faith, purer in their lives, wiser in doctrine, and living nearer to God than when the onset was first made. True, they have gained an apparent victory by forcing through the House of Representatives, with a whoop and yell and almost without opposition, the Edmunds-Tucker bill, with all its atrocious features intact, and with an additional amendment, which makes it all the more oppressive. Still, it has not yet become law, and we have so often seen the hand of the Lord marvelously extended in our behalf that we shall not cease to hope for its ultimate defeat until all reason for hope has disappeared, and then we will trust the Lord that out of this apparent evil He will bring abundant good to those who will continue to serve Him.

The almost unanimous manner in which the House appears, from the telegraph dispatches, to have passed this cruel and tyrannical measure, demonstrates how rapidly this nation is sinking in all that constitutes a great people, and warns us how quickly we are drawing near to momentous changes. Amongst our enemies here it will doubtless have the effect of making them more tyrannical and overbearing and less inclined to accord the Latter-day Saints any rights whatever. It is evident that this extreme feeling has grown so strong in them that, to-day, in many of their minds, killing is no murder when a "Mormon" is the victim, as is evidenced in the late assassination of Elder E. M. Walton, at Parowan, by Deputy Marshal Thompson, and the indecent haste with which the farce of indicting, trying and acquitting him for his infamous act was performed. The tragedy brings deep grief to all the Saints, and especially to the family of the murdered one; but in the providence of God it may prove more disastrous to those who are guilty of it and who abet the murderer than to us. The whole affair is so atrocious and so plain a case of cold-blooded murder that it cannot fail to have its effect; and the innocent blood which has thus been shed will bring vengeance here and eternal damnation hereafter upon those who have been guilty of shedding it and consenting thereto. On the other hand, we are encouraged by the reports that we receive of the increasing diligence of the Saints, and our constant prayer to God is that He will increase upon His people the spirit of repentance, that they will arouse themselves from their lethargy and cast aside everything that is offensive to the heavens, so that His favor may be shown towards us in delivering us from the cunning snares and plots of the wicked. And if these persecutions effect this, great will be the gain, however unpleasant they may be to pass through or undergo. And in all we can see the hand of the Lord in our behalf. Many things which occur give evidence that while this persecution is being permitted by Him and controlled for the purpose of accomplishing His designs in connection with the purification of the Saints of God, He has not forgotten us, nor left us to the mercy of our enemies. We rejoice in the knowledge that He is watching over Zion, and that every promise which He has made concerning her will be fulfilled. We rejoice ourselves, personally, in the circumstances which surround us. Although we are cut off from many of the privileges that we would enjoy, we still have many blessings granted unto us, which we know we ought to appreciate, and which we endeavor to be continually thankful for. Our health is good, and we are able to attend to our duties to an extent that is very gratifying, considering all the difficulties of our position.

We presume that you keep advised concerning the general news, therefore it is not necessary for us to dwell at length upon what you can obtain from the papers. The acquittal of Brother Lorin Farr, for whose trial great preparations were made at Ogden, made the judge angry and, from all accounts, aroused the extreme ire of Prosecuting Attorney Dickson, who was not present himself at the trial. The judge is considered a great improvement on his predecessor, Powers, and all the brethren speak kindly of his rulings and the course he has taken: but in Brother Farr's case he seemed desirous to secure his conviction, probably because of his prominence and the effect which it might have upon the practice of plural marriage among our people. Dickson has not been so successful, however, in other cases at Ogden. He was compelled to acquit Brother Francis A. Brown, who has been in prison once, and he hoped to entrap him again on the ground that the presumption was he was guilty of unlawful cohabitation because he had refused at his former conviction to make any promises. The prosecution now appear to be willing to admit that the presumption is not enough, and that they must show by proof some sort of cohabitation before a conviction can be had. * * *

We were under the impression that we had written to you directly upon the question of your release and return from your mission; but an examination of our correspondence shows that our feelings upon this subject were communicated in our correspondence to Elder George Teasdale, a copy of which was forwarded to you. * * You are at perfect liberty, Brother Daniel, to consider yourself honorably released from all the duties we have assigned you in the British Mission, whenever in your judgment you may think it better for you to return. * As we said in our letter to Elder Teasdale, you have labored faithfully and to our satisfaction, and have done all that could be expected of you since your departure from home and your appointment as President of the British Mission; and whether you stay or return, you can be assured of our blessings.

With love to yourself, Elder Teasdale, and the brethren associated with you, in which Brother L. John Nuttall joins; and praying the Lord to bless you with every gift necessary for the performance of all your duties, and that He will preserve you from all your enemies,

We remain, your brethren, JOHN TAYLOR, GEORGE Q. CANNON.
