James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Death of President John Taylor, August 3, 1887

Official announcement of the death of President John Taylor by Wilford Woodruff in behalf of the Twelve Apostles. President Taylor died still in "exile" or hiding where he had been for two and one half years. He died at the home of Thomas F. Rouche in Kaysville, Utah. Thirteen days before his death, Joseph F. Smith returned from his "exile" in the Hawaiian Islands and the First Presidency were together again for this brief two weeks for the first time since December 1884.

A COMMUNICATION from President Woodruff to the Saints of God Throughout the World.

BELOVED BRETHREN AND SISTERS: Once more in the dispensation of Providence we are called to mourn the departure from this life of a friend and brother.

The Prophet, Seer, Revelator, and President of the Church, Elder John Taylor, was called to rest on the evening of July 25,1887. In sorrow for our loss, we, your brethren, join with you in mourning his departure. Having fought the good fight, he earned a crown of endless glory, and now mingles with Joseph and Hyrum and Brigham.

He has gone beyond the veil, but God is with us still to comfort, inspire, and direct as heretofore. Peace be unto you. God is at the helm, and all is well. As upon two former occasions in our history, the duty and responsibility of presiding over and directing the affairs of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in all the world devolves upon the Twelve Apostles. With the blessing of the Lord and the faith and prayers of His people we hope to do our duty until we too shall be laid to rest.

As Saints of the Most High, while living, let us give our hearts to God, sanctify ourselves by keeping His commandments, have oil in our lamps, our houses in order, and hopefully and prayerfully look forward to the day of deliverance, the set time for the accomplishment of which is fast approaching.

While mourning for the dead and holding his memory sacred; let us trust in the God of heaven, remember the living, unite our hearts, and earnestly strive for the redemption of Zion.

Let us not seek occasion for offense one against another, but forgive each other's trespasses, that the Holy Ghost may be our constant companion, and the doctrines of the Priesthood distil on our minds like the dews of heaven.

"Many are called, few are chosen." The Almighty has revealed in our day the reasons, but what a mighty host have wrecked their eternal hopes on those fatal reefs-love of the riches of this world, the honors and praises of men, and the exercises of unrighteous dominion.

Let all Israel remember that the eternal and everlasting Priesthood is bestowed upon us for the purpose alone of administering in the ordinances of life and salvation, both for the living and the dead, and no man on earth can use that Priesthood for any other purpose than for the work of the ministry, the perfecting of the Saints, edifying the body of Christ, establishing the Kingdom of Heaven, and redeeming Zion. If we attempt to use it for unrighteous purposes, like lightning from heaven our power, sooner or later, falls, and we fail to accomplish the designs of God.

Let us, therefore, beloved brethren and sisters, beware of the pride of the world, and, casting vanity far from us, be true to God, true to each other and true to the covenants that we have made. Purging ourselves from iniquity and the works thereof, let us set our faces like flint against sin and wickedness of every kind. So shall we, while patiently following the Redeemer, eventually gain the victory over the flesh, hell and the grave. We will continue in communication with you as circumstances may require and opportunities be afforded.

Praying the Lord God of heaven and earth, who holds all men and things in the grasp of His power, to comfort, cheer and bless you, we remain your brethren in the Gospel covenant,

WILFORD WOODRUFF, August, 1887. In behalf of the Twelve Apostles.

1887-September 19-Letter to Joseph Dean on the Sandwich Islands (Hawaii) instructing him to take native Hawaiians with him and open a mission to the Navigator and other South Sea Islands.

No copy of this letter is available for present publication.
