James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Epistle to Saints in Semi-Annual Conference, October 10, 1887

1887-October 10-Original pamphlet. Church Historian's Library. Salt Lake City, Utah.

Roberts (CHC 6:191-192) says that following the funeral of President Taylor on July 9, 1887 that his counselors, George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith, along with five of the twelve apostles and Daniel H. Wells had met and it was decided that the two counselors to the late President Taylor would preside over the church until the council of apostles could be convened. This council was convened on August 3, 1887 with eight members present. The two counselors were in this meeting reinstated in their positions (five and six) in the Council of the Apostles and that at the ensuing October General Conference the Quorum of the Twelve with Wilford Woodruff as president was sustained "as the presiding council and authority of the church, and with their counselors as prophets, seers and revelators." Roberts also indicates that the meeting of August 3rd authorized Wilford Woodruff to issue the brief Communication ... "To the Saints Throughout the world" reproduced above.

L. John Nuttall, who was asked by President Woodruff to continue his duties as secretary records in his diary that on October 4 and 5 the Epistle below was read and corrected in a meeting of the Quorum of the Twelve and that Erastus Snow and Moses Thatcher were authorized to write the paragraphs on Mexico and Canada. Nuttall says that the Epistle was read to the Church on October 6, 1887 but the published pamphlet says it was read October 10th.

The Epistle contains a restatement of the authority of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles to preside over the Church upon the death of the President of the Church, also the personal testimony of Wilford Woodruff and other items of instruction and information.

AN EPISTLE to the Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

INTRODUCTORY

Dear Brethren and Sisters:

It appears proper, at this Fifty-eighth Semi-annual Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, that an Epistle should be addressed to the members of the Church, in conformity with the custom which has been observed at the past five General Conferences.

DEATH OF PRESIDENT TAYLOR

As some of the Apostles are prevented, by circumstances well known to the Saints, from appearing in public, the Church will naturally look for some expression from them concerning their feelings and hopes respecting the works of our God. Especially at the present time is deep interest felt in the utterances of the Apostles, because of the loss which the Church has sustained in the death of PRESIDENT JOHN TAYLOR. Twice before has the Church mourned the death of its President, and each time the event has produced a profound impression upon its members. In this instance this sad event is invested with more significance than it would have been had it occurred in the ordinary way. President Taylor died in exile. For about two years and a half he had been compelled to live in seclusion, and to refrain from all public association with the people whom he loved more than he did life.

Through his decease the Church is called the third time to mourn the departure of the man who had stood as its President and as the Prophet, Seer and Revelator to this generation. The experience which the Saints have gained in passing through these trials has been of exceeding value to them. They have learned that God can take care of his own work, and that they need not worry nor yield to anxiety or doubt concerning its management.

After the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph there were pretenders who asserted that they had the right to take his place at the head of the Church. Some were deceived by their pretensions, not being familiar with the order of the Priesthood.

THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE APOSTLES

For some time before his death the Prophet Joseph was inspired of the Lord to anticipate his own departure from earthly scenes. This was shown in various ways; but especially in the great anxiety which he displayed to bestow upon the Twelve Apostles all the keys and authority of the Holy Priesthood which he had received. He declared in private and in public that they were equipped and fully qualified, and that he had rolled the kingdom of God on to the shoulders of the Twelve Apostles.

PRESIDENT WOODRUFF'S PERSONAL TESTIMONY

I, Wilford Woodruff, being the last man living in the flesh who was present upon that occasion feel it a duty I owe to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to the House of Israel, and to the whole world to bear this my last testimony to all nations, that in the winter of 1843-4, Joseph Smith, the Prophet of God, called the Twelve Apostles together in the City of Nauvoo, and spent many days with us in giving us our endowments, and teaching us those glorious principles which God had revealed to him. And upon one occasion he stood upon his feet in our midst for nearly three hours declaring unto us the great and last dispensation which God had set His hand to perform upon the earth in these last days. The room was filled as if with consuming fire; the Prophet was clothed upon with much of the power of God, and his face shone and was transparently clear, and he closed that speech, never-to-be-forgotten in time or in eternity, with the following language:

"Brethren, I have had great sorrow of heart for fear that I might be taken from the earth with the keys of the Kingdom of God upon me, without sealing them upon the heads of other men. God has sealed upon my head all the keys of the Kingdom of God necessary for organizing and building up of the Church, Zion, and Kingdom of God upon the earth, and to prepare the Saints for the coming of the Son of Man. Now, brethren, I thank God I have lived to see the day that I have been enabled to give you your endowments, and I have now sealed upon your heads all the powers of the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods and Apostleship, with all the keys and powers thereof, which God has sealed upon me; and I now roll off all the labor, burden and care of this Church and Kingdom of God upon your shoulders, and I now command you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ to round up your shoulders, and bear off this Church and Kingdom of God before heaven and earth, and before God, angels and men; and if you don't do it you will be damned."

And the same spirit that filled the room at that time burns in my bosom while I record this testimony, and the Prophet of God appointed no one else but the Twelve Apostles to stand at the head of the Church and direct its affairs.

THE PRESIDENCY IN THE APOSTLES

When the Prophet Joseph had passed away by foul assassination, those who possessed the Spirit of God and were living in close communion with it, knew the voice of the true shepherd and were not deceived by the claims of men who pretended to have authority. The body of the Church followed the leadership of those whom God had chosen, and whom His servant Joseph had been instructed to prepare for this great responsibility. The Twelve Apostles, with President Brigham Young as their head, became the presiding council of the Church.

The lessons which the Church then learned in regard to the Priesthood, have never been forgotten. When President Young was taken from us, there was no jar nor division of sentiment among the Apostles; and among the people there was scarcely a question as to where the right of Presidency rested. President John Taylor took the position which belonged to him, and the work of God moved forward without interruption, and with a union and harmony on the part of all connected with it, most delightful to witness. He has stood at our head for nearly ten years, and during that period he has possessed the gifts and qualifications which belonged to his high office and calling. His entire career is one that can be contemplated with the utmost satisfaction and pleasure by all who love the truth and admire integrity in those who are called to be servants of God. From the time that he was baptized a member of the Church until his spirit took its flight from earth, he never wavered in his advocacy and defense of the principles of righteousness. Under all the varied circumstances through which he and the people of God were called to pass, in the midst of the deepest trials and afflictions, his voice was always raised in tones of encouragement and hope; and when the storms were the fiercest, he rose to the occasion and always displayed undaunted courage and unflinching devotion to the Zion of God. In the providence of God it fell to his lot to be with the Prophet Joseph and Patriarch Hyrum when they were martyred for the truth, and he mingled his own blood with theirs. Though severely wounded on that occasion, he miraculously escaped death. He was a man whom the Lord loved. The evidence of this is to be found in the fact that He chose him to preside over His Church at the departure of His servant Brigham. We feel thankful to God our Eternal Father that we have been permitted to live with and enjoy the society of President John Taylor and be his fellow-laborers. Our association with him and the Presidents and Apostles who have gone before him into the spirit world, we esteem as a great honor. We take delight in anticipating the rejoicing that we shall have when we shall be permitted to mingle in their society.

Once more, the responsibility of presiding over the Church has fallen upon the Council of the Twelve Apostles. The Counselors of President Taylor, Brothers George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith, being members of the Council of the Twelve Apostles at the time they were chosen to be members of the First Presidency, have, since his death, taken their places again as members of that Council.

Fifty-seven years and a half have elapsed since the Church was organized. In looking around among those with whom we associate to-day, how few there are left of those who, under the Lord, helped to lay the foundation of this work and were the companions of the Prophet in the early labors connected therewith! To-day there is but one Apostle left of those who belonged to the Council of the Apostles during the lifetime of the Prophet Joseph, or, indeed, at the time these valleys were first settled. The other faithful Apostles who were ordained under the direction of the Prophet have all passed behind the veil. Since the death of President Young four have joined him in the other world, and in the same period six have been ordained as members of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. This gives some idea of the changes which are occurring, and how rapidly a new generation is taking an active part in the building up of Zion.

THE LABORS OF THE APOSTLES

Those of us who have been at liberty to travel, have devoted our time to visiting the various Stakes, and in meeting with them at their Quarterly Conferences. Some of us have been laboring in Mexico, others in Arizona, besides visiting the Stakes in Idaho and in Utah. These Quarterly Conferences are attended with excellent results. The people come together and receive instructions and counsel upon leading topics, and much good is derived therefrom. Though it involves considerable labor for the Apostles to visit them, yet we are encouraged in doing so by the advantages which those visits bring to the people in keeping them informed concerning general movements and counsel. In these labors we have had much joy and satisfaction, especially in witnessing the increase of faithfulness on the part of the Saints.

THE PATIENCE OF THE SAINTS

Though many of the leading men have been compelled to be absent, some of them having been incarcerated in prison, the people have, nevertheless, been steadfast, and have sought with increased diligence to perform their duties. The persecution to which they have been subjected has led the people to think and act for themselves, and not depend so much upon others for guidance. This can not fail to be attended with good results. It is necessary that all the members of the Church should exercise their powers of reason and reflection and thoroughly understand why they take the course which God points out. Intelligent obedience on the part of His Saints is desired by our Father in heaven. He has given us our agency to think and act for ourselves, on our own volition, to obtain a testimony for ourselves from Him concerning the truth of the principles which He teaches, and then be firm and unshaken in the performance of all which is necessary for salvation. ...

We have felt great satisfaction in witnessing the dignity and courage which the Saints have exhibited through the trials of the past three years. Their conduct has been admirable. They have displayed great qualities. The forbearance, patience and fortitude which they have exhibited are proofs that God has been with them. Outrages which would have goaded any other people into acts of violence have been of frequent occurrence. In other communities men and women would be desperate under such treatment. But the Lord has given His people power to control themselves and peace has been maintained. Riots and bloodshed have been avoided, and even under strong provocation, when blood was shed, the community restrained itself. Prejudice may prevent our nation and its rulers from acknowledging, at the present, how noble the demeanor of the people has been under these trying circumstances, and with the strong provocations which they have had to indulge in outbreaks; yet the time will come when all this will receive its proper recognition and due credit will be accorded the Latter-day Saints for their magnanimity and self-control throughout this entire persecution.

PRIMARY ASSOCIATIONS, ETC.

In the organizations which have been established among our people in all our settlements in these mountains, the advancement and training and benefit of all classes are amply provided for. Among no people of whom we know anything have such provisions been made for the salvation and care of the members of society of all ages as among the Latter-day Saints. If we and our children do not progress in intelligence and in the knowledge of all principles pertaining to life here and life hereafter, it is because we do not avail ourselves of those facilities which are placed within our reach. We have the Primary Associations provided for the benefit of the young children of our Church, and their instruction in those simple principles which they can understand. We also have Sunday schools for the training and education of those of larger growth. In them they can learn the doctrines of salvation and the history of the work of God, and be prepared for greater progress. Then we have the Young Mens' and Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Associations, which have been organized, as their names imply, for the development of the young people of both sexes and their advancement in every thing that will qualify them for lives of usefulness and honor. But besides these organizations we have the various councils of the Priesthood, to some office in which every young man who is worthy can be ordained. The young women, as they increase in years, can also find a sphere of usefulness in the Relief Societies which have been organized for the purpose of assisting the Bishops and Counselors and Teachers of the Wards in caring for the poor and relieving the wants of the suffering and distressed. So that by means of these organizations, which are of vast interest to us as a people, every one from early childhood to maturity, can be led forward step by step, from one degree of knowledge to another until fully qualified to discharge all the duties of perfected and honorable manhood and womanhood.

So far as we know the sisters who have charge of the Primary Associations are doing a most commendable work in arousing interest in the little ones and in teaching them in simple style those lessons which are adapted to their understandings. We hope that in all our settlements these associations will receive the constant care and attention of our wise and judicious sisters. The seed sown in the hearts of the children by the instructions imparted there will produce in years to come an abundant harvest that will gladden the hearts of the Saints who witness it.

OUR SUNDAY SCHOOLS, ETC.

The progress of the Sunday School cause in Zion continues satisfactory, though undoubtedly somewhat retarded by the enforced absence from its labors and associations of so many brethren and sisters who have in former years taken an active interest in its welfare. We notice, with pleasure, the constantly increasing number of schools, teachers and scholars reported by the officers of the Union and the evident care taken by the presiding local authorities in our settlements to have a Sunday School as one of the first institutions established. We are also gratified to learn that in most of the foreign missions of the Church Sunday Schools and Improvement Associations are being organized wherever practicable. In Great Britain, in Continental Europe, in New Zealand, and in the Sandwich Islands, as also in the branches scattered throughout the missions in the United States, these institutions are found contributing their influence in instructing and forming the character of the children of the Latter-day Saints.

The Mutual Improvement Societies are also accomplishing great good throughout our settlements. In connection with them and the Sunday Schools, we desire to remind our brethren and sisters who are engaged in the praise-worthy labor of fostering these institutions, that the original design in organizing Sunday Schools and Improvement Societies among us was, that the children and youth of the Saints should be made wise in the principles of the Gospel and their faith be developed in the revelations of God. This the officers and teachers should keep constantly in mind. The books used should be almost without exception, the revelations of God as contained in ancient and modern Scripture, together with the other works of the Church. The teachings, while direct, brief and simple, should be such as will increase the faith, develop the veneration and love, and draw out the intelligence of the youthful hearers toward the divine principles of which by God's grace, we have been made the custodians. All attempts, however slight, to secularize these institutions and to change them so that they will not accomplish the ends sought for in their creation, should be discountenanced. The spirit and teachings of the Gospel should hold undivided control in all our ministrations connected with this cause. In the theological and other classes all discussions should be avoided as much as possible on subjects which God in His wisdom has not yet fully revealed. We know there are many persons who appear to take more delight in dwelling upon questions which are mysterious and cannot very well, in our present state of knowledge, be answered than they do upon those subjects which are plain and simple and essential to present progress. But the Lord has revealed so much that we can understand and that we ought to learn in order to be useful in the labors devolving upon us here, that we need not enter into discussion on subjects which in no way affect our happiness here or eternal salvation hereafter. In our theological classes, quorum meetings and other assemblies, therefore, these debatable questions need not be discussed or be dwelt upon to occupy the time of the members, to the exclusion of more profitable topics. In the Primary Association, the Sunday schools and the Mutual Improvement Associations, singing should receive a large share of attention. Singing exercises can be made a great attraction and also a valuable addition to the education of the young. The interest that is now taken among us in vocal and instrumental music is a marked feature of the times, and this taste finds increasing opportunities for its development in the facilities which are now being furnished to all who desire its cultivation. Instead of having a select few act as choirs inthese institutions to do the singing for the whole, the voices of all should be united in harmonious melody in giving utterance to the feelings of their hearts in hymns and songs. This will increase the pleasure of the meetings, and make all feel that they have an equal interest in worship and rejoicing.

THE RELIEF SOCIETIES

The mission of the Relief Societies as organized among us, is truly grand and beneficent. There is no limit to their labors and usefulness while suffering and want exist in our midst. To aid the needy by feeding the hungry and clothing the destitute is distinctively and peculiarly their mission. In the energetic performance of their duty human sympathy and divine mercy are beautifully harmonized. In extending relief to the poor, the love of God and of our fellows is clearly manifest. It is more praiseworthy for a relief society to be able to say "There are none in our Ward in need of food, raiment or shelter," than to report thousands of dollars in hand, while the needs of the poor are unsupplied.

These societies have done a vast amount of good among us, and the members have been of great service in assisting the Priesthood in the wards in caring for the destitute and in supplying the wants of those who have been in need of help. In these labors we desire to give them every encouragement and to invoke the blessing of heaven upon them, and all their exertions for the benefit of suffering humanity.

THE CARE OF THE POOR

As the winter season is approaching, it is proper that each Bishop and his Counselors should take the necessary steps to properly care for the poor who live in their wards. They should call the Relief Societies to their aid in this labor. The reasonable wants of the poor should be supplied and the pangs of poverty and destitution should be averted. God has greatly blessed us in the fruits of our fields and gardens, in our flocks and herds, and in giving us comfortable habitations and means to sustain ourselves, and we should always remember the words of the Apostle James: "Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world."

While it has always been the policy of our people to encourage industry and to repress idleness in every form, and to expect all persons to contribute, according to their ability, to their own support; still there are many cases where the aged and the infirm, or the unfortunate, cannot, with the utmost exertion and economy, obtain through their own labors sufficient to sustain themselves. It would be a great evil among us to encourage any class in living upon the benevolence of the community. No system of begging should be permitted. Those able to work should be furnished employment. Persons who are properly disposed will be glad to obtain it in preference to being fed with the bread of charity; and all should be encouraged to labor according to their strength. This policy, if wisely pursued will prevent pauperism, develop self-exertion and confidence, and produce self-respect. It is a cause of great pleasure to think that beggary is unknown throughout our settlements. There is no need for anyone, however destitute, to publicly solicit alms. But while this is the case, the sensitive and those who shrink from asking aid, who conceal, in some instances, their poverty, should be carefully looked after by the Relief Societies under the direction of the Bishops of the wards, so that there may be no individual in any of our wards suffering for the want of food or any other article necessary to sustain or preserve life. The community whose hearts are open to the cries of distress, who are ready to administer of the substance which the Lord gives them to relieve their fellow creatures, may always depend upon the favor of the Lord, for He loves those who are kind to their fellow-men, and who administer to their necessities, whose hearts are tender, and who readily respond to applications of this character which are made upon them, or who anticipate them by giving freely to the destitute.

FAST OFFERINGS

In some of our wards there is not proper care taken in the collection of the fast offerings of the people. The first Thursday in the month has been set apart in the Church as a day of fasting and of prayer. That day should be strictly observed. Fast offerings should be brought with a liberal hand to the Bishop of each ward, that he may be prepared to supply those who are dependent upon the ward for sustenance. Some wards require considerable aid from the Church to help sustain their poor, because their own fast offerings do not supply them; while sometimes in the same Stake there are other wards where there are few, if any, dependent poor. Presidents of Stakes should make arrangements with the Bishops of the last named wards to transfer their fast offerings to the Bishop of some contiguous ward which has more poor within its borders than its own fast offerings will supply. In this way all the people can have an equal opportunity of doing their duty to the poor.

THE LESSONS OF LIBERALITY

Experience has abundantly proved that those who are attentive to these and all other duties required by the Lord receive His blessing. God does bless those who devote themselves with singleness of purpose to His work. If proof of this were needed, one has only to notice the condition of Elders in the various settlements who have spent years of their lives upon missions. Though their home affairs may have been left to the care of their wives and children, they are not distinguished by their poverty from their fellow-servants who have remained at home.

We have only to look around us to satisfy ourselves also, that those who are generous in contributing to God's work are favored of the Lord. This was the experience of ancient Israel, and it is our experience. Yet in regard to voluntary donations there is too much carelessness, notwithstanding all the precious promises connected therewith. The Saints should be reminded of the obligation which rests upon them. Our children, also, should be taught this duty, that it may become a fixed habit with them to punctually attend to these matters. Those who have strictly observed these requirements can testify to the great pleasure and many rewards they have received from their observance.

This law of liberality appears to be one of the safeguards which the Lord has adopted to avert from his people the evil consequences which follow the possession of wealth. He has told us that the riches of the earth are His to give; but He has warned us to beware of pride, lest we become as the Nephites of old. We know the ruin it wrought for them, and we should spare no precaution to prevent wealth having a disastrous effect upon us. Many can endure poverty and be humble and live near the Lord who cannot bear riches. They become lifted up in pride and become covetous, and forget their God. Those, however, who remember constantly the teachings of the Lord concerning the earth and its inhabitants, and who contribute of the means which the Lord gives them to assist the poor and help carry forward the work of God, exercise a check upon themselves and give Satan less power to lead them astray. Under the present system of affairs, those who supply themselves and their families with luxuries and advantages that are denied their neighbors, are in danger of becoming separated from the bulk of the people and forming a distinct class. But the day will come when a more perfect order will be introduced. Then it will be said there are no poor and no rich in Zion that is, we shall not be divided into classes, but shall all possess everything of this character necessary for our comfort and happiness. But until then, if we wish our families and ourselves to remain Latter-day Saints, we must be especially careful to guard against the deceitfulness of riches.

THE DUTIES OF THE SAINTS

The great labor which devolves upon us, as members of the Church, is to build up Zion. God has founded Zion, and we should seek to extend its benefits and blessings unto all mankind. It should be our constant care to do nothing that will weaken its influence or power or retard its growth in the earth. This we should constantly impress also, upon our children, that they may grow up filled with an abiding love for the work of God.

There has been too much neglect on this point. Many have pursued a short-sighted, selfish policy; and have worked to that which they believed was their own individual advantage without regard to the effect their action would have upon the work of God. Their eyes have not been single to His glory. Such a disposition has proved a snare to those who have indulged in it; they have wrought injury to themselves, not to mention the effect their conduct has had upon Zion.

THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF MARRIAGE

The Lord has informed us that marriage is ordained of God unto man. The institution of marriage, in some communities of which we read, is falling almost into disrepute. It is alleged that there is a growing tendency in this direction among us. The cause is doubtless, traceable to the increase of wealth and the disinclination of young men to take upon them the burdens of a wife and family. As we depart from the simplicity of early days, we may naturally expect that this tendency will increase as young men may be restrained from offering marriage to young ladies unless they can give them something like as comfortable a home as they enjoy under their parents' roof. Extravagant or luxuriant habits or training on the part of the girls will also have the effect to deter young men from marrying. Care should be taken by every person of influence to counteract this tendency, and to set before the rising generation the advantages which follow well-arranged marriages. No community can prosper and maintain a high standard of morality where there is a large percentage of unmarried young men and young women. We should deplore the increase of such a class among us, and all honorable means should be used to prevent its existence. The young of both sexes should be taught that it is not necessary to happiness in marriage to be in the possession of wealth. In this country an industrious, economical married couple can soon surround themselves with all the conveniences and comforts essential to life and happiness. The satisfaction each will have in after years in the enjoyment of the fruits of their joint industry and thrift will amply repay them for any inconveniences or privations they may have been subjected to in the early days of their married life. The comforts thus accumulated will be doubly sweetened unto them by the recollection of their exertions in common to procure them. No rightly constituted and educated young woman will refuse an offer of marriage from a worthy, industrious young man for no other reason than that he is not able to surround her at first with the comforts which she may think she ought to have. Young men, who have a due share of the qualities which women esteem in a husband, need not be afraid that girls of that kind will refuse them, because they may not be well endowed with this world's goods. They will cheerfully bear their part of the burdens of life without repining when confident of the love and supporting and guiding hand of their husbands.

AGAINST INCURRING DEBT

We feel led to caution the Latter-day Saints against forming the bad habit of incurring debt and taking upon themselves obligations which frequently burden them heavier than they can bear, and lead to the loss of their homes and other possessions. We know it is the fashion of the age to use credit to the utmost limit, and it is customary for nations, states, counties and cities to borrow money, issue bonds and thus load themselves with taxes to such an extent that large numbers of the people are prevented from owning land or even the houses which they occupy. Thus the masses become tenants and have to pay rent for land and shelter. This is a great evil and one that we, as a people and as individuals, should carefully shun. Our business should be done, as much as possible, on the principle of paying for that which we purchase, and our needs should be brought within the limit of our resources. The disposition to speculate and to take chances upon ventures of one kind and another should be repressed. There are many people who have been rendered homeless in our Territory by the neglect of this precaution. To raise funds to invest in some scheme which has appeared promising they have mortgaged their homes, only too often, to be disappointed and to find themselves without a place of shelter for themselves and their families. All this is wrong. If the penalty for such unwisdom fell upon the one through whose acts and influence it is brought about, the consequences would not be so deplorable; but very frequently families suffer and the bad results are widely felt. We, therefore, repeat our counsel to the Latter-day Saints, to shun debt. Be content with moderate gains, and be not misled by illusory hopes of acquiring wealth. Remember the saying of the wise man: "But he that hasteth to get rich shall not be innocent." Let our children also be taught habits of economy, and not to indulge in tastes which they cannot gratify without running in debt.

ZION SHALL NOT BE REMOVED

We have been favored, as no other people have, with wise counsels. Their extent and variety are immeasurable. They cover every department of human life. So far as we have observed them, prosperity and happiness have been the results. Whatever difficulties we may have to contend with to-day are due, if not wholly, at least in great part, to our disregard of them. Is not this the experience and testimony of all the faithful Saints who have watched the progress of events among us? Had we observed these counsels, how many of the evils from which we now suffer would never have been known among us! Our neglect of them has brought its punishment, and the faithful can see it. But shall we not profit by the experience of the past and act more wisely in the future? As the Lord has said (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. 90, ver. 36-37),

"But verily I say unto you, that I, the Lord, will contend with Zion, and plead with her strong ones, and chasten her until she overcomes and is clean before me: For she shall not be removed out of her place, I, the Lord, have spoken it."

We should begin to understand that God's ways are infinitely superior to our ways, and that His counsels, though they may seem to call for sacrifice, are always the best and the safest for us to adopt and carry out. Thousands among us can testify to the truth of this from individual experience. These thousands should combine and create a public opinion in favor of obedience to the counsel of heaven that will have its proper effect upon our children and the inexperienced among us.

THE GLORY WILL BE THE LORD'S

We also should learn this great truth, that God will have all the glory and honor for the establishment of His Church and Kingdom on the earth. Man cannot claim it in this or any other age of the world. Nothing but the power of God could have brought forth the fullness of the Gospel, organized the Church, gathered His people to Zion in fulfillment of revelation and performed the work which has been accomplished. Therefore, as Latter-day Saints, we are obliged to acknowledge the hand of God in all the blessings we enjoy.

THE CONDUCT OF OUR LIVES

It should be the aim of all the members of the Church to carry out practices * * [and] principles of the Gospel. In no way can we better convince the world of their truth than in showing in our acts and dealings with one another and with mankind the elevating effect they have upon us. We make high professions, and there should be such a high standard of purity of life among us as to correspond with these professions. Our children should be impressed with this, and be taught that the name of Saint is so holy that they only who are pure in heart can claim it.

If our religion does not lead us to love our God and our fellow man and to deal justly and uprightly with all men, then our profession of it is vain. The Apostle says:

"If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his brother, whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen?"

We can best exemplify our love for our God by living our religion. It is vain to profess a love for God while speaking evil of or doing wrong to His children. The sacred covenants we have made with Him strictly impose upon us the duties we owe to one another; and the great office of religion is to teach us how to perform those duties so as to produce the greatest happiness for ourselves and for our fellow-beings. When the obligations of our religion are observed, no words are spoken or acts are committed that would injure a neighbor. If the Latter-day Saints lived as they should do, and as their religion teaches them to do, there would be no feeling in any breast but that of brotherly and sisterly affection and love. Backbiting and evil-speaking would have no existence among us,; but peace and love and good will would reign in all our hearts and habitations and settlements. We would be the happiest people on the face of the earth, and the blessing and peace of Heaven would rest upon us and upon all that belongs to us.

If there be unhappiness and heartburnings and quarrelings and hatreds among us, they exist because we do not observe the religion which we profess. They are not its fruits. Where these evils exist there is a crying necessity for repentance. If any feel injured by the words or acts of their brethren and sisters, the Gospel points out and furnishes the way by which this injury may be repaired. Instead of talking about this to others they should go to the person or persons who have done the wrong and make their feelings known. If satisfaction is then made, that ought to end the matter; but if not, it can be reported to the proper officers of the Church for them to take the necessary steps to terminate the difficulties. In this way animosities and disunion can be prevented and confidence is maintained.

PARTAKING OF THE SACRAMENT

As Latter-day Saints, it is our general custom to partake of the sacrament once a week. If the teachings of our Lord, in remembrance of whom we observe this sacred ordinance, be regarded, no one who has trespassed can be permitted to share in it until he has made reconciliation. It is the express commandment of the Lord Jesus that no one shall be permitted to partake of His flesh and blood unworthily. A more perfect system to prevent the existence of improper feelings and wrongs among brethren and sisters can not be imagined. If the Saints do their duty, difficulties do not remain unsettled beyond the Lord's day when they assemble to eat and drink in remembrance of Him.

TEMPLE WORK

Notwithstanding the difficulties that the Saints have had to contend with of late, they have pursued their labors in every direction with unabated zeal. This is particularly noticeable in their attendance at the Temples. The wish to avail themselves of the opportunities for attending to the ordinances for themselves and their deceased friends has, if anything, increased, and those employed in these sacred buildings have their time fully occupied in performing their duties there. It is evident that the Latter-day Saints appreciate the blessings to be obtained through this Temple work. When we reflect that we have two buildings of this character already completed, furnishing abundant facilities for all who choose to go there to obtain the ordinances of God's house for themselves and for those in whose salvation they take so deep an interest, and that we have another Temple at Manti nearing completion, and one in Salt Lake City, which we hope to see finished before long, our hearts are filled with gladness and we cannot refrain from praising our God for His goodness unto His people in permitting them, notwithstanding the opposition and many difficulties they have had to contend with, to erect such structures and to dedicate them, according to the pattern He have given for these sacred uses.

No right-feeling Latter-day Saint can think upon this subject without being thrilled with heavenly joy for what God has done for us in our generation, furnishing us, as He has done, with every facility to prepare us, our posterity and our ancestors for that eternal world which lies beyond the present life. The Latter-day Saints are, in truth, a highly favored people, and praise to God should ascend from every heart and habitation in our land for the great mercy and goodness which He has shown unto us. He has made us promises of the most precious character, and he has fulfilled them up to the present time. We would be the most ungrateful and unworthy people that ever lived if, after receiving such wonderful manifestations of His goodness, we slackened in our diligence or failed in our obedience and devotion to Him and His great cause.

FOREIGN MISSIONS

The treatment which the Elders have received in preaching the Gospel throughout the Southern States, as we are informed by President John Morgan, has been much better of late than it has been at some other periods. The Elders are listened to with patience and do not meet with so much of the spirit of mobocracy and unreasoning hate. Additions are being made to the Church, and those who emigrate from that region have generally settled in San Luis Valley, Colorado.

The Elders in the North Western States under the direction of President W. M. Palmer, pursue their labors with undiminished zeal and with moderate success in bringing people into the Church. These fields of labor have furnished opportunities for numbers of our young men to gain experience in missionary efforts, and those who have this privilege return home, in the most of instances, better qualified to assist the local authorities where they reside in the labors of the ministry.

In Great Britain the Elders meet with considerable opposition in places, principally, however, from apostates. They find that field a much more difficult one than it was in former years. The hearts of the people seem to have become hardened, and great indifference prevails in regard to religion. Still we learn from President George Teasdale, who presides at the present time over the European Mission, that the Elders who zealously enter into the labors of the ministry find abundant cause for rejoicing in the success which attends their exertions. Throughout the Swiss and German Mission presided over by Elder Frederick Schoenfeld, and the Scandinavian Mission presided over by Elder N. C. Flygare, the Elders are laboring also with commendable zeal and with gratifying results. An effort is being made at the present time to preach the Gospel in Turkey, where Elders Jacob Spori, J. M. Tanner and F. F. Tintze have been, and are laboring, and even the land of Palestine has been visited, and in the late company of emigrants which reached this City from Europe, nine persons were gathered who had received the Gospel in that land, a land hallowed to us as the earthly home of our Redeemer, and the soil of which his sacred feet trod.

On the Sandwich Islands the Elders are laboring faithfully under the direction of President William King, and everything is being done to improve the condition of that people and to save them from the destruction which threatens the extinction of the race. The plantation at Laie is still maintained, and the Elders who have labored and who are still laboring there enter with spirit into the management of that property in a way to benefit as much as possible the native Saints. The attention of the Elders there is directed at present to the Navigator Islands, where some few years ago two native Elders from the Sandwich Islands were successful in baptizing a large number of natives and organizing them into branches. These Islands have not been visited by any of the white Elders, but it is probable that some of our Elders on the Sandwich Islands may in the near future make a visit there.

The letters which we receive from New Zealand where President William Paxman presides, continue to bring us gratifying intelligence concerning the condition and progress of the work there. The Elders are very successful among the Maoris. Many of the white brethren have succeeded in acquiring the language of that race, which is cognate to that of the Sandwich Islands, and two of them, Elders Ezra T. Richards and Sondra Sanders, Jr., are now engaged, we are informed, in translating the Book of Mormon into the Maori language. In Australia the Elders are also laboring, but it is a much harder field than among the natives of New Zealand.

HOME MANUFACTURES

Frequent reference has been made in past teachings and in former Epistles to the subject of home manufactures. It has been, and we feel it still ought to be, a theme of inexhaustible interest to Zion; yet there remains an immense amount to be done in developing our resources and furnishing facilities for the employment of the people. It is pleasing to note the progress which is being made in some directions. Our woolen manufactures are gaining credit for their excellence in other communities as well as our own. But we export considerable wool even after all our factories are well supplied. If this could be manufactured at home, it would add greatly to the wealth of our community, not only in the profits which would accrue from the use of machinery, but in the employment which it would furnish to many of our citizens. Besides the manufacture of woolen cloths, there is considerable home-made hosiery of excellent quality which is placed on the market.

The range of articles which are manufactured in this Territory is gradually increasing; and from the feeling which now prevails we judge that many more branches will soon be added to those already in operation. The manufacture of soaps of various grades has now become a settled and paying business. A fine quality of hats is also made. Boots and shoes and clothing, glass, white lead, leadpipe, native paints, brushes, paper, printing type, starch, pearl barley and oatmeal are all manufactured in the Territory, and many of these articles in sufficient quantities to supply the local demand and to export to some extent. It is an encouraging feature in the most of these enterprises that those engaged in them are seeking to enlarge their facilities with the view to increase their production. We have a large number of children growing up among us who should be furnished with opportunities to acquire skill in mechanism, manufactures, and other pursuits which are necessary for the comfort of man. It is not only incumbent upon parents to seek for avenues of profitable employment for their children, but it should be kept in view by the leading men of the Church in all our settlements. An idle man's brain, it is said, is the devil's workshop, and no community can prosper and maintain a high standard of morality that does not furnish employment for its members. Far better to work for low wages than not to work at all. But with proper care, and by putting in use the experience that many individuals in every settlement possess, there need be no want of remunerative employment for the rising generation, and for others who may come in from abroad. It may not always be kept in mind, yet it is a fact, that any percentage of idle persons in a community is a direct loss to the whole. It is unfortunate, also, for a community, when the young and enterprising are compelled to leave it and go elsewhere to find employment or room for the exercise of the talent of which they feel themselves possessed. Settlements that are in this situation will languish and go to decay, while other that furnish facilities for employment will become thrifty and prosperous. The combination of capital by means of co-operation would, in many instances, enable settlements to start branches of manufacture and conduct them successfully. Chimerical schemes, however, should not be encouraged, as their failure destroys confidence and makes it more difficult to obtain aid for worthy enterprises which might be made successful. Where co-operation has failed among us, it has not been because the principle is defective, but because of mismanagement, sometimes from ignorance and carelessness, and sometimes, perhaps, from selfishness.

Our country abounds in useful elements. We have a fertile soil, when properly cultivated, and an admirable climate. Grains, fruits, and vegetables, as well as all kinds of stock, can be raised here, and as superior in quality as can be found anywhere on the earth. Care should be taken to raise the very best varieties. Our horses, cattle, sheep, and poultry, as well as our grains, and fruits, and vegetables, should be of the very best kinds, and no pains should be spared to keep them pure. Our system of irrigation does not admit of the cultivation of large areas of land. Our farms are moderate in extent. This being the case, they should be cultivated in the most approved style, and the whole business connected with a farm should be conducted in a manner to bring the best results. As facilities for education increase, there undoubtedly will be a marked improvement in the management of all these branches of business.

PRACTICAL EDUCATION

It is gratifying to notice the interest that is being taken among us in education; yet there is great room for improvement. As the taste for what may be called book-learning increases, manual labor should not be neglected. The education of the mind and the education of the body should go hand in hand. A skillful brain should be joined with a skillful hand. Manual labor should be dignified among us and always be made honorable. The tendency, which is too common in these days, for young men to get a smattering of education and then think themselves unsuited for mechanical or other laborious pursuits is one that should not be allowed to grow among us. Of course it is necessary as society is now organized, that the professions, as they are termed, should receive attention. But every one should make it a matter of pride to be a producer, and not a consumer alone. Our children should be taught to sustain themselves by their own industry and skill, and not only to do this, but to help sustain others, and that to do this by honest toil is one of the most honorable means which God has furnished to his children here on the earth. The subject of the proper education of the youth of Zion is one of the greatest importance.

President Brigham Young during his lifetime established schools in Provo and Logan, where the principles of the Gospel have been taught in connection with other branches of education, and more recently similar schools have been commenced, and conducted with marked success; in Salt Lake, Beaver and Fillmore Cities.

The good results arising from teachings received in the Provo and Logan Academies are very apparent and pleasing to all who have the interests of the young at heart, and we regret that such institutions are so limited in number.

Through the indefatigable labors of Professors Karl G. Maeser, J. Z. Stewart and their associates, these schools have done, and are now doing, a great work in educational advancement, by instilling a knowledge of the principles of the Gospel of life and salvation into the minds of our children, upon whose shoulders the Kingdom of God must rest in the near future.

We trust it will not be long before schools of this kind will be established in every city and village where the Latter-day Saints reside. In the meantime, however, the Saints should not fail to avail themselves of the privileges that are now offered them in the Provo, Logan, Beaver, Fillmore, and Salt Lake Academies.

THE "CHURCH SUITS."

Congress, at its last session as you are aware, passed a law entitled "An Act to amend an Act entitled an Act to amend Section 5352 of the Revised Statutes of the United States, in reference to bigamy, and for other purposes," etc.

Under the 15th and 17th sections of this law the Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are respectively declared dissolved, and in this Act it is made the duty of the Attorney General of the United States to cause proceedings to be taken in the Supreme Court of the Territory of Utah to wind up the affairs of said associations.

Pursuant to the duty thus imposed upon the Attorney General, on the 30th day of July, 1887, proceedings were begun in said court by the United States against the Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company and its trustees, and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and its alleged trustees for the purpose of disposing of the property of the one and winding up the affairs of the other: asking in these suits to escheat to the United States large amounts of property alleged to be held by these two defendants. At the time of this writing nothing has been done in these cases further than to appear and answer the complaints. What the result of these cases will be, we, of course cannot now say. It is proper, however, that we should speak upon this important proceeding and let the Saints know how the cases stand.

The Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company, as all of you well know, was conceived and organized for but one purpose, namely, to aid the poor of our people in their humble efforts to gather with their brethren. It has been for this charitable purpose, the object of this generous bounty of the Latter-day Saints, but at no time in its history has it owned any real estate, or any personal property, save sufficient for its absolute needs each succeeding year. The Church on the other hand has been the owner of property, the gifts and bequests of an earnest, sincere people, made for the purpose of aiding in the propagation of the Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ. The effort now being made by our government to dissolve or wind up these associations and escheat their property, is the first of the kind in the history of our people, and is believed to be without historical precedent in this country. When we say we shall watch these cases with deep interest, the Saints will readily believe that it is not alone for the property involved in these suits, but also for the principles and rights that are at stake.

OUR SETTLEMENTS IN ARIZONA

The intelligence which reaches us from our settlements in Arizona is encouraging; and we note with pleasure that the people of the settlements at St. Johns and Woodruff have conquered some of the difficulties with which they had to contend, and which made their position very trying. Indeed, the news from all the Stakes there is gratifying.

IN IDAHO

In Idaho, though our people pay taxes and support the schools, everyone of our faith is denied the privilege of acting in the capacity of a school trustee or teacher, and no one with our belief can take the test oath that has been prescribed by the Legislature. The situation of the people there is one that excites great sympathy. They are practically denied the rights of American citizens through the infamous test oath law which was enacted by the Legislature. It is very trying to their patience and bears heavily upon them. But the day must come when they will be relieved from the operation of this infamous law.

IN COLORADO

In San Luis Valley, Colorado, the efforts of our people to open and cultivate farms, and to surround themselves with the necessaries and comfort of life, are meeting with gratifying success. This is the more noteworthy because of the fact that the great bulk of settlers there have moved from a warm climate and have not had experience in battling with the difficulties that have to be met in the building up of new settlements in an untried soil and climate. Like the Saints in Wyoming, those who reside in Colorado have always received fair treatment and encouragement and kind consideration from their neighbors and the officials of the State.

IN MEXICO

Our settlements in Mexico are progressing favorably and are gradually being strengthened, both at Diaz and Juarez. At the places named and in the Sierra Madre Mountains near the latter, we have nearly one hundred and fifty thousand acres of grazing, timber and agricultural lands.

The country is well adapted to stock-raising, as the grasses are of good quality and great variety, while the climate is uniform, the temperature seldom reaching higher than 85 degrees or lower than an approach to the freezing point. The facilities for making comfortable homes there are excellent, the land, water and timber being good. A fine steam saw, shingle and lath mill, and a planer and molder, are in operation, affording building material within easy reach of Juarez.

The treatment of our people by the national and state officials in Mexico and her citizens generally, has been cordial and hospitable. By word and act they have encouraged colonization in the Republic. The settlements in Chihuahua afford abundance of room for several hundred families and they could live there in peace, and by ordinary habits of industry would soon make themselves prosperous and happy.

The Mexican Mission was opened in 1879, and the Church now has quite a large following of native Saints, mainly located in and about the national capital. The Book of Mormon, Voice of Warning, and numerous pamphlets have been published in the Spanish language and are being distributed according to ancient predictions. Thus the truth is being spread abroad among the seed of Israel through the means of the record of their fathers, as well as by the preaching of the Elders.

THE ALBERTA COLONY

Recent letters from President Charles O. Card, in charge of our colony in Canada, contain information of a gratifying nature. The soil upon which they are located is said to be very productive, and the grain and vegetables produced are of excellent quality, and range for stock is abundant and nutritious. The colony is preparing for winter, and the families composing it will soon have their houses completed. They have opened a fine vein of coal within three miles of their settlement, which is on Lees Creek, Alberta, Canada.

The treatment accorded the Saints there, by officials and people, has been considerate and kind, and the prospects for improvements and prosperity are good. Brother Card would be glad to have any of the Saints, contemplating a change of location, to join him, in that land, and we will gladly approve efforts in that direction.

We may be led, hereafter, to call some of the brethren to go there with their families, to aid him in developing the resources of that goodly land.

CONCLUSION

We cannot refrain from expressing to you our own feelings of thankfulness that we live in such an age, and that God has bestowed upon us His Holy Priesthood and has permitted us to take part in His great work. We are thankful that we are associated with this people called Latter-day Saints; that we live in a day when Prophets and Apostles have been raised up in the Church of Christ; and that God has stretched forth His hand to fulfil His great and marvelous purposes which have been predicted by the mouths of the holy prophets since the world began. We testify in the name of our Lord and Master, Jesus that this is the great work of which the prophets have spoken, that God is the founder of it, and that it will stand forever, and accomplish all that has been predicted concerning it. Zion is established and will be redeemed. And it is our continual desire unto God that His people may be faithful in keeping His commandments and doing His will, so that they may be accounted worthy to stand, and their children after them, and inherit the great blessings which He has to bestow upon the faithful. The day is not far distant when our Lord and Savior will be revealed from the heavens, and we should live in constant expectation of this great event, and seek, with all the energy and power that we can exercise and obtain, to prepare ourselves, our households, and, as far as we have influence, the inhabitants of the earth, for His glorious appearing. Your brother, WILFORD WOODRUFF, In behalf of the Council of the Twelve Apostles.

1887-November 27-Letter to John W. Young, Washington, D.C. about Utah statehood petition.

1887-November 27-Letter to Charles W. Penrose, Washington, D.C. on Utah Statehood petition and other business. To be delivered personally by L. John Nuttall.

1888-February 2-To Honorable John T. Caine, Washington, D.C. (Telegram) Authorized Caine to "speak as the Spirit shall dictate" before the hearings in Congress on statehood for Utah.

1888-February 17-Telegram to John W. Young on Utah statehood matters.

1888-March 19-Letter to President Joseph F. Smith, Washington, D.C. on Utah statehood matters.

1888-April 6-Instructions on Tithing.

No copies of these documents are available for present publication.
