James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Remuneration for Presidents of Stakes, April 6, 1888

1888-April 6-Original circular letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

President Brigham Young shortly before his death in 1877 had shifted part of the burden of Church administration from the Apostles by reorganizing the Stakes. President John Taylor in 1878 had further instructed Stake Presidencies in their duties. (See Messages of the First Presidency 2:283-295; 306-311; 321-325) The instructions below constituted one of the next logical steps in Church organization and procedure due to increased duties of Stake Presidencies.

A LETTER to the President and Counselors of St. George Stake.

DEAR BRETHREN: The Council of the Apostles have had under consideration the subject of the proper remuneration for the Presidents of Stakes and their Counselors. It has been felt for some time that where officers act in such an important position as the Presidency of a Stake, and whose time is much engrossed with public affairs, some appropriation should be made to assist them in bearing the pecuniary burdens which rest upon them connected with the sustenance of their families. Among other names which came up before the Council, were yours, and it was decided to allow the President of your Stake Eight hundred Dollars per annum, and each of the Counselors Four hundred Dollars; these amounts to be paid quarterly, in advance, commencing April 1st, 1888, and to be drawn in the various kinds of tithing received, in equitable proportions. You will have sent you from my office an order to cover these amounts, and they will be remitted to you quarterly, hereafter.

In making these opportunities to you, as the Presidency of the St. George Stake, it is expected that you will devote yourselves, to as great an extent as possible, to the duties of your ministry, and that you will look strictly after the welfare of the Saints in your charge. Difficulties and contentions should not be allowed to grow to any size without receiving speedy attention from you. If brethren are known to be living in an unfriendly and unbrotherly manner, you should instruct the Bishops to see that the Teachers visit these brethren, and by their judicious labors bring about reconciliation and such harmony of feeling as will admit of all the Saints partaking of the Lord's Supper without condemnation. The necessity of all the Saints dwelling together in unity should be constantly kept before them. No man or woman should eat the bread and drink of the cup at the Sacrament who entertains hard feelings against any of his or her brethren and sisters. They should be taught the importance of settling all their difficulties and removing all causes of ill-feeling, so that no condemnation will rest upon them for partaking of this holy ordinance unworthily. By paying strict attention to this, the Wards will be kept in a healthy condition, the Spirit of the Lord will flow freely to the people, and the blessings of heaven will be upon them.

Among other duties, the Saints should be carefully taught the principle of paying their tithes strictly and punctually. They should be impressed with its importance, for their own sakes and for the material advantages which will come to them by a close observance of this holy law. The experience of the Latter-day Saints during the time the law has been taught to us, abundantly demonstrates that all the Lord has said concerning it, and the promises which He has made, are true, and can be confidently relied upon. Proofs of this are to be found in every family and Ward where this law has been observed.

When this was given as a standing law to the Latter-day Saints, to be observed by them forever, we were instructed by the Lord that we were to pay one-tenth of all our interest annually, and that we must observe this law or we should not be found worthy to abide among the Saints. We were further told, "If my people observe not this law to keep it holy, and by this law sanctify the land of Zion unto them, that my statutes and my judgments may be kept thereon, that it may be most holy, behold, verily I say unto you, it shall not be a land of Zion unto you."

It is a law which, if properly observed, will prepare the Church of Christ against the clay of vengeance and burning which will come upon the ungodly. Too great importance, therefore, cannot be attached to its correct observance. The Lord, through His prophet Malachi, commanded ancient Israel to bring "all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it. And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field, saith the Lord of hosts. And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a delightsome land, saith the Lord of hosts." These words are as true now and as applicable to us as they were then, and compliance with these requirements will be attended the same blessing; for God does not change, and those who keep His commandments to-day, we are assured, will receive His blessings as freely as they have done at any other period.

Our tithing, or as it is sometimes called, voluntary donations, should increase as the growth of the people in numbers and in property increases. It is not creditable to any Stake to have tithing fall off, unless the season and business of the year should be very unfavorable. Under ordinary circumstances, with ordinary prosperity, there should be a gain each year. When there is not, there is room to fear that there is a decline in the faith or interest of the Saints in the performance of this duty.

Respecting the percentage which was authorized by the late President John Taylor, in his capacity as Trustee-in-Trust, as compensation to the Bishops and Clerk in the Wards and Stakes, the Council have decided that this shall hereafter be distributed by the Presidency and the High Council of each Stake, and according to the amount and value of the services rendered by the Bishops and Clerks of the Wards, and to the Bishop's Agent or Stake Clerk. You will, therefore, please consider this hereafter as a part of your duties, in connection with the High Council of your Stake, and we trust that you will be able to give such satisfaction in the equitable distribution of this that there will be no complaints.

Praying the Lord to fill you with the spirit and power necessary to enable you to discharge all the duties of your high calling in righteousness before Him,

I remain, with kind regards, your brother, WILFORD WOODRUFF In behalf of the Council of the Apostles.
