James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Establishment of Stake Boards of Education, June 8, 1888

1888-June 8-Original circular letter in Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Until December, 1884 the "Mormons" held control of public schools in Utah. On December 29, 1884 Governor Murray issued a proclamation appointing a prominent "Gentile" mining man, William M. Perry as the first non-Mormon Superintendent of Public Schools in the Territory of Utah although L. John Nuttall had been elected in the fall of 1883 for a two year term to the same office. Utah now had two Territorial Superintendents of Public Schools.

On July 23, 1885 the Utah Commission spread upon their minutes their request, to the Secretary of Interior and the Attorney General of the United States, for a ruling in this dispute. The Attorney General ruled that the office should be appointive and upheld Governor Murray.

On March 13, 1886, Governor Murray issued another proclamation appointing Parley L. Williams, another non-Mormon, to succeed William M. Perry. There was not another Mormon Superintendent of Public Schools for Utah until after statehood in 1896.

Under these circumstances the First Presidency had announced in their Epistle to the Church on October 6, 1886:

"Our children should be indoctrinated in the principles of the Gospel from their earliest childhood. They should be made familiar with the contents of the Bible, the Book of Mormon and the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. These should be their chief text books, and everything should be done to establish and promote in their hearts genuine faith in God, in His Gospel and its ordinances, and in His works. But under our common school system this is not possible." (See full text of Epistle earlier in this volume.)

The First Presidency also had commended Brigham Young Academy in Provo and Brigham Young College in Logan for their excellent work and had called for the establishment of a Church School system "independent of the District School system, in all places where it is possible."

On August 5, 1887 two of the five members of the Utah Commission (A. B. Carlton and John A. McLernand) wrote a minority report to Congress in which they said:

"In Utah there are persons of multifarious religious creeds, some with no religious belief at all. Some enterprising and prominent citizens believe in the revelations of the Old Testament and reject those of the New, while a large majority of the people in the Territory profess a belief in the Old Testament, the New Testament, and divers modern revelations," besides. Those who accept the revelations of the Bible are divided into many separate church organizations by reason of diverse interpretations. Then in the close of the most enlightened century in the tide of time, shall we invoke legal coercion over the consciences of men and resort to the pains and penalties inflicted in former times for recursary non-conformity and heresy?"

The answer of the minority report of August 5, 1887 to this last question was a resounding NO!

John Taylor, President of the L.D.S. Church died about two weeks before this minority report was issued.

In the October 6, 1887 Epistle of Wilford Woodruff in behalf of the Twelve Apostles (see earlier in this volume) a call was made for a further expansion of the L.D.S. Church School system.

On January 9, 1888 in his Governor's Message to the Territorial Legislative Assembly, Governor Caleb W. West said:

"That the Mormon Church can by the sublimity and beauty of its teachings and the moral and religious conduct of its members subdue and dominate the world, is not here now my province to question."

But on the question of free public schools in Utah and their control he said:

"Let the priest of the church when he enters the Council of State, doff his priestly robes of power, resigning all divine authority or claim thereof." ...

Early in 1888 a general Church Board of Education consisting principally of General Authorities of the L.D.S. Church was established with Wilford Woodruff as presiding authority of the Church as Chairman of the Board. During the period from 1888 to July, 1897 this general board issued nine Circulars of Instruction for the operation of the new Church School system.

As the Circular letter below indicates, the next step after the establishment of a general Church Board of Education was the establishment of Stake Boards of Education. This circular letter authorized the establishment of these Stake Boards.

For a more detailed discussion of the historical background leading to the issuance of this circular letter see: James R. Clark, Church and State Relationships in Education in Utah. Doctor's dissertation, Utah State University, 1958. (Particularly pp. 230-276)

A LETTER to the Presidency of St. George Stake. June 8, 1888, Salt Lake City, Utah.

DEAR BRETHREN:

A meeting of the General Board of Education was held to-day, and the subject of the educational interests of the Latter-day Saints was taken into consideration and discussed at some length. It was decided that a Board of Education, consisting of not less than five and not to exceed eight in number, should be selected in each Stake to take charge of and promote the interests of education in the Stake. This communication is addressed to you to inform you of this action, and to have you select energetic men who are friends of education, who understand the needs of the people, and who have influence with the Saints, to carry out any suggestions in this direction may be deemed proper. In the decision which was made by our Board it was made the duty of these Boards to take into consideration the formation of Church schools and the best method of accomplishing this, and after arriving at proper conclusions, to report them to the General Board. Communications of this character may be addressed to Elder George Reynolds, who is the Secretary of the Board. It was felt by the Board that, to begin with, there should be one Stake Academy established in each Stake as soon as practicable.

We feel that the time has arrived when the proper education of our children should be taken in hand by us as a people. Religious training is practically excluded from the District Schools. The perusal of books that we value as divine records is forbidden. Our children, if left to the training they receive in these schools, will grow up entirely ignorant of those principles of salvation for which the Latter-day Saints have made so many sacrifices. To permit this condition of things to exist among us would be criminal. The desire is universally expressed by all thinking people in the Church that we should have schools where the Bible, the Book of Mormon and the Book of Doctrine and Covenants can be used as text books, and where the principles of our religion may form a part of the teaching of the schools. To effect this it will be necessary that funds be collected. The Church will doubtless do its share; but it cannot carry the entire burden. The Saints must be appealed to. There are hundreds of liberal-minded people among us who will be willing to contribute to this worthy object when they find the subject is receiving proper attention, and that definite and permanent arrangements are being made to establish academies of this character.

The brethren whom you select to form this Board should be men of character and integrity among the people, who will he able to use an influence in the collection of funds, so that academies may be established, good Faculties be employed, and education be made so cheap that it will be within the reach of the humblest in the land. After you have made a proper selection for this Board, the names of the brethren composing it should be presented regularly at your Stake Conference as other authorities are, so that the people can vote for them.

Very respectfully yours,

WILFORD WOODRUFF, Chairman of the Church Board of Education.

GEORGE REYNOLDS, Secretary.
