James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Special Fast Day, December 2, 1889

1889-December 2-Original circular letter, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah. See also Deseret News Weekly, December 21, 1889.

This circular letter calling for a Church-wide special Fast Day takes on added significance from the story and Revelation immediately preceding it in this volume.

The reference in this letter to a pending decision of the Supreme Court of the United States presumably was relative to the validity of the Idaho Test Oath Law which was upheld as constitutional February 3, 1890 in a decision in the case of Davis vs. Beason.

The list of things for which the Saints should pray during their special fast might be classified as the Mormon "Bill of Rights" of 1889.

A LETTER to the Presidents of Stakes and their Counselors.

President's Office, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, December 2, 1889.

DEAR BRETHREN:

There never was a time probably in our history when the Latter-day Saints needed more than they do at present the assistance which God has promised to render to us. He has made precious promises to His Church; among them He has said that no weapon that is formed against Zion shall prosper. This will be fulfilled to the very letter. The Lord's word cannot fail. But it is for us, as a people, to place ourselves in such a condition that we can ask the Lord in faith for these blessings, and receive them at His hand. We should so live that He will feel bound by His promises to come to our aid and to fulfil His word to us. We have never appealed to Him in vain. He has always listened to our supplications when we have approached Him aright. The knowledge of this encourages us to cry unto Him as an entire people, with united voice. And that we may do this in a proper manner we have felt led to set apart the next anniversary of the birthday of the Prophet Joseph Smith-December 23rd-as a day of fasting and of solemn prayer unto the Lord.

It is for this end that we address this circular to you, that all the Latter-day Saints throughout these mountains may be informed that the day mentioned is designated and set apart as a day of general fasting and prayer for the whole Church, and that the Saints may assemble at their various meeting houses and devote the day to prayer to Almighty God in behalf of Zion.

We need not describe at any length the reasons there are for making in this way this united appeal to our Great Creator. They are familiar to you and to all the people. It is easy to perceive that we are menaced with a total deprivation of our rights as freemen and as citizens, because we are members of the Church of the Lamb of God. Look which way we will and there appears no earthly help of which we can avail ourselves. But we can turn to the Lord in perfect confidence that he will hear and help us.

We think the fast should be from sundown on Sunday, the 22nd, to sundown on Monday, the 23rd, covering a period of twenty-four hours.

We desire you to take immediate steps to notify the Bishops and their Counselors, and other presiding officers in your Stakes, of the appointment of this Fast Day, that it may be known to all the Saints of your Stakes.

All labor that can be dispensed with should be suspended on that day, and the people should assemble themselves-men, women and children-and humble themselves before the Lord, and call upon Him in mighty prayer to look with mercy and tender compassion upon the people of His Church.

Among other subjects for which we should pray on the Fast Day now set apart, the following should not be forgotten:

We should pray for the plots and the schemes which are being framed for the purpose of robbing us of our civil and political rights and of obtaining control of our cities, counties and Territory, to be confounded, and their authors to be thwarted in their evil designs.

We should pray for all who conspire, in any manner, to injure or destroy the work of God, or to take from the people their rights and liberties, to be defeated in their wicked purposes.

We should pray for the unfavorable action of courts and of officials to be overruled in such a manner that no injury will be done to Zion.

We should pray for the Executive of our nation, for the Cabinet, the Senate, the House of Representatives, the Judiciary and the people of our nation to be so influenced and controlled that their hearts will be softened towards the people of God, and that they may not be inclined to listen to the slanderous reports and falsehoods which are circulated concerning us, and which may be brought before them; and that all the officers of our nation may be inspired with such wisdom, justice and mercy that they will fill their stations so as to gain the love and esteem of the people and the approbation of the Lord.

In the event of the decision of the Supreme Court not being rendered before the Fast Day concerning our property which has been seized, we should pray to the Lord to so move upon the hearts of the Judges that they will be strengthened and filled with courage, so as to render a righteous decision.

We should pray for the Lord to soften the hearts of the nation, and to open their eyes that they may see us in our true light and be inclined to treat us with that kindness and consideration which are due to fellow citizens who are loyal and true in upholding the Constitution of our great country.

We should pray for the Lord to come to our help and to deliver us from the many snares that are spread around us for our overthrow and destruction; to make our path plain before us; to lead us so that we may escape from the pits that are dug for our feet.

We should pray that the Lord will pour out in a great power His Holy Spirit and the gifts thereof upon His servants, that every man may be filled with the qualifications and power which are necessary to enable him to magnify his office acceptably before the Lord; and that He will fill the hearts of His Saints with comfort and peace, and witness unto them that He has not forgotten and does not neglect Zion.

Of course, there are many other blessings that can be prayed for. But we feel to mention these as being subjects that are prominent in our minds, and to which our attention is called at the present time, and for which we ourselves exercise faith before the Lord.

In closing, we suggest to yourselves and to the Saints that however much we may feel aggrieved at the acts of men towards us, we should not pray for their condemnation. Let us confess our own sins and pray that we may be forgiven for them, and leave other sinners to the Lord, who has said that judgment is His, and He will repay.

Praying to the Lord that He will fill you and the Saints under your presidency with His Holy Spirit and give unto you spirit of faith and prayer,

We remain, your Brethren, WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
