James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Instructions on annual Tithing settlement, December 5, 1889

1889-December 5-Original Circular, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

This Circular of Instructions for handling Tithing and other Church annual reports had seemingly been issued each year from 1886 to 1889, but no copies for 1887 and 1888 have been located. The instructions in 1889 were virtually the same as in 1886 (See circular of November 15, 1886 earlier in this volume) but with additional instructions on the issuance of tithing receipts to those who were not members of a particular ward and additional instructions on the annual tithing settlement.

A LETTER to the Presidents of Stakes, Bishops of Wards and Stake Tithing Clerks in Zion: Salt Lake City, Utah, December 5th, 1889.

DEAR BRETHREN:

We forward you blanks for the rendering of your annual statements of tithes received and disbursed for the fiscal year closing Dec. 31st, 1889, as follows:

Blank No. 1, Ward Tithing Record; Blank No. 2, Ward Account Current; Blank No. 3, Ward Balance Sheet; Blank No. 4, Ward Inventory; Blank No. 5, Stake Account Current; Blank No. 6, Stake Balance Sheet; Blank No. 7, Stake Inventory.

Realizing that many may not have kept for reference the Circular issued last year (under date of Dec. 10th), we conclude to again embody, in this letter, the instructions given formerly.

BLANK NO. 1, WARD "TITHING RECORD."

This should contain the names of all the tithe payers and the kinds and amounts each pay. The names should be arranged in alphabetical order exercising care in getting the proper and full name of each tithe payer; group similar names together, particularly in the instance of families, entering seniors or heads of families first. This record when filled and returned to us is carefully bound and preserved in the archives of the Church, hence neatness in penmanship and care in arrangement should be strictly observed.

BLANK NO. 2 (WARD) AND NO. 5, (STAKE) "ACCOUNTS CURRENT."

Upon these blanks should be entered:

1st. The tithes on hand, at the beginning of the year, which should correspond with the actual amounts reported on hand at the close of the preceding year.

2nd. Receipts under headings indicated in Balance Sheet. Give in detail "Receipts from other sources."

3rd. Disbursements during year under headings also indicated in Balance Sheet, together with balances on hand. Separate the "P. B. O." Orders from Receipts and in listing both, note the series, number and amount of each, entering them consecutively. All such orders and receipts for the current year, should be forwarded with your returns to the Presiding Bishop's Office.

Stake Tithing Clerks when entering the item "P. B. O. orders paid" on their Accounts Current, should separate them under the following sub-headings: Orders paid on account "Presidency of Stake," "Charity," "Board of Education" and "Miscellaneous."

BLANKS NO. 3 (WARD) AND NO. 6 (STAKE) "BALANCE SHEETS."

These blanks give a recapitulation of the Accounts Current in a condensed form.

Provision is made on these blanks for entering balances unpaid on "P. B. O." orders at the close of the year, by placing such amounts yet due opposite title of "Liabilities" and in column of "P. B. O. orders paid." Such amounts due should be deducted (in total) from balance on hand Dec. 31st, 1889, in the place provided for this entry on the margin of the Balance Sheet. The balance remaining, when added to your total disbursements, will equal your receipts; (same entries should be made in "Accounts Current" when treating these unpaid accounts.)

BLANKS NO. 4 (WARD) AND NO. 7 (STAKE) INVENTORIES

These should contain an itemized statement of articles on hand, at the close of the fiscal year, together with their respective values.

The total of the "Inventory" should correspond with the amount of tithes reported on hand, in "Balance Sheet" and "Accounts Current."

NOTE.-Never endorse payments on our orders.

All "P. B. O." orders on Wards or Stakes when presented should be taken up, charged us and paid in full. When this cannot be done take the order up, credit the party in whose favor it is drawn with the full amount of the order and then charge that account with payments made on same. Make efforts to pay such balances before the close of the year. However, should balances remain unpaid on these accounts at the end of the year, they can be accounted for as indicated in a previous paragraph.

MISCELLANEOUS

The Bishops will as soon as possible after Dec. 31st, commence the settlement of their tithing accounts and should make up one copy each of their "Ward Tithing Record" and "Balance Sheet," and two copies each of their "Accounts Current" and "Inventory," furnishing the same to the Stake Tithing Clerk on or before Feb. 1st, 1890. The Bishops should record in their Ward Ledger, copies of their "Balance Sheet," "Account Current" and "Inventory" for future reference.

When found correct and properly attested, the Stake Tithing Clerk will forward, to the Presiding Bishop's Office, the following reports: Ward "Tithing Records," Ward "Account Current" and Ward "Inventory;" Stake "Account Current," Stake "Balance Sheet" and Stake "Inventory," together with Receipts, Orders, etc., etc. It is earnestly desired that they be sent in to us on or before March 1st, 1890.

Vouchers should be taken for all disbursements made under headings of columns 12, 13 and 14, of "Balance Sheet," and where practicable, separate Schedules furnished us of such payments, noting to whom paid and for what account.

In forwarding tithes to the "General Tithing Storehouse," always send an invoice of same, specifying articles sent and market value.

Produce and Miscellaneous tithes for credit of 1889, must be paid into the General Tithing Storehouse, on or before Jan. 4th, 1890. The books of the "Presiding Bishop's Office" will remain open for cash remittances from Stake Tithing Clerks for credits for 1889, until Feb. 4th, 1890.

When persons pay Tithing in a Ward where they do not reside, certificates stating the kind and amount of Tithing paid in that Ward, should be furnished them for such credit, so that in settling their Tithing in the Ward where they reside, said certificate may be shown to the Bishop and entered as a memorandum upon the Ward Book and Tithing Record, with the amount and kinds paid, but not carried out as Tithing received in that Ward; this will enable the Bishop to determine the per cent of Tithing paid, and thus avoid the transfer of such accounts from one Ward to another.

Blank books of certificates will be furnished from this Office on application.

The Bishops or acting Bishops should designate (as early in January as possible), a time for the final settlement of Tithing and should be present at such settlements; every member of his Ward should be notified of the time and place.

If any members should fail to appear, a Teacher should visit them and ascertain the reason. At the close of the settlement, the Bishop and Counselors should carefully examine the amount paid by each person, and if in their judgment there are members who have not paid a full Tithing, said members should be visited by the Teacher and an opportunity be given them to be heard, before the judgment of the Bishop and Council is entered on the Record as to the per cent of tithing paid by such person.

Extenuating circumstances, such as old age, sickness, on missions, etc., etc., should be stated on Ward Tithing Record and as nearly as possible exact fairness rendered to all.

The Stake Tithing Clerks are requested to assist the Bishops in the settlement of their accounts and see that the instructions relating to reports are carried out. In many instances, Stake returns have not been rendered us till weeks after the designated time for their receipt. This should not occur in the future. If the settlements of Tithes are began immediately after January 1st, there is no reason why returns cannot be rendered more promptly.

Very truly, your Brethren in the Gospel, WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEO. Q. CANNON, JOS. F. SMITH, First Presidency.
