James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Report of affairs in Utah, April 12, 1890

1890-1896

1890-April 12-MS 53:282-284 (May 5, 1890); also Nordstjernan 14:171-172 (June 1, 1890).

This letter to George Teasdale in England reports affairs in Utah and the United States in the running battle the Latter-day Saints were having with the Federal government and with the nation. The Supreme Court of the United States (as mentioned in an earlier note) had found the Idaho Test Oath law constitutional. This report notices the next outgrowth of that decision in the introduction into the United States Senate of a bill that would disfranchise all members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints regardless of where they lived in the United States or its territories. The bill referred to was one which had been introduced into the Senate on April 10, 1889 by Senator Cullom and into the House on April 11th by Isaac Strubble of Iowa.

L. John Nuttall had been sent to Washington. D.C. to 'keep his ear to the ground.' He reported that R. H. Baskin (of the John Moore case fame) was the real author of these bills. Nuttall sent a telegram on April 11th to the First Presidency reporting the status of the legislation in Congress. On April 12th the First Presidency wrote this report to George Teasdale, member of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles and in charge of the European missions of the Church.

Salt Lake City, April 12, 1890. President George Teasdale:

DEAR BROTHER: Your favors of March 21st and 29th are before us. We sincerely regret to hear of the sickness of so many of the brethren laboring under your presidency, and trust that all possible care and energy will be used by the various Presidents of Conferences, so that no brother is permitted to suffer unnecessarily, or endanger his life from an excess of the sentiment that it is his duty to remain in the field of labor whether he has health and strength to do so or not. You have no doubt instructed the brethren on these points; and yet we are forced to believe that there are some brethren so chivalrous that they will not make their condition known until, frequently, too late. The loss of four Elders in the missionary field during the last few weeks impresses this strongly upon us; and we should be pleased to have you take the necessary steps to make our feelings understood by all, that the condition of the Church is such to-day that no Elder is required to unnecessarily expose himself or sacrifice his life—that the life of a servant of God is too valuable to be recklessly endangered though even in the path of duty. Wisdom and discretion should characterize our conduct in these matters as in all others.

Our late General Conference was a very enjoyable one. The discourses of the various brethren who addressed the congregations of Israel were short, spirited, and full of good instruction, and the spirit of the meetings was very delightful. No business of particular importance was presented. The teachings of the brethren generally were such as applied to the every day life of the people; there were, however, some very pointed instructions given cautioning the brethren to avoid entering into mysteries in their discourses, or entering into argument on points of doctrine which it has not pleased the Lord as yet to fully make known. The only change made in the presentation of the general authorities of the Church, was the name of Elder George Reynolds to fill the vacancy in the Quorum of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies, caused by the removal of Elder A. H. Cannon to the Council of the Apostles.

It may perhaps surprise you to hear that Elder Joseph Dietrich has turned from the truth, and is influencing nearly all the Saints from Bohemia in the same direction. It is stated, we know not with how much truth, that he has written to the Austrian Minister in Washington, placing himself under his protection. It is somewhat difficult to understand what should cause Brother Dietrich to take this step, except it be his lack of experience in the things of the Gospel. * * * We very much regret this; but it is only another evidence that, in the present condition of affairs in Zion, it is not desirable that brethren and sisters who have been but a very short time in the Church should be brought to these valleys. The influence of the Evil One is so potent, and his efforts to lead away the Saints of God so extraordinary, that the inexperienced are liable to become troubled and confused in their feelings, and while under this strain their faith is liable to give way. Better that such persons should have a longer experience in the nations in which they are baptized, and in this way gain a strength in the Gospel, and an understanding of that which the Saints have to undergo to enable them to build up the kingdom of God, for thereby they are better prepared to meet the difficulties and peculiar conditions that they find on reaching the gathering place of the Saints.

It is probable that the First Presidency will in the near future pay a visit to the Saints in Mexico, and possibly to those in Arizona. The time has not yet been positively decided upon; but should our other duties permit, we shall probably start within the next few weeks.

You will have noticed that a Bill has been introduced into the United States Senate to disfranchise all the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and place them in the same position as their brethren in Idaho. We naturally expected that this would be the result of the decision of the Supreme Court affirming the constitutionality of the Idaho test oath. It is not to be expected that our enemies will be content until they have succeeded in disfranchising the Latter-day Saints throughout all the Territories. This is what they have set out to do, and what they will doubtless work at until they accomplish their purposes, unless the Lord shall decree otherwise. Though we do not desire to be placed in this position of political serfdom, we feel that the passage of the Bill would not be an unmixed evil. The introduction of party politics in our midst tends to give rise to feelings in the hearts of the Saints that are not compatible with the best interests of the kingdom of God; and it may be that the Lord in this way intends to more forcibly emphasize and draw the line of division between the Saints and Babylon. At any rate, by taking this extraordinary course towards us, the rulers of our nation will be filling up the cup of its iniquity.

Our health is good. We are always glad to hear from you; and with constant prayers for your welfare, and that of the brethren laboring with you, and all the Saints,

We remain, your brethren, WILFORD WOODRUFF GEORGE Q. CANNON.
