James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

"The Manifesto" on plural marriage, September 24, 1890

1890-September 24-Original circular letter, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Discussions of the "Woodruff Manifesto" on polygamy or plural marriage can be found in nearly any history book dealing with Utah and the Mormons. Roberts (CHC 6:210-229) has covered the essential historical facts and has sought to interpret the reasoning behind the Mormon practice of plural marriage and then its discontinuance at this particular critical juncture in Mormon history. Berrett and Burton (RCH 3:101-126) drew heavily on Roberts but have added some additional documents and sources. The coverage of this document and surrounding events in these two sources are probably sufficient for most readers. Serious students in the field will already know the additional literature.

Both Roberts (p. 220) and Berrett and Burton (p. 106-107) state that the "Manifesto" was issued on September 25, 1890. We have reproduced two separate copies of this Official Declaration. The first copy is one issued in Washington, D.C. September 25th by John T. Caine, Delegate in Congress for the Territory of Utah. The Declaration was sent by telegraph from President Woodruff to Delegate Caine. The Declaration, it will be noted is dated September 24, 1890.

In the "Snow Resolution" accompanying this Declaration when it was adopted by a vote of the General Conference on October 6, 1899 the date of the Declaration is also referred to as September 24th rather than September 25th. In the copy of the "Snow Resolution" printed in Roberts the date of the Declaration is given as September 24th. In the copy of the "Snow Resolution" printed by Berrett and Burton the date of the Declaration is given as September 25th.

The entry in Wilford Woodruff's personal journal or diary for September 24 reads in part: "I met with the twelve apostles and my counselors upon an important subject."

The entry in the Woodruff Journal for September 25th reads:

"I have arrived at a point in the history of my life as the president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints where I am under the necessity of acting for the temporal salvation of the church.

The United States government has taken a stand and passed laws to destroy the Latter-day Saints on the subject of polygamy, or patriarchal order of marriage; and after praying to the Lord and feeling inspired. I have issued the following proclamation which is sustained by my counselors and the twelve apostles."

This Official Declaration, or as it is usually referred to-"The Manifesto"-now appears in the Doctrine and Covenants following Section 136 and so has become a part of the books of scripture of the L.D.S. Church.

WASHINGTON, D. C., Sept. 25, 1890.

—————————- —————————-

Sir: I beg leave to call your attention to the following declaration of the President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormon Church), just received by telegraph from Salt Lake City, Utah.

Very respectfully, JOHN T. CAINE, Delegate in Congress, Territory of Utah.

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH, Sept. 24, 1890.

To whom it may concern:

Press dispatches having been sent from Salt Lake City, which have been widely published for political purposes to the effect that the Utah Commission, in their recent report to the Secretary of the Interior, allege that plural marriages are still being solemnized, and that forty or more such marriages have been contracted in Utah since last June or during the past year; also, that in public discourses the leaders of the church have taught, encouraged, and urged the continuance of the practice of polygamy:

I, therefore, as President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, do hereby, in the most solemn manner, declare that the charges are false. We are not teaching polygamy or plural marriage, nor permitting any person to enter into its practice; and I deny that either forty or any other number of plural marriages have, during that period, been solemnized in our temples or in any other place in the Territory.

One case has been reported in which the parties alleged that the marriage was performed in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City in the spring of 1889, but I have not been able to learn who performed the ceremony. Whatever was done in this matter was without my knowledge. In consequence of this alleged occurrence the Endowment House was by my instructions taken down without delay.

Inasmuch as laws have been enacted by Congress forbidding plural marriages, which laws have been pronounced constitutional by the Court of last resort, I do hereby declare my intention to submit to those laws, and to use all my influence with the members of the church over which I preside to have them do likewise. There is nothing in my teachings to the church, or in those of my associates, during the time specified which can reasonably be construed to inculcate or encourage polygamy, and when any elder of the church has used language which appeared to convey such teaching he has been promptly reproved; and I now publicly declare that my advice to the Latter-day Saints is to refrain from contracting any marriage forbidden by the laws of the land.

WILFORD WOODRUFF,

President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
