James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Establishment of L.D.S. Week-day Religious Education Program, October 25, 1890

1890-October 25-Circular letter, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City; also in various circulars of the General Board of Education on file in the same library and at B. Y. U. Library, Provo, Utah.

This circular letter to Presidents of Stakes, Bishops, and all whom it may concern marks the establishment of the week-day religious education program of the L.D.S. Church. The classes called for "a short time each afternoon after the close of district school, or for a longer time on the Saturday only wherein the first principles of the Gospel, Church history and kindred subjects shall be taught." This week-day religious education program here inaugurated has grown into the present (1966) vast Seminary and Institute program of the L.D.S. Church, including the released-time program, early morning Seminary programs, and now the Indian Seminary program of the Church. At first this program was called simply, "Religion Classes."

The motivation for the establishment of this program to supplement and "counteract the tendencies that grow out of a Godless education" was probably the passage on February 18, 1890 of Utah's first free public school law. This law, written by C. E. Allen, prominent member of the Congregational Church and chairman of the standing committee on education of the House of Representatives of the Territory of Utah, was in some respects, an answer to the question of religion in the public schools.

A debate had been going on for some time in Utah circles. Mormon and non-Mormon, as to the proper place of religion in the schools. In a convention called by the Salt Lake Ministerial Association in April, 1888 Reverend C. L. Libby, Pastor of the Methodist Church, had said: "If the Bible should not be in the public schools ... we are no more a Christian nation than we are a Pagan ..." Dr. J. F. Millspaugh, another prominent non-Mormon educator and Principal of the Salt Lake Collegiate Institute, had added: "How is the State to prevent men from becoming bad? Science will not do it ... Civilization will not do it ... What then is to be done? I answer, the State's only power in this direction, comes through careful moral training in the public schools; and this in turn, never has been, and never can be effectually carried out, except by the Christian method, with the Bible as the corner stone of all character building."

Utah's public schools were now (1890) to be non-denominational and secular, hence the issuance of this circular letter establishing the L.D.S. week-day religious education program and system.

For a more detailed discussion see: James R. Clark, Church and State Relationships in Education in Utah, Doctor's dissertation, Utah State University, 1958, pp. 258-276.

Salt Lake City, Utah, October 25, 1890.

A LETTER to the Presidents of Stakes, Bishops, and all whom may it concern:

DEAR BRETHREN AND SISTERS:

The all-absorbing motive that led the great majority of the Latter-day Saints to forsake their homes in the various nations to dwell in these mountain valleys was an ardent desire to serve the Lord more perfectly and with a better understanding. In too many instances, in the course of the years, this grand object has been lost sight of in the toil for daily existence, and less noble aims have largely taken the place of the endeavor to learn the ways of the Lord and of the efforts to walk in His paths. This benumbing influence on our spiritual life is widely felt in our homes, and more particularly affects our children, whose faith in the great latter-day work has not been developed and strengthened by the experience which their elders have had in lands beyond the borders of Zion. Nor does the training which our youth receive in the district schools increase their feelings of devotion to God and love for His cause, for, as is well-known, all teachings of a religious character are rigorously excluded from the studies permitted in these institutions.

To lessen this great evil, and counteract the tendencies that grow out of a Godless education, the Church schools of the Saints have been established. But while these accomplish great good, the sphere of their usefulness does not cover the entire field. There are many places where Church schools cannot, at present, be established; and also many Saints in those places where such schools exist who, for various reasons, cannot send their children there to. For these causes we have deemed it prudent to suggest to the various local authorities other measures which, while not occupying the place of the Church schools, will work on the same lines, and aid in the same work in which the Church educational institutions are engaged.

We suggest that in every ward where a Church school is not established, that some brother or sister or brethren and sisters well adapted for such a responsible position by their intelligence and devotion, as well as their love for the young, be called, as on a mission, by the Bishop, after consultation with the President of the Stake, to take charge of a school wherein the first principles of the Gospel, Church history and kindred subjects shall be taught. This school to meet for a short time each afternoon after the close of the district school, or for a longer time on the Saturday only, as may in each ward be deemed most consistent with the situation of the people and most likely to secure a good attendance of the children. In some cases it will be found that the children are too wearied after their usual daily studies to take interest in a class of this kind; in others Saturday may prove to be an unsuitable day.

Where arrangements can be made it will, as a general thing, be well to secure the district school room for this purpose, so that when they take place in the afternoon, these exercises can commence immediately after the regular sessions and before the children scatter; but where this is done care must be taken to keep the two entirely separate, so that the law may not be infringed upon. Where the regular school room cannot be obtained, some building conveniently situated and as near as possible, should be secured in its stead; the object being to secure the attendance, as far as possible, of the children of all the Latter-day Saints; a strenuous effort should likewise be made to gain the hearty co-operation of the parents, as without their aid the school will measurably fail in the object of its creation.

We deem it desirable that every school thus established should be under the guidance and direction of the General Board of Education; and those brethren and sisters who accept this call will receive a license from that board to act in this capacity. Suggestions with regard to the studies, etc., will also be issued by the general board, and other means be adopted to place these classes in harmony with the method of the Church school system, of which, in fact, they will form an important part. Where it is found necessary to pay the teacher a small stipend for his services, the General Board of Education should be consulted through the Stake Board; but it is thought that the incidental expenses for fuel, etc., may, without inconvenience, be met by the ward, or by the people whose children are benefited.

With a constant desire for the progress of all true education, We remain, with much respect, Your Brethren in the Gospel, WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
