James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Manufacture of Sugar in Utah, November 14, 1890

1890-November 14-Original circular letter, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

According to President Heber J. Grant in the Ninetieth Annual Conference of the Church (April, 1919, pp. 819), President Wilford Woodruff had come to believe in 1890 that it was "the mind and the will of the Lord" that the sugar beet industry be established.

Arrington says (Great Basin Kingdom, p. 388) that after the cornerstone for the sugar factory had been laid in Lehi, Utah, that the "First Presidency issued a formal call to the leading financial men in the various wards and stakes to subscribe for stock in the concern" and that in support of this circular reproduced below that "members of the Council of Twelve Apostles visited conferences and priesthood meetings in the various wards and stakes and urged the faithful to support the enterprise-at first by subscribing for stock, and later by buying its sugar. In these speeches, church authorities stressed the employment it would provide, the scriptural admonitions to be self-sufficient, etc. ..." For additional background see: RCH 3:223-234.

A LETTER to the Presidency of the several Stakes and the Bishops and Counselors of the different Wards:

SALT LAKE CITY, November 14th, 1890. DEAR BRETHREN:

A Company for the manufacture of sugar has been organized and steps have been taken for the erection of a factory with a sufficient plant to convert into sugar three hundred tons of beets per day of twenty-four hours. That this business can be successfully carried on in this Territory and meet all reasonable expectations has been made as clear as it is possible under the circumstances, by actual investigation of prudent and judicious men-brethren of ours. There is no room for any reasonable doubt as to the success of this enterprise, if it be entered into and carried on properly. The determination of those interestedis to have the management of this manufacture in the most reliable hands-the hands of men of established reputation among us, and who have proved their ability by the success that has attended their labors generally.

One-half of the stock has already been subscribed for by a comparatively few of the brethren; but it is desirable in a factory of this kind the stock should be widely distributed among the people, and we wish you to bring this to the attention of the Latter-day Saints in your Ward. If there be any who cannot subscribe a large amount, let them take some stock and have some interest in the enterprise. We believe it will be a great benefit to our Territory; and as it is the largest industry of the kind that has been attempted among us, and one requiring the greatest amount of capital, we trust that this appeal will be met by a general response from all parts of the Territory.

We suggest that you appoint a committee of responsible men for your Stake who will take interest in this matter, and under their direction there may be a sub-committee for each Ward, if necessary, to whom subscriptions can be paid. Of course, stock will be issued by the Company on the receipt of the amount subscribed. The circular of the Company will explain also that it is not necessary for the whole amount to be paid at once; but it can be paid in installments.

In closing, we may say that we are desirous to have this enterprise meet with the success which it deserves. We have no doubt that it will, and trust this appeal will be met by a cordial response from yourselves and the people. We are, your Brethren, WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH.
