James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Education and Morality of "Mormon" and "Gentiles" in Utah, November 28, 1890

1890-November 28-Original printed letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The Utah Commission in its majority report for August 22, 1890 had made certain charges that the Mormons were responsible for a crime wave in Utah. The Utah Commission report for 1891 was even more critical of the Mormons on these grounds or charges. This letter to A. Milton Musser, prominent Mormon leader called for the gathering of statistics to refute the charges of the Utah Commission.

President's Office, SALT LAKE CITY, U. T., November 28, 1890. ELDER A. M. MUSSER:

DEAR BRETHREN: We desire to obtain answers to the following questions, and have them as correct as it is possible, because we do not wish to leave the least ground for dispute concerning them, if it be possible to avoid it.

First.-The actual condition of the morals of the Mormons as compared with the Gentiles in the Territory.

Second.-The proportion of all crimes, outside of polygamy, committed by Gentiles and Mormon.

Third.-Do the Mormons maintain gambling houses and saloons, and what proportion, either now or heretofore?

Fourth.-The number of arrests and convictions for murder, rape, arson, grand larceny, petit larceny, assault and battery, and drunkenness, and who the guilty parties were whether Mormon or Gentile.

Fifth.-How many miles of wagon road, and how many miles of irrigating canals and ditches have been built?

Sixth.-How many schoolhouses are controlled by the Mormons?

Seventh.-Is the Sabbath observed by the Mormon people as a rule? Also, can you give the average attendance at church?

Eighth.-The actual Mormon population.

Ninth.-What percentage of the Mormon people in the Territory can read and write, and what percentage can not?

The answer to this question should be made to agree as near as possible with what the census report will be. If you have any suggestions that are favorable to our people on this point, we want them.

If the facts will warrant it, we wish to show that the morality of the Mormon people is equal, if not superior, to that of the people of the older States of the Union.

In asking you these questions, we desire to obtain answers that can be well authenticated as possible. If there are any that you cannot answer, and that some one else can, please advise us.

We want to obtain replies as quickly as possible.

Have you any data at hand to show what the number of our people is in Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, Colorado, Arizona, New Mexico and Nevada?

With kind regards, we remain,

Your Brethren, WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH.
