James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Refutation of falsehoods appearing in the Illustrated American, January 9, 1891

1891-January 9-Typewritten letter, Church Historian's Library; also Der Stern 21:97-116 (April 1, 1891).

This document or article is an answer to a series of articles which had appeared in the magazine, Illustrated American. The author of the articles (seemingly unsigned) claimed to be a "Mormon." Wilford Woodruff, as President of the Church, points out the historical inaccuracies and plagiarisms in the articles. The articles and President Woodruff's reply devote considerable space to the Mountain Meadows Massacre.

Salt Lake City, Utah, January 9th, 1891.

Editor Illustrated American:

My attention has been called to articles in your magazine of December 27th and January 3rd concerning the "Mormon" Church. I have neither the time nor the inclination to notice the numerous misstatements and vile aspersions that frequently appear in the public prints in reference to the "Mormons." They have been common for more than half a century, and the later productions are chiefly mere echoes of the falsehoods refuted years ago. There is nothing new in the articles that have been published in the Illustrated American, except this: The writer claims to be a Mormon, "the oldest Mormon in the Rocky Mountains;" to have been connected with the "Mormon" Church for nearly sixty years; to be a resident of this city now; to relate true "Mormon" History, and to express the present views and intentions of the "Mormon" people. Thus the old untruths and the current misrepresentations in reference to our people are presented under a new guise, and that which might pass unnoticed if published in the ordinary way or over the signature of the compiler, is likely to attract attention and obtain credence because it purports to be written by a "Mormon." This is why I devote some attention to these articles.

That the person who has gathered from various sources scraps of purported "Mormon" history, fragments of supposed "Mormon" doctrine and figments of imaginary "Mormon" sentiment, is not and never was a member of the "Mormon" Church, and that his whole pretension is false, is evident to every one familiar with the subjects which he attempts to treat.

In professing to relate how Nauvoo was settled, he speaks of "how Joseph Smith, our leader, became possessed of a large tract of land in Hancock County, Ill." and says, "The angel who revealed it to him bade him call the city Nauvoo, which he said meant "The Beautiful."

When the place on which Nauvoo was built was first occupied by the "Mormons," it was called Commerce, and at that time Joseph Smith, instead of becoming possessed of this "large tract of land," was suffering illegal imprisonment in the State of Missouri. It was never claimed that an angel revealed the place to him. It was offered to the Saints who had fled from their inhuman persecutors in Missouri, by the owner, and was purchased and paid for in an ordinary business manner. No "Mormon" would make the mistake that is here conspicuous.

He states that he was in the jail at Carthage with Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum when they were assassinated. That he put his head out of the window and watched to see if there were signs of life in the man he loved. That he expected to be shot the next moment, etc. It is a matter of undisputed history that when Joseph and Hyrum Smith were murdered, only two other persons were present in the prison where the attack was made. They were Willard Richards, who died March 11, 1854, and John Taylor, who died July 25, 1887. Their accounts of the tragedy have been published many times since 1844 and the words used by this pretended "Mormon" are the identical language of Dr. Willard Richards.

This plagiarist betrays himself in an equally conspicuous manner in his account of the exodus from Nauvoo and the enlistment of the Mormon Battalion at Winter quarters. It is stolen bodily from the celebrated lecture of Gen. Thos. L. Kane before the Historical Society of Pennsylvania which has been in publication for forty years.

He states that Col. Steptoe was in command of troops sent to the Mormon capital at the time of the famous so-called "Mormon war," in which, by the way, not one drop of human blood was shed. No Mormon or person acquainted with Utah history could fall into such a blunder. Col. Steptoe's visit occurred many years before, was of a pacific and civil character, and he gave due credit to Governor Brigham Young and the people here for their fidelity to the government and their peaceful and industrious life. He also recommended the reappointment of Brigham Young as Governor of Utah.

This pretended "Mormon," forgetful of some facts he previously presented, says in his second article that, "every member of the Territorial Legislature is a high dignitary of the Church; all local and municipal government is under the same control; and thus it comes to pass that, in America, a church absolutely governs a Territory."

The truth is that no high dignitary of the Church occupies a seat in the Legislative Assembly; that no polygamist can hold any office or vote at any election in Utah; that eight members of the last Assembly were "Gentiles"; that Salt Lake, Ogden and Park cities are entirely controlled by non-Mormon" municipal officers; that instead of the Church governing the Territory, the Governor, the Judges, the Prosecuting Attorney and other territorial officers as well as the postmasters, are appointed by the United States Government, and that even the registration officers and judges of elections are appointed by a Commission appointed itself by the President and Senate of the United States. No "Mormon" would so misstate the situation, because this anti-republican condition of affairs is a constant source of "Mormon" complaint, and no well informed anti-Mormon would commit such a palpable error which the writer himself refutes in the sixth chapter of his first contribution.

Minor inaccuracies still further prove the compiler of these articles to be a person unfamiliar with actual "Mormon" life, however diligent he may have been in culling anti-Mormon literature. He speaks of "The United Order of Orderville" as a present organization, when it has not existed for many years. He quotes a notice issued over forty years ago in this city by a Bishop long since deceased, as being now posted in all the settlements. He says that in each town, besides the ward bishops there is a Presiding Bishop, which is not true. He entirely misrepresents the functions of the Ward Teachers, and by many erroneous references shows that his statement that he is "a Mormon of nearly sixty years standing" is transparent and wilful fraud and deception.

This of itself should, in the eyes of all reasoning readers, vitiate his entire contribution to the literature of the day. But there are some statements artfully interwoven with the fabric of his story which require specific refutation. Others may be dismissed with a general denial. He puts remarks into the mouth of the late President Brigham Young and other Elders of the Church, which they never uttered, attributes acts to them which they never performed, repeats stories that are taken from anti-Mormon works as though they were utterances of his own, and expresses sentiments as entertained by the "Mormons" which are entirely foreign to their belief and feelings and intentions. These all lead up to the vain object of the articles-that is to deceive the American public and foster the latest scheme for the disfranchisement of the monogamic "Mormon" people, by conveying the ideas that polygamy is still taught and entered into in Utah, that the Church dominates the state, and that the "Mormons" are under military discipline and ready to fight against the Government.

To this end the oft-refuted and spurious story of the Mountain Meadows massacre is told, as fabricated by Utah romancers, and the Blood Atonement fiction is reproduced after the style of the dime novelist. As to the former, while the general public believe that the tragedy was perpetrated under the sanction, if not by the direction, of Brigham Young, the evidence elicited at the trial which resulted in the conviction of John D. Lee, demonstrated the entire disconnection of President Young and the Church over which he presided, with the awful occurrence that has been so widely misrepresented for evil purposes. The United States District Attorney officially and publicly announced this at the trial. He declared he had received all the aid he could ask for from the Church authorities to get at the root of the matter, and the accused was convicted of murder by a jury composed principally of members of the Mormon Church.

It is a fundamental doctrine of our creed that a murderer cannot be forgiven; that he "hath not eternal life abiding in him"; that if a member of our Church, having received the light of the Holy Spirit, commits this capital crime, he will not receive forgiveness in this world nor in the world to come. The revelations of God to the Church abound in commandments forbidding us to shed blood. There are no people living who have a greater horror of this offence against the law of God and of man than the Latter-day Saints, commonly; but erroneously, called "Mormons." This Church was no more responsible for the massacre at Mountain Meadows than any Christian Church is for the atrocities that may be committed by persons professing to be its members. It is but just to the memory of President Brigham Young to say that the evidence against his complicity with this dreadful crime, as accessory either before or after the fact, is abundant, convincing and complete.

It is part of our faith that the only atonement a murdered can make for his "sin unto death" is the shedding of his own blood, according to the fiat of the Almighty after the flood: "Whoso sheddeth man's blood by man shall his blood be shed." But the law must be executed by the lawfully appointed officer. This is "blood atonement," so much perverted by maligners of our faith. We believe also in the atonement wrought by the shedding of Christ's blood on Calvary; that it is efficacious for all the race of Adam for the sin committed by Adam, and for the individual sins of all who believe, repent, are baptized by one having authority, and who receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of authorized hands. Capital crime committed by such an enlightened person cannot be condoned by the Redeemer's blood. For him there is "no more sacrifice for sin"; his life is forfeit, and he only can pay the penalty. There is no other blood atonement taught, practiced or made part of the creed of the Latter-day Saints.

We do not believe, as stated by the pretended "Mormon," that divulging the secrets of the Endowment House, marital unfaithfulness on the part of the wife, leaving the Mormon Church, are unpardonable, or that "the only atonement that can be made for any of these offences is the atonement of blood." The statement that "this doctrine is part of our duty" is another proof that the writer is not a "Mormon," and that he does not understand, or else that he wilfully misrepresents the faith which he pretends to explain.

The connection drawn between this alleged doctrine and the murders committed at Mountain Meadows, also proves the falsity of the claim that the writer is a "Mormon," and demonstrates his misapprehension of his own subject. The company that fell victims to Indian ferocity and white vengeance and rapacity were not "Mormons." They had revealed no secrets, they had not left the Church, they had done nothing to justify their slaughter, even on the false theory of Blood Atonement copied by the writer in the American from old newspaper fiction. This should be evident even to the casual reader.

Another statement is equally absurd and obviously untrue. Speaking of the Mormons said to have participated in the massacre, he says: "Some of them are alive today. They nod to me familiarly on the streets of Salt Lake City, and I nod back to them. The United States Government knows who they are, knows what they have done; and yet it has never dared to arrest them or interfere with them." This is as great a libel on the officers of the United States entrusted with the enforcement of the law, as it is upon the Mormon people. The whole machinery of the courts judges, juries, prosecutors and peace officers, also the municipal government and its police, are in the hands of anti-Mormons, who would all be eager to punish a participator in that crime, and most of whom would be glad to avail themselves of the opportunities for slander and excitement which a revival of this dead issue would afford. The nonsense of his statement, then, is only equaled by its falsehood, and in attempting once more to make it appear that he is a "Mormon" he only affords one more proof of his imposture.

As to the power and disposition of the Mormons to fight and the necessity of a resort to arms he is equally ridiculous and erroneous. There has been no militia, either Mormon or Gentile, in the Territory for more than twenty years. There are no Mormons under arms. There has been no drilling or military training. Peace and equal rights with other American citizens is all that the Mormons desire. They do not believe they will be required to handle the weapons of war. They have profound faith that God will fight their battles. There is not the slightest whisper of a carnal conflict among them. There is no pretext for a collision between the Mormons and the government. The only dispute that has arisen of late years between them was a question of law. That has been settled by the decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States and the action of the Church in general conference. Plural marriage has been judicially decided to be unlawful. The Church has accepted the decision as legally final, and by my official advice as President of the Church has in the most solemn and authoritative manner decided not to enter into any marriages in future that are contrary to the laws of the land.

What folly then for this assumed "Mormon" to say: "We must fight or we must perish." "We would rather die than give up this article of our creed." And what absurdity to say, "In every endowment house in Utah plural marriages are being secretly celebrated today." There never was but one endowment house in Utah and that, by my orders, was taken down in 1889. If the temples are meant by that term, I say most emphatically the statement is false, and that no plural marriages are or have been celebrated in Utah, to my knowledge or that of any of my associates for some years. And I cannot conceive how they could be performed without my sanction and official consent.

I object to the publication of the articles in the ILLUSTRATED AMERICAN, chiefly on the ground that they pretend to be written from a "Mormon" standpoint, and that thus the public are misled and the people whom I represent are correspondingly injured. For, while objections might reasonably be made to the many misrepresentations those articles contain, yet they are principally old stories retold, and they have been often disproved. But when they are attributed to a "Mormon" source, their falsehood becomes doubly shameful, and they can only be characterized as cowardly and contemptible.

The editorial remarks that have accompanied them follow the line and lead to the end they have in view. They credit the Mormons with lives which are "models of decorum," yet they assert that the Mormons massacred men, women and children at Mountain Meadows. The same people who are held up to admiration for their honesty, truth, and fidelity to their religion, are accused of "a policy of deception" and while yielding to the demands made upon them at a great sacrifice of feeling, they are charged with defying the government, "flinging down the gauntlet," and wanting and preparing to fight.

All this is a libel upon the Latter-day Saints. They have no such belligerent feelings or intentions. They are not deserving of the imputations cast upon their veracity. They intend to obey the law and sustain good government. They revere the Constitution of our country and desire to promote republican institutions. They are under no Church obligations or restrictions which interfere with their perfect freedom, whether in politics or in business. Their faith is different from that of the orthodox sects and they claim the right to worship as they choose without hindrance from any earthly power, while conceding that right to all who differ with them. If any one of their number violated the law, he is amenable to the law. But a community should not be condemned for the unapproved wrongful acts of individuals. That our views on the subject of civil government as it relates to religion may be understood, I quote from the Doctrine and Covenants of the Church, which with the Bible and the Book of Mormon forms our standard of religious principle:

"We believe that religion is instituted of God, and that men are amenable to him, and to him only, for the exercise of it, unless their religious opinions prompt them to infringe upon the right and liberties of others; but we do not believe that human law has a right to interfere in prescribing rules of worship to bind the consciences of men, nor dictate forms for public or private devotion; that the civil magistrate should restrain crime, but never control conscience; should punish guilt, but never suppress the freedom of the soul.

"We believe that all men are bound to sustain and uphold the respective governments in which they reside, while protected in their inherent and inalienable rights by the laws of such governments; and that sedition and rebellion are unbecoming every citizen thus protected, and should be punished accordingly; and that all governments have a right to enact such laws as in their own judgment are best calculated to secure the public interest, at the same time, however, holding sacred the freedom of conscience.

"We believe that every man should be honored in his station: rulers and magistrates as such, being placed for the protection of the innocent, and the punishment of the guilty; and that to the laws, all men owe respect and deference, as without them peace and harmony would be supplanted by anarchy and terror; human laws being instituted for the express purpose of regulating our interest as individuals and nations, between man and man, and divine laws given of heaven, prescribing rules on spiritual concerns, for faith and worship, both to be answered by man to his Maker. ...

"We do not believe it just to mingle religious influence with civil government, whereby one religious society is fostered, and another prescribed in its spiritual privileges, and the individual rights of its members as citizens denied.

"We believe that all religious societies have a right to deal with their members for disorderly conduct according to the rules and regulations of such societies, provided that such dealings be for fellowship and good standing; but we do not believe that any religious society has authority to try men on the right of property or life, to take from them this world's goods, or to put them in jeopardy of either life or limb, neither to inflict any physical punishment upon them; they can only excommunicate them from their society, and withdraw from them their fellowship."

The following are the articles of faith of the Church as published for many years, and re-affirmed and adopted at the last general conference:

"1. We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost.

I am eighty three years old. I expect before very long to meet my Maker and give account for my earthly acts and words. In view of this I testify before God and all mankind that the foregoing articles of faith and discipline are the true doctrines of our Church, that God has established that Church by revelation and has given authority to His servants to administer its ordinances, and that it will prevail against the errors and forces which are used for its destruction. But its weapons are not carnal, it claims no civil authority, it wields no political domination, and it seeks no quarrel with any earthly government. All men and all nations are responsible to the Almighty for their acts, and with Him I am willing to leave the issue between us and our enemies and defamers. WILFORD WOODRUFF. President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
