James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Refutation of Utah Commission report on plural marriages, October 6, 1891

1891-October 6-Deseret News Weekly 43:507-508; also MS53:505; CHC 6:295.

This was the official answer of the L.D.S. Church to charges made against it in the annual report of the Utah Commission for 1891. General John A. McClernand, a member of the Utah Commission, however, would not subscribe to the charges made by the majority of the Commission and wrote a minority report which referred to official court records showing that there were only four cases instead of the eighteen charged in the majority report.

It might be noted that Apostle Moses Thatcher, who later became disaffected with the Church over certain interpretations of the "Woodruff Manifesto" of 1890 moved that the Conference "receive, endorse and adopt as true" this statement of the First Presidency and the Declaration was adopted by a unanimous vote of the General Conference of the L.D.S. Church.

For additional background see CHC 6:202-206.

DECLARATION by the First Presidency of the Church.

Concerning the official report of the Utah Commission made to the Secretary of the Interior, in which they allege, "During the past year, notwithstanding the 'manifesto,' reports have been received by the Commission of eighteen male persons who, with an equal number of females, are believed to have entered into polygamous marriages, during the year," we have to say, it is utterly without foundation in truth. We repeat in the most solemn manner the declaration made by President Wilford Woodruff at our General Conference held last October, that there have been no plural marriages solemnized during the period named.

Polygamy or plural marriage has not been taught, neither has there been given permission to any person to enter into its practice, but on the contrary, it has been strictly forbidden.

WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Apostle Moses Thatcher moved that we receive, endorse and adopt as true the statement of the Presidency. Unanimously adopted.
