James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Completion of Salt Lake Temple, October 31, 1891

1891-October 31-Original circular letter, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The remaining documents or Messages reproduced below for the year 1891 are concentrated mainly around a theme of Temples and Temple work. Even the address of President Wilford Woodruff at Cache Stake Conference, November 1, 1891 with its explanation that he had acted under revelation in issuing the September 24, 1890 "Manifesto" has as one of its main themes Temples and Temple work. He bluntly states that he issued the "Manifesto" under the direction of the Lord, for not to have done so would have caused, among other things, the "loss of all the Temples, and the stopping of all the ordinances therein, both for the living and the dead." The amnesty petition of December 19th re-iterates this same stand.

This letter of October 31, 1891 contains notice of a General Priesthood meeting of the Church held on October 7, 1891 in which it was announced that it would take "not less than One Hundred Thousand Dollars" to finish the Salt Lake Temple. The letter called for a general subscription throughout the Church to raise this amount and finish the Temple.

The two Circular letters of November 6th and November 16th announce a change in procedure for issuing recommends to faithful Latter-day Saints for admission to the Temples. Prior to this time it was required that Temple recommends be endorsed by the President of the Church. These two letters placed the responsibility for issuing and signing Temple recommends solely on the shoulders of the Bishops and Stake Presidents, a procedure that has continued to be the procedure in the Church from November, 1891 down to date (1966).

The letter of November 6, 1891 contains an interesting exception to the above rule that is not mentioned in the letter issued four days later on November 10th. Temple recommends for SECOND ANOINTINGS still required the signature of the President of the Church.

This note will serve as a general introduction to the remaining messages for 1891. For additional background see CHC 6:230-235; RCH 3:137-157.

Office of the First Presidency, Salt Lake City, October 31st, 1891. DEAR BROTHER: You will doubtless remember that at the General Priesthood meeting held in the Eighteenth Ward Chapel, on Wednesday, the 7th inst., the question of raising the necessary funds to complete the Salt Lake Temple was considered, and the early completion of that building became the subject of interesting remarks by several of those present. It having been ascertained that it would require not less than One Hundred Thousand Dollars to finish the edifice, it was suggested that a certain number of brethren should each give a stated sum sufficient to meet this amount. The sense of the meeting, however, expressed by unanimous vote, was that the subscription should be general, leaving each person at liberty to give as large a sum as he pleased, and those of moderate means such an amount as they could afford.

In calling your attention to this action of the Priesthood meeting, we desire to suggest that the present is an opportune time to carry this proposition into practical effect; and we trust that you will reflect the spirit and feeling of the meeting in presenting this matter to the members of your Ward, as it is exceedingly desirable that the Saints should be enabled to fullyappreciate the importance of making a last strong effort to finish this Temple, to whose dedication we so longingly look forward.

We are, with kindest regards, WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
