James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Amnesty Petition to the President of the United States, December 19, 1891

1891-December 19-RCH 3:114-115; also Stewart L. Grow, A Study of the Utah Commission, 1882-1896. Doctor's dissertation, University of Utah, pp. 300-301.

Note again in this plea for amnesty to the President of the United States the claim made that the Manifesto" of 1890 was as much a revelation as the original revelation which set up plural marriage. (Now Doc. & Cov. Section 132)

AMNESTY PETITION to the President: [of the United States]. Salt Lake, December 19, 1891.

We, the first presidency and apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, beg respectfully to represent to your excellency the following facts:

We formerly taught our people that polygamy, or celestial marriage, as commanded by God through Joseph Smith, was right; that it was a necessity to man's highest exaltation in the life to come.

The doctrine was publicly promulgated by our president, the late Brigham Young, forty years ago, and was steadily taught and impressed upon the Latter Day Saints up to a short time before September, 1890. Our people are devout and sincere, and they accepted the doctrine, and many embraced and practiced polygamy.

When the Government sought to stamp the practice out, our people almost without exception remained firm, for they, while having no desire to oppose the Government in anything, still felt that their lives and their honor as men were pledged to a vindication of their faith, and that their duty towards those whose lives were a part of their own was a paramount one, to fulfill which they had no right to count anything, not even their own lives, as standing in the way. Following this conviction, hundreds endured arrests, trial, fines, and imprisonment, and the immeasurable suffering borne by the faithful people no language can describe. That suffering in abated form still continues. More, the Government added disfranchisement to its other punishment for those who clung to their faith and fulfilled its covenants. According to our faith, the head of our Church receives from time to time revelations for the religious guidance of his people. In September, 1890, the present head of the church, in anguish and prayer cried to God for help for his flock, and received the permission to advise the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints that the law commanding polygamy was henceforth suspended.

At the great semi-annual conference, which was held a few days later, this was submitted to the people, numbering many thousands and representing every community of the people in Utah, and was by them in the most solemn manner accepted as the future rule of their lives.

They have been faithful to the covenant made that day. At the late October conference, after a year had passed by, the matter was once more submitted to the thousands of people gathered together, and they again in the most potential manner ratified the solemn covenant.

This being the true situation and believing that the object of the Government was simply the vindication of its own authority and to compel obedience to its laws, and that it takes no pleasure in persecution, we respectfully pray that full amnesty may be extended to all who are under disabilities because of the operation of the so-called Edmunds and Edmunds-Tucker laws. Our people are scattered; homes are made desolate; many are still in prison; others are banished or in hiding. Our hearts bleed for these. In the past they followed our counsels, and while they are thus afflicted our souls are in sackcloth and ashes. We believe there are nowhere here in the Union a more loyal people than the Latter Day Saints. They know no other country except this. They expect to live and die on this soil. When the men of the South, who were in rebellion against the Government in 1865 threw down their arms and asked for recognition along the old lines of citizenship, the Government hastened to grant their prayer. To be at peace with the Government and in harmony with their fellow citizens who were not of their faith and to share in the confidence of the Government and people, our people have voluntarily put aside something which all their lives they have believed to be a sacred principle.

Have they not the right to ask for such clemency as comes when the claims of both law and justice have been fully liquidated?

As shepherds of a patient and suffering people we ask amnesty for them and pledge our faith and honor for their future. And your petitioners will ever pray. WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH, LORENZO SNOW, FRANKLIN D. RICHARDS. MOSES THATCHER, FRANCIS M. LYMAN, H. J. GRANT, JOHN HENRY SMITH, JOHN W. TAYLOR, M. W. MERRILL, ANTHON H. LUND, ABRAHAM H. CANNON.
