James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Mountain Meadows Massacre, January 21, 1892

1892-January 21-Autobiography of Andrew Jensen, pp. 197-198.

This is an interesting document in light of the renewed interest in the subject of the Mountain Meadows Massacre occasioned by the recent work of Juanita Brooks. Perhaps the most significant sentence in the document in light of recent research on the Mountain Meadows Massacre and John D. Lee is the statement: "We are anxious to learn all that we can upon this subject, not necessarily for publication, but that the Church may have the details in its possession for the vindication of innocent parties, and that the world may know, when the time comes, the true facts connected with it."

For further background see CHC 4:139-180; also the works of Juanita Brooks on John D. Lee and on the Mountain Meadows Massacre.

Office of the First Presidency, Salt Lake City, Jan. 21, 1892. To whom it may concern:

Bishop Orson F. Whitney has been selected to write a history of Utah. Among other important subjects that will have to be mentioned is what is known as the Mountain Meadow Massacre. Many facts have already been published concerning this affair; but there is an opinion prevailing that all the light that can be obtained has not been thrown upon it. Many of those who have personal knowledge concerning what occurred at that time have passed away. Others are passing away; and ere long there will be no person alive who will know anything about it only as they learn it from what has been written. We are anxious to learn all that we can upon this subject, not necessarily for publication, but that the Church may have the details in its possession for the vindication of innocent parties, and that the world may know, when the time comes, the true facts connected with it.

Elder Andrew Jenson, who is the bearer of this letter, has been selected for the purpose of conversing with such brethren and sisters as may be able to impart information upon this subject. We desire to say to you that he can be trusted, and any communication that you wish to make to him will be confidential, unless you wish them published. Much information might be published, but it might be prudent not to mention names. Upon this point the wishes of those who have this information, if expressed to Bro. Jenson, will be fully respected. We remain your brethren, WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH.
