James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Political freedom of L.D.S. Church members, March 25, 1892

1892-March 25-Deseret News Weekly, March 25, 1892, p. 440; also CHC 6:309.

We are with this statement back to same controversial issue that had been agitating the Utah scene for some time-the reputed influence of the First Presidency and other high "Mormon" leadership in politics. Inthe elections of 1891 Mormons began to divide on national party lines rather than the strictly "Mormon" and non-"Mormon" party lines that had existed in Utah for so long. But by what process should such a realignment take place? In the Logan, Utah municipal election of 1891 it was held that a letter written by George F. Gibbs, secretary to the First Presidency, had "been effective in turning many Democrats from their party to the Republican fold." Roberts (CHC 6:308-309) comments that this statement, made in reply to the views expressed in the Gibbs letter, "presents the attitude of the church president-and of course the church-in the matter of their relationship to politics."

For additional background see: CHC 6:302-311.

STATEMENT.

We emphatically deny that we, or either of us, authorized Mr. George F. Gibbs or any other person or persons to use our names so as to influence citizens to vote the Republican ticket, at Logan or elsewhere. If our names have been used in any such way, it has been entirely without permission from us, and we hereby condemn it as wrong and reprehensive. If we have any desire in this matter it is that the people of this territory shall study well the principles of both the great national parties, and then choose which they will join, freely, voluntarily and honestly, from personal conviction, and then stand by it in all honor and sincerity. Each party should have the same rights, privileges and opportunities as the other. If any man claims that it is the wish of the First Presidency that a Democrat shall vote the Republican ticket, or a Republican the Democratic ticket, let all people know that he is endeavoring to deceive the public and has no authority of that kind from us. We have no disposition to direct in these matters, but proclaim that, as far as we are concerned, the members of this church are entirely and perfectly free in all political affairs. But they should not indulge in ill-feeling or personalities. President George Q. Cannon is absent, but we are sure that if he were here he would sign this declaration with us. WILFORD WOODRUFF, JOSEPH F. SMITH, Of the Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
