James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Call for the completion of the Salt Lake Temple, April 21, 1892

1892-April 21-The Contributor, 14:280-281 (April 21, 1892); also MS 54:312-313 (May 16, 1892).

In December, 1889 when the L.D.S. Church was meeting almost insurmountable problems the First Presidency called a special church-wide fast day. That fast day and its results are referred to in the first paragraph of this message.

Now the First Presidency were anxious to complete the Salt Lake Temple which had been under construction since 1853 or thirty-nine years. The capstone finally had been laid a few days before this call was issued for another special fast day to speed the completion of the Temple so that it might be dedicated one year hence on April 6, 1893.

This message refers to a significant resolution that had just been passed at the laying of the capstone of the Temple which again emphasizes the role of the President of the Church and his authority in calling for funds to speedily complete the Temple. The resolution had been offered by Francis M. Lyman, member of the council of the twelve as follows:

"Believing that the instruction of President Woodruff, respecting the early completion of the Salt Lake Temple, is the word of the Lord unto us, I propose that this assemblage pledge themselves, collectively and individually, to furnish as fast as it may be needed, all the money that may be required to complete the temple at the earliest time possible, so that the dedication may take place on April 6th, 1893."

It was suggested that the raising of funds for the completion of the Temple would be an appropriate subject for the Bishops to discuss at the special fast day services.

Evidently this Special Fast Day did not completely meet the pressing needs for completion of the Temple, for on October 10, 1892 a Priesthood meeting was held in the nearly completed Salt Lake Temple at which a vote was taken to apportion the amount of money needed to complete the Temple, among the various stakes. A copy of the apportionment list together with the cover letter sent to Stake Presidents on October 16, 1892 follows this call for the special fast day in this volume even though to do so places one other document slightly out of chronological order.

This one note will serve as an introduction to both messages or documents on funds for completion of the Salt Lake Temple.

For further background see: CHC 6:232-236; RCH 3:153-160.

To the Latter-day Saints in Zion and throughout the world.

BELOVED BRETHREN AND SISTERS: A little over two years ago we were impressed to call upon the Latter-day Saints to set apart a day for fasting and solemn prayer unto the Lord. Our position at that time was such that it seemed as though no earthly power could deliver us from the evil which environed us and which threatened our overthrow. Turn which way we would, every avenue seemed closed against us. Human help was beyond our reach. Our eyes and hearts, under those circumstances, turned to the Lord as the only power to which we could appeal for succor. Do we say too much when we testify that the Lord did on that occasion condescend to hear and answer the supplication of His people?

Their humiliation before Him was not without its fruits. If the objects which were suggested in our circular letter at that time to be prayed for be examined, the result will show how wonderfully the Lord has granted the prayers of His people.

In view of this, and the great mercy shown unto us by our Father in heaven in permitting us, at our recent General Conference, to lay the top stone of the Salt Lake Temple with shouts of Hosanna to God and the Lamb, it has suggested itself to us that it would be most appropriate for the Latter-day Saints to gather in their various places of worship, on Sunday, the first day of May, 1892, and in fasting and prayer offer up to the Most High with heartfelt and solemn thanksgiving for His goodness and mercy, which He has shown unto them, and the deliverance that He has wrought out in their behalf.

Surely, no people have greater cause for thanksgiving and praise than have the Latter-day Saints throughout these mountains. And as we cannot have occasion for thanksgiving because of deliverance wrought out for us, without our brethren and sisters in other lands sharing in our joy, it is proper that they, too, should select a day, as may be suitable and convenient to them, in like manner to fast and pray and offer up their gratitude and thanks to the Great Creator for the blessings He has bestowed upon His people.

We have decided to select Sunday for this purpose, because it can meet with a more general observation on the part of the people than would be possible upon any other day.

Every man, woman and child belonging to our Church should join in this glad service, for, although we have many obstacles to contend with, and the adversary of our souls has not made truce, nor laid down his arms, yet the Lord has spoiled many of his schemes, and destroyed his snares, and has provided for us a way of escape from his power.

In our prayers we should still supplicate the Almighty Father to continue to bless and deliver His Zion, and to prepare the way for the ushering in of the full reign of righteousness and truth, when He whose right it is to reign shall hold undisputed sway over all the earth.

The following resolution was unanimously adopted by the immense assemblage of people at the laying of the top stone of the Temple:

"Believing that the instruction of President Woodruff, respecting the early completion of the Salt Lake Temple, is the word of the Lord to us, I propose that this assemblage pledge themselves, collectively and individually, to furnish, as fast as it may be needed, all the money that may be required to complete the Temple at the earliest time possible, so that the dedication may take place on April 6th, 1893."

Plans have been suggested for the collection of the funds needed to complete the Temple in accordance with this resolution; but we have decided that no better occasion could offer for this purpose than the time when the Saints shall be assembled to observe this day of prayer and thanksgiving. Subscriptions can then be taken by the various Bishops and other presiding officers, from all who are present at the meetings; and if all are not prepared to give that which they desire to subscribe at the time, they can make their arrangements to pay by installments.

It is very desirable that this labor should be completed so that the sacred building can be dedicated to the Lord at the General Conference, April 6th, 1893. Steps have already been taken to have the work done, with the full expectation that the funds which were voted for when this resolution was adopted will be forthcoming in time to meet all the payments. We feel assured there will be no disappointment in this, if the Bishops and other presiding authorities do their duty.

There is no labor in which the Latter-day Saints feel more deeply interested than in the building and completing of temples.

This Temple at Salt Lake City has long been in process of erection. By the 6th of April next, forty years will have elapsed since the laying of the foundation stones. It seems proper, then, that the expiration of that period should witness its dedication. We trust that no exertions will be spared to accomplish this end, and that all will respond liberally to the call which will be made upon them.

Praying the Lord to bestow upon all the Latter-day Saints upon this occasion the spirit of prayer and thanksgiving, we remain,

Your brethren, WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
