James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Iosepa Hawaiian Colony, Skull Valley, Utah October 17, 1892

1892-October 17-Cluff Family Journal, pp. 365-366.

As part of a new type of L.D.S. Church colonization in the late 1880's and the 1890's, joint stock companies were organized under the sponsorship of the Church. "The companies were incorporated, shares of stock were subscribed, dividends distributed and property rights precisely described and apportioned." (Arrington, p. 383-384) The Iosepa Agricultural & Stock Company was one of those so formed, in 1889. This colony was founded in Skull Valley, Tooele County, Utah by a group of native Hawaiians who migrated from the Islands. This letter in 1892 appointed Harvey H. Cluff as the ecclesiastical leader and authority for the colony under the direction of the First Presidency but it is made plain that he was not to interfere in the temporal affairs of the colony which were being governed by the joint stock company. Church appointed leaders of colonies prior to this time usually had both ecclesiastical and temporal authority. For additional background see: Arrington, Great Basin Kingdom pp. 380-384.

Salt Lake City, Oct. 17, 1892. Elder Harvey H. Cluff: DEAR BROTHER: You have been selected to take charge of the affairs of the settlement at Iosepa. We hereby appoint you as President of that settlement, with full authority to administer in all spiritual affairs, to hold meetings regularly for the instruction of the people and to preside in those meetings, to administer the sacrament and to attend to all the duties that may arise connected with their spiritual welfare, as a presiding elder in their midst; to call any of their number, who may bear the priesthood, to assist you as Teachers or in any other capacity, so no evils shall be permitted to grow up in their midst. You will have full authority to council and direct them, to baptize and confirm them, to bless their children, and to do all things that may be necessary to their growth and happiness. While we do not assume any jurisdiction over temporal affairs in that settlement, there being an incorporated company to whom the property belongs, still we shall be pleased at any time to counsel with you upon any matters that may arise in which we can be of benefit to you or to the people.

We shall take great interest in your labors and shall be pleased to hear from you as to your progress from time to time. Praying the Lord to bless you and to give you every necessary qualification to enable you to discharge the duties that devolve upon you.

We remain your brethren,

WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH.
