James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Further instructions on those who hold Temple Recommends, May 9, 1893

1893-May 9-Circular letter, Church Historian's Library; also B. Y. U. Library, Provo, Utah.

Office of The First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City, Utah, May 9th, 1893.

PRESIDENT ______________ and COUNSELORS, _________________, Stake of Zion.

DEAR BRETHREN:

With this we return the recommends given by you to members of your Stake to be present at the dedicatory services at the Temple. We do so for the purpose that you may carefully examine them and become acquainted with the standing of the persons recommended. There were numbers who gained admission to these services whose lives had, for many years, been inconsistent with their calling as Saints; in fact, in some cases they were not known to be members of the Church. But their names were found on the records, fellowship had not been withdrawn from them, and they claimed the right, under the ruling of the First Presidency, to be present at the dedication. These persons having claimed this privilege by reason of their membership in the Church, it now becomes the duty of the local authorities, Bishops and others, to see that all such assume the responsibilities of their profession. When, in your search through the recommends, you meet the name of any of whose standing you are in doubt, they should be labored with in the divine spirit of love and patience, and be admonished to repent of all that is unseemly and inconsistent with their callings as officers or members of Christ's Holy Church. If any turn a deaf ear to these warnings, continue in ways of indifference or sin, and they be found unworthy of membership, they should be dealt with by the proper councils of the Church, as the word of the Lord directs, and their names should be stricken from the records, that the vineyard of the Lord may be pruned and no further opportunity given to the unworthy to repeat the course they took to gain admission to the Temple services.

Our Heavenly Father having exercised His right to forgive whom He will forgive, and to say to each one of us, "Son (or daughter) thy sins be forgiven thee," on condition that we forsake our sins and live unto Him in newness of life, it would be well not to impose further conditions or to require that any of the Saints should be re-baptized before they can be recognized as in full fellowship; on the other hand, none should be forbidden to, in this way, renew their covenants, if they feel that by so doing they will more fully satisfy their consciences, or will receive thereby renewed strength to commence a life more faithful in the observance of God's commandments.

We desire that the Presidents of quorums should act in harmony with the Presidents of Stakes and Bishops. They should examine the rolls of their quorums and where they find men entirely neglecting the duties of their Priesthood and ignoring its responsibilities, they should take the usual action therein.

Praying the Lord to bless you with His Holy Spirit, not only in carrying out these instructions, but at all times and under all circumstances,

We remain, your Brethren in Christ, WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

P. S. We send you a number of extra copies of this circular for distribution among the Bishops and Presidents of Quorums in your Stake.
