James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

World Congress of Religions, July 10, 1893

1893-July 10-Improvement Era 2:676-677 (July, 1899).

Brigham H. Roberts, member of the First Council of Seventy, was the representative of the L.D.S. Church appointed by the First Presidency to contact Mr. Charles C. Bonney, originator of the idea of the World's Parliament of Religions to be held in connection with the World's Columbian Exposition at Chicago. He was instructed to ask for representation for the L.D.S. Church at this Parliament of World Religions. A first-hand account of the whole event is given by Roberts in CHC 6:236-241.

The following letter was addressed to Mr. Charles C. Bonney:

DEAR SIR:

Our attention has recently been called to the importance of the World's Congress of all religions to be held at the World's Fair in Chicago during the month of September. We are given to understand that an invitation is extended of all denominations of Christians and to all religions of the earth to meet "in friendly conference * * * not for debate, but to speak of what are to them the supreme truths, and to show the relation of these truths to the practical problems of modern life. In a word to illustrate their own religion and show its value to believers and to the world."

Appreciating the value and importance of such a parliament as this is set forth to be, we are solicitous that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints should be represented; and present for the consideration of the eminent religionists who will in this Congress be assembled, what we regard as the "supreme truths," and the "distinguishing characteristics" of our faith.

It will be scarcely necessary for us to call your attention to the fact that an abiding interest centers in what the world calls "Mormonism," that its purely American origin will make it of special interest in such a religious parliament as that proposed; that its success in the face of the stupendous opposition it has encountered gives it the right to be heard in such an assembly by its own accredited representatives. All this we believe will be patent to you, and we therefore respectfully ask that the privilege be accorded us of sending a delegation to represent the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints at the World's Religious Congress.

If the opportunity herein asked is accorded us, would you be kind enough to inform us of the privileges that would be extended to our representatives; what time would be allowed for speaking or presentation of papers, etc.; and especially if a committee room in the building where the Congress is to be held would be at their service where they could meet their friends, and converse with those who might wish to make inquiry concerning our faith, etc. Indeed, we should appreciate any information you could communicate to us in respect to this matter; and you will pardon our lack of information on the subject since none of the literature treating of the movement has been forwarded to us.

Hoping to hear from you at your earliest convenience we are,

Most respectfully yours,

WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH, Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
