James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Instructions to Elders-Avoid debating Church issues, June 2, 1894

1894-June 2-Deseret News Weekly 48:747 (June 2, 1894); also Nordstjarnan 18:200-201 (July 1, 1894).

This Card to the Elders of the L.D.S. Church relieves them of the responsibility of accepting challenges to debate controversial religious subjects when challenged by those not of their faith. The questions mentioned as being closed for debate in this card are the type of questions that might be expected to come from those who chose not to follow the leadership of Brigham Young following the death of Joseph Smith.

CARD to the Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

DEAR BRETHREN: Certain parties who appear to be anxious for notoriety, and who desire to take advantage of the prominence and achieve the dignity which discussion with the Elders of this Church would give them, have sent to representative Elders of the Church challenges to hold discussion upon the doctrines and the validity of the authority of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. People of this kind in California and elsewhere have of late been very persistent in demanding an acceptance of their challenge-the question, for debate as they put it, being:

First-Was Brigham Young the lawful and legitimate successor of Joseph Smith (the Seer), to the prophetic office and presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints?

Second-And is Utah the appointed place for the gathering of the Saints in the last days as spoken by the Prophets of God, including Joseph Smith, the Seer?

We take this public method of saying to all our Elders that we consider it entirely unnecessary for the vindication of the principles of the Church, or to prove the authority of the Priesthood of the presiding authorities of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to resort to any such method for their vindication. We leave this for the Lord to prove and sustain, and we think it folly to submit the claims of our Church or the Priesthood to the arbitrament of man. The Lord has said, "By their fruits, ye shall know them;" and to these we can confidently point, feeling satisfied that the people who are seeking for truth and looking for the evidence which the truth always furnishes, can more readily obtain this knowledge by calm investigation and close observation than by controversy.

It is our counsel, therefore, that any Elder who may have received and accepted such a challenge take no steps whatever towards meeting his challenges, but that he leave them severely alone.

No Elder in such a position need feel that any responsibility or discredit will attach to him for declining any discussion into which he may have been drawn; such responsibility we freely assume. We wish it to be further understood that this is our counsel to all of our Elders at home and abroad.

Your Brethren, WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
