James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Establishment of a Church University, August 18, 1894

1894-August 18-Official Announcement, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

As is evidenced by a careful reading of the text of this announcement, the Church University referred to was neither the Brigham Young Academy (now University,) which the L.D.S. Church had established in 1875 in Provo, nor the Latter-day Saints College which the Church had established in Salt Lake City but a projected Church University which it was planned should become "the head of our Church School system." Evidently this Church University, according to this announcement had a short life of one academic year after which this announcement marked its demise. The L.D.S. First Presidency thereupon announced their support of the University of Utah, a "State" institution which had been funded by the "Mormons" less than three years after their arrival in Utah under the title of the University of Deseret.

The Latter-day Saint's College, then located adjacent to a "downtown" location of the University of Utah, was by this announcement to serve the students of the University of Utah and others with a religious education which they could not receive in the "State" institution. By this assigned function the Latter-day Saint's College thus became the forerunner of the present system of LDS Institutes of Religion adjacent to numerous State University campuses throughout North America.

OFFICIAL ANNOUNCEMENT to the Officers and Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

DEAR BRETHREN AND SISTERS:

For several years past, the Presiding Authorities of the Church, acting in conjunction with the General Board of Education, have operated toward the establishment of a Church University, this institution to become the head of our Church School System, and to be equipped for the work of higher instruction. During the past two years, steps were taken toward founding and endowing such an institution as would meet the needs of the people of Utah, and particularly of the Latter-day Saints, as a denominational school of high grade; and on the 8th of September, 1893, a circular was issued announcing the opening of the Church University. The work of the institution was conducted during the academic year 1893-4, with abundant proofs of success; and all connected with the management of the Church University had reason to anticipate for the school a brilliant future. There was no intention on the part of the promoters of the Church University to arouse any unfair competition or rivalry between that school and the University of Utah; nevertheless, the existence of two institutions in the same city, with many courses in common, rendered the paralleling of work, and the consequent duplication of expenditure, absolutely unavoidable. Time has very plainly demonstrated the fact that Utah, while abundantly able under present conditions to maintain one well equipped institution for higher instruction, cannot adequately support many such, either in material supplies of means, or in students prepared for university courses of study. After due consideration of the present conditions and future prospects of educational affairs in Utah, the presiding quorums of the Church have deemed it wise to bring the work of the Church University to a close, that greater energy, resulting from concentration of effort, may be devoted to the development of our Territorial University. Toward the University of Utah our people may properly indulge a feeling of pride; the institution was established in the early days of Utah's history; it was incorporated, indeed, under the name of the University of Deseret within less than three years after the first settlement of this region. It has grown in spite of the numerous difficulties incident to pioneer existence, to its present fair proportions, and to the attainment of its forty-fifth year, with a steady and healthful progress which inspires strong confidence for its future. Utah has need of such an institution of learning; indeed there appears no reason why our University should not become the great inter-mountain center for the diffusion of knowledge in advanced and specialized branches. We hope that the day is not far distant when the youth of Utah will no longer need to journey afar in search of professional instruction; but that our own State will offer her sons and daughters ample facilities in all departments of intellectual progress.

We recommend to the Latter-day Saints that they faithfully devote their influence and energy, such as might have been claimed by the University of the Church, had wisdom dictated the continuance of that institution, to the University of Utah. We trust that our people will sustain the Territorial University by their good words and works, and particularly by their patronage in sending thither their sons and daughters who are prepared to become students in the institution, which by law is constituted as the head of the public school system of Utah.

The officers of the University are men in whom the people have learned to repose their confidence; the Chancellor and the Regents need no encomiums from us in their responsible and honorable stations. The President and Faculty of the institution are severally of recognized abilities in their professions, and of steadfast devotion to the educational advancement of the people; they are entitled to the fullest confidence of Utah's citizens without distinction.

We feel assured that the moral influence of the University will prove of salutary effect, and that all due attention will be paid to the training of students in the studies of true moral citizenship as well as in the subjects of purely secular instruction. However, as the University is a public possession, the property of people of many sects and creeds, it would be manifestly improper to allow any species of sectarian religious instruction to be imparted within its walls, or under its auspices. In view of these facts, and knowing, as we do, that many of the Latter-day Saints are imbued with a strong desire to have their youth instructed in theological tenets co-ordinately with secular training, we call your attention to the fact that the Latter-day Saints' College, an institution which stands among the foremost of our Church Schools, is conducted in close proximity to the University, and that the very full courses of daily instruction in Theology will be offered at such hours, and under such conditions, that Latter-day Saint students who are attending the University, and others not regularly attending the College, may pursue in the latter such of these sacred studies as their ability and opportunities will permit. It is the aim of our local and general educational boards to strengthen the theological department of the College, increasing and augmenting the courses, to meet all requirements.

We request that the Presidents of Stakes, Bishops of Wards, and other presiding officers, will cause this letter to be read intheir places of public gathering; and that they will use their influence in otherwise bringing this subject before the people.

Respectfully your Brethren, WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH, First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
