James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Regulations and "calling" of Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir, February 11, 1895

1895-February 14-Printed card; Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The First Presidency who issued this card in 1895 had accompanied the Tabernacle Choir to the World's Fair in Chicago September, 1893 when the choir had won second prize in a national contest. Their work at the World's Fair was the beginning of a great missionary work to be accomplished by this musical organization. This card contains the commendation for their work and a set of rules or regulations governing membership and participation in the Choir.

For additional background see CHC 6:242-258.

Salt Lake City, Utah, Feb. 11, 1895.

To Conductor Evan Stephens, and the Members of the Tabernacle Choir,

DEAR BRETHREN AND SISTERS: The following memoranda express, in part, our wishes and feelings with regard to yourselves and the important work placed in your hands:

First.-Members of the Tabernacle Choir are really acting as missionaries, called for their special work, their duties being to give the necessary time for training and practice, and their services on the Sabbath, and on other occasions as required by their Conductors.

Second.-Being called especially to this work, all other duties of a public nature should be secondary. None should be under obligations to perform any other public duty which would conflict with their duties in this choir, unless first released from the choir.

Third.-All those called to this work should be faithful in their attendance, and should give hearty and cheerful aid to their conductors; complying, as far as possible with the plans and movements deemed necessary to the choir's proper advancement towards perfection in the "Divine Art," which cannot be attained without united effort and perfect discipline.

Fourth.-The members may feel assured that any and all movements of any importance will only be taken with the full sanction, approval and encouragement of the proper authorities of the Church, by whom you are called to this labor.

We desire to see this choir not only maintain the high reputation it has earned at home and abroad, but become the highest exponent of the "Divine Art" in all the land; and the worthy head, example and leader of all other choirs and musical bodies in the Church, inspiring musicians and poets with purest sentiment and song and harmony, until its light shall shine forth to the world undimmed, and nations shall be charmed with its music.

This choir is and should be a great auxiliary to the cause of Zion. By means of its perfection in the glorious realm of song, it may unstop the ears of thousands now deaf to the truth, soften their stony hearts, and inspire precious souls with a love for that which is divine. Thus removing prejudice, dispelling ignorance and shedding forth the precious light of heaven to tens of thousands who have been, and are still, misled concerning us.

This is a noble work, a glorious cause, worthy of your earnest efforts, and of the exertion it requires; as well as the exercise of the divine gifts and talents with which you are endowed.

And may you, its leaders, officers and members, always be ready, at home or abroad, (as recently at the World's Fair), to reflect the excellence, beauty, intelligence, order and refinement of the people of God, from our Tabernacle on the "Mountain Tops." For to this goodly work you are called, and we confidently believe you will give to it your best energies, will be faithful to this trust, and succeed gloriously.

We remain, Your Brethren in the Gospel, Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, Joseph F. Smith.
