James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Position of Alternate Stake High Councillors, August 17, 1895

1895-August 17-Letter on file, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

This letter states that President Brigham Young had first provided for alternate members to Stake High Councils and that President John Taylor had given the instructions that these alternate members should be invested with the same powers and rights as the regular High Council members. Wilford Woodruff as President of the Church here ruled that a "court composed of a majority of Alternates is a competent tribunal to transact any business of the stake needing attention." He further ruled that the business of the Church must not suffer from the inactivity of High Council members.

Office of the First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Salt Lake City, Utah, August 17, 1895.

Prest. Orson Smith, S. M. Molen, Isaac Smith, Presidency Cache Stake of Zion.

DEAR BRETHREN:

In your communication of the 5th inst., you state that on the 3rd of March, 1887, Elder F. D. Richards, after ordaining a number of alternate High Councillors for your Stake, explained the powers and duties of a High Councillor, and stated that alternate High Councillors were High Councillors in the Stake, possessing all the qualifications of the regular members of the High Council. That since that time you have used the alternates as regular members whenever occasion required for the transaction of business even when there was not a quorum of the regular members present. That some of the High Councillors had taken exception to the rightfulness of the Council transacting business without a full quorum of the regular members; and you ask for a ruling on this point.

Your communication was submitted to and considered by the Council of First Presidency and Apostles at their regular meeting, held on the 8th inst., at which meeting there were present, besides ourselves, Elders Lorenzo Snow, F. D. Richards, Brigham Young, F. M. Lyman, J. H. Smith, H. J. Grant, M. W. Merrill and A. H. Cannon.

The object of creating alternate High Councillors was explained in substance as follows: There had been a good deal of trouble in convening High Councils throughout the different stakes, and upon the suggestion of the late President Brigham Young Alternates were Provided for so that the business of the church might not suffer in consequence of the inability of stake presidents to convene their respective councils; and it was the intention of President Brigham Young to confer upon them full powers with the regular members. To this was added the testimony of Elder F. D. Richards, who stated that pursuant to instructions given him and Elder Henry Smith by the late President John Taylor, they ordained the first Alternate members of your High Council, investing them with the same rights and powers as those conferred upon the regular members whenever they (the Alternates) might be called upon to act in this office, and that this was done in order that a competent Council might be convened in the absence of any of the regular members.

It was the sense of the Council that Alternate High Councillors possess all the powers of the twelve regular members, when called upon to exercise them; and that therefore a court composed of a majority of Alternates is a competent tribunal to transact any business of the stake needing attention. To quote the language which I (W. W.) used in rendering the decision on this point: "This church cannot stop doing business." A majority of the regular members, however, should be present whenever possible, and the vacancies filled by Alternates; but the business of the stake should not be allowed to suffer for the lack or non-attendance of a single regular member.

Your Brethren, Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, Joseph F. Smith.
