James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Fraternal and labor organizations and "right to work" regulations, July 9, 1896

1896-July 9-Journal History of the Church, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

This reply to the President of the Wasatch Stake on the advisability of issuing Temple recommends to members of the Church who were also members of the A. O. U. W. is of interest for at least two reasons. First, it discourages membership in fraternal organizations by holders of the priesthood, but places the decision of a Temple recommend on a basis of individual worthiness of those who belong to "outside" fraternal organizations. Secondly, it constitutes the first statement of which we are aware of the First Presidency of the L.D.S. Church on the subject of right to work rules or regulations. The document should be interesting to present readers in light of the recent statements issued by the First Presidency against attempts to repeal provision 14B of the Taft-Hartley Law which again is right to work legislation. It seems that the First Presidency in 1965-66 had precedent for their stand on right to work from the stand taken in 1896 by President Wilford Woodruff and his counselors.

Perhaps the reader is as puzzled as was the compiler over the meaning of the initials A. O. U. W. They stand for Ancient Order of United Workman.

The Ancient Order of United Workmen were founded October 27, 1868 by J. J. Upchurch. Upchurch was a Master Mechanic in a Pennsylvania railroad shop when there was a strike called by one of the unions. Negotiations brought a raise in wages which union members accepted but their leaders refused. Upchurch out of that experience decided to organize a workman's organization that would bring better employer-employee relationships. He stated his philosophy in founding the A. O. U. W. in these words:

"What right has any man or set of men to dictate to others what wages they should receive? What right has a society to order that men must not work unless the demands of the society are complied with? Who gave them power to take away or control the will of the workingmen?

"As I thought over the subject, I saw more and more the injustice done not only to capital but to laboring men whom they profess to befriend. I was thoroughly convinced the way these societies were managed that they exercised a baneful influence upon the business relations of the country." (J. J. Upchurch, The Life, Labors & Travels of Father J. J. Upchurch; founder of the Ancient order of United Workmen, San Francisco, 1887, p. 22)

A copy of the Upchurch autobiography and another volume giving the A. O. U. W. Ritual are in the Brigham Young University Library.

The following letter was addressed in Elder Abraham Hatch, President of the Wasatch Stake, which explains itself:

"You Ask the question, Are members of the A. O. U. W., who are members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints entitled to recommends to the Temples for marriages and Temple work?"

In reply, we would say that we are not in favor of our Brethren joining organizations of any kind outside of our Church. But we are more especially impressed with the wrongfulness of their joining organizations which interfere with the rights of their fellow citizens in regard to labor. To illustrate: We think it is wrong, contrary to our religion, and contrary to good citizenship, for men to combine together in any organization to prevent their fellowmen from working because they do not join them or work for such an amount as they think workmen ought to have. This, we think, states our position clearly in regard to those organizations. But this A. O. U. W., as we understand, is not in the strictest sense an organization of that kind. Still we think it would be better for our brethren not to join it. It would not do, however, to refuse a young man who wanted to be married in the Temple a recommend because of his being a member of that organization. We do not wish to drive our people away from the Church and from its ordinances. At the same time we would not like this to be a precedent and for others to say, "Well, the Church has no objection to our belonging to the A. O. U. W., because So and So has received a recommend and he is a member of that Order." From this we think you will understand our position. If a man desires a recommend, and this is the only objection, we think you should grant it to him, at the same time giving him these views."

WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH, First Presidency.
