James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Endorsement of Pioneer Electric Power Co. irrigation project, Ogden, Utah, October 2, 1896

1896-October 2-Original circular, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The Pioneer Electric Power Company was organized in February, 1896 with a capitalization of $2,000,000. George Q. Cannon of the First Presidency was the president of the company and the L.D.S. Church owned approximately $350,000 of the $400,000 of common stock issued. The company issued 1,500 gold bonds each with a face value of $1,000 and bearing six per cent interest. These bonds were purchased by Joseph Banigan, an eastern financier upon an unconditional and absolute guarantee issued by the First Presidency of the L.D.S Church and Wilford Woodruff as trustee-in-trust for the Church. Hence the interest in the project by the First Presidency as expressed by this circular.

An excellent discussion of this Church business venture is given in Arrington, Great Basin Kingdom, p. 394-400.

The Pioneer Electric Power Company after several consolidations became the Utah Power and Light Company. Arrington cites the files of the Pioneer Electric Company in the Church Historian's Library, the Diary of Wilford Woodruff, and the Utah Power and Light archives in Salt Lake City as additional references.

According to Arrington (p. 393) enterprises engaged in by the L.D.S. Church in the 1890's differed from those promoted in the 1870's in at least these features:

"(1) Whereas the 1870 ventures were constructed with battalions of volunteer workers recruited from the various settlements, laboring primarily for tithing pay or stock in the enterprise ... [the 1890 projects]... were all constructed on a contract basis by private enterprise motivated by profit. ...

(2) Whereas in the 1870 ventures 'the building of the Kingdom' and 'the welfare of Zion' were paramount, attention was paid to profit ... [by the 1890 projects]."

Salt Lake City, Utah, October 2nd, 1896.

DEAR BROTHER:

The Pioneer Electric Power Company, whose works are at Ogden, Utah, has established a splendid system of canals to irrigate about 20,000 acres of land lying to the north-west of Ogden City, most of which tract is from eight to twelve miles only distant from the heart of Ogden, and all reached by good and convenient roads. The land is especially adapted to orchards and to market gardens. A great part of it is as choice as any land in these valleys.

By this enterprise there is afforded an opportunity for people in Utah to get homes without migrating to distant parts. We recommend to you that you call this subject to the attention of such of the people in your locality as may contemplate locating upon farms and orchard lands.

The prices of the land are low, and the supply of water, it is believed, will be unfailing.

Full information can be had by correspondence with Elder Charles C. Blown, Land Agent of the Pioneer Electric Power Company, Ogden, Utah.

Your Brethren, WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH.
