James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

To the Saints in the Turkish Mission, September 7, 1897

1897-September 7-Original letter. Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

A brief history of the Turkish Mission, which was founded in December, 1884 is given in Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1941, p. 888-890. According to Jenson, political disturbances in Turkey in 1895 had forced the recall of American Elders from Turkey and Dr. Armenag Shil Hagopian (Hagobian), a native Elder was placed in charge of the mission. In September, 1897 political affairs in Turkey became more settled and Elders Philip Maycock and Andrew L. Larsen were appointed to reopen the mission. This letter anticipates that reopening of the mission.

The letter is also interesting and valuable for what it has to say about Palestine, the rebuilding of Jerusalem and the American Indian as a portion of the house of Israel.

The First Presidency in their Epistle of October 6, 1887, appearing earlier in this volume, had also mentioned the missionary work being attempted in Turkey.

Salt Lake City, Utah, Sept. 7, 1897.

Beloved Brethren and Sisters in Turkey:

We have lately received a number of letters from various brethren addressed to Bro. Levon S. Abraham. In these letters a number of questions are sprung concerning your condition and also asking about a future opportunity of gathering to some place in your own land.

First, we learn that the different branches of the Church in Turkey need a fuller organization, this has been ordered to be corrected through the office in Liverpool and Elder Armenag S. Hagobian. President Hagobian should make a visit to the different branches of the church and ordain a few worthy brethren to the office of elders and some to the lower priesthood so that there may be workers in each branch to supply the necessary spiritual food and to preach the Gospel with authority to those not acquainted with our doctrines. There are also some difficulties that should be straightened out so that all might work as one in Jesus Christ our Lord.

It is probable that before long some elders will be sent there again to labor, and we hope you will receive them as the servants of the living God sent to you to minister in the ordinances of life and salvation for your good and for the good of the nations in that far off part of the world. For the Gospel of Christ must be preached in all places according to the will of the Father before the end will come. Dear Brethren and Sisters, you are inclined to be impatient, as though you alone had troubles to endure. This you should not be. The saints have troubles in all the world, some more, some less, but all have to exercise patience and by so doing show their devotion to God and His cause, and their works will in time shine forth out of the darkness that surrounds the world. God will be glorified through our labors and our love of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ. Satan is pressing the saints everywhere possible. He knows his time is short and he loses no opportunity to oppress the saints and if possible to overcome. This we know he cannot, but he will try, and we must resist evil and do good, labor faithfully and diligently and never tire, and although we cannot do as we like, let us not forget that this work is of God. He guides and he will inspire his servants to move at the right time and in the right place. Wherefore, let us love, respect and pray for His servants that they may have the Holy Spirit to guide them and that the saints may have the Comforter to help them to understand their counsels and to carry them out. This work is great. We mean the work of redemption, and the laborers, are few in comparison to the greatness of the work. Calls for elders and Gospel knowledge are extensive and where the nations seem ripe to harvest many are sent and many precious souls are redeemed from the false doctrines and traditions of the world and as soon as the way seems clear the work in Turkey will be pushed forward. For, to the land of Palestine are made great promises, and if you remain faithful you will be instrumental by your prayers, faith and works to help fulfil many of the glorious promises. Teach your children as best you can the Gospel of Christ, so that when they are eight years old they can be baptized and confirmed members of His Church, for so has God commanded us in these days. And until you can be gathered to one place where you can have the home rule, the laws and privileges of the country affords, let your children attend the Protestant schools and learn to read and write and do the best you can for them, and God will give the children sufficient of His Spirit to discern good from evil. Let father and mother teach and exhort them at home about the Gospel, and the Protestants will have no power over the children to lead them astray. God has much good among all nations and this he will consecrate for the upbuilding of His kingdom. We are all His children and He has joy in the good works and in the progress of His children and the saints above all should be fully tolerant and observant, and kind and good, always speaking the truth, do right, and above all, be virtuous in thought and deed.

Of the young sisters of whom you write, we would say it is best not to give them in marriage to any but saints, if possible. Let them rather wait the time of the Lord. Good men will be found in time. It is not good for saints and sinners to be bound together. Be patient in well-doing. These questions about the children and young sisters are the same as we find among the saints in all lands where they are scattered, and they have to abide the Lord's time until they can be changed in the proper way. We do not build school-houses nor support schools only where the saints locally are able to do so; it is not in the line of our work, but we sustain the laws and institutions of the country where we go, and find that good results follow, for so the Lord has revealed to us.

We hope and pray to God that a way may be opened, that a gathering place for our people may be found somewhere in the promised land. For as we are of Israel we feel the promises are unto us and we look forward to the day when God will move upon the rulers in Turkey to set apart a place for us to live, and there acknowledge us as a people and give us liberal government and such privileges as insure peace and prosperity to us and the nation. Do not despair, Latter-day Saints, were you in countries ruled by some of the Christian potentates, you would not have as much liberty as you now have, neither could our hopes be so bright for the future. For priestcraft and sin and misrule are very great in many nations, so much so that we cannot preach the Gospel there at all.

Be sure we will do all we can for you, you are of us; we are all one body in Christ; we have one Lord; we all drink at the same fountain; we are all looking for redemption through the only name given under heaven whence comes salvation. Now that our faith is one and our hope the same, let us seek to be filled with the love of God. Let us always seek profitable conversations, leaving mysteries alone. Read the scriptures for they are profitable to us for instruction. And more particularly let us seek for the possession of the Spirit of God to be our guide and to increase our testimonies. Do not discuss the time of the coming of Christ in an unprofitable manner. There is a time appointed, and God only knows it. He has not revealed it. But the appointed time will surely come long before most people are prepared. This we know, it is not far distant, for the signs of his coming are now very plain. But there is yet much to do to prepare for that great event. Many of the honest have not yet heard of His great Latter-day work. Zion must be fully established. Jerusalem must be rebuilt by the Jews, the ten tribes must return from the north, the American Indians, who are of the house of Israel must be converted and become workers in His cause. And many more of the different branches of the House of Israel must return to the promised lands and be prepared to meet Him and to receive Him. He will be their King when He comes. God's works must all be fulfilled and we must wait patiently and labor in the fear of God that we may be with His holy company when He comes. For He will come in the clouds and save His saints while His angels will reap the earth and cleanse it from sin.

Brother Levon Abraham, who is here, is a faithful and humble member of the church. He has a great desire to do good. His whole soul is laboring to do you good, and when he has learned the English language he will return to you and be instrumental in doing much good, if he remains faithful. He has given us much comfort concerning the saints in Turkey and his labors here in Zion in our behalf will be of great benefit to you in time to come.

Your Brethren in the Gospel, WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH.
