James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Annual Tithing settlement, December 20, 1897

1897-December 20-Circular of Instructions, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

At least two special instructions are contained in this Circular of Instructions for handling tithes. Beginning with 1898 the Bishops and Stake tithing clerks were to make a monthly report of cash tithes to the Trustee-in-Trust and the Stake Presidents were instructed that they possessed supervisory powers over the care of tithes in their Stake.

The Circular also indicates an economy where tithing "in kind" or in commodities was still the dominant practice rather than tithing paid in cash which is the predominant practice today (1966) in the Church.

CIRCULAR OF INSTRUCTIONS to the Presidents of Stakes, Bishops of Wards and Stake Tithing Clerks in Zion.

Salt Lake City, Utah, December 20th, 1897.

SETTLEMENT OF TITHES FOR THE YEAR 1897

DEAR BRETHREN:

The time is now approaching for the annual settlement of Tithes. We desire to direct the attention of those having charge of tithing affairs in the several Wards and Stakes of Zion to this important subject, and also to give instructions and advice concerning the receiving and disbursing of the tithes.

Great responsibility is placed upon the Bishops, as Stewards of the Lord's Storehouse. They should see that roots of all kinds are properly protected, hay carefully stacked, grain securely garnered, livestock kept in good condition, and in fact, nothing should be allowed to waste or decay for lack of care and attention, but handled with economy and to the best interests of the Church.

Beginning with the tithes of 1898, the Bishops of Wards and Stake tithing clerks, should remit to President Wilford Woodruff, Trustee-in-Trust, monthly, or oftener if necessary, all cash received by them, whether on tithing or proceeds from sale of other kinds of tithes.

In wards not accessible to the Bishops' General Storehouse, perishable produce, merchandise, building material, etc., should be sold or exchanged for articles more marketable. Grain, horned stock or sheep must be held subject to instructions from the General Storehouse; but if an opportunity occurs for sale of any of these items in the various Stakes, the Bishop or Stake tithing clerk should communicate with the Bishops' General Storehouse, stating the price offered, and his opinion whether the market would justify the sale locally. When hay is not needed for the feed of Church or Stake cattle, the Stake tithing clerk will report the surplus quantity on hand in the several Wards, to the Bishop's General Storehouse; instructions can then be given as to its disposition.

An inventory of the tithes on hand should be taken at the close of annual settlement, by weights, measurements and description, and a fair market valuation placed on each article or kind. An estimate of the value of real estate, buildings, improvements, fixtures, furniture, etc., used or controlled by the Tithing Department, should also be given. The Stake tithing clerk, when requested, will assist the Bishop in rendering his accounts, so that all instructions may be properly carried out.

No tithing credit should be given persons on promises to pay at some future date, nor should the tithes be loaned, or persons allowed to draw from the Tithing Department, unless permission is given, in writing, by the Presidency of the Church or Presiding Bishopric. This is intended to apply to officers, as well as other members of the Church.

All orders issued on Wards or Stakes should be taken upon presentation, charged the Bishop's General Storehouse and paid in full in the kinds specified on the order. If this cannot be done, in consequence of the amount of order or conditions of its payment, credit the party or account in whose favor it is drawn with the full amount of the order and then charge all payments made on same; but when you have tithes on hand in kinds called for on the order, notice must be given those having credit on your books that you are prepared to pay the balance of the order in full, and the account closed. In any event, such accounts must be paid before the close of the year in which they originate, providing you have tithes on hand to make the payment.

When persons pay tithes in a Ward where they do not reside, certificates stating the kind and amount so paid must be given by the Bishop for such credit, so that in settling their tithing in the Ward where they do reside, the certificate may be shown their Bishop and entered as a memorandum on the Ward book and Tithing Record, in red ink, but not carried out as tithes received in that Ward. Blank certificates for use in such cases will be furnished from the Bishop's General Storehouse on application.

The Bishops should give receipts for all tithes received by them, and a duplicate or stub of said receipt be properly filled out. This will materially assist in making accurate and satisfactory settlement with tithe payers. Blank receipt books for this purpose will be furnished from the Bishop's General Storehouse on application.

In forwarding tithes to the Bishop's General Storehouse, an invoice of same should always be sent by mail, specifying the articles sent and their local market value. Blank invoices for this purpose will be furnished by your Stake tithing clerk on application to him. We call the attention of the Bishops to the necessity of allowing only fair market values for produce, stock and miscellaneous tithing.

The Bishop or acting Bishop should designate a date as early in January as possible for the final settlement of Tithing, and should be present in person at such settlement. Every member of his Ward should be notified, by the Teachers, of the time and place for such settlement.

Bishops desiring credit for produce or miscellaneous tithing in 1897, must forward same to the Bishop's General Storehouse, on or before January 4th, 1898. The books will remain open for cash remittances until February 1st, 1898, for credit in 1897.

The question was asked at the late Priesthood meeting, at which were present Presidents of Stakes and Bishops of Wards, What authority, if any, have Presidents of Stakes over the tithes of their Stakes? The answer was, that they should take supervision of everything in their Stakes, including the care of the tithes; and as they are required to certify to the correctness of the tithing reports made annually to the Presiding Bishop's Office, they should satisfy themselves that the tithing accounts of the Bishops and Stake tithing clerk are correctly and properly kept.

In conclusion, we desire to impress upon the presiding officers in the Stakes and Wards of Zion, the urgent necessity of diligently teaching the Saints the Law of Tithing, its importance to their spiritual and temporal welfare and the many blessings promised those who observe the law in the spirit and meaning thereof.

Praying the blessings of the Lord may rest upon you continually in your labors among the Saints,

We remain your Brethren in the Gospel, WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH, First Presidency.
