James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Relations of the L.D.S. Church with Colonel Isaac Trumbo, February 12, 1898

1898-February 12-Deseret News Weekly 56:262 (February 12, 1898).

Roberts (CHC 6:338-345) discusses the political situation in Utah 1896-1898. Colonel Isaac Trumbo's connection with Utah politics and affairs is briefly mentioned on p. 339. Roberts says that "Public understanding, rightfully or not, usually coupled the name and interests of George Q. Cannon with those of Mr. Trumbo, and their names [in 1896] were commonly coupled together as prospective senators to be elected by the Republican legislature of Utah."

Arrington (Great Basin Kingdom, p. 385) quotes the Journal History for a formal discussion by the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve on January 27, 1898 regarding the inter-relationships then existing between L.D.S. and "Gentile" leaders. He quotes them as saying: "the Saints never expected to be so mixed up with Gentiles as circumstances had led them into ..."

George Q. Cannon was not only a member of the First Presidency but he was president of a number of business ventures in which the First Presidency had invested L.D.S. Church funds. (See for example Arrington's discussion of "Case Studies of Church Promotion in the 1890's", pp. 386-403)

With George Q. Cannon's name coupled with that of Isaac Trumbo in politics it might also be natural to have it coupled, by popular opinion, in business. This "Explanation To the Public" was doubtless made to refute such rumors or allegations as were current that such a relationship had led to the turning over of large sums of L.D.S. Church funds to Colonel Isaac Trumbo.

AN EXPLANATION to the Public.

There have been many communications of late in the newspapers concerning Colonel Isaac Trumbo and his affairs. Charges have been made, emanating from various sources, that there has been some financial connection between himself and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It has been repeatedly stated in years past, and the story has been revived of late, that Colonel Trumbo has had large amounts of money in his hands and under his control belonging to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; that he has been its agent in the expenditure of funds for the accomplishment of certain ends that were desired to be achieved.

We have remained silent upon this subject. It is well known that from time to time charges are made and circulated concerning us and our affairs, which we deem it unnecessary to notice. It would be occupying too much of our time to be contradicting stories which are put in circulation by one and another for their own purposes. This feeling has restrained us in the past in relation to Colonel Trumbo and his connection with us and our affairs. But it seems to be proper now, and just to ourselves, as well as common justice to him, that we should say something in relation to the association that has existed between Colonel Isaac Trumbo and ourselves as the representatives of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

First of all, we wish to state most emphatically that Colonel Trumbo has not had property of ours in his possession for such purposes as alleged. He has neither been our financial agent, nor had any control of our property. We have not entrusted him with amounts of money to expend for us for any such purposes.

In the time of our deep distress, when bitterness and hatred were manifested against us in almost every public quarter, Colonel Isaac Trumbo came to Utah, and showed interest in our affairs. Some of his own relatives were involved in cases that were then before the courts. One prominent connection of his was consigned to the penitentiary, on the common charge that was in vogue against so many prominent Latter-day Saints. The colonel's sympathies it seems, were aroused, at least in behalf of his kinsfolk. This caused him to take interest in the whole question: and this interest absorbed him to such an extent that he withdrew from profitable business that he had at the time in San Francisco, and devoted himself almost exclusively to the labor of correcting the false impressions which prevailed and to the enlistment of the press in the correction of the many falsehoods and aspersions which were in circulation: and afterwards, on a wider field, using his influence with leading men of the nation. We may say here that Colonel Isaac Trumbo is a man of extraordinary energy. When he undertakes anything that he thinks ought to be done, he is untiring in his efforts to accomplish it. These characteristics were wonderfully illustrated in the labors which he took upon himself in behalf of the maligned and misrepresented Latter-day Saints. Being a man of means, he was able to travel from place to place, and especially to visit and sustain himself at Washington. We can never forget his activity in visiting editors and using his influence to correct public opinion through the press. No man could have displayed greater zeal and disinterestedness than he did in the labors that he took upon himself. We felt that he was inspired; for, not being a member of our religious organization, and having no financial ends to accomplish that would be remunerative to him, there was nothing to incite him to these extraordinary exertions except a purely philanthropic desire to defend an oppressed and unpopular people and to roll back the tide of calumny and evil that threatened to overwhelm them. We felt thankful many times for the kind Providence which raised him up; for he seemed to come to our aid at a time when a man in his position and with his indefatigable energy was especially needed.

When the Mormon people were threatened with disfranchisement, Col. Trumbo spent considerable time in Washington, exerting himself to the utmost of his ability to defeat that infamous measure. And while there were other agencies also at work (for everyone that had any influence in the community realized how necessary it was that this measure should be defeated), still Colonel Isaac Trumbo was the means of bringing powerful influences to bear against the enactment of that villainous bill. In the defeat of that proposed legislation every member of our Church had cause to be deeply grateful to the Lord and to the instruments which, under Him, were the means of bringing it to naught.

With the same zeal and devotedness he worked untiringly to obtain the amnesty; and also afterwards in securing the return of the personal property of the Church, and in preparing the way for the return of the real estate.

He threw himself into the accomplishment of all these ends with an energy and wholeness of soul that won him many friends and crowned his labors and the labors of those who worked with him with success.

Colonel Trumbo was most fortunate in winning the respect and admiration of influential men in the nation. By his representations of the condition of things in the then Territory of Utah and his enthusiastic defense of the Mormon people, he aroused the active interest and sympathies of very many of them. This was notably the case with General James S. Clarkson. This gentleman was deeply moved by all that he learned, and he entered with his whole soul and great influence, with Colonel Trumbo, into the effort to make the true character of the people known to the nation and to remove the widespread and deep-rooted prejudices which existed so generally at that time against the Mormon people. It would be invidious perhaps to attempt to give names of other leading and influential public men who, by the powerful appeals which were made to them, were induced to examine what was known as the Mormon question from a different standpoint to that which they had occupied; but their names are cherished in grateful remembrance by the men of Utah, and their deeds will be preserved in the history of the people. All the influence which he had gained by personal acquaintance Colonel Trumbo used to make the people of Utah better known to the nation at large, and towards preparing the way for the admission of Utah as a State. It is not necessary for us to go into details concerning his labors in this direction; it is sufficient to say that probably no single agency contributed so much to making Utah a State as the labors of Colonel Isaac Trumbo and his immediate friends.

WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q, CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH.
