James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Volunteers for Spanish-American War, April 28, 1898

1898-April 28-Deseret Weekly, April 28, 1898, p. 644.

This call for 500 volunteers for the Spanish-American War is compared to a previous call in 1846 for 500 "Mormon" volunteers for the Mexican War.

As announced in this document and in similar announcements at the beginning of each war engaged in by the United States since 1846, the L.D.S. Church abhors war and favors peace but when war does come its membership has always been instructed to answer the call to loyal and patriotic military service.

See Messages of the First Presidency 1:293-305, 324-326 for comparison of the circumstances of the call of the Mormon Battalion in 1846 referred to in this present document.

Office of the First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Salt Lake City, Utah, April 28, 1898.

Hon. Heber M. Wells, Governor of the State of Utah:

DEAR GOVERNOR: We have read with much interest your proclamation to the people of our State, in which you call, in response to the proclamation of the President of the United States for the enlistment of 500 men to furnish Utah's quota of the 125,000 volunteers called for by the President to serve in the army of the United States for two years.

The people whom we represent are lovers of peace, and would do anything in their power, consistent with honor and the patriotic duty which every citizen owes to his country, to avert war and its dreadful train of consequences. Because of this feeling we have been led to admire the course which has been taken by President McKinley throughout this Spanish imbroglio, and we have hoped that his efforts to preserve peace between the two countries would result in success.

But war has been declared, and we have it to meet. Our citizens are called upon to enlist, and Utah is asked to furnish cavalry and batteries of artillery approximating 500 men.

We trust that the citizens of Utah, who are Latter-day Saints will be found ready to respond with alacrity to this call which is made upon our estate. There was a time in the past when we were called upon, as a religious organization, to make a far greater sacrifice than this, under circumstances that were exceedingly painful. Then there was no hesitation; but upwards of one-third of the men of suitable age formed a battalion of 500, left the camp and volunteered to take part in the Mexican war. In like manner there should be no hesitation now; and we sincerely trust that your recruiting officers will find our co-religionists as ready now to enlist and march to the defense of their country as their fathers were in the days to which we refer.

Trusting that you will be eminently successful in raising Utah's proper quota of volunteers, and that the Almighty will protect our nation in the hour of trial, and assist us in our battles for humanity and right, we remain. Very respectfully,

WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH,

First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
