James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Sunday Schools given priority on Sunday morning worship hours, September ?, 1898

1898-?-Original Circular, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City, Utah.

This circular may have been issued anytime between 1889 and the death of President Wilford Woodruff at the home of Colonel Isaac Trumbo in San Francisco, California, September 2, 1898.

A check of the diaries of John M. Whitaker, who was secretary of the Deseret Sunday School Union Board until his call to the Eastern States mission in December, 1897 failed to provide any reference or clue to the dating of the circular. The Juvenile Instructor for 1889-1898 and the Jubilee History of the Deseret Sunday School Union were also checked in an attempt to date this document.

Because it announces an important procedure in the priority and scheduling of L.D.S. Church meetings, it has been included even though no date has been established. It is hoped that further investigation may enable the compiler to establish the date of the circular and therefore of this ruling of the First Presidency of the Church on the priority of the Sunday Schools over the Sunday morning worship hours. By this ruling Sunday School Superintendents were given permission to hold their services without interruption by even Stake or General Conferences of the Church. This ruling has since been modified to some extent to meet changing conditions.

A LETTER to the Presidents of Stakes and Bishops of Wards.

The question of conducting Sunday Schools without interruption by General and Stake Conferences, Mutual Improvement Associations, Relief Societies and Primary Associations, has been brought to our attention several times, and some general counsel has been given, but not in such a form as to receive the attention it deserves. Again the subject has been brought before us by the brethren who have spent years of their lives in the Sunday School cause, and who are actively engaged in the management of the affairs of the Sabbath Schools, and after due consideration we have decided that it should be understood throughout all the wards and Stakes of Zion that each Sunday morning shall be held exclusively for the Sabbath Schools, and that no organization shall consider itself at liberty to use that part of the Sabbath to the prevention of Sunday Schools being held.

The general consensus of opinion among leading officers of the Church who have given this subject attention is to the effect that the breaking up of the Sunday Schools even for one Sunday has an injurious effect; and these schools are so important and they are doing so great an amount of good that we feel convinced that it is unwise to permit them to be suspended. We have, therefore, concluded that this request which has been made upon us by the Deseret Sunday School Union Board is consistent and proper, and we take this method to make it known throughout the Church.

It is our desire that the superintendents of Sunday Schools be permitted to conduct their schools every Sunday morning without any interruption whatever, even on the Sabbath days when general or quarterly conferences may he held. This is not intended to prevent other organizations holding conferences, providing that in so doing the Sunday School are not stopped.

WILFORD WOODRUFF, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH, First Presidency.
