James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Appeal for support of Church Chronology sales, December 3, 1898

1898-December 3-MS 61:7 (January 25, 1899)

Under Wilford Woodruff the First Presidency had announced the acquisition and Andrew Jenson for the purpose of raising funds to erect a new Historian's Office. The appeal for support for this publishing project is repeated here on December 3, 1898 and again on October 18, 1899 by the new First Presidency.

CHURCH CHRONOLOGY

The News has been requested to call attention to the new and enlarged edition of Church Chronology which will be placed before the public this month. It will be a work of reference of great value to every student of the history of the Church.

The profits accruing from the sale of this work will be used toward the erection of a new Historian's office, and a fire-proof building in which to preserve the records and documents of the Church. This is very much needed, the present buildings being entirely inadequate for the amount of literature that has accumulated and must be taken care of.

Of the new edition of the Church Chronology 25,000 copies are now being printed and it is expected this edition will find a ready sale among the Saints. The work will cover among other points the following historical data:

Births of men who have become prominent in the Church; circumstances associated with the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, the restoration of the Holy Priesthood and the organization of the Church; the growth of the Church and the succession of its General Authorities; the persecution of the Saints in Missouri, Ohio and Illinois; the exodus from Nauvoo to Great Salt Lake Valley; the establishment of settlements of Saints in Utah and surrounding states and territories; the organization of Stakes of Zion, Bishops' wards, councils and Priesthood, auxiliary associations, etc.; the establishment of foreign missions, and the succession of their presidencies; a record of arrests, prosecutions, fines and imprisonments under the anti-polygamy laws; deaths of prominent men and women in the Church; all other events of importance associated with the development and growth of the Church; all given in chronological order.

The Chronology is thus endorsed by the First Presidency of the Church:

"We commend Church Chronology to the kind consideration of the Saints, and trust it will meet with the success it merits, and that the presiding officers and leading men in all the Stakes of Zion will favor the work with their aid and influence, so that the purpose for which it is being published may be successfully carried out.

LORENZO SNOW, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH."

-Deseret News.
