James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Deseret News-the Official organ of the Church, January 13, 1899

1899-January 13-Circular letter, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City.

The Deseret News was once more "the property of the Church and will be sustained by the First Presidency as the official organ of the Church." Charles W. Penrose, a former editor of the Deseret Nets for twelve years was called out of retirement and spent another seven years as editor of the Church organ.

Salt Lake City, Utah, January 13, 1899.

Prest. Angus M. Cannon, Salt Lake Stake of Zion.

DEAR BROTHER:

The Deseret News is now the property of the Church and will be sustained by the First Presidency as the official organ of the Church. It is very important that the church should have and through which their official utterances may be declared. It is also important that the saints shall have a newspaper fit to go into every family and be a means of the diffusion of general a public journal which will reflect the views of the authorities intelligence, that they may not be a whit behind any other people in the world as to information concerning current events but that they may be abreast with the times.

The new year opened with a change in the editorial and business management of the Deseret News, which it is hoped will meet with favor among the saints in every Stake of Zion. Elder C. W. Penrose has been appointed to take the editorial oversight of the paper and Elder Horace G. Whitney to manage its business affairs. Improvements will be made as fast as circumstances will permit, and the cooperation of our leading brethren is earnestly desired so that the News may be made in every way successful.

Will you be kind enough to give this matter your personal consideration. Every ward in your Stake should be informed on this matter. All the saints who can afford it should be invited to subscribe for the paper. The weekly issues will be discontinued. The Daily and Semi-weekly editions will be published regularly the Daily at $8 per year and for shorter times in proportion; the Semi-weekly at $2 per year. Will you please use your influence and engage the efforts of the Bishops and leading elders in your stake to help place the Deseret News in that financial and literary position which it should occupy in the journalistic field, as the champion of truth, human rights, and civil and religious liberty, and thus oblige,

Your Brethren in the Gospel, LORENZO SNOW, GEORGE Q. CANNON, JOSEPH F. SMITH.
