James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, vol. 3 ( 1966)

Testimony on life of David W. Patten, February 6, 1900

1900-February 6-Circular letter, Church Historian's Library, Salt Lake City.

We have not been able to determine what circumstances may have prompted President Snow to issue this Circular "To the Reader" containing his tribute to David W. Patten, one of the early Apostles of the L.D.S. Church. For a further account of early spiritual experiences, perhaps those referred to in this circular see CHC 6:383-384.

Salt Lake City, Utah, February 6, 1900.

To the Reader:

All the circumstances of my first and last meeting with Apostle David W. Patten are as clear to my mind as if it were an occurrence of but yesterday, and yet it took place some sixty-four years ago. He appeared to me then to be a remarkable man, and that impression has remained with me ever since.

We traveled together on horseback from my father's home, at Mantua, Ohio, to Kirtland, a distance of perhaps twenty-five miles, he on his return from some missionary labor, I to commence a course of studies at Oberlin College.

On the way our conversation fell upon religion and philosophy, and being young and having enjoyed some scholastic advantages, I was at first disposed to treat his opinions lightly, especially so as they were not always clothed in grammatical language; but as he proceeded in his earnest and humble way to open up before my mind the plan of salvation, I seemed unable to resist the knowledge that he was a man of God and that his testimony was true. I felt pricked in my heart.

This he evidently perceived, for almost the last thing he said to me, after hearing his testimony, was that I should go to the Lord before retiring at night and ask him for myself. This I did with the result that from the day I met this great Apostle, all my aspirations have been enlarged and heightened immeasurably. This was the turning point in my life.

What impressed me most was his absolute sincerity, his earnestness and his spiritual power; and I believe I cannot do better in this connection than to commend a careful study of his life to the honest in heart everywhere.

LORENZO SNOW.
