Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

ANOTHER "THREE WITNESSES"

Nearly two centuries before Christ, three of his mightiest witnesses arose in ancient America.

Two came out of a period of gross iniquity that involved them deeply; yet they reached spiritual heights seldom known by men. Very much like Saul of Tarsus, they turned from being enemies of Jesus to becoming devoted advocates.

The third was burned at the stake for his testimony.

Each foretold the Savior's birth into mortality and the Atonement he would accomplish for all mankind. Their names and labors cannot be separated, for their ministries were closely intertwined.

Their testimonies were unshakable and stand even today as beacon lights to all generations of men. And who were they?

Two were named Alma—father and son, both of them towers of faith and devotion.

The other was Abinadi, a fearless champion and martyr for the word of God, an inspired herald of the expected Messiah.

In ancient America these three fully identified the Lord as the Only Begotten Son of God and taught that his name would be Jesus Christ. Four hundred years earlier the Lord revealed to the prophet Nephi, also in America, details of the mission of Jesus, including his virgin birth and crucifixion. The Almas and Abinadi built on Nephi's foundation. They explained the Atonement in detail, stressed the resurrection of the dead, and made it clear that while all who die will be raised from their graves, salvation from sin will come only to those who accept and obey the gospel.

The people of their day lived under the law of Moses as well as the gospel, and the relationship of the two was explained. These men taught that Christ, as the Law-Giver himself, would also fulfill the law when he came in mortality; in its place he would provide a higher spirituality, not based on the routine performance of the rites of the law, but on the elevation of the soul. Thereby mankind could become "even as I am," to use the Savior's words.

The way to peace and prosperity was pointed out by these three prophets, and always it was the way of Christ. Said one of them:

"For I say unto you that whatsoever is good cometh from God, and whatsoever is evil cometh from the devil.

"Therefore, if a man bringeth forth good works he hearkeneth unto the voice of the good shepherd, and he doth follow him; but whosoever bringeth forth evil works, the same becometh a child of the devil, for he hearkeneth unto his voice, and doth follow him. And whosoever doeth this must receive his wages of him; therefore, for his wages he receiveth death, as to things pertaining unto righteousness, being dead unto all good works.

"And now, my brethren, I would that ye should hear me, for I speak in the energy of my soul; for behold, I have spoken unto you plainly that ye cannot err, or have spoken according to the commandments of God. For I am called to speak after this manner, according to the holy order of God, which is in Christ Jesus; yea, I am commanded to stand and testify unto this people the things which have been spoken by our fathers concerning the things which are to come.

"And this is not all. Do ye not suppose that I know of these things myself? Behold, I testify unto you that I do know that these things whereof I have spoken are true. And how do ye suppose that I know of their surety? Behold, I say unto you they are made known unto me by the Holy Spirit of God. Behold, I have fasted and prayed many days that I might know these things of myself. And now I do know of myself that they are true; for the Lord God hath made them manifest unto me by his Holy Spirit; and this is the spirit of revelation which is in me.

"And moreover, I say unto you that it has thus been revealed unto me, that the words which have been spoken by our fathers are true, even so according to the spirit of prophecy which is in me, which is also by the manifestation of the Spirit of God.

"I say unto you, that I know of myself that whatsoever I shall say unto you, concerning that which is to come, is true; and I say unto you, that I know that Jesus Christ shall come, yea, the Son, the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace, and mercy, and truth. And behold, it is he that cometh to take away the sins of the world, yea, the sins of every man who steadfastly believeth on his name." (Alma 5:40-48.)
