Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

THEIR BEGINNING

The ministry of these three prophets actually arose out of the reign of the wicked King Noah, who lived about 160 B.C.

Noah ruled a colony living apart from the main body of Nephites in the area of Zarahemla. His little kingdom was many days' journey into the wilderness in a region of the land of Nephi that was known as Lehi-Nephi.

Noah's father, a righteous man named Zeniff, led the colony away from Zarahemla. When he arrived in the land of Nephi, he found it occupied by the Lamanites. He entered into a treaty with the king of the Lamanites, who moved his own people out and allowed Zeniff to take it over. This colony enjoyed peace for twelve years, and the people chose Zeniff as their king. He taught them righteousness, for he was devout, and they lived according to the commandments of the Lord.

The king of the Lamanites, whose name was Laban, was a crafty man. After the people of Zeniff became well established and began to prosper, he demanded tribute from them up to one-half of all their crops, their flocks, and their precious things. This brought on a war that was won by the Nephites. Another period of peace prevailed, this time for twenty-two years, but then the Lamanites renewed their attacks. Again Zeniff and his people fought "in the strength of the Lord" and drove the Lamanites away.

Zeniff by this time had become an old man, and he wished to relinquish his leadership of the growing colony. He bestowed the crown upon his son Noah, who turned against God and began to lead his people into debauchery and degradation.

King Noah "did not keep the commandments of God, but he did walk after the desires of his own heart. And he had many wives and concubines. And he did cause his people to commit sin, and do that which was abominable in the sight of the Lord. Yea, and they did commit whoredoms and all manner of wickedness.

"And he laid a tax of one fifth part of all they possessed, a fifth part of their gold and of their silver, and a fifth part of their ziff, and of their copper, and of their brass and their iron; and a fifth part of their fatlings; and also a fifth part of all their grain.

"And all this did he take to support himself, and his wives and his concubines; and also his priests, and their wives and their concubines; thus he had changed the affairs of the kingdom. For he put down all the priests that had been consecrated by his father, and consecrated new ones in their stead, such as were lifted up in the pride of their hearts.

"Yea, and thus they were supported in their laziness, and in their idolatry, and in their whoredoms, by the taxes which king Noah had put upon his people; thus did the people labor exceedingly to support iniquity. Yea, and they also became idolatrous, because they were deceived by the vain and flattering words of the king and priests; for they did speak flattering things unto them.

"And it came to pass that king Noah built many elegant and spacious buildings; and he ornamented them with fine work of wood, and of all manner of precious things, of gold, and of silver, and of iron, and of brass, and of ziff, and of copper; and he also built him a spacious palace, and a throne in the midst thereof, all of which was of fine wood and was ornamented with gold and silver and with precious things.

"And it came to pass that he placed his heart upon his riches, and he spent his time in riotous living with his wives and his concubines; and so did also his priests spend their time with harlots.

"And it came to pass that he planted vineyards round about in the land; and he built winepresses, and made wine in abundance; and therefore he became a wine-bibber, and also his people." (Mosiah 11:2-9, 14-15.)

When Laban, king of the Lamanites, died, his son began to reign. The new king declared war on the Nephites but was badly defeated. The Nephites took many spoils in this war and rejoiced at their victory.

Since they had turned away from the Lord, through Noah's bad example, they gave God no credit for their success.
