Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

ABINADI APPEARS

When King Noah's army returned from defeating the Lamanites, "they were lifted up in the pride of their hearts; they did boast in their own strength, saying that their fifty could stand against thousands of the Lamanites; and thus they did boast, and did delight in blood, and the shedding of the blood of their brethren, and this because of the wickedness of their king and priests." (Mosiah 11:19.)

But the Lord refused to bless them in their wickedness; instead, he rebuked them and called them to repentance.<#>* Then there came among them a man whose name was Abinadi.

Who was Abinadi? The record indicates that he was one of the men who lived in the colony of King Noah, "a man among them." Although the king, along with many of his immediate followers, turned to wickedness, others remained loyal to the righteous teachings of Zeniff. Abinadi was one of them.

Abinadi came as a prophet of the Lord to call the people to repentance. He went among them and began to prophesy, saying: "Behold, thus saith the Lord, and thus hath he commanded me, saying, Go forth, and say unto this people, thus saith the Lord—Wo be unto this people, for I have seen their abominations, and their wickedness, and their whoredoms; and except they repent I will visit them in mine anger." (Mosiah 11:20.)

Note that Abinadi received a revelation from the Lord calling him to confront the king, and giving him instructions as to what he should say. His words were forceful: "Thus saith the Lord," he cried out, "and thus hath he commanded me," and then he quotes the language of the Lord.

God always directs his prophets. There was revelation in those days even as now. And so the Lord commanded Abinadi to give his warning, "Thus saith the Lord, Wo be unto this people."

This was revelation, and it was God's message to those people. Abinadi was but the instrument of communication. The language is in the first person, as the Lord himself addressed them. His words continue:

"Except they repent and turn to the Lord their God, behold, I will deliver them into the hands of their enemies; yea, and they shall be brought into bondage; and they shall be afflicted by the hand of their enemies. And it shall come to pass that they shall know that I am the Lord their God, and am a jealous God, visiting the iniquities of my people.

"And it shall come to pass that except this people repent and turn unto the Lord their God, they shall be brought into bondage; and none shall deliver them, except it be the Lord the Almighty God. Yea, and it shall come to pass that when they shall cry unto me I will be slow to hear their cries; yea, and I will suffer them that they be smitten by their enemies.

"And except they repent in sackcloth and ashes, and cry mightily to the Lord their God, I will not hear their prayers, neither will I deliver them out of their afflictions; and thus saith the Lord, and thus hath he commanded me."

This direct accusation angered the people. They attempted to seize Abinadi to kill him, but the Lord protected him, and he went into hiding. His assailants then reported the affair to King Noah.

"Now when King Noah had heard of the words which Abinadi had spoken unto the people, he was also wroth; and he said: Who is Abinadi, that I and my people should be judged of him, or who is the Lord, that shall bring upon my people such great affliction? I command you to bring Abinadi hither, that I may slay him, for he has said these things that he might stir up my people to anger one with another, and to raise contentions among my people; therefore I will slay him."

Abinadi's visit left the people more than ever entrenched in their sins. Their "hearts were hardened" against the words of the prophet as they searched for him that they might kill him.

"And king Noah hardened his heart against the word of the Lord, and he did not repent of his evil doings." (Mosiah 11:21-29.)

* It is interesting to note that one of Noah's sons was a devout man who held true to the teachings of Zeniff in spite of his father's apostasy. This son was named Limhi. The record does not relate Limhi to either Alma or Abinadi. It is silent on his activity until after the death of Abinadi and the departure of Alma and his people. Limhi became the leader of the colony after his father, Noah, fled into the wilderness in fear of an approaching Lamanite army.
