Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

THE PROPHET RETURNS

Two years passed before Abinadi returned. This time he remained among the people, and the Lord permitted his arrest. This obviously was to provide opportunity for Abinadi to be taken into the royal court, where he could testify to the king and his courtiers.

Since Noah was surrounded by wicked priests, they too would hear Abinadi's warning. The prophet came by divine direction. His message was given to him by revelation. The Lord spoke to this humble but fearless prophet and told him: "Abinadi, go and prophesy unto this my people, for they have hardened their hearts against my words; they have repented not of their evil doings; therefore, I will visit them in my anger, yea, in my fierce anger will I visit them in their iniquities and abominations."

In his preaching the devoted prophet said:

"Yea, wo be unto this generation! And the Lord said unto me: Stretch forth thy hand and prophesy, saying: Thus saith the Lord, it shall come to pass that this generation, because of their iniquities, shall be brought into bondage, and shall be smitten on the cheek; yea, and shall be driven by men, and shall be slain; and the vultures of the air, and the dogs, yea, and the wild beasts, shall devour their flesh.

"And it shall come to pass that the life of king Noah shall be valued even as a garment in a hot furnace; for he shall know that I am the Lord. And it shall come to pass that I will smite this my people with sore afflictions, yea, with famine and with pestilence; and I will cause that they shall howl all the day long."

Abinadi described the afflictions that would come upon the people if they failed to repent. He again spoke in the first person on behalf of the Lord, as if God himself was giving warning. The language of the Lord was:

"Yea, and I will cause that they shall have burdens lashed upon their backs; and they shall be driven before like a dumb ass. And it shall come to pass that I will send forth hail among them, and it shall smite them; and they shall also be smitten with the east wind; and insects shall pester their land also, and devour their grain. And they shall be smitten with a great pestilence—and all this will I do because of their iniquities and abominations.

"And it shall come to pass that except they repent I will utterly destroy them from off the face of the earth; yet they shall leave a record behind them, and I will preserve them for other nations which shall possess the land; yea, even this will I do that I may discover the abominations of this people to other nations."

The angry crowd took Abinadi immediately before the king, which apparently was part of the Lord's plan. The wicked monarch must be called to repentance. The Lord would leave him no excuse.

The people said to the king, "Behold we have brought a man before thee who has prophesied evil concerning thy people and saith that God will destroy them. And he also prophesieth evil concerning thy life, and saith that thy life shall be as a garment in a furnace of fire.

"And again, he saith that thou shalt be as a stalk, even as a dry stalk of the field, which is run over by the beasts and trodden under foot.

"And again, he saith thou shalt be as the blossoms of a thistle, which, when it is fully ripe, if the wind bloweth, it is driven forth upon the face of the land. And he pretendeth the Lord hath spoken it. And he saith all this shall come upon thee except thou repent, and this because of thine iniquities.

"And now, O king, what great evil hast thou done, or what great sins have thy people committed, that we should be condemned of God or judged of this man?

"And now, O king, behold, we are guiltless, and thou, O king, hast not sinned; therefore, this man has lied concerning you, and he has prophesied in vain. And behold, we are strong, we shall not come into bondage, or be taken captive by our enemies; yea, and thou hast prospered in the land, and thou shalt also prosper. Behold, here is the man, we deliver him into thy hands; thou mayest do with him as seemeth thee good."

Noah immediately imprisoned Abinadi without even hearing him. But that was not the Lord's plan. The king personally must hear the warning. He called his wicked priests together to discuss the entire event and determine what should be done about it.

The priests wanted to question Abinadi in hopes of trapping him into making some statements damaging to himself.

"And they began to question him, that they might cross him, that thereby they might have wherewith to accuse him; but he answered them boldly, and withstood all their questions, yea, to their astonishment; for he did withstand them in all their questions, and did confound them in all their words."

Much of the discussion related to the law of Moses, which these wicked priests pretended to teach, but which they themselves violated, and which they allowed the people to ignore.

Abinadi said unto them, "Are you priests, and pretend to teach this people, and to understand the spirit of prophesying, and yet desire to know of me what these things mean?

"I say unto you, wo be unto you for perverting the ways of the Lord! For if ye understand these things ye have not taught them; therefore, ye have perverted the ways of the Lord. Ye have not applied your hearts to understanding; therefore, ye have not been wise. Therefore, what teach ye this people?"

They replied, "We teach the law of Moses."

Abinadi continued, "If ye teach the law of Moses why do ye not keep it? Why do ye set your hearts upon riches? Why do ye commit whoredoms and spend your strength with harlots, yea, and cause this people to commit sin, that the Lord has cause to send me to prophesy against this people, yea, even a great evil against this people?

"Know ye not that I speak the truth? Yea, ye know that I speak the truth; and you ought to tremble before God. And it shall come to pass that ye shall be smitten for your iniquities, for ye have said that ye teach the law of Moses. And what know ye concerning the law of Moses? Doth salvation come by the law of Moses? What say ye?"

They answered that salvation did come by the law of Moses.

Though the priests claimed that salvation came by the law of Moses itself, Abinadi corrected them and told them of Christ, through whom salvation truly comes. He pointed out that they were required to obey the law of Moses until Jesus should come in the flesh to fulfill it. Salvation is obtained only through Christ, he declared. His atonement provided it, not the performance of physical rituals. The Lord requires a righteous life, for no unclean thing may enter his presence. (Mosiah 12.)
