Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

ABINADI'S DEFENSE

A lively discussion developed between Abinadi and the evil priests of King Noah. They tried to entrap him but failed. Inspired by the Holy Ghost, he resisted their every effort. He taught them the Ten Commandments and other laws of Moses, but particularly bore strong testimony of the mission of Christ.

Surprising as it may seem, one of the most significant things about Abinadi's teachings is that they parallel so closely the wording of the King James translation of the Bible. The Holy Land is a long way from America, and the ancient Americans lived many centuries before King James, but the striking similarity between the King James Version and Abinadi's words cannot be overlooked.

The King James Version was not prepared until the seventeenth century after Christ, whereas Abinadi ministered 150 years B.C., eighteen hundred years earlier. And yet, what he said confirms and sustains the accuracy of the King James Version in a most remarkable manner. It also testifies in no uncertain terms that the Lord guided the Prophet Joseph Smith, and that the publication of the Book of Mormon was nothing less than God's own work. Joseph was his inspired servant.

Some six hundred years before Christ, Lehi left Jerusalem at the command of the Lord. He was en route to what is now known as America, a land that the Almighty called choice above all other lands.

The Lord commanded Lehi to take with him the brass plates of Laban, which contained what had been written to that time of the ancient record that we know as the Old Testament. A priceless record, engraved on metal to resist the ravages of time, it would form for Lehi and his followers the basis of gospel teachings as well as the day-to-day education of his descendants. It was well known that people without written records lose their language as well as much of their culture, as was the case with the Mulekites.

The sons of Lehi obtained the plates from Laban, and the family took these sacred records with them to America. Their teachings were used for generations. In this manner the Ten Commandments and other writings from the Old Testament that were inscribed on the brass plates were available among the Nephites. Copies were made and distributed freely.

Abinadi did not have the brass plates themselves, since they were kept at the headquarters of the Church, probably in Zarahemla. But he had copies, and he was familiar with them. While he discoursed on the Ten Commandments with the priests of Noah, he quoted from those records. His quotations are nearly identical to the same passages as they appear in the King James Version of the Bible. For example, in the first commandment there are differences in only two words.

The King James Version reads: "I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt have no other gods before me." (Ex. 20:2-3.)

The quotation as given by Abinadi reads: "I am the Lord thy God who hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt have no other God before me." (Mosiah 12:34-35.)

The King James Version uses the word which, while Abinadi used who; and the word God is capitalized and used in the singular in Abinadi's words, as contrasted with the plural and lowercase word gods in the King James Version.

The second commandment as published in the Bible reads as follows: "Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth." (Ex. 20:4.)

Abinadi's version reads: "Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing in heaven above, or things which are in the earth beneath." (Mosiah 12:36.)

Later in his speech he gave this same commandment with a slight difference: "Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of things which are in heaven above, or which are in the earth beneath, or which are in the water under the earth."

Then he continued, "Thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them, nor serve them; for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generations of them that hate me; and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments." (Mosiah 13:12-14.)

With the exception of two words, the two versions are identical in this passage also.

Anyone reading the Bible and the Book of Mormon may make similar comparisons with the rest of the Ten Commandments and find that the two renderings are virtually the same. This is a great testimony to the accuracy of the King James Version, for the Abinadi quotations are from the brass plates of Laban, transferred to the gold plates of the Book of Mormon, and then translated by the Prophet Joseph Smith through the use of the Urim and Thummim. Hence they are correct.

In reading the fourteenth chapter of Mosiah, we see that Abinadi quoted from the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, one of the grandest descriptions of the Savior's ministry ever written. Abinadi's rendering is virtually identical to King James. Is this not another testimony to the accuracy of the King James Version? Were not those translators of the seventeenth century inspired? Historians tell us that those English scholars undertook their work in a spirit of prayer, with much fasting to reinforce their perception. The Lord responded.

When Abinadi explained the passages relating to "how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings," again we see a remarkable likeness between the two versions. (See Mosiah 15.)

This is representative of other Bible quotations in the Book of Mormon, and there are many of them. Not only was Isaiah quoted often in the Book of Mormon, but Malachi also—and he lived after Lehi left Jerusalem. The Savior gave his words directly to the Nephites—but they follow the King James text!

The most outstanding of all such examples is the Sermon on the Mount. There are few differences between the Book of Mormon version, given as the Savior delivered that sermon to the Nephites, and what appears in Matthew, chapters 5, 6, and 7, in the King James Version.

And be it remembered that the Book of Mormon passages were direct translations from the gold plates and given to us through the use of the Urim and Thummim. This great miracle is convincing testimony both to the Prophet Joseph Smith's calling with regard to the translation of the Book of Mormon and to the accuracy of the King James Version. Can we wonder then that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has designated the King James Version as its official Bible?
