Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

ABINADI THE MARTYR

The teachings of Abinadi were rejected by the court of the wicked King Noah, who immediately commanded his priests to seize the prophet and put him to death.

But one of the priests had been converted by Abinadi's preaching. So deeply did he feel the power and spirit of the Lord's humble servant that he determined to try to save the prophet's life. Well aware of the evil against which Abinadi had warned them, this priest appealed to the king to release the prophet and let him "depart in peace."

The king became enraged at this. He not only condemned Abinadi to death, but also ejected the young priest from the palace and sent his soldiers out to slay him.

The young priest was Alma. He managed to escape and went into hiding. While secluded, he wrote all the words of the prophet.

Meanwhile, Abinadi was bound and thrown into prison, where he was held for three days while Noah counseled further with his priests as to what punishment should be given him. Then he was brought before the king, who said to him, "Abinadi, we have found an accusation against thee, and thou art worthy of death. For thou hast said that God himself should come down among the children of men; and now, for this cause thou shalt be put to death unless thou wilt recall all the words which thou hast spoken evil concerning me and my people."

Abinadi, who was not afraid of the king, replied, "I say unto you, I will not recall the words which I have spoken unto you concerning this people, for they are true; and that ye may know of their surety I have suffered myself that I have fallen into your hands. Yea, and I will suffer even until death, and I will not recall my words, and they shall stand as a testimony against you. And if ye slay me ye will shed innocent blood, and this shall also stand as a testimony against you at the last day."

The king, who was moved by what Abinadi said, would have released him, "for he feared that the judgments of God would come upon him." But the priests, seeing the king's determination weaken, began to accuse Abinadi, saying, "He has reviled the king." As a result, the angry king delivered Abinadi up to be slain.

"And it came to pass that they took him and bound him, and scourged his skin with faggots, yea, even unto death."

While the flames grew higher, Abinadi cried out one final message:

"Behold, even as ye have done unto me, so shall it come to pass that thy seed shall cause that many shall suffer the pains that I do suffer, even the pains of death by fire; and this because they believe in the salvation of the Lord their God.

"And it will come to pass that ye shall be afflicted with all manner of diseases because of your iniquities. Yea, and ye shall be smitten on every hand, and shall be driven and scattered to and fro, even as a wild flock is driven by wild and ferocious beasts. And in that day ye shall be hunted, and ye shall be taken by the hand of your enemies, and then ye shall suffer, as I suffer, the pains of death by fire.

"Thus God executeth vengeance upon those that destroy his people. O God, receive my soul."

Then Abinadi, having said these words, fell, "having suffered death by fire; yea, having been put to death because he would not deny the commandments of God, having sealed the truth of his words by his death." (Mosiah 17.)

Subsequently the Lamanites attacked the colony. King Noah fled with some of his priests and other attendants. He also ordered all the men of the city to flee, leaving their wives and children behind. Some obeyed, but many did not. Those who remained with their families went out to meet the Lamanites completely unarmed and pleaded for their lives. The hearts of the Lamanites were softened, and the people were spared. However, the Lamanites did enslave them and required them to pay a tribute of half of all their possessions and half of their crops and flocks.

The enslaved colonists chose as their king Limhi, a righteous son of Noah. Others in the city seem to have remained faithful also, because they gladly received Ammon and his company, who had been sent out from Zarahemla to find them. Ammon helped them to escape from the Lamanites and led them to Zarahemla.

Thus, all the prophecies of Abinadi were fulfilled, including the death of Noah, who was burned to death also.
