Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

ESCAPE FROM NOAH

King Noah, who was relentless in his search for Alma, set guards about the community, hoping that they would see him. Noticing a number of people moving toward the wilderness, the guards followed them to the waters of Mormon, where they had gathered together to hear the word of the Lord.

When King Noah was told this, he declared that Alma was "stirring up the people to rebellion against him," so he ordered his army sent out to destroy them.

"And it came to pass that Alma and the people of the Lord were apprised of the coming of the king's army; therefore they took their tents and their families and departed into the wilderness. And they were in number about four hundred and fifty souls." (Mosiah 18:32-35.)

Alma and his followers traveled for eight days into the wilderness and "came to a land, yea, even a very beautiful and pleasant land, a land of pure water." There they pitched their tents and began to till the soil. They also built permanent buildings so that they would not have to live in tents.

The people asked Alma to be their king and to rule over them. They had been accustomed to the reign of kings, since they had come out of Noah's kingdom over which Noah's father, Zeniff, had also reigned.

Alma was beloved by his people, the record says, but he was also wise. He told them, "It is not expedient that we should have a king; for thus saith the Lord: Ye shall not esteem one flesh above another, or one man shall not think himself above another; therefore I say unto you it is not expedient that ye should have a king. Nevertheless, if it were possible that ye could always have just men to be your kings it would be well for you to have a king."

Reminding them of the iniquity of King Noah and the manner in which he had led the people into degradation, Alma admitted that he himself had been caught in that snare, but now he had completely repented.

"Ye have been oppressed by king Noah," he said, "and have been in bondage to him and his priests, and have been brought into iniquity by them; therefore ye were bound with the bands of iniquity.

"And now as ye have been delivered by the power of God out of these bonds; yea, even out of the hands of king Noah and his people, and also from the bonds of iniquity, even so I desire that ye should stand fast in this liberty wherewith ye have been made free, and that ye trust no man to be a king over you. And also trust no one to be your teacher nor your minister, except he be a man of God, walking in his ways and keeping his commandments.

"Thus did Alma teach his people, that every man should love his neighbor as himself, that there should be no contention among them."

The Lord appointed Alma to be high priest over the people, and with this authority, Alma established the church of Jesus Christ among them.

"And it came to pass that none received authority to preach or to teach except it were by him from God. Therefore he consecrated all their priests and all their teachers; and none were consecrated except they were just men. Therefore they did watch over their people, and did nourish them with things pertaining to righteousness. And it came to pass that they began to prosper exceedingly in the land; and they called the land Helam."

Their peace did not continue, however, because suddenly and unexpectedly an army of the Lamanites approached them. The army had become lost on its way home after having been on an expedition, and the Nephites, who were out in their fields tending their crops and herds, were frightened. They fled to Alma in the city, and he assured them that the Lord would protect them.

"Therefore they hushed their fears, and began to cry unto the Lord that he would soften the hearts of the Lamanites, that they would spare them, and their wives, and their children. And it came to pass that the Lord did soften the hearts of the Lamanites. And Alma and his brethren went forth and delivered themselves up into their hands; and the Lamanites took possession of the land of Helam."

In its travels this army had found the wicked priests of King Noah who had escaped when Noah's city was invaded by the Lamanites and who had fled into the wilderness. When the Lamanite army found the priests, their leader, Amulon, pleaded with them. "He also sent forth their wives, who were the daughters of the Lamanites, to plead with their brethren, that they should not destroy their husbands. And the Lamanites had compassion on Amulon and his brethren, and did not destroy them, because of their wives."

As a result, Amulon and his brethren joined the Lamanites. The combined troops were traveling in the wilderness, searching for the land of Nephi, when they stumbled on the land of Helam.

The Lamanites promised Alma, as they approached his city, that if he would show them how to get back to the land of Nephi, they would not disturb his people, but in this they lied.

Amulon, who had by now been accepted by the Lamanites, recognized Alma as one of the former priests of King Noah. Ingratiating himself into the good graces of the Lamanites, he asked that he be made king of the land where Alma and his people lived. This request was granted, and immediately he began to oppress the people.

"And it came to pass that so great were their afflictions that they began to cry mightily to God. And Amulon commanded them that they should stop their cries; and he put guards over them to watch them, that whosoever should be found calling upon God should be put to death.

"And Alma and his people did not raise their voices to the Lord their God, but did pour out their hearts to him; and he did know the thoughts of their hearts."

As Alma and his people prayed mightily to the Lord for deliverance, the Lord responded and told them, "Lift up your heads and be of good comfort, for I know of the covenant which ye have made unto me; and I will covenant with my people and deliver them out of bondage. And I will also ease the burdens which are put upon your shoulders, that even you cannot feel them upon your backs, even while you are in bondage; and this will I do that ye may stand as witnesses for me hereafter, and that ye may know of a surety that I, the Lord God, do visit my people in their afflictions."

Then the Lord strengthened them "that they could bear up their burdens with ease," and they submitted "cheerfully and with patience to all the will of the Lord."

When the people exhibited great faith and patience, the Lord spoke again and said, "Be of good comfort, for on the morrow I will deliver you out of bondage."

Alma and his people spent the entire night preparing to leave their homes, gathering their flocks together and also packing up their grain. Then the Lord caused a deep sleep to come upon the Lamanites so that Alma and his people could leave in peace.

After traveling for twelve days, the people reached Zarahemla, where King Mosiah of the Nephites received them with joy. (Mosiah 24.)

After helping the people to become established in Zarahemla, King Mosiah gave Alma permission to establish branches of the church throughout Zarahemla. He also gave him "power to ordain priests and teachers over every church. Now this was done because there were so many people that they could not all be governed by one teacher; neither could they all hear the word of God in one assembly; therefore they did assemble themselves together in different bodies, being called churches; every church having their priests and their teachers, and every priest preaching the word according as it was delivered to him by the mouth of Alma.

"And thus, notwithstanding there being many churches they were all one church, yea, even the church of God; for there was nothing preached in all the churches except it were repentance and faith in God. And now there were seven churches in the land of Zarahemla. And it came to pass that whosoever were desirous to take upon them the name of Christ, or of God, they did join the churches of God; and they were called the people of God. And the Lord did pour out his Spirit upon them, and they were blessed, and prospered in the land." (Mosiah 25:20-24.)
