Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

THE SAVIOR SPEAKS!

King Mosiah and Alma became close friends. Alma was now the head of the church, and Mosiah was head of the government. They worked closely together, and Mosiah protected the rights of the church and made laws against persecution.

A number of people in Zarahemla refused to believe the gospel.

"They did not believe what had been said concerning the resurrection of the dead, neither did they believe concerning the coming of Christ. And now because of their unbelief they could not understand the word of God; and their hearts were hardened. And they would not be baptized; neither would they join the church. And they were a separate people as to their faith, and remained so ever after, even in their carnal and sinful state; for they would not call upon the Lord their God."

The unbelievers were less than half as numerous as the members of the church, but because of the dissensions among the members, the skeptics became more numerous. This was a sad commentary. Because of the members' dissensions, the unbelievers prospered. It has ever been so. Apostasy breeds wickedness, and conflict among the members is always a comfort to the enemies of the church.

"It came to pass that they did deceive many with their flattering words, who were in the church, and did cause them to commit many sins; therefore it became expedient that those who committed sin, that were in the church, should be admonished by the church."

The teachers of the church brought the dissenting members before the priests, who took them to Alma hoping he, being the high priest, would judge them.

There had never been such a dissension among the people whom Alma had led, so he did not know how to handle the situation. He therefore went to the king for consultation, saying, "Here are many whom we have brought before thee, who are accused of their brethren, yea, and they have been taken in divers iniquities. And they do not repent of their iniquities, therefore we have brought them before thee, that thou mayest judge them according to their crimes."

Since it was a matter of apostasy within the church, and not an attack upon the government, the king put the matter back into Alma's hands.

That was no answer for Alma, who still did not know how to solve the problem, so he went to the Lord for direction. He received a direct revelation from Jesus Christ, the Savior. The Savior identified himself as "the Lord their God, . . . their Redeemer."

Speaking to Alma, the Lord said, "Blessed art thou, Alma, and blessed are they who were baptized in the waters of Mormon. Thou art blessed because of thy exceeding faith in the words alone of my servant Abinadi. And blessed are they because of their exceeding faith in the words alone which thou hast spoken unto them. And blessed art thou because thou hast established a church among this people; and they shall be established, and they shall be my people. Yea, blessed is this people who are willing to bear my name; for in my name shall they be called; and they are mine."

The Lord referred directly to Alma's request for direction about the apostates, saying, "Because thou hast inquired of me concerning the transgressor, thou art blessed. Thou art my servant; and I covenant with thee that thou shalt have eternal life; and thou shalt serve me and go forth in my name, and shalt gather together my sheep."

Then the Lord declared, "He that will hear my voice shall be my sheep; and him shall ye receive into the church, and him will I also receive. For behold, this is my church; whosoever is baptized shall be baptized unto repentance. And whomsoever ye receive shall believe in my name; and him will I freely forgive. For it is I that taketh upon me the sins of the world; for it is I that hath created them; and it is I that granteth unto him that believeth unto the end a place at my right hand."

Note here that the Savior declared himself to be the Creator: "It is I that hath created them." He went on to say that if those who are called in his name know him, they shall come forth and shall have a place eternally at his right hand.

Then the Lord continued in this remarkable revelation to Alma:

"It shall come to pass that when the second trump shall sound then shall they that never knew me come forth and shall stand before me. And then shall they know that I am the Lord their God, that I am their Redeemer; but they would not be redeemed. And then I will confess unto them that I never knew them; and they shall depart into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels.

"Therefore I say unto you, that he that will not hear my voice, the same shall ye not receive into my church, for him I will not receive at the last day.

"Therefore I say unto you, Go; and whosoever transgresseth against me, him shall ye judge according to the sins which he has committed; and if he confess his sins before thee and me, and repenteth in the sincerity of his heart, him shall ye forgive, and I will forgive him also.

"Yea, and as often as my people repent will I forgive them their trespasses against me. And ye shall also forgive one another your trespasses; for verily I say unto you, he that forgiveth not his neighbor's trespasses when he says that he repents, the same hath brought himself unto condemnation.

"Now I say unto you, Go; and whosoever will not repent of his sins the same shall not be numbered among my people; and this shall be observed from this time forward."

Alma recorded this revelation for use in his ministry whenever he had to judge wicked members of the church.

"And it came to pass that Alma went and judged those that had been taken in iniquity, according to the word of the Lord. And whosoever repented of their sins and did confess them, them he did number among the people of the church; and those that would not confess their sins and repent of their iniquity, the same were not numbered among the people of the church, and their names were blotted out.

"And it came to pass that Alma did regulate all the affairs of the church; and they began again to have peace and to prosper exceedingly in the affairs of the church, walking circumspectly before God, receiving many, and baptizing many." (Mosiah 26.)
