Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

ALMA THE YOUNGER

Among the apostates who began to fight against the church were Alma's own son, whom he had named after himself, and the sons of King Mosiah.

Mosiah's sons were a great embarrassment, as was Alma the younger. The record says that young Alma "became a very wicked and idolatrous man. And he was a man of many words and did speak much flattery to the people. Therefore he led many of the people to do after the manner of his iniquities.

"And he became a great hinderment to the prosperity of the church of God; stealing away the hearts of the people; causing much dissension among the people; giving a chance for the enemy of God to exercise his power over them." (Mosiah 27:9.)

Alma and the sons of Mosiah went about the church destroying faith wherever they went, "seeking to destroy the church, and to lead astray the people of the Lord, contrary to the commandments of God, or even the king." (Mosiah 27:10.)

Of the sons of Mosiah the record says, "They were the very vilest of sinners." (Mosiah 28:4.) These young men were named Ammon, Aaron, Omner, and Himni. But like Saul of Tarsus, they were "chosen vessels of the Lord," and their great talents were needed in the church. And, like Saul of Tarsus, they were stopped in their wickedness by a heavenly manifestation:

"As they were going about rebelling against God, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto them; and he descended as it were in a cloud; and he spake as it were with a voice of thunder, which caused the earth to shake upon which they stood; and so great was their astonishment, that they fell to the earth, and understood not the words which he spake unto them.

"Nevertheless he cried again, saying: Alma, arise and stand forth, for why persecutest thou the church of God? For the Lord hath said: This is my church, and I will establish it; and nothing shall overthrow it, save it is the transgression of my people.

"And again, the angel said: Behold, the Lord hath heard the prayers of his people, and also the prayers of his servant, Alma, who is thy father; for he has prayed with much faith concerning thee that thou mightest be brought to the knowledge of the truth; therefore, for this purpose have I come to convince thee of the power and authority of God, that the prayers of his servants might be answered according to their faith.

"And now behold, can ye dispute the power of God? For behold, doth not my voice shake the earth? And can ye not also behold me before you? And I am sent from God.

"Now I say unto thee: Go, and remember the captivity of thy fathers in the land of Helam, and in the land of Nephi; and remember how great things he has done for them; for they were in bondage, and he has delivered them. And now I say unto thee, Alma, go thy way, and seek to destroy the church no more, that their prayers may be answered, and this even if thou wilt of thyself be cast off."

The young men fell to the earth with astonishment, "for with their own eyes they had beheld an angel of the Lord; and his voice was as thunder, which shook the earth; and they knew that there was nothing save the power of God that could shake the earth and cause it to tremble as though it would part asunder."

Alma the younger was struck dumb, and his strength ebbed away. He was so weak that he could not walk, and being dumb, he could not speak.

Mosiah's sons, not so afflicted, carried young Alma to the home of his father and laid him down, helpless, before him. They explained all that had happened, and the father rejoiced, "for he knew that it was the power of God."

Alma called the people in the area to come and see his son and to learn what had happened. He then called a number of the priests of the church to come and fast and pray that the youth might regain both his speech and his physical strength. This the father did "that the eyes of the people might be opened to see and know of the goodness and glory of God."

For two days and nights the priests fasted and prayed, and then Alma the younger received his strength. He stood up before all of the people and began to speak to them. It was a great miracle, but even greater was the transformation that had taken place within. This young man, formerly so sinful and rebellious, had been given a change of heart by the Lord. As he stood before the people, and his own father, he said:

"I have repented of my sins, and have been redeemed of the Lord; behold I am born of the Spirit.

"And the Lord said unto me: Marvel not that all mankind, yea, men and women, all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, must be born again; yea, born of God, changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters. And thus they become new creatures; and unless they do this, they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God.

"I say unto you, unless this be the case, they must be cast off; and this I know, because I was like to be cast off. Nevertheless, after wandering through much tribulation, repenting nigh unto death, the Lord in mercy hath seen fit to snatch me out of an everlasting burning, and I am born of God.

"My soul hath been redeemed from the gall of bitterness and bonds of iniquity. I was in the darkest abyss; but now I behold the marvelous light of God. My soul was racked with eternal torment; but I am snatched, and my soul is pained no more.

I rejected my Redeemer, and denied that which had been spoken of by our fathers; but now that they may foresee that he will come, and that he remembereth every creature of his creating, he will make himself manifest unto all. Yea, every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess before him. Yea, even at the last day, when all men shall stand to be judged of him, then shall they confess that he is God; then shall they confess, who live without God in the world, that the judgment of an everlasting punishment is just upon them; and they shall quake, and tremble, and shrink beneath the glance of his all-searching eye."

The sons of Mosiah were similarly reborn, and the group again began visiting the church, this time to repair the damage they had done and to declare their repentance and conversion as a result of the visitation of the angel.

Their former friends, the apostates, turned against them and bitterly persecuted them, but they continued on, "zealously striving to repair all the injuries which they had done to the church, confessing all their sins, and publishing all the things which they had seen, and explaining the prophecies and the scriptures to all who desired to hear them.

"And thus they were instruments in the hands of God in bringing many to the knowledge of the truth, yea, to the knowledge of their Redeemer. And how blessed are they! For they did publish peace; they did publish good tidings of good; and they did declare unto the people that the Lord reigneth." (Mosiah 27:11-37.)
