Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

THE TRANSFORMATION

Great changes now came to the Nephites.

King Mosiah was growing old, and so was Alma. The king desired to bestow the crown upon one of his sons, but all four of them rejected the idea. Now that they had been converted to Christ, their whole desire was to preach his word. Thus, they went to King Mosiah and asked permission to leave Zarahemla and go over into the land of Nephi to preach the gospel to the Lamanites. They sincerely desired to bring the word of God to those people in the hope of reforming them, bringing them salvation, and to preserve peace in the land.

Their father, a prophet as well as a king, inquired of the Lord. He responded, saying, "Let them go up, for many shall believe on their words, and they shall have eternal life; and I will deliver thy sons out of the hands of the Lamanites." (Mosiah 28:7.)

With this instruction, Mosiah permitted his sons to leave.

The younger Alma devoted himself to the ministry in Zarahemla and worked closely with his own father, who was high priest over the church in all the land. He progressed rapidly in the work of the Lord and was completely devoted in every way.

With the father growing old—he was now past eighty years of age—Alma the younger steadily took over more and more of the ministry; subsequently, he became high priest in the place of his father.

With no son on whom to bestow the crown, Mosiah now decided that there should not be a king to succeed him, but that there should be a government of the people and by the people. He sent a proclamation out to all the land in which he announced that he would continue to reign as long as he lived, but that the people should now prepare to rule themselves through men whom they would choose "by the voice of the people."

He spoke of the evil caused by unrighteous kings: "How much iniquity doth one wicked king cause to be committed, yea, and what great destruction! . . . The sins of many people have been caused by the iniquities of their kings; therefore their iniquities are answered upon the heads of their kings." (Mosiah 29:17, 31.)

Emphasizing the importance of this fact, Mosiah said, "Yea, remember king Noah, his wickedness and his abominations, and also the wickedness and abominations of his people. Behold what great destruction did come upon them; and also because of their iniquities they were brought into bondage. . . .

"Now I say unto you, ye cannot dethrone an iniquitous king save it be through much contention, and the shedding of much blood. For behold, he has his friends in iniquity, and he keepeth his guards about him; and he teareth up the laws of those who have reigned in righteousness before him; and he trampleth under his feet the commandments of God." (Mosiah 29:18, 21-22.)

King Mosiah then laid down the principles of free government by which the Nephites were to govern themselves:

"Therefore, choose you by the voice of this people, judges, that ye may be judged according to the laws which have been given you by our fathers, which are correct, and which were given them by the hand of the Lord.

"Now it is not common that the voice of the people desireth anything contrary to that which is right; but it is common for the lesser part of the people to desire that which is not right; therefore this shall ye observe and make it your law—to do your business by the voice of the people.

"And if the time comes that the voice of the people doth choose iniquity, then is the time that the judgments of God will come upon you; yea, then is the time he will visit you with great destruction even as he has hitherto visited this land." (Mosiah 29:25-27.)

King Mosiah was willing to give up his own throne and divest his family of all the privileges of royalty in order to set up a free government in this hemisphere. But he knew that even with democratic rule, God must be a part of it or it would fail. So he said, "I command you to do these things in the fear of the Lord; and I command you to do these things, and that ye have no king; that if these people commit sins and iniquities they shall be answered upon their own heads." (Mosiah 29:30.)

When the Lord gave to modern America its free form of government, he had the same thing in mind. He said that the laws and the Constitution of the United States should be "maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh, according to just and holy principles; that every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment.

"Therefore, it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another. And for this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed the land by the shedding of blood." (D&C 101:77-80.)

Further, the Lord said through the Prophet Joseph Smith, "I, the Lord God, make you free, therefore ye are free indeed; and the law also maketh you free." (D&C 98:8.)

Freedom of choice was first given to man in the Garden of Eden, when the Lord told Adam that he could choose for himself. There is no eternal advancement without it.

It is notable that in both the case of Mosiah and the Constitution of the United States, God's rules of righteousness were intended to be part and parcel of the government. Mosiah said that the judges to be elected were to administer the laws that were given by their fathers, "which are correct, and which were given them by the hand of the Lord." (Mosiah 29:25.)

With respect to the Constitution of the United States the Lord said it "should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh, according to just and holy principles." (D&C 101:77.) Thus we see that a government by the voice of the people was established in America a century before the birth of Christ.

Alma the younger "was appointed to be the first chief judge, he being also the high priest, his father having conferred the office upon him, and having given him the charge concerning all the affairs of the church.

"And now it came to pass that Alma did walk in the ways of the Lord, and he did keep his commandments, and he did judge righteous judgments; and there was continual peace through the land. And thus commenced the reign of the judges throughout all the land of Zarahemla, among all the people who were called the Nephites; and Alma was the first and chief judge." (Mosiah 29:42-44.)

King Mosiah had been a prophet as well as a king to his people, and God recognized him as such. The Lord had committed to his care the many sacred records compiled through the years. He also possessed the Urim and Thummim by which he could read ancient languages, and when the Jaredite plates were brought to him, he was able to translate them. They became what we know as the book of Ether.

Failing in health, Mosiah felt that his end was near, and so he "took the plates of brass, and all things which he had kept, and conferred them upon Alma, who was the son of Alma; yea, all the records, and also the interpreters, and conferred them upon him, and commanded him that he should keep and preserve them, and also keep a record of the people, handing them down from one generation to another, even as they had been handed down from the time that Lehi left Jerusalem." (Mosiah 28:20.)

The elder Alma passed away at age eighty-two. "And it came to pass that Mosiah died also, in the thirty and third year of his reign, being sixty and three years old; making in the whole, five hundred and nine years from the time Lehi left Jerusalem. And thus ended the reign of the kings over the people of Nephi; and thus ended the days of Alma, who was the founder of their church." (Mosiah 29:46-47.)
