Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

THE LAWS OF JUSTICE

When Mosiah prescribed a government "by the voice of the people," he decreed that the laws to be used should be those handed down from the fathers that had been given to them by the Lord. We do not know what all of those laws were, but we do know that the Ten Commandments were among them, because Abinadi made such a point of them in his discussion with the priests of Noah. Obviously there were many others. Among those mentioned in the scriptures were:

The Nephites had their own locally made laws as well. When the wicked Nehor killed Gideon he was sentenced to death. The record says:

"And thou hast shed the blood of a righteous man, yea, a man who has done much good among this people; and were we to spare thee his blood would come upon us for vengeance. Therefore thou art condemned to die, according to the law which has been given us by Mosiah, our last king; and it has been acknowledged by this people; therefore this people must abide by the law.

"And it came to pass that they took him; and his name was Nehor; and they carried him upon the top of the hill Manti, and there he was caused, or rather did acknowledge, between the heavens and the earth, that what he had taught to the people was contrary to the word of God; and there he suffered an ignominious death." (Alma 1:13-15.)

In 2 Ne. 9:35 we read that the murderer who deliberately kills shall die. In Alma we read, "If he murdered he was punished unto death" (Alma 30:10), and "The law requireth the life of him who hath murdered" (Alma 34:12).

"They durst not lie, if it were known, for fear of the law, for liars were punished; therefore they pretended to preach according to their belief; and now the law could have no power on any man for his belief. And they durst not steal, for fear of the law, for such were punished; neither durst they rob, nor murder, for he that murdered was punished unto death." (Alma 1:17-18.)

Persecution, in the sense of physical abuse, was forbidden, although there were instances when name-calling and mental harassment went unpunished.

"Now there was a strict law among the people of the church, that there should not any man, belonging to the church, arise and persecute those that did not belong to the church, and that there should be no persecution among themselves." (Alma 1:21.)

"There was no law against a man's belief; for it was strictly contrary to the commands of God that there should be a law which should bring men on to unequal grounds.

"For thus saith the scripture: Choose ye this day, whom ye will serve. Now if a man desired to serve God, it was his privilege; or rather, if he believed in God it was his privilege to serve him; but if he did not believe in him there was no law to punish him.

"But if he murdered he was punished unto death; and if he robbed he was also punished; and if he stole he was also punished; and if he committed adultery he was also punished; yea, for all this wickedness they were punished." (Alma 30:7-10.)

"For there was a law that men should be judged according to their crimes. Nevertheless, there was no law against a man's belief; therefore, a man was punished only for the crimes which he had done; therefore all men were on equal grounds." (Alma 30:11.)

The Nephites were taught the gospel of Christ, and the Lord communicated with their prophets. But the Nephites were also required to continue living under the law of Moses, for it had not yet been fulfilled. The Savior himself would accomplish that through his atonement. Much of the government of the Nephites might be called a theocracy. There were judges for the civil laws, but priests for the law of Moses. Though at times the Nephites had kings who made civil laws, they still were under the law of Moses. With the righteous kings, the civil law harmonized completely with the law of Moses insofar as conduct and punishments were concerned.

In Old Testament times in Palestine such severe crimes as adultery were punished by death. There is no evidence in the Book of Mormon that adulterers were stoned to death in America as was the case in Palestine.

As Abinadi had pointed out, "it was expedient that there should be a law given to the children of Israel, yea, even a very strict law, for they were a stiff-necked people, and slow to remember the Lord their God. Therefore, there was a law given them, yea, a law of performances and of ordinances, a law which they were to observe strictly from day to day, to keep them in remembrance of God and their duty towards him. But behold, I say unto you, that all these things were types of things to come.

"And now, did they understand the law? I say unto you, Nay, they did not all understand the law; and this because of the hardness of their hearts; for they understood not that there could not any man be saved except it were through the redemption of God." (Mosiah 13:30-32.)

As the Nephite records show, the rule of judges chosen by the voice of the people was generally effective, although there were crises from time to time, as in the time of the great Captain Moroni when "kingmen" arose, seeking to overthrow the rule of the people and reestablish the monarchy. Much blood was shed over that, but men like Moroni and Pahoran preserved peace by law, despite all the efforts of the "kingmen."

Wicked rulers such as King Noah discarded the laws of God and the righteous laws of men. They set up their own wicked rules to justify all their immoralities, dishonest practices, concubines, robberies, and idolatries.

In the two hundred years following the visitation of the Savior, the law was that of the gospel.

"And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people.

"And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God.

"There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanites, nor any manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God.

"And how blessed were they! For the Lord did bless them in all their doings; yea, even they were blessed and prospered until an hundred and ten years had passed away; and the first generation from Christ had passed away, and there was no contention in all the land." (4 Ne. 1:15-18.)

This was the golden age of all time—anywhere—and it lasted as long as people were willing to live the gospel of Christ. When they departed from His law, however, selfishness arose, crime developed, and eventually mighty wars wiped out the Nephites entirely.
