Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

THE CHURCH ORGANIZED

In the Nephite record, repeated references are made to the establishment of the church from time to time, either in new cities or following apostasies in the older ones. There is no clear description of its form of organization, however. Early in his work, soon after he left Noah's influence, Alma ordained teachers and priests and set them over congregations of fifty people each.

Reference is made later to the ordination of elders. Alma consecrated elders "over the church" (Alma 6:1) and he gave one of them "power to enact laws" (Alma 4:16).

The scripture specifically says that Alma was a high priest in the high priesthood after the order of the Son of God. (Alma 13:1-11.) Ammon was a high priest over the Ammonites (Alma 30:20), and Helaman and his brethren became high priests over the church (Alma 46:6).

Alma talked freely about this higher priesthood "after the order of his [God's] Son," which we today know as the Melchizedek Priesthood.

We are told in the Doctrine and Covenants that "there are, in the church, two priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood.

"Why the first is called the Melchizedek Priesthood is because Melchizedek was such a great high priest. Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God. But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, they, the church, in ancient days, called that priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek Priesthood." (D&C 107:1-4.)

When Alma discussed this higher priesthood he said:

"Or in fine, in the first place they were on the same standing with their brethren; thus this holy calling being prepared from the foundation of the world for such as would not harden their hearts, being in and through the atonement of the Only Begotten Son, who was prepared—

"And thus being called by this holy calling, and ordained unto the high priesthood of the holy order of God, to teach his commandments unto the children of men, that they also might enter into his rest—

"This high priesthood being after the order of his Son, which order was from the foundation of the world; or in other words, being without beginning of days or end of years, being prepared from eternity to all eternity, according to his foreknowledge of all things—

"Now they were ordained after this manner—being called with a holy calling, and ordained with a holy ordinance, and taking upon them the high priesthood of the holy order, which calling, and ordinance, and high priesthood, is without beginning or end—

"Thus they become high priests forever, after the order of the Son, the Only Begotten of the Father, who is without beginning of days or end of years, who is full of grace, equity, and truth. And thus it is. Amen.

"Now, as I said concerning the holy order of this high priesthood, there were many who were ordained and became high priests of God; and it was on account of their exceeding faith and repentance, and their righteousness before God, they choosing to repent and work righteousness rather than to perish;

"Therefore they were called after this holy order, and were sanctified, and their garments were washed white through the blood of the Lamb."

Alma was familiar with the place of Melchizedek in the church of God. He said:

"And now, my brethren, I would that ye should humble yourselves before God, and bring forth fruit meet for repentance, that ye may also enter into that rest.

"Yea, humble yourselves even as the people in the days of Melchizedek, who was also a high priest after this same order which I have spoken, who also took upon him the high priesthood forever. And it was this same Melchizedek to whom Abraham paid tithes; yea, even our father Abraham paid tithes of one-tenth part of all he possessed.

"Now these ordinances were given after this manner, that thereby the people might look forward on the Son of God, it being a type of his order, or it being his order, and this that they might look forward to him for a remission of their sins, that they might enter into the rest of the Lord.

"Now this Melchizedek was a king over the land of Salem; and his people had waxed strong in iniquity and abomination; yea, they had all gone astray; they were full of all manner of wickedness; but Melchizedek having exercised mighty faith, and received the office of the high priesthood according to the holy order of God, did preach repentance unto his people. And behold, they did repent; and Melchizedek did establish peace in the land in his days; therefore he was called the prince of peace, for he was the king of Salem; and he did reign under his father.

"Now, there were many before him, and also there were many afterwards, but none were greater; therefore, of him they have more particularly made mention."

The scriptures available to the people of Alma's day evidently had full information on this subject, for Alma said, "Now I need not rehearse the matter; what I have said may suffice. Behold, the scriptures are before you; if ye will wrest them it shall be to your own destruction." (Alma 13:5-20.)

The Nephites had temples over a period of centuries. We do not know what the ordinances consisted of. There was no work for the dead, because that was reserved until after the crucifixion and resurrection of the Lord.

But there were many temples, some in the time of the first Nephi (2 1 Ne. 5:16) at least one temple in the land Bountiful at the time of Christ (3 Ne. 11:1) a temple in the time of Mosiah (Mosiah 1:18); and a temple in Zeniff's kingdom, which was still standing in the time of the wicked King Noah, who added frills to it (Mosiah 11:10, 12). Noah's kingdom was but a small colony separated from the main body of Nephites.

An indication that there were many temples is seen in the comments of Mormon as he wrote the Book of Helaman. When he spoke of people going into the land northward he said, "And the people who were in the land northward did dwell in tents, and in houses of cement, and they did suffer whatsoever tree should spring up upon the face of the land that it should grow up, that in time they might have timber to build their houses, yea, their cities, and their temples, and their synagogues, and their sanctuaries, and all manner of their buildings." (Hel. 3:9.)

And when he expanded on his account of this migration, he spoke of "their preaching and their prophecies, and their shipping and their building of ships, and their building of temples, and of synagogues and their sanctuaries." (Hel. 3:14.)

What ordinances were performed in those temples and by what priesthood authority is not indicated, but since the people lived under the law of Moses as well as the gospel of Christ, and since their ancestors had known the temple in Jerusalem, there can be little doubt about their activity in temple work.
