Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

PERSECUTIONS ARISE

From the beginning of Alma's reign as chief judge, conflicts arose among the people, chiefly due to opposition from the non-believers. Many loved the "vain things of the world, and they went forth preaching false doctrines; and this they did for the sake of riches and honor. . . .

"But it came to pass that whosoever did not belong to the church of God began to persecute those that did belong to the church of God, and had taken upon them the name of Christ.

"Yea, they did persecute them, and afflict them with all manner of words, and this because of their humility; because they were not proud in their own eyes, and because they did impart the word of God, one with another, without money and without price.

"Now there was a strict law among the people of the church that there should not any man, belonging to the church, arise and persecute those that did not belong to the church, and that there should be no persecution among themselves.

"Nevertheless, there were many among them who began to be proud, and began to contend warmly with their adversaries, even unto blows; yea, they would smite one another with their fists."

Among the faithful members of the Church there was great sincerity of worship. They had no paid clergy, and all labored for their own living. "And when the priests left their labor to impart the word of God unto the people, the people also left their labors to hear the word of God. And when the priest had imparted unto them the word of God they all returned again diligently unto their labors; and the priest, not esteeming himself above his hearers, for the preacher was no better than the hearer, neither was the teacher any better than the learner; and thus they were all equal, and they did all labor, every man according to his strength." The priests were mindful of the poor; they did not wear costly apparel, "yet they were neat and comely."

The members began to prosper abundantly, but still "they did not send away any who were naked, or that were hungry, or that were athirst, or that were sick, or that had not been nourished; and they did not set their hearts upon riches; therefore they were liberal to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, whether out of the church or in the church, having no respect to persons as to those who stood in need.

"And thus they did prosper and become far more wealthy than those who did not belong to their church."

Those who did not belong to the church indulged "in sorceries, and in idolatry or idleness, and in babblings, and in envyings and strife; wearing costly apparel; being lifted up in the pride of their own eyes; lying, thieving, robbing, committing whoredoms, and murdering, and all manner of wickedness; nevertheless, the law was put in force upon all those who did transgress it, inasmuch as it was possible."

Through a strict enforcement of the law, persecution was largely discontinued, and peace prevailed for the first five years of the reign of the judges. (Alma 1.)
