Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

AMLICI'S REBELLION

Dissension arose in the fifth year of the reign of the judges, caused by a crafty man named Amlici, who attempted to set himself up as a king, thus destroying the free government under which the people lived. Through his persuasion, he gained numerous followers. This caused many disputations among the people, and it was arranged that assemblies be held in which advocates of Amlici's kingship could debate the issue with the people who favored freedom.

The scripture says that every man could speak according to his own mind, "whether it were for or against Amlici . . . having much dispute and wonderful contentions one with another. And thus they did assemble themselves together to cast in their voices concerning the matter," and their arguments were laid before the judges of the land.

Those who were against Amlici, being in the majority, were grateful that the voice of the people could be expressed and that the decisions would be made through the system of judges.

But this did not please Amlici. He refused to abide by the free choice of the people. His followers grouped together and consecrated Amlici to be king over the land. He armed his followers and immediately ordered them to begin a war against the rest of the people.

"Alma, being the chief judge and the governor of the people of Nephi, therefore he went up with his people, yea, with his captains, and chief captains, yea, at the head of his armies, against the Amlicites to battle. And they began to slay the Amlicites upon the hill east of Sidon. And the Amlicites did contend with the Nephites with great strength, insomuch that many of the Nephites did fall before the Amlicites.

"Nevertheless the Lord did strengthen the hand of the Nephites, that they slew the Amlicites with great slaughter, that they began to flee before them.

"And it came to pass that the Nephites did pursue the Amlicites all that day, and did slay them with much slaughter, insomuch that there were slain of the Amlicites twelve thousand five hundred thirty and two souls; and there were slain of the Nephites six thousand five hundred sixty and two souls."

Alma's men pursued the Amlicites for a time, and then sent out spies to watch their camps. To their great astonishment, an army of Lamanites came, joined the Amlicites, and renewed the attack.

"Nevertheless, the Nephites being strengthened by the hand of the Lord, having prayed mightily to him that he would deliver them out of the hands of their enemies, therefore the Lord did hear their cries, and did strengthen them, and the Lamanites and the Amlicites did fall before them.

"And it came to pass that Alma fought with Amlici with the sword, face to face; and they did contend mightily, one with another. And it came to pass that Alma, being a man of God, being exercised with much faith, cried, saying: O Lord, have mercy and spare my life, that I may be an instrument in thy hands to save and preserve this people.

"Now when Alma had said these words he contended again with Amlici; and he was strengthened, insomuch that he slew Amlici with the sword. And he also contended with the king of the Lamanites; but the king of the Lamanites fled back from before Alma and sent his guards to contend with Alma. But Alma, with his guards, contended with the guards of the king of the Lamanites until he slew and drove them back." (Alma 2.)

The Nephites drove their enemies completely out of their land. It was a great victory, for which they thanked the Lord, acknowledging that they had fought with the strength of God.

Alma now saw the importance of spending more time in the ministry, and he felt that he must assign the office of chief judge to someone else. He found a humble and faithful man named Nephihah "and gave him power according to the voice of the people, that he might have power to enact laws according to the laws which had been given, and to put them in force according to the wickedness and the crimes of the people." (Alma 4:16.)

Alma retained the office of high priest and gave only the judgment seat to Nephihah. "And this he did that he himself might go forth among his people, or among the people of Nephi, that he might preach the word of God unto them, to stir them up in remembrance of their duty, and that he might pull down, by the word of God, all the pride and craftiness and all the contentions which were among his people, seeing no way that he might reclaim them save it were in bearing down in pure testimony against them." (Alma 4:19.)
