Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

AMULEK JOINS ALMA

One of the most difficult cities on Alma's missionary journey was Ammonihah. There the people refused to listen to him.

"Nevertheless Alma labored much in the spirit, wrestling with God in mighty prayer, that he would pour out his Spirit upon the people who were in the city; that he would also grant that he might baptize them unto repentance.

"Nevertheless, they hardened their hearts, saying unto him: Behold, we know that thou art Alma; and we know that thou art high priest over the church which thou hast established in many parts of the land, according to your tradition; and we are not of thy church, and we do not believe in such foolish traditions."

The people spat on him, railed against him, and said, "We know that because we are not of thy church . . . thou hast no power over us; and thou hast delivered up the judgment-seat to Nephihah; therefore thou art not the chief judge over us." Then they cast him out of the city. Discouraged and sorrowful he walked on his way toward another city named Aaron. Suddenly an angel came to him, saying:

"Blessed art thou, Alma; therefore, lift up thy head and rejoice, for thou hast great cause to rejoice; for thou hast been faithful in keeping the commandments of God from the time which thou receivedst thy first message from him. Behold, I am he that delivered it unto you.

"And behold, I am sent to command thee that thou return to the city of Ammonihah, and preach again unto the people of the city; yea, preach unto them. Yea, say unto them, except they repent the Lord God will destroy them. For behold, they do study at this time that they may destroy the liberty of thy people, (for thus saith the Lord) which is contrary to the statutes, and judgments, and commandments which he has given unto his people."

Alma immediately retraced his steps, entering the city another way. As he entered the gates he met a man and asked him if he would "give an humble servant of God something to eat." To Alma's great surprise the man said: "I am a Nephite, and I know that thou art a holy prophet of God, for thou art the man whom an angel said in a vision: Thou shalt receive. Therefore, go with me into my house and I will impart unto thee of my food; and I know that thou wilt be a blessing unto me and my house.

"And it came to pass that the man received him into his house; and the man was called Amulek; and he brought forth bread and meat and set before Alma. And it came to pass that Alma ate bread and was filled; and he blessed Amulek and his house, and he gave thanks unto God."

After Alma had eaten, he told Amulek that he was Alma, the high priest of the Church, and that he was called to preach repentance to the people of that city. He also told of his fasting preparatory to coming to Ammonihah, and that he was indeed hungry when he met Amulek.

The prophet stayed with Amulek for several days before he began preaching again. "And it came to pass that the people did wax more gross in their iniquities." Amulek joined Alma in his undertaking, "and they were filled with the Holy Ghost.

"And they had power given unto them, insomuch that they could not be confined in dungeons; neither was it possible that any man could slay them; nevertheless they did not exercise their power until they were bound in bands and cast into prison. Now, this was done that the Lord might show forth his power in them.

"And it came to pass that they went forth and began to preach and to prophesy unto the people, according to the spirit and power which the Lord had given them." (Alma 8.)
