Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

AMULEK'S TESTIMONY

The people paid little attention to Alma at first, but when Amulek began to speak, they listened because he was one of them. He identified himself by saying, "I am Amulek; I am the son of Giddonah, who was the son of Ishmael, who was a descendant of Aminadi; and it was the same Aminadi who interpreted the writing which was upon the wall of the temple, which was written by the finger of God.

"And behold, I am also a man of no small reputation among all those who know me; yea, and behold, I have many kindreds and friends, and I have also acquired much riches by the hand of my industry.

"Nevertheless, after all this, I never have known much of the ways of the Lord, and his mysteries and marvelous power. I said I never had known much of these things; but behold, I mistake, for I have seen much of his mysteries and his marvelous power; yea, even in the preservation of the lives of this people.

"Nevertheless, I did harden my heart, for I was called many times and I would not hear; therefore I knew concerning these things, yet I would not know; therefore I went on rebelling against God, in the wickedness of my heart, even until the fourth day of this seventh month, which is in the tenth year of the reign of the judges." (Alma 10:2, 4-6.)

Then he said this surprising thing:

"As I was journeying to see a very near kindred, behold an angel of the Lord appeared unto me and said: Amulek, return to thine own house, for thou shalt feed a prophet of the Lord; yea, a holy man, who is a chosen man of God; for he has fasted many days because of the sins of this people, and he is an hungered, and thou shalt receive him into thy house and feed him, and he shall bless thee and thy house; and the blessing of the Lord shall rest upon thee and thy house.

"And it came to pass that I obeyed the voice of the angel, and returned towards my house. And as I was going thither I found the man whom the angel said unto me: Thou shalt receive into thy house—and behold it was this same man who has been speaking unto you concerning the things of God. And the angel said unto me he is a holy man; wherefore I know he is a holy man because it was said by an angel of God.

"And again, I know that the things whereof he hath testified are true; for behold I say unto you, that as the Lord liveth, even so has he sent his angel to make these things manifest unto me; and this he has done while this Alma hath dwelt at my house."

Amulek told the people how Alma had blessed his family, his wife, his children, and his father, "even all my kindred hath he blessed, and the blessing of the Lord rested upon us."

The people were astonished when they saw that there were two witnesses instead of one. Certain lawyers among them tried to trap the brethren into saying things damaging to themselves, that would form a basis for charges against them, so that they could be jailed, or even slain. But Amulek defended himself by the power of the Holy Spirit. His success in doing so angered the people who charged, "This man doth revile against our laws which are just, and our wise lawyers whom we have selected."

Amulek was not afraid. He cried out mightily to them, saying:

"O ye wicked and perverse generation, why hath Satan got such great hold upon your hearts? Why will ye yield yourselves unto him that he may have power over you, to blind your eyes, that ye will not understand the words which are spoken, according to their truth? For behold, have I testified against your law? Ye do not understand; ye say that I have spoken against your law; but I have not, but I have spoken in favor of your law, to your condemnation.

"And now behold, I say unto you, that the foundation of the destruction of this people is beginning to be laid by the unrighteousness of your lawyers and your judges."

The response from the people was: "Now we know that this man is a child of the devil, for he hath lied unto us; for he hath spoken against our law. And now he says that he has not spoken against it. And again, he has reviled against our lawyers, and our judges." (Alma 10.)

One of the craftiest of the lawyers was a man named Zeezrom, a leader among those accusing Alma and Amulek. He raised the question of whether there is a Christ and whether he shall come. Amulek replied:

"He shall come into the world to redeem his people; and he shall take upon him the transgressions of those who believe on his name; and these are they that shall have eternal life, and salvation cometh to none else.

"Therefore the wicked remain as though there had been no redemption made, except it be the loosing of the bands of death; for behold, the day cometh that all shall rise from the dead and stand before God, and be judged according to their works.

"Now, there is a death which is called a temporal death; and the death of Christ shall loose the bands of this temporal death, that all shall be raised from this temporal death.

"The spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame, even as we now are at this time; and we shall be brought to stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright recollection of all our guilt.

"Now, this restoration shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their heads be lost; but every thing shall be restored to its perfect frame, as it is now, or in the body, and shall be brought and be arraigned before the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy Spirit, which is one Eternal God, to be judged according to their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil."

This gave Amulek an opportunity to explain the resurrection:

"Now, behold, I have spoken unto you concerning the death of the mortal body, and also concerning the resurrection of the mortal body. I say unto you that this mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death, even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption." (Alma 11:40-45.)

When he finished this statement, the people listened in astonishment, but Zeezrom, who had led the attack, now began to tremble.

Seeing how Amulek had silenced Zeezrom, Alma arose and continued the discussion, "for he beheld that Amulek had caught him [Zeezrom] in his lying and deceiving to destroy him." Then, seeing that Zeezrom had begun to tremble "under a consciousness of guilt," Alma bore testimony to the truthfulness of what Amulek had said. He turned to the trembling lawyer and said:

"Now Zeezrom, seeing that thou hast been taken in thy lying and craftiness, for thou hast not lied unto men only but thou hast lied unto God; for behold, he knows all thy thoughts, and thou seest that thy thoughts are made known unto us by his Spirit; and thou seest that we know that thy plan was a very subtle plan, as to the subtlety of the devil, for to lie and to deceive this people that thou mightest set them against us, to revile us and to cast us out—now this was a plan of thine adversary, and he hath exercised his power in thee. Now I would that ye should remember that what I say unto thee I say unto all.

"And behold I say unto you all that this was a snare of the adversary, which he has laid to catch this people, that he might bring you into subjection unto him, that he might encircle you about with his chains that he might chain you down to everlasting destruction, according to the power of his captivity." (Alma 12:3-6.)

This made Zeezrom tremble more than ever. His heart seemed to soften, and he began to ask questions about the gospel, ceasing his attack upon the brethren.
