Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

BELIEVERS MARTYRED

Alma and Amulek were taken before the chief judge of the land, who was determined to wipe out all effects of their preaching. Some of the people had believed the words of the two brethren, and now they, together with their wives and children, were bound and burned at the stake.

"Whosoever believed or had been taught to believe in the word of God they caused that they should be cast into the fire, and they also brought forth their records which contained the holy scriptures, and cast them into the fire also, that they might be burned and destroyed by fire.

"And it came to pass that they took Alma and Amulek, and carried them forth to the place of martyrdom, that they might witness the destruction of those who were consumed by fire.

"And when Amulek saw the pains of the women and children who were consuming in the fire, he also was pained; and he said unto Alma: How can we witness this awful scene? Therefore let us stretch forth our hands, and exercise the power of God which is in us, and save them from the flames.

"But Alma said unto him: The Spirit constraineth me that I must not stretch forth mine hand; for behold the Lord receiveth them up unto himself, in glory; and he doth suffer that they may do this thing, or that the people may do this thing unto them, according to the hardness of their hearts, that the judgments which he shall exercise upon them in his wrath may be just; and the blood of the innocent shall stand as a witness against them, yea, and cry mightily against them at the last day.

"Now Amulek said unto Alma: Behold, perhaps they will burn us also.

"And Alma said: Be it according to the will of the Lord. But, behold, our work is not finished; therefore they burn us not."

The chief judge came and stood before Alma and Amulek as the flames consumed not only the families of the believers, but all their books as well. He smote the two prophets in the face and said, "After what ye have seen, will ye preach again unto this people, that they shall be cast into a lake of fire and brimstone? Behold, ye see that ye had not power to save those who had been cast into the fire; neither has God saved them because they were of thy faith. And the judge smote them again upon their cheeks, and asked: What say ye for yourselves?"

When Alma and Amulek made no reply, they were again thrown into the prison. Three days later the chief judge and the priests and teachers of their apostate church returned to the prison and questioned the brethren. But again they refused to talk. Their captors visited them again the next day, smiting them again in the face and demanding answers to their questions. They said, "Will ye stand again and judge this people, and condemn our law? If ye have such great power why do ye not deliver yourselves? . . . How shall we look when we are damned?"

The two brethren were left in the prison without food or drink for many days. Then the chief judge of Ammonihah and his lawyers came again. After beating the brethren they said: "If ye have the power of God deliver yourselves from these bands, and then we will believe that the Lord will destroy this people according to your words.

"And it came to pass that they all went forth and smote them, saying the same words, even until the last; and when the last had spoken unto them the power of God was upon Alma and Amulek, and they rose and stood upon their feet.

"And Alma cried, saying: How long shall we suffer these great afflictions, O Lord? O Lord, give us strength according to our faith which is in Christ, even unto deliverance. And they broke the cords with which they were bound; and when the people saw this, they began to flee, for the fear of destruction had come upon them.

"And it came to pass that so great was their fear that they fell to the earth, and did not obtain the outer door of the prison; and the earth shook mightily, and the walls of the prison were rent in twain, so that they fell to the earth; and the chief judge, and the lawyers, and priests, and teachers, who smote upon Alma and Amulek, were slain by the fall thereof."

All in the prison were killed except the two prophets, who walked unharmed from the prison grounds and into the city.

"Now the people having heard a great noise came running together by multitudes to know the cause of it; and when they saw Alma and Amulek coming forth out of the prison, and the walls thereof had fallen to the earth, they were struck with great fear, and fled from the presence of Alma and Amulek even as a goat fleeth with her young from two lions; and thus they did flee from the presence of Alma and Amulek." (Alma 14.)

The Lord now commanded the brethren to leave Ammonihah and go to Sidom. There they found members of the Church; they also discovered Zeezrom, who was sick with a fever. He had thought that because of his own iniquity, Alma and Amulek had been killed. "And this great sin, and his many other sins, did harrow up his mind until it became exceedingly sore, having no deliverance; therefore he began to be scorched with a burning heat."

When he heard that the two brethren were in the city, he sent for them. Alma took him by the hand and said, "Believest thou in the power of Christ unto salvation?

"And he answered and said: Yea, I believe all the words that thou hast taught.

"And Alma said: If thou believest in the redemption of Christ thou canst be healed.

"And he said: Yea, I believe according to thy words.

"And then Alma cried unto the Lord, saying: O Lord our God, have mercy on this man, and heal him according to his faith which is in Christ.

"And when Alma had said these words, Zeezrom leaped upon his feet, and began to walk; and this was done to the great astonishment of all the people; and the knowledge of this went forth throughout all the land of Sidom.

"And Alma baptized Zeezrom unto the Lord; and he began from that time forth to preach unto the people. And Alma established a church in the land of Sidom, and consecrated priests and teachers in the land, to baptize unto the Lord whosoever were desirous to be baptized."

Many people, having heard of Alma and Amulek, came "from all the region round about Sidom, and were baptized." (Alma 15:1-14.)
