Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

AMMONIHAH IS DESTROYED

The Lord had predicted that Ammonihah and all its evil inhabitants would be destroyed. Alma and Amulek had faithfully delivered this message to the people, but they were completely rejected.

Knowing of the impending destruction, Amulek could not go back to his home or family in that city. The record says that he was rejected by his friends and "his father and his kindred." He had "forsaken all his gold, and silver, and his precious things, which were in the land of Ammonihah, for the word of God."

Amulek now had no place to go. Alma had learned to appreciate his great devotion to the Lord, so "he took Amulek and came over to the land of Zarahemla, and took him to his own house, and did administer unto him in his tribulations, and strengthened him in the Lord." (Alma 15:16-18.)

But then came a cry of war. Peace had prevailed in Zarahemla for a number of years, but now a cry of war was heard throughout the land. The Lamanite armies marched into Nephite territory, but not against Zarahemla. This time they surrounded Ammonihah! Now the word of the Lord was about to be fulfilled.

The Nephites prepared to raise an army to drive the invaders out of their land, but before they could organize their forces, the city of Ammonihah was destroyed, "yea, every living soul of the Ammonihahites was destroyed, and also their great city, which they said God could not destroy, because of its greatness. . . . In one day it was left desolate; and the carcases were mangled by dogs and wild beasts of the wilderness. Nevertheless, after many days their dead bodies were heaped up upon the face of the earth, and they were covered with a shallow covering. And now so great was the scent thereof that the people did not go in to possess the land of Ammonihah for many years. And it was called Desolation of Nehors; for they were of the profession of Nehor, who were slain; and their lands remained desolate.

"And the Lamanites did not come again to war against the Nephites until the fourteenth year of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi. And thus for three years did the people of Nephi have continual peace in all the land.

"And Alma and Amulek went forth preaching repentance to the people in their temples, and in their sanctuaries, and also in their synagogues, which were built after the manner of the Jews. And as many as would hear their words, unto them they did impart the word of God, without any respect of persons, continually.

"And thus did Alma and Amulek go forth, and also many more who had been chosen for the work, to preach the word throughout all the land. And the establishment of the church became general throughout all the land, in all the region round about, among all the people of the Nephites.

"And there was no inequality among them; the Lord did pour out his Spirit on all the face of the land to prepare the minds of the children of men, or to prepare their hearts to receive the word which should be taught among them at the time of his coming—that they might not be hardened against the word, that they might not be unbelieving, and go on to destruction, but that they might receive the word with joy, and as a branch be grafted into the true vine, that they might enter into the rest of the Lord their God.

"Now those priests who did go forth among the people did preach against all lyings, and deceivings, and envyings, and strifes, and malice, and revilings, and stealing, robbing, plundering, murdering, committing adultery, and all manner of lasciviousness, crying that these things ought not so to be—holding forth things which must shortly come; yea, holding forth the coming of the Son of God, his sufferings and death, and also the resurrection of the dead.

"And many of the people did inquire concerning the place where the Son of God should come; and they were taught that he would appear unto them after his resurrection; and this the people did hear with great joy and gladness.

"And now after the church had been established throughout all the land—having got the victory over the devil, and the word of God being preached in its purity in all the land, and the Lord pouring out his blessings upon the people—thus ended the fourteenth year of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi." (Alma 16.)
