Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

A JOYOUS REUNION

Many years had passed since Alma, now the high priest of the land, had seen the sons of King Mosiah with whom he had been so friendly earlier in life. They also had been converted when the angel appeared to Alma but they were not stricken down as seriously as was he. In their repentance they desired to serve a mission among the Lamanites in the land of Nephi, and their father, the king, granted them permission. The Lord had told the king that he, the Lord, would preserve their lives while they were among the Lamanites.

Ammon was the leader of these sons of Mosiah. He and his brothers served long among the Lamanites, suffering serious afflictions while doing so, but they were blessed abundantly by the Lord. Thousands of the Lamanites were converted, and now Ammon and his brothers hoped to lead them to Zarahemla, where they would make their homes with other members of the Church.

These Lamanites were so completely converted that they took an oath before God that they would never again take up swords in battle. They had learned that the Nephites were their true brethren, and that they, the Lamanites, had indeed been misled by the false tradition of their fathers, going as far back as the time of Laman and Lemuel, sons of Lehi.

Ammon and his brethren had left their Lamanite converts in the wilderness while they sought permission to bring them in to Zarahemla. Alma also was returning from a journey, and on the road to Zarahemla he met these sons of Mosiah. "And behold, this was a joyful meeting.

"Now the joy of Ammon was so great even that he was full; yea, he was swallowed up in the joy of his God, even to the exhausting of his strength; and he fell again to the earth. Now was not this exceeding joy? Behold, this is joy which none receiveth save it be the truly penitent and humble seeker of happiness. Now the joy of Alma in meeting his brethren was truly great, and also the joy of Aaron, of Omner, and Himni; but behold their joy was not that to exceed their strength.

"And now it came to pass that Alma conducted his brethren back to the land of Zarahemla; even to his own house. And they went and told the chief judge all the things that had happened unto them in the land of Nephi, among their brethren, the Lamanites.

"And it came to pass that the chief judge sent a proclamation throughout all the land, desiring the voice of the people concerning the admitting their brethren, who were the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi.

"And it came to pass that the voice of the people came, saying: Behold, we will give up the land of Jershon, which is on the east by the sea, which joins the land Bountiful, which is on the south of the land Bountiful; and this land Jershon is the land which we will give unto our brethren for an inheritance."

The Nephites recognized the oath that Ammon's people had taken, pledging that they would never again take up swords in battle, and they therefore allowed Ammon and his brothers to bring their people to Zarahemla.

Alma now accompanied Ammon into the wilderness to bring these faithful converts in to Zarahemla.

"And it came to pass that it did cause great joy among them. And they went down into the land of Jershon, and took possession of the land of Jershon; and they were called by the Nephites the people of Ammon; therefore they were distinguished by that name ever after.

"And they were among the people of Nephi, and also numbered among the people who were of the church of God. And they were also distinguished for their zeal towards God, and also towards men; for they were perfectly honest and upright in all things; and they were firm in the faith of Christ, even unto the end.

"And they did look upon shedding the blood of their brethren with the greatest abhorrence; and they never could be prevailed upon to take up arms against their brethren; and they never did look upon death with any degree of terror, for their hope and views of Christ and the resurrection; therefore, death was swallowed up to them by the victory of Christ over it.

"Therefore, they would suffer death in the most aggravating and distressing manner which could be inflicted by their brethren, before they would take the sword or cimeter to smite them.

"And thus they were a zealous and beloved people, a highly favored people of the Lord." (Alma 27.)
