Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

"O THAT I WERE AN ANGEL"

Sickened by the sins of both his own nation and the Lamanites, and seeing the possibility of great destruction for them if they failed to repent, Alma dedicated himself more than ever to the ministry. He found that preaching of the word "was more powerful even than the sword."

Alma was close to the Lord, and he received revelations frequently for his guidance and comfort. His desire to preach the word of God was overpowering. Lifted up in his great enthusiasm for the work one day he cried out:

"O that I were an angel, and could have the wish of mine heart, that I might go forth and speak with the trump of God, with a voice to shake the earth, and cry repentance unto every people!

"Yea, I would declare unto every soul, as with the voice of thunder, repentance and the plan of redemption, that they should repent and come unto our God, that there might not be more sorrow upon all the face of the earth.

"But behold, I am a man, and do sin in my wish; for I ought to be content with the things which the Lord hath allotted unto me."

"Why should I desire that I were an angel, that I could speak unto all the ends of the earth? For behold, the Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have; therefore we see that the Lord doth counsel in wisdom, according to that which is just and true.

"I know that which the Lord hath commanded me, and I glory in it. I do not glory of myself, but I glory in that which the Lord hath commanded me; yea, and this is my glory, that perhaps I may be an instrument in the hands of God to bring some soul to repentance; and this is my joy.

"And behold, when I see many of my brethren truly penitent, and coming to the Lord their God, then is my soul filled with joy; then do I remember what the Lord has done for me, yea, even that he hath heard my prayer; yea, then do I remember his merciful arm which he extended towards me.

"Yea, and I also remember the captivity of my fathers; for I surely do know that the Lord did deliver them out of bondage, and by this did establish his church; yea, the Lord God, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, did deliver them out of bondage. Yea, I have always remembered the captivity of my fathers; and that same God who delivered them out of the hands of the Egyptians did deliver them out of bondage.

"Yea, and that same God did establish his church among them; yea, and that same God hath called me by a holy calling, to preach the word unto this people, and hath given me much success, in the which my joy is full.

"But I do not joy in my own success alone, but my joy is more full because of the success of my brethren, who have been up to the land of Nephi. Behold, they have labored exceedingly, and have brought forth much fruit; and how great shall be their reward! Now, when I think of the success of these my brethren my soul is carried away, even to the separation of it from the body, as it were, so great is my joy.

"And now may God grant unto these, my brethren, that they may sit down in the kingdom of God; yea, and also all those who are the fruit of their labors that they may go no more out, but that they may praise him forever. And may God grant that it may be done according to my words, even as I have spoken. Amen."

Alma had brought hosts of people into the faith, had taught them, had baptized them, had ordained many to the priesthood, and in times of war, had joined with the Nephite armies and fought on the battlefields. He had seen the great losses from these wars, and he hoped to bring peace through the gospel to prevent more bloodshed.

Casualties in these wars were particularly heavy, since all the fighting was hand-to-hand combat with sword and axe, one man to one man; and when one soldier slashed down his opponent, he would go on to another. With this kind of gladiator-like fighting, thousands were killed in a single engagement.

When Alma saw this carnage, and when he afterward heard the mourning of the widows and orphans, the mothers and fathers of the dead, he was sick at heart. He yearned for greater power than he then possessed to preach repentance and faith to his people. Remembering the voice of the angel who had spoken to him and the sons of Mosiah, he knew the power of conversion that accompanied that visitation. Now he and the sons of Mosiah were all in the ministry. The voice of the angel had done its work.

But others needed it. So he wished for angelic power to bring people to Christ. "But," he said, "I am a man, and do sin in my wish: for I ought to be content with the things which the Lord hath allotted unto me." (Alma 29. Italics added.) And so it was.
