Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

THE ZORAMITE APOSTASY

One of the most difficult apostate groups Alma had to deal with was the Zoramites, who practiced idolatry. These people lived in the land of Antionum, east of the land of Zarahemla, near the seashore. The Nephites feared that the Zoramites would join with the Lamanites in attacking them, and this worried Alma.

"And now, as the preaching of the word had a great tendency to lead the people to do that which was just—yea, it had had more powerful effect upon the minds of the people than the sword, or anything else, which had happened unto them—therefore Alma thought it was expedient that they should try the virtue of the word of God."

Alma took two of his sons, two of the sons of Mosiah (Aaron and Omner), and also Ammon, Amulek, and Zeezrom with him on a journey to the Zoramites, hoping to convert them. The Zoramites were dissenters from the Nephites. They already knew some of the gospel teachings, but Zoram had introduced idolatry and immoral practices.

Alma and his company were astonished at what they found when they arrived in Antionum. They had never seen the kind of worship that existed there. The Zoramites had built up in the center of their synagogue "a place for standing, which was high above the head; and the top thereof would only admit one person.

"Therefore, whosoever desired to worship must go forth and stand upon the top thereof, and stretch forth his hands towards heaven, and cry with a loud voice, saying:

"Holy, holy God; we believe that thou art God, and we believe that thou art holy, and that thou wast a spirit, and that thou art a spirit, and that thou wilt be a spirit forever.

"Holy God, we believe that thou hast separated us from our brethren; and we do not believe in the tradition of our brethren, which was handed down to them by the childishness of their fathers; but we believe that thou hast elected us to be thy holy children; and also thou hast made it known unto us that there shall be no Christ.

"But thou art the same yesterday, today, and forever; and thou hast elected us that we shall be saved, whilst all around us are elected to be cast by thy wrath down to hell; for the which holiness, O God, we thank thee; and we also thank thee that thou hast elected us, that we may not be led away after the foolish traditions of our brethren, which doth bind them down to a belief of Christ, which doth lead their hearts to wander far from thee, our God.

"And again we thank thee, O God, that we are a chosen and a holy people. Amen."

Every man in the congregation went forward and offered the identical prayer with his hands stretched forth to heaven, "thanking their God that they were chosen of him, and that he did not lead them away after the tradition of their brethren, and that their hearts were not stolen away to believe in things to come, which they knew nothing about."

After the worship was over, the people returned to their homes, never speaking of God again until they reassembled in the synagogues.

Alma himself bowed in prayer and said:

"Behold, O God, they cry unto thee, and yet their hearts are swallowed up in their pride. Behold, O God, they cry unto thee with their mouths, while they are puffed up, even to greatness, with the vain things of the world.

"Behold, O my God, their costly apparel, and their ringlets, and their bracelets, and their ornaments of gold, and all their precious things which they are ornamented with; and behold, their hearts are set upon them, and yet they cry unto thee and say—We thank thee, O God, for we are a chosen people unto thee, while others shall perish.

"Yea, and they say that thou hast made it known unto them that there shall be no Christ."

Then he prayed that he and his brethren would have success in teaching these people. (Alma 31.)

Alma and his companions began their work, going first to the poor and humble of the city. They spoke in some of the synagogues as well as in the streets. Before long they were cast out of the synagogues, as were the poorer people who listened to them and who had allowed them to preach there.

One day Alma spoke from a hill known as Onihah. A large multitude of the poor people followed him there and complained about being forced out of synagogues that they themselves had built. He told them, "I behold that ye are lowly in heart; and if so, blessed are ye. Behold thy brother hath said, What shall we do?—for we are cast out of our synagogues, that we cannot worship our God. Behold I say unto you, do ye suppose that ye cannot worship God save it be in your synagogues only? And moreover, I would ask, do ye suppose that ye must not worship God only once in a week?

"I say unto you, it is well that ye are cast out of your synagogues, that ye may be humble, and that ye may learn wisdom; for it is necessary that ye should learn wisdom; for it is because that ye are cast out, that ye are despised of your brethren because of your exceeding poverty, that ye are brought to a lowliness of heart; for ye are necessarily brought to be humble.

"And now, because ye are compelled to be humble blessed are ye; for a man sometimes, if he is compelled to be humble, seeketh repentance; and now surely, whosoever repenteth shall find mercy; and he that findeth mercy and endureth to the end the same shall be saved.

"And now, as I said unto you, that because ye were compelled to be humble ye were blessed, do ye not suppose that they are more blessed who truly humble themselves because of the word? Yea, he that truly humbleth himself, and repenteth of his sins, and endureth to the end, the same shall be blessed—yea, much more blessed than they who are compelled to be humble because of their exceeding poverty.

"Therefore, blessed are they who humble themselves without being compelled to be humble; or rather, in other words, blessed is he that believeth in the word of God, and is baptized without stubbornness of heart, yea, without being brought to know the word, or even compelled to know, before they will believe." (Alma 32:1-16.)

Alma then began to preach to the Zoramites concerning Christ, the Son of God. He quoted two former prophets, Zenos and Zenock, both of them testifying of Christ.

When Amulek arose to speak, he also testified of Christ. He too quoted Zenos and Zenoch concerning the Savior, and then he said, "And now, behold, I will testify unto you of myself that these things are true. Behold, I say unto you, that I do know that Christ shall come among the children of men, to take upon him the transgressions of his people, and that he shall atone for the sins of the world; for the Lord God hath spoken it."

He explained that there must be one great and last sacrifice, "and then shall there be, or it is expedient there should be, a stop to the shedding of blood; then shall the law of Moses be fulfilled; yea, it shall be all fulfilled, every jot and tittle, and none shall have passed away.

"And behold, this is the whole meaning of the law, every whit pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God, yea, infinite and eternal. And thus he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name; this being the intent of this last sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance." (Alma 34:1-15.)

Teaching the people to pray over their families, their fields, and their flocks and herds, Amulek called on them to repent, saying, "Behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors."

He explained why they must not postpone their repentance: "For behold, if ye have procrastinated the day of your repentance even until death, behold, ye have become subjected to the spirit of the devil, and he doth seal you his; therefore, the Spirit of the Lord hath withdrawn from you, and hath no place in you, and the devil hath all power over you; and this is the final state of the wicked." (Alma 34:32-35.)
