Mark E. Petersen, Alma and Abinadi ( 1983)

ALMA IS TAKEN

Alma sensed that he was nearing the end of his mortal mission. Knowing that faithful Helaman would take over the work, Alma called his son before him. He must reassure himself of Helaman's faithfulness, so he asked him, "Believest thou the words which I spake unto thee concerning those records which have been kept?"

Helaman replied, "Yea, I believe."

Alma said again, "Believest thou in Jesus Christ, who shall come?"

"Yea, I believe all the words which thou hast spoken."

"Will ye keep my commandments?"

Helaman said, "Yea, I will keep thy commandments with all my heart."

Then Alma told him, "Blessed art thou; and the Lord shall prosper thee in this land."

Alma had a prediction to leave with his son:

"But behold, I have somewhat to prophesy unto thee; but what I prophesy unto thee ye shall not make known; yea, what I prophesy unto thee shall not be made known, even until the prophecy is fulfilled; therefore write the words which I shall say.

"And these are the words: Behold, I perceive that this very people, the Nephites, according to the spirit of revelation which is in me, in four hundred years from the time that Jesus Christ shall manifest himself unto them, shall dwindle in unbelief.

"Yea, and then shall they see wars and pestilences, yea, famines and bloodshed, even until the people of Nephi shall become extinct—yea, and this because they shall dwindle in unbelief and fall into the works of darkness, and lasciviousness, and all manner of iniquities; yea, I say unto you, that because they shall sin against so great light and knowledge, yea, I say unto you, that from that day, even the fourth generation shall not all pass away before this great iniquity shall come.

"And when that great day cometh, behold, the time very soon cometh that those who are now, or the seed of those who are now numbered among the people of Nephi, shall no more be numbered among the people of Nephi.

"But whosoever remaineth, and is not destroyed in that great and dreadful day, shall be numbered among the Lamanites, and shall become like unto them, all, save it be a few who shall be called the disciples of the Lord; and them shall the Lamanites pursue even until they shall become extinct. And now, because of iniquity, this prophecy shall be fulfilled."

Alma now blessed Helaman and his other sons, and the earth for the sake of righteous people. But he added: "Thus saith the Lord God—Cursed shall be the land, yea, this land, unto every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, unto destruction, which do wickedly, when they are fully ripe; and as I have said so shall it be; for this is the cursing and the blessing of God upon the land, for the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance."

This was Alma's last pronouncement. "And now, when Alma had said these words he blessed the church, yea, all those who should stand fast in the faith from that time henceforth.

"And when Alma had done this he departed out of the land of Zarahemla, as if to go into the land of Melek. And it came to pass that he was never heard of more; as to his death or burial we know not of.

"Behold, this we know, that he was a righteous man; and the saying went abroad in the church that he was taken up by the Spirit, or buried by the hand of the Lord, even as Moses. But behold, the scriptures saith the Lord took Moses unto himself; and we suppose that he has also received Alma in the spirit, unto himself; therefore, for this cause we know nothing concerning his death and burial." (Alma 45:1-19.)
