The doctrine of free agency is plainly elucidated in the written revelations from God. The plan for man's redemption was predicated on his fall.

No law could have been given to our first parents, and no penalty affixed for the breaking of a law, unless they had been free to act without constraint. The liberty to choose was given by the Creator to the progenitors of the race, and that liberty has been fully recognized in all his dealings with their posterity.

As the Patriarch of the race entailed on it an experimental knowledge of good and evil, through sufferings and death, so, through the sufferings and death of the Only Begotten Son, they are redeemed from the effects of his transgression, independent of any act of theirs.

Man was created in the image of God, with the possibility of becoming like him. But he cannot attain to that position without a knowledge of good and evil. Through the act of the Father he has attained to that knowledge; through the act of the Son he is delivered from the effects of original transgression.

Thus, with the privilege of exercising his free agency, he is placed on an equality with the parents of the race, and has the choice of good or evil for himself, with the results of that choice. If he chooses evil, a second death will be the result. If the good, it will prove to be the way to all the powers, glories and exaltations that the Gods enjoy, in whose image man is created.

The Book of Mormon is very plain on this subject: "Wherefore, men are free according to the flesh; and all things are given them which are expedient unto man. And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great mediation of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil;" 2 Nephi 2. 27.

Bible.

Gen. 2. 17 in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.

3, 6 Eve eat of the fruit of the tree and gave to her husband and he did eat. 12, 17.

Book of Mormon.

1 Nephi 6. 4 that I may persuade men to come to God.

2 Nephi 2. 16 Lord gave unto man that he should act for himself.

Mos. 2, 33 if he listeth to obey him, the same drinketh damnation.

Alma 3. 26 reap eternal happiness or misery, according to the spirit they obey.

Hel. 14. 30 ye are permitted to act for yourselves.

Doctrine & Covenants.

Sec. 10. 66 may come and partake of the waters of life freely.

39 men must needs be tempted, or they could not be agents to themselves. Sec. 58. 27, 28.

Pearl of Great Price.

Page 7. thou mayest choose for thyself. Satan sought to destroy the agency of man.

See a sermon by B, Young, J. of D., Vol. I., page I.

Sermon by B. Young, J. of D., Vol. 3, page 80.

,, by O. Pratt, J. of D. Vol. I, page 328.

,, by D. H. Wells, J. of D. Vol. 9, page 259.
