"Faith is the first principle of revealed religion and the foundation of all righteousness." "Now faith is the substance (assurance) of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen;" Heb. 11. 1, Doc. and Cov., Lecture on Faith, 1. 1-8. That to use the word assurance, instead of substance, would be the proper rendering of the above passage, is evident from the 22d verse of the previous chapter: "Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith."

Faith begets trust and confidence. "In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him;" (Jesus Christ.) Eph. 3. 12. Faith is the gift of God. "Saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God;" 2. 8. "To another faith by the same Spirit;" 1 Cor. 12. 9. "But to think soberly, according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith;" Rom. 12. 3. Moroni 10. 11.

Through repentance, baptism and the laying on of hands man may receive the Holy Ghost. It will open his spiritual vision and he will begin to comprehend himself, the object of his creation, and his affinity to his Heavenly Father. Then through the further observance of all the ordinances of the Gospel, will the righteousness of God be revealed to him, from faith to faith, until by keeping the commandments and seeking after knowledge through the inspirations of the Holy Ghost, in time, he will reach that assurance of faith which is unto eternal life.

The Lectures on Faith, by Joseph Smith, Jun., in Doc. and Cov., may justly be considered the most elaborate treatise on the subject in the sacred writings. They are written in such simplicity, that they can be easily understood by all who will honestly study them, to obtain a knowledge of the nature of faith. Their fulness, their comprehensiveness, is one of the many evidences of the Divine inspiration of the Prophet Joseph.

The first lecture shows that faith is an assurance that men have of the existence of things that they have not seen, and that it is an element of power. "It is the principle by which Jehovah works, and through which he exercises power over all temporal as well as eternal things."

The second lecture informs us how faith, in the beginning was based on a knowledge of God and his attributes, and that faith in God has existed in man in proportion to that knowledge.

The third lecture teaches us that to exercise faith in God, man must have an idea that he exists, and also of his character and attributes. He must, as well, feel an assurance that he is living in accordance with the will of God. Consequently, those who fail to obtain this knowledge by living in the spirit and power of the Gospel, cannot exercise a true and understanding faith in God, no matter what their pretentions.

Lecture fourth treats of the connection between correct ideas of God's attributes, of his Knowledge, Faith or Power, Justice, Judgment, Mercy and Truth; and the exercise of faith unto salvation, in a rational being.

The fifth lecture shows the necessity of faith in God the Father, and in his Son Jesus Christ.

Lecture sixth evidences the necessity of men knowing that their course of life is in accordance with the will of God, in order to exercise faith in him unto salvation. "It was this that enabled the ancient Saints to endure all their afflictions and persecutions, and to take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing (not believing merely) that they had a more enduring substance. Heb. 10. 34.

The seventh lecture treats of the effects of faith. That working by faith is working by mental exertion instead of physical force; illustrating the fact by numerous examples. It also elucidates the principle that the mental powers are far superior to the physical forces of nature, and that through them the power of faith is manifested.

### FAITH IN GOD THE FATHER, THE SON, AND THE HOLY GHOST.

Bible.

Gen. 15. 6 Abraham believed in God and he counted it to him for righteousness. Rom. 4. 3; Gal. 3. 6.

Exod. 4. 5 that they may believe that the God of their fathers hath appeared unto thee.

Num. 20. 12 ye believed me not; ye shall not bring this congregation into the land.

Psalm 119. 66 teach me judgment and knowledge, for I have believed thy commandments.

Prov. 16. 20 whoso trusteth in the Lord, happy is he.

Jonah 3. 5 so the people of Nineveh believed God.

John 1. 12 to as many as believed on him he gave power to become the sons of God.

Acts 8. 29 the Spirit said to Philip, go near and join thyself to him.

37 eunuch answered, I believe Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

Rom. 1. 16 Gospel of Christ the power of God unto salvation.

17 therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith. The just shall live by faith.

14 how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?

2 Cor. 1. 9 not trust in ourselves, but in God who raiseth the dead.

Gal. 2. 20 I live by the faith of the Son of God, who gave himself for me.

Col. 1. 4 faith in Christ and love for all the Saints.

1 Tim. 1. 16 for a pattern for those who should hereafter believe on him.

Titus 3. 8 they who believe in God might maintain good works.

Heb. 3. 18 they that believe not should not enter into his rest.

James 2. 19 thou believest there is one God; devils believe and tremble.

1 Peter 1. 21 by him believe in God that raised him from the dead, &c.

1 John 4. 16 we have believed the love God hath for us.

Book of Mormon.

1 Nephi 10. 6, 17 which power he received by faith on the Son of God.

2 Nephi 11. 6, 7 my soul delighteth in proving to my people, that, save Christ should come, all men must perish.

Jacob 3. 1 pray to God with great faith.

Enos 1. 8 he said to me, because of thy faith in Christ.

Jarom 1. 11 persuading them to believe in the Messiah to come.

Mos. 4. 2 for we believe in Christ who shall come.

Alma 5. 15 do you exercise faith in the redemption of him who created you? 48.

Hel. 3. 35 they grew firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ.

3 Nephi 11. 32 the Holy Ghost bears record of the Father and Son. 34, 35, 36.

28 thou hast purified these whom I have chosen because of their faith. 29, 35.

Chap. 28. The three Nephite disciples of Jesus had the faith that enabled them to receive a change in their bodies, that they might remain on the earth until his coming.

4 Nephi 1. 48 being constrained by the Holy Ghost, Ammaron hid up the records.

Mormon 7. 7 Father, Son and Holy Ghost are one God. 10.

Ether 5. 4 the Father, Son and Holy Ghost beareth record. Chap. 12. 41.

Moroni 6. 4 were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost. Chap. 7. 32.

Doctrine & Covenants.

Sec. 18. 18 ask the Father in faith and you shall receive the Holy Ghost. 19.

Pearl of Great Price.

Page 2. Moses declared to Satan that he would worship only the God of glory. God blessed Moses for his faith in him.

Thou shalt call upon God in the name of the Son for evermore.
