The first Nephi, 2400 years before the days of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, had a vision of the discovery and colonization of America by Europeans. He also saw the record of the Jews (the Bible) come forth from the Gentiles to the remnant of the seed of his brethren (the American Indians). He says, "After it had come forth unto them, I beheld other books, which came forth by the power of the Lamb, from the Gentiles unto them:" 1 Nephi 13. 38, 39.

Admitting that this prophecy has been partly fulfilled, by Christian denominations who have sent missionaries and the Bible among the Indians, it remained for Joseph Smith, Jun., to initiate the fulfilment of the second part of the prophecy, that other books, besides the Bible, should come forth to the children of Lehi, which should bear testimony of the truth of the Bible.

The Book of Mormon was the first of this series of books, which were to be carried forth among the American Indians, after the Bible. It has been followed by the book of Doctrine and Covenants, containing revelations and instructions concerning the latter-day work, and by inspired translations from the writings of Enoch, Abraham and Moses, which all bear record of the truth of the Jewish prophets, and of the teachings of Jesus and his apostles, as foretold they would do by the prophet Nephi.

This same prophet further says, "There is nothing which is secret, save it shall be revealed; * * * there is nothing which is sealed upon the earth, save it shall be loosed. Wherefore, all things which have been revealed unto the children of men, shall at that day be revealed;" 2 Nephi 30. 17, 18. The context of this passage shows that it speaks of the latter days.

The following is nearly a parallel passage in meaning: "And he shall send Jesus Christ which before was preached unto you: whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began;" Acts 3. 20, 21.

That is, all the knowledge that has ever been revealed to man will be restored to the earth. All that was revealed to Adam and the ante-diluvian prophets; to Noah and the Jaredite prophets; to Abraham; to Moses and the Jewish prophets; to the Nephite prophets; to the primitive apostles of our Savior, and many others, to whom the Lord has shewn all things from the beginning of the world to the end thereof.

After many centuries had passed, in which man's wisdom had failed to comprehend the meaning of the phrase, "The restitution of all things," or the grand fulfilment of prophecy comprehended in a "Dispensation of the fulness of times"—a time in which all the knowledge and power of all times will be gathered into one—Jos. Smith, Jun., appears in the United States of America, and claims that the Lord has authorized him to open up this grand dispensation of a fulness, and that for this purpose he has bestowed upon him first, and then through him upon others, all the keys and powers of the Priesthood which had been held in former dispensations.

"For unto you, (the twelve) and those (the first presidency) who are appointed with you, to be your counselors and your leaders, is the power of this Priesthood given, for the last days and for the last time, in the which is the dispensation of the fulness of times, which power you hold in connection with all those who have received a dispensation at any time from the beginning of creation;" Doc. & Cov. 112. 30-32.

In sec. 110 we are informed that Jesus Christ, Elias, Moses, and Elijah the prophet, appeared to Jos. Smith, Jun., and others, and bestowed upon them the keys of the holy Priesthood, held in other dispensations, that they might be concentrated in this.

In these last two quotations, from Doc. & Cov., we have an account of the bestowal of the necessary authority upon certain persons, for the opening up of the gathering dispensation of the latter times, that is perfectly consistent with the Book of Mormon and the Bible.

No man, unless endowed by Divine inspiration, could have conceived of such a sacramental feast as is represented in the following, to which will be gathered in the latter times, the great dignitaries of all dispensations, with Jesus Christ at their head, together holding all the keys, authority and powers of the holy Priesthood, pertaining to the redemption of man and of the earth.

"For the hour cometh that I will drink of the fruit of the vine with you on the earth, and with Moroni, whom I have sent unto you to reveal the Book of Mormon, containing the fulness of my everlasting Gospel, * * * and also with Elias, to whom I have committed the keys of bringing to pass the restoration of all things," and with John the Baptist, "whom I have sent unto you, my servants, Jos. Smith, Jun., and Oliver Cowdery, to ordain you unto this first Priesthood which you have received. * *

"And also Elijah, unto whom I have committed the keys of the power of turning the hearts of the fathers to the children, * * * and also with Joseph and Jacob, and Isaac, and Abraham, your fathers, * * and also with Michael, or Adam, the father of all, the prince of all, the ancient of days.

"And also with Peter, and James, and John, * * * by whom I have ordained you and confirmed you to be Apostles, and especial witnesses of my name, and bear the keys of your ministry, and of the same things which I have revealed unto them: unto whom I have committed the keys of my kingdom, and a dispensation of the Gospel for the last times; and for the fulness of times, in the which I will gather together in one all things, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth;" 27. 5-13.

On a certain occasion, when the Nephite disciples of our Savior were engaged "in mighty prayer and fasting," he appeared in their midst and asked them, "What will ye that I shall give unto you? And they said unto him, Lord, we will that thou wouldst tell us the name whereby we shall call this church; for there are disputations among the people concerning this matter.

"And the Lord said unto them, Verily, verily I say unto you, why is it that the people should murmur and dispute because of this thing? Have they not read the scriptures, which say ye must take upon you the name of Christ, which is my name? For by this name shall ye be called at the last day. * * * Therefore whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in my name; therefore ye shall call the church in my name;" 3 Nephi 27. 2-7.

In the above Jesus plainly told his disciples that his name was Christ, and that his church should be called Christ's Church, not Christian, Catholic, Campbellite or Episcopalian.

When Jos. Smith, Jun., organized this church, on the 6th of April, 1830, it was organized as the Church of Jesus Christ, in obedience to the instructions of Jesus Christ, some 1800 years before.

The prophet Nephi, speaking of the gathering of Israel, says, that the Lord "Will bring them again out of captivity, and they shall be gathered together to the lands of their inheritance; and they shall be brought out of obscurity, and out of darkness;" 1 Nephi 22. 12.

The Book of Mormon, brought forth through the agency of Jos. Smith, Jun., reveals to the world the fact that the millions of aboriginal Americans scattered over the American continent, from Cape Horn to the Arctic Ocean, are of the house of Israel.

The keys of the Patriarchal Priesthood enable those on whom they are bestowed, to know, by revelation, the lineage of the Latter-day Saints, and tens of thousands of Ephraim, and thousands of Manasseh, are being gathered, who were not known before the days of Jos. Smith, Jun., as portions of the house of Israel. Thus the great work of bringing the tribes of Israel, out of obscurity and darkness, and of developing their existence to themselves, and to the world, has been inaugurated by Jos. Smith, Jun. The work must continue until they are gathered from all parts of the earth, in fulfilment of the words of the prophets, and of the promises made to their fathers.

The following promise was made to Joseph who was sold into Egypt, "The fruit of thy loins shall write; and the fruit of the loins of Judah shall write;" and that which shall be written, "Shall grow together, unto the confounding of false doctrines, and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins, and bringing them to the knowledge of their fathers in the latter-days; and also the knowledge of my covenants, saith the Lord;" 2 Nephi 3. 12. Jos. Smith, Jun., has brought forth the Book of Mormon, the writing of the fruit of the loins of Joseph through Ephraim and Manasseh, and has placed it, side by side, with the writing of the fruit of the loins of Judah—the Bible—the one establishing the truth of the other, and thus has literally fulfilled this prophecy.

The Lord further said to Joseph who was sold into Egypt, "I will raise up unto the fruit of thy loins; and I will make for him a spokesman. And I, behold, I will give unto him, that he shall write the writing of the fruit of thy loins (the Nephites), unto the fruit of thy loins (the American Indians); and the spokesman of thy loins shall declare it;" verse 18.

In Doc. & Cov., we are informed of the fulfilment of this prophecy. The Lord said to Joseph the prophet and S. Rigdon, "It is expedient in me that you, my servant Sidney, should be a spokesman unto this people; yea, verily, I will ordain you unto this calling, even to be a spokesman unto my servant Joseph;" 100. 9.

"And it shall be as if the fruit of thy loins had cried unto them from the dust;" 2 Nephi 3. 19. Jos. Smith, Jun., was of the lineage of Joseph who was sold into Egypt, to whom these promises were made. The Nephites were also his descendants, and they wrote and hid up the plates of the Book of Mormon, with the assurance that, in after years, the writing should be brought forth to their descendants and others of the house of Israel; Mormon 8. 14-16. The record was engraved on plates in a language known only to the Nephites; Mormon 9. 34.

Of necessity there were some means provided for interpreting and re-writing the record in a modern language, before it could benefit those for whom it was designed. With the plates of the Book of Mormon was found a Urim and Thummim, by means of which, through the power of God, Jos. Smith, Jun., was enabled to translate the Nephite record for the benefit of the descendants of Lehi, and any others of the human family who would receive it; Doc. & Cov. 10. 1. "And it shall be as if the fruit of thy loins had cried to them from the dust," was fulfilled in taking the writing out of the earth, where it had been deposited for 1400 years.

In Mormon 8. 13, 14, we are informed that the record was hid up in the earth by Moroni, the son of Mormon, and it remained under his care until he delivered it to Joseph Smith, Jun., P. of G. P. page 49. The Lord said, "And it shall come to pass that my people which are of the house of Israel, shall be gathered home unto the lands of their possessions; and my word also shall be gathered in one;" 2 Nephi 29. 14.

In fulfilment of this prophecy, Jos. Smith, Jun., during the short period of his ministry, not only inaugurated the great work of gathering Israel, but also of gathering together sacred writings, which at this time consist of the unsealed portion of the record of Mormon; the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and of important portions of the writings of Enoch, of Abraham, and of Moses. He also declared that more sacred writings would come forth, as fast as the people were prepared to receive them.

Moroni, who completed and hid up the record of Mormon in the earth, says, of the plates, "Unto three shall they be shown by the power of God; wherefore they shall know of a surety that these things are true. And in the mouth of three witnesses shall these things be established;" Ether 5. 3, 4. We find that the Lord repeated this prediction to Jos. Smith, Jun.; Doc. & Cov. 5. 11-15. On the second page, after the title page of the Book of Mormon, we find the testimony of three men, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris, that an angel appeared to them and showed them the plates, "Which is a record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites their brethren, and also of the people of Jared, who came from the tower" of Babel.

It was made manifest to them that they had been translated by the gift and power of God, and the voice of the Lord commanded that they should bear record of the things that had been shown them.
