"And the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days;" Doc. & Cov. 1. 4. This was one of the first prophetic commandments given to the Latter-day Saints, through Jos. Smith, Jun.

Many hundreds of the Elders of the Church have traveled to and fro in the earth, regardless of exposure to the elements, of fatigue, or of pecuniary considerations, warning the people to repent of their sins, for the day of the Lord was near.

There are now but few nations who are prepared to receive the word, that have not had the Gospel of this dispensation preached to them. With a constantly increasing number of Elders, the labor will continue until the Gospel is preached "as a witness to all nations." The quorums of the Priesthood were organized and set in order, by Jos. Smith, Jun., with this great work especially in view.

In sec. 3. 16-20, it is predicted that a knowledge of the Savior, and also of their fathers, should come to the descendants of Lehi, the American Indians. Through the ministry and teachings of Jos. Smith, Jun., thousands of the Lamanites have come to a knowledge of their fathers, and many "Believe the Gospel and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ," of which many of the Latter-day Saints are witnesses.

"Behold, a marvellous work is about to come forth among the children of men;" 4. 1. This declaration was made in February, 1829; before the organization of the Church. The organization of the Church, the teachings, unity, energy, and progress of the Latter-day Saints, have ever been a marvel to the world, and are daily becoming more so, in fulfilment of this often repeated prediction in the book of Doc. & Cov.

In March, 1829, the Lord said to Jos. Smith, Jun., "For hereafter you shall be ordained and go forth and deliver my words unto the children of men;" 5. 6. On the 15th of May following, John the Baptist laid his hands upon the heads of Jos. Smith, Jun., and O. Cowdery, and ordained them to "The Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the Gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins;" sec. 13.

It is evident that, previous to this time, Jos. Smith, Jun., had foreseen by the spirit of prophecy, that it was necessary he should be called of God as was Aaron, and for this reason was prepared to receive a proper ordination by the hands of an authorized messenger from God. We have no record of such previous ordination to the Priesthood, since the days of the primitive apostles.

The Lord said to Joseph Smith, Jun., "There are many that lie in wait to destroy thee from off the face of the earth;" 5. 33. The whole life of Jos. Smith, Jun., and his death, evidence the truthfulness of this prophecy. Some forty times was he brought before the courts by his enemies, and they failed to substantiate the charges preferred against him, and, on the 27th of June, 1844, he, and his brother Hyrum, were assassinated in Carthage jail, by a mob, when under the pledged protection of the Executive of the state of Illinois.

"And the poor and the meek shall have the Gospel preached unto them, and they shall be looking forth for the time of my coming;" 35. 15. Not only has the Gospel been preached to the poor and the meek, but they are the ones who have received it, and are looking and preparing for the coming of our Lord, "For it is nigh at hand."

"Inasmuch as my people shall assemble themselves to the (state of) Ohio, I have kept in store a blessing such as is not known among the children of men, and it shall be poured forth upon their heads;" 39. 15. This prophetic promise was given through Joseph Smith, Jun., in Fayette, New York, January 5, 1831. In 1836, a temple was completed in the town of Kirtland, Ohio. It was the first temple of modern times, dedicated to that Priesthood of which Jesus Christ is the acknowledged head.

In this temple the Elders of the Church received endowments and great blessings, of which the world generally were entirely ignorant. The Lord said through J. Smith, Jun., "The sound must go forth from this place into all the world, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth—the Gospel must be preached unto every creature, with signs following them that believe;" 58. 64.

This prophecy was literally fulfilled by the Elders scattering from Kirtland, after receiving their endowments, to all parts of the United States and the Canadas, and by the first European Mission being established soon after.

At this time thousands of Latter-day Saints can testify that the Gospel has been preached in a large portion of the world, and that the signs of faith, gift of tongues, healing, etc., have followed the believer.

The following remarkable prophecy was delivered Dec. 25th, 1832. "Thus saith the Lord, concerning the wars that will shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina, which will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls. The days will come that war will be poured out upon all nations, beginning at that place; * * and it shall come to pass, after many days, slaves shall rise up against their masters, who shall be marshalled and disciplined for war;"

In 1861, twenty-nine years after this prophecy was recorded, the war between the North and South commenced in South Carolina. It continued for several years and was very destructive. In the latter part of it many thousands of slaves deserted their masters and were marshalled and disciplined for war, and formed a part of the armies of the Northern States.

During the contest the Southern States called upon the nation of Great Britain for assistance. "And it shall come to pass also, that the remnants who are left of the land (the Indians) will marshal themselves, and shall become exceeding angry, and shall vex the Gentiles with a sore vexation;" Sec. 87.

Never before, since the United States have been a nation, has the Indian question been so complicated and vexatious as now. That a part of this prophecy has been so literally fulfilled would seem a guarantee that the whole will be realized.

The delivery of the keys of the holy Priesthood unto the Prophet Joseph Smith, by Elias, by Moses, by Elijah, their ordination to the Priesthood of Aaron by John the Baptist, to the Melchisedek Priesthood by Peter, James and John, the building of temples, the ordinances and endowments for the living and for the dead, received in them; the preaching of the Gospel to all the world, the gathering of Israel; and all the varied labors of the Latter-day Saints in order to establish a veritable kingdom of God on the earth, and to prepare for the coming of our Savior in his glory, are the direct results of the personal labors and inspired teachings of Joseph Smith, Jun.

He stands forth, pre-eminently, as the Divinely inspired prophetic leader of the "Dispensation of the fulness of times;" as God's agent for the "Restitution of all things spoken by all holy prophets since the world began." As the great fulfiller of numerous prophecies of both the ancient Jewish and Nephite prophets, as recorded in the Bible and Book of Mormon; as the great prophet of the nineteenth century, and the fulfiller of his own prophecies, showing that he was Divinely inspired to both prophesy and to fulfil.

See a pamphlet by O. Pratt, entitled, "Divine Authority, or, was Joseph Smith sent of God."

A pamphlet entitled, "A Public Discussion, between J. Taylor and C. W. Cleeve, J. Robertson and P. Cater."

"Joseph Smith's Prophetic Calling," Mil. Star, Vol. 42, pages 164, 187, 195, 227.

Epistle of D. W. Patten, History of J. Smith, July 31, 1838.

O. Spencer's Letters to Rev. Wm. Crowel, No. 1.
