"Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world;" Acts 15. 18.

The knowledge that we have of the beginning of the world is principally derived from the history of its creation in the Bible Genesis, and in the writings of Moses and of Abraham, as given in P. of G. P., pages 4-7, and 32-36.

Abraham says, "Now the Lord had shewn unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones; and God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said, These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me, Abraham, thou art one of them, thou wast chosen before thou wast born;" P. of G. P., page 32.

These writings make it plain that man existed in a spiritual condition prior to coming here, and also quite as evident that in that pre-existence he exercised his free agency. These facts throw much light on the following passages: "Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and Slain;" Acts 2. 23. "For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son;" Rom. 8. 29.

"Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called;" verse 30. "God hath not cast away his people which he foreknew;" 11. 2. "For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance;" verse 29.

The last passage explains the previous ones. God may have called and chosen men in their first estate, or spiritual existence, but whether they will accept that call and fill it, by repentance and good works in this life, is a matter in which it is their privilege to exercise their free agency.

This idea is illustrated in the case of the Roman centurion, who had faith that his sick servant would be healed if Jesus would only speak the word. Jesus said to those around him, "That many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven: But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness;" Matt. 8. 11, 12.

The "Children of the kingdom" evidently refers to Israel, the called and chosen of God. The passages are numerous in which Israel is called the "Chosen of God;" "The elect according to the covenant." "Hearken unto me, O Jacob and Israel, my called;" Isa. 48. 12.

Jesus, when he predicted the destruction of Jerusalem, and the scattering of the Jews, declared that for the elect's sake those days should be shortened; Matt. 24. 22.

The elect could only mean according to the covenant with Abraham for the remnant who were saved in the flesh were of a wicked generation, and they and their children became a hiss and a by-word among all nations, consequently they could not have been the elect through faith and good works.

David said to the congregation, "Solomon, my son, whom alone God hath chosen;" 1 Chron. 29. 1. Yet Solomon did not fully prove himself by good works, for he fell into transgression and corrupted Israel; 1 Kings 11. 9-11.

The Book of Mormon is plain on this subject: "Being called and prepared from the foundation of the world, according to the foreknowledge of God, on account of their exceeding faith and good works; in the first place being left to choose good or evil;" Alma 13. 3-7.

Their calling and preparation from the foundation of the world were evidently based on their faith and good works, previous to their being called, and not on the possibilities of their future good conduct.

This idea is verified by the apostle who, speaking of Christ, says, "And again, when he bringeth in the first-begotten into the world, he saith, And let all the angels of God worship him. * * * Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows;" Heb. 1. 6, 9. "Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you;" 1 Pet. 1. 20. Christ was chosen before the foundation of the world, because he had already proven himself worthy.

Men exercised their free agency in the first or spiritual estate, as well as in this. That the character of their works in that estate shaped their destiny in this is evident. The Lord said to Abraham, "They who keep their first estate, shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate, shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate;" P. of G. P., page 32.

There are some foreordained to condemnation: "There are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation;" Jude 4.

"The angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day;" Jude 6. That is, those angels who, voluntarily, by their own acts, forfeited the glory prepared for them.

The Lord revealed to Joseph, the Seer, that the only ones who should not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord are those who "Having denied the Holy Spirit after having received it, and having denied the Only Begotten Son of the Father—having crucified him unto themselves, and put him to an open shame." Doc. & Cov. 76. 31-43. We learn from the Book of Mormon also "The way is prepared for all men from the foundation of the world, if so be that they repent and come unto him." 1 Nephi 10. 18.

Bible.

Exo. 33. 19 I will shew mercy on whom I will.

Num. 16. 7 the man whom the Lord shall choose shall be holy.

Deut. 7. 6 the Lord hath chosen thee to be a special people. 14. 2.

2 Sam. 6. 21 it was before the Lord which chose me before thy father.

Neh. 9. 7 thou art the Lord who did'st choose Abram.

Psalm 33. 12 the people whom he hath chosen for his own inheritance.

Isa. 14. 1 Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel.

Matt. 12. 18 behold my servant whom I have chosen.

Luke 18. 7 shall not God avenge his own elect?

John 15. 16 ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. 19.

Acts 1. 24 shew whether of these two thou hast chosen.

Rom. 9. 11-22 Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. 23, 24, 26.

28 but as touching the election they are beloved.

1 Cor. 1. 24, 27 God hath chosen the foolish things of the world.

Eph. 1. 4-11. 18 predestination and adoption set forth.

Col. 3. 12 put on therefore as the elect of God.

2 Thess. 2. 13, 14 because God, from the beginning, hath chosen you to salvation.

Titus 1. 1 an apostle of Jesus Christ according to the faith of God's elect.

James 2. 5 hath not God chosen the poor of this world?

1 Peter 1. 2 elect according to the foreknowledge of God.

Rev. 17. 14 those that are with him are called and chosen.

Book of Mormon.

1 Nephi 1. 20 over all whom he has chosen because of their their faith.

2 Nephi 9. 18 shall inherit the kingdom of God prepared for them.

Alma 13. 10, 11 were called after his holy order on account of their faith.

Moroni 7. 31 by declaring the word of God unto chosen vessels. 48.

22 they that are without law are alive in Christ.

Doctrine & Covenants.

Sec. 10. 59-62 other sheep I have which are not of this fold.

46 little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world. 74. 7.

Pearl of Great Price.

Page 26. Abraham became a rightful heir.

See Article by B. Young and W. Richards, Mil. Star, Vol. 38, page 145.

History of J. Smith, Jan., 1, 1841.

Sermon by B. Young, J. of D., Vol. 10, page 1.

Article by J. Nicholson, Mil. Star, Vol. 27, Page 739.
