A dispensation "is power and authority to dispense the word of God, and to administer in all the ordinances thereof." What the dispensation of the fulness of times is, is well expressed by the apostle Paul in Eph. 1. 9, "Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself: that in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth, even in him."

It is still more comprehensively expressed by the prophet Joseph. "Now the thing to be known is, what the fulness of times means, or the extent and authority thereof. It means this, that the dispensation of the fulness of times is made up of all the dispensations that ever have been given since the world began, until this time. Unto Adam first was given a dispensation. It is well known that God spake to him with his own voice in the garden, and gave him the promise of the Messiah."

"And unto Noah also was a dispensation given; for Jesus said, 'As it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the coming of the Son of Man;' and as the righteous were saved then, and the wicked destroyed, so will it be now. And from Noah to Abraham, and from Abraham to Moses, and from Moses to Elias, and from Elias to John the Baptist, and from then to Jesus Christ, and from Jesus Christ to Peter, James, and John, the Apostles all having received in their dispensation by revelation from God, to accomplish the great scheme of restitution, spoken by all the holy Prophets since the world began; the end of which is, the dispensation of the fulness of times, in which all things shall be fulfilled that have been spoken of since the earth was made." Mil. Star, vol. 16, page 220. The apostle Paul further says on this subject, "For I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own conceits, that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in. And so all Israel shall be saved: as it is written, There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob;" Rom. 11. 25, 26.

These passages make it evident, in connection with other passages, that the dispensation of the fulness of times will commence when the fulness of the Gentiles shall come in, for then will a Deliverer come out of Zion who shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.

This dispensation of the fulness of times is a period in which all things will be restored to their proper order or condition.

The apostle Peter had a very comprehensive view of this subject when he severely reproved the Jews for killing the "Prince of Life," and said to them, "Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord."

This was evidently to take place when Israel should be gathered and the Gospel restored, in its fulness: "And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: whom the heavens must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began;" Acts 3. 19, 21. Peter gave them to understand that not until then could those who killed the "Prince of Life" expect to be restored to the privileges of the Gospel which was preached to them while in the flesh.

In this time of restitution everything in heaven and in earth will find its appropriate place and condition, and good and evil will find their fulness of reward.

The Book of Mormon is very plain on this subject: "The meaning of the word restoration, is to bring back again evil for evil, or carnal for carnal, or devilish for devilish; good for that which is good; righteous for that which is righteous; just for that which is just; merciful for that which is merciful. * * * Deal justly, judge righteously, and if ye do all these things, then shall ye receive your reward; yea, ye shall have mercy restored unto you again; ye shall have justice restored to you again; ye shall have a righteous judgment restored unto you again; and ye shall have good rewarded unto you again; for that which ye do send out shall return unto you again, and be restored; therefore, the word restoration more fully condemneth the sinner, and justifieth him not at all;" Alma 41. 13-15.

This principle of restitution has also been further revealed in this dispensation: "Unto the day when the Lord shall come to recompense unto every man according to his works, and measure to every man according to the measure which he has measured to his fellow man;" Doc. & Cov. 1. 10. The following passage warns us that the time is near when the evil and the good will each find their own place: "The hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion; and also the Lord shall have power over his Saints, and shall reign in their midst;" 35, 36.

All the intelligences, of whatever order, pertaining to this earth, will be redeemed from death through the resurrection, except the sons of perdition. The great burden of the ancient prophets was the restoration, in the latter times, of the house of Israel to the lands of their inheritance, and to the favor of God. On the other hand, those who have oppressed and persecuted them must suffer the full reward of their evil works.

This world, in its present condition, is one of antagonisms. When all things are restored to their proper place, these antagonisms will cease, and the good and the evil will be placed in positions where they will harmonize with their surroundings.

The term, "Dispensation of the fulness of times," refers to the latter days, when the fulness of the Gospel will be revealed, and the holy Priesthood be restored to the earth. Under its direction the work of restoration will commence and be fully consummated, through the great plan of redemption for man and the earth, which was decided in the councils of heaven before the foundations of the earth were laid.

Bible.

Isa. 11. 6, 7 animals shall dwell together in peace.

9 the earth shall be full of the knowledge of God.

16 then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness.

17, 18 and the work of righteousness shall be peace.

7 and the parched ground shall become a pool.

9 no lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast.

Mic. 4, 4 they shall sit, every man under his own fig tree.

Hab. 2. 14 the earth will be filled with a knowledge of the glory of the Lord.

Zech. 14. 4 and the Mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof.

Matt. 17. 11 Elias truly shall first come and restore all things.

Rom. 11. 25 until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in.

2 Peter 3. 11, 12 all these things shall be dissolved.

Rev. 6. 13, 14 the stars of heaven will fall, and the heavens be rolled together.

Book of Mormon.

2 Nephi 30. 17, 18, works of darkness to be made manifest; that which is sealed to be loosed; all things which have been revealed to be again revealed.

Hel. 14. 31 good restored to good and evil to evil.

Doctrine & Covenants.

Sec. 1. 22 that mine everlasting covenant might be established

38 all the word of the Lord to be fulfilled.

Sec. 2. Elijah, the prophet, to reveal the Priesthood.

Sec. 13. John the Baptist restored the Aaronic Priesthood.

3 caused this church to be built up as in days of old.

12 Peter, James and John ordained J. Smith, Jun., to hold the keys of the dispensation of the Gospel, for the last time.

Sec. 110. Moses, Elias and Elijah appeared in the Kirtland temple, and bestowed keys of former dispensations.

20 declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the dispensation of the fulness of times.

See Sermon by P. P. Pratt, J. of D. Vol. 3, page 127.

" " E. Snow, " " 16, " 200.

History of J. Smith, May 2, 1842.

Epistle by D. W. Patten, History of J. Smith, July, 1838.

Latter-day Kingdom, a pamphlet by O. Pratt.

Article, Mil. Star, Vol. 21, pages 17, 35.

O. Spencer's Letters to Rev. Wm. Crowel, Nos. 12, 13.

Voice of Warning, by P. P. Pratt, Chap. 5.

Pearl of Great Price, pages 21, 22.
