The name, Saint, "Signifies a holy or godly person, one that is so by profession, covenant, and conversation;" Cru. Con.

In the Old Testament it means one who worked righteousness, and one in whom the Lord delighted, for that reason. "But to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight;" Psalm 16. 3. "Gather my Saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice;" Psalm 50. 5.

While the meaning of the term Saints is not changed in the New Testament, it is used in the epistles of the apostles as a general name of the followers of Jesus Christ; "To the Saints which are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus;" Eph. 1. 1. They are those who have submitted themselves to Jesus Christ, and have become his subjects. "Just and true are thy ways, thou king of Saints;" Rev. 15. 3.

Jesus said, "I am come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not: if another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive;" John 5. 43. This saying of our Savior's is as applicable to the Christian world to-day, as it was to the people to whom he spake. The Latter-day Saints have come in the name of Jesus Christ, and preached the Gospel of repentance as he preached it, and do all things in his name, and, yet, the most of the world reject them.

Some Christian sects have derived their names from their founders, as Calvanists, Lutherans, Wesleyans. Others have some appellation growing out of a peculiarity of doctrine, or faith, as Baptists, Methodists and Presbyterians. Others again derive their name from historical events connected with their origin, and geographical location, as Roman Catholic Church, Greek Church, Church of England, etc. Not a church in all the world bearing the name of Jesus Christ, except that of the Latter-day Saints.

Sectarians may ask, are we not called Christians? But the name of our Savior was Jesus Christ, not Christian. The early Christians first received that name at the city of Antioch; Acts 11. 26.

We find that the apostles, in their epistles, addressed the members of the various churches, as Saints, "Beloved of God, called to be Saints;" Rom. 1. 7. "To the Saints and faithful brethren in Christ;" Col. 1. 2. We further find that the apostles do not speak of themselves as followers of men; but Paul calls himself, "An apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God;" Col. 1. 1. 1 Tim. 1. 1. "Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith of God's elect;" Titus 1. 1. Not according to the doctrines of Luther, Calvin or Wesley.

The most definite instructions on this subject are found in the Book of Mormon. When the Nephite disciples of Jesus were, at a certain time, united in mighty prayer and fasting, he came and stood in the midst of them, and asked them, "What will ye that I shall give unto you?" "And they said unto him, Lord, we will that thou wouldst tell us the name whereby we shall call this church; for there are disputations among the people concerning this matter.

"And the Lord said unto them, Verily, verily I say unto you, why is it that the people should murmur and dispute because of this thing? Have they not read the scriptures, which say ye must take upon you the name of Christ, which is my name? For by this name shall ye be called at the last day; and whoso taketh upon him my name, and endureth to the end, the same shall be saved at the last day; therefore whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in my name; therefore ye shall call the church in my name; and ye shall call upon the Father in my name, that he will bless the church for my sake; and how be it my church, save it be called in my name? For if a church be called in Moses' name, then it be Moses' church; or if it be called in the name of a man, then it be the church of a man; but if it be called in my name, then it is my church, if so be that they are built upon my Gospel;" 3 Nephi 27. 2-8.

In accordance with the spirit of the Old and New Testaments, and with these instructions of Jesus Christ, when the church was organized on Gospel principles, by Joseph Smith, Jun., in 1830, it was named, "The Church of Jesus Christ." The Lord afterwards revealed to his Prophet, Joseph Smith, that it should be called, "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints;" Doc. & Cov. 115. 3, 4.

Bible.

Psalm 16 3. but the Saints that are in the earth.

Book of Mormon.

Mos. 5. 7-12 the disciples of Christ exhorted to take upon them his name.
