The earliest account we have of Jerusalem is in the fourteenth chapter of Genesis, under the date of 1913 B. C.

When Abram was returning from the slaughter of the five kings, Melchisedek, king of Salem, brought him refreshments. He was a righteous prince and a priest of the Most High God; and he blessed Abram.

Josephus, the Jewish historian, states that this city of Salem was afterwards called Jerusalem; Ant. of the Jews, B. 1., Chapter 10. It has been the scene of many great events connected with the ministry of the holy Priesthood on the earth.

Abram was commanded to offer his son Isaac, on one of the mountains in the land of Moriah; Gen. 22. 2. Josephus says, that the mountain on which Abram built an altar, to offer his son Isaac, was the same on which king David (Solomon) afterwards built a temple.

The Jebusites retained possession of the city of Jerusalem until 1048 B. C., when it was subdued by David. He first took the stronghold of Zion; "The same is the city of David." At that time, this was only a strong outwork or fortification for the defence of the city; 2 Sam. 5. 6-9.

In the days of Solomon, Jerusalem became a great and strong city, with a magnificent temple towering on Mount Moriah.

From its conquest by David, until the death of Solomon, it was the capital city of Israel, and afterwards of the kingdom of Judah. B. C. 585, Jerusalem was burned by the army of Nebuchadnezzar, and the better part of the inhabitants of the land were carried captive to Babylon; 3 Kings, chapters 24 and 25.

The city was re-established at the end of the seventy years' captivity. It afterwards played an important part in the history of that part of Asia.

Almost under the shadow of its walls, our Savior was born. It was the central place of the scenes of his earthly mission. In it he was scourged and condemned to death. Just outside of its walls, and in sight of its towers, and the glorious temple built to his name, the God of Israel died the death of a malefactor.

It was here, and near here, that he consummated his earthly mission, and ascended to his Father.

In A. C. 70, the land of Judea, and city of Jerusalem, were made a desolation by the Roman armies, and the Jews, as a nation, entirely rooted out of their heritage, and scattered among all nations.

For information on this subject, the student should read, carefully, Josephus' "Wars of the Jews."

Up to this time, in her history, many prophecies were fulfilled. In her future many more are to be fulfilled, for she is yet to take an important part in the great work of the latter days. Like the New Jerusalem of the American continent, this city will descend out of heaven, after the final change of the earth to its celestial condition; Rev. 21. 10-27.

It is often called Zion in the Old Testament, and will be the capital city of gathered Israel on the Eastern hemisphere, in the latter days.

There are many passages in the Scriptures relating to this important city. A few are appended to assist the student in further researches concerning it.

Bible.

Deut. 31. 29 evil will befall you in the latter days, because ye will do evil.

1 Kings 11. 11-13 Lord declared he would rend the kingdom from Solomon.

2 Kings 20. 17, 18 treasures laid up by the fathers, to be carried to Babylon.

2 Chron. 36. 21 the land shall enjoy her Sabbaths seventy years. Jer. 29. 10.

Isa. 4. this chapter evidently refers to the latter days, and to the Zion of the Western Hemisphere, and to the city of Jerusalem, on the Eastern.

Jer. 25. 11 these nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years.

18 to make Jerusalem and her kings a desolation, and a curse.

Ezek. 38 and 39. these chapters are a prophecy of the gathering of the nations against Jerusalem in the latter days.

Zeph. 1. this chapter is, evidently, a prophecy of the desolation of Jerusalem.

Haggai 2. 9 the glory of this latter house, shall be greater than that of the former.

Zech. 12. the restoration of Judah.

Chap. 14. in the latter days the Lord will deliver Jerusalem from the nations that will go up to battle against it.

Matt. 24. Destruction of Jerusalem foretold. P. of G. P., page 38.

Luke 19. 41-44 Christ foretells the destruction of Jerusalem. Chap. 23. 28-30.

See Article, by C. W. Penrose, Mil. Star, Vol. 30, page 353.

"New Jerusalem," a pamphlet by O. Pratt.
