The Jaredite prophet, Ether, predicted, 600 B. C., that a city which should be called a holy city, should be built on the land of North America, and that it should be built up unto the remnant of the seed of Joseph. He further informs us, that it should be called the New Jerusalem, to distinguish it from Jerusalem which should be built on the eastern hemisphere; Ether 13. 3-8.

Ether also saw that this New Jerusalem was the one that John the Revelator saw, in vision, coming down out of heaven. "Until the end come, when the earth shall pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth; and they shall be like unto the old, save the old have passed away, and all things have become new. And then cometh the New Jerusalem;" verses 8-10. Rev. 21. 2.

Our Savior, in his personal ministration among the Nephites, six hundred years after the predictions of Ether, renews the promise that a New Jerusalem should be built upon this land.

Speaking to the Nephites, he says: "This people will I establish in this land, unto the fulfilling of the covenant which I made with your father Jacob; and it shall be a New Jerusalem;" 3 Nephi 20. 22.

The Savior again says, speaking to the Gentiles, that those who shall come into the covenant, shall "be numbered among this the remnant of Jacob." "And they shall assist my people, the remnant of Jacob, and also, as many of the house of Israel as shall come, that they may build a city, which shall be called the New Jerusalem; and then shall they assist my people that they may be gathered in, who are scattered upon all the face of the land in unto the New Jerusalem;" 21. 22-24.

We learn from the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, that this New Jerusalem is to be the city of Zion, of the latter days. "And it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the Saints of the most High God; And the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be called Zion;" Doc. & Cov. 45. 66, 67.

This is, also, the Zion spoken of by the ancient Jewish prophets, as separate and distinct from the Zion, or Mount Zion, that was in Jerusalem, in the land of Palestine.

In the following passages, evidently, two distinct places are intended. "Zion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation;" Isa. 64. 10. "For the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem;" Micah 4. 2.

There are three Zions spoken of in the sacred writings—the Zion on the American continent, the Zion at Jerusalem, and the Zion of Enoch. For some account of the Zion of Enoch, see Pearl of Great Price, pages 18-22. On the 22d page we learn, that, when Christ shall come, the Zion of the western hemisphere and the Zion of Enoch shall be united in one. There the Lord will reside, and it will be the gathered Zion "which shall come forth out of all the creations which I have made."

Bible.

Psalm 14. 7 oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion!

Isa. 1. 27 Zion shall be redeemed with judgment.

Jer. 3. 14 will take you one of a city and two of a family, and bring you to Zion.

Joel 2. 32 for in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, shall be deliverance.

Obad. 21. Saviors shall come up on Mount Zion.

Zeph. 3. 14 sing, O daughter of Zion, rejoice, O daughter of Jerusalem.

16 said to Jerusalem, fear not; and to Zion, let not thine hands be slack.

Zech. 1. 17 the Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and choose Jerusalem.

Rom. 11. 26 there shall come out of Zion the Deliverer.

Rev. 14. 1 a Lamb stood on Mount Zion.

Doctrine & Covenants.

Sec. 28. 9 no man knoweth where the city shall be built.

29-31 land of Zion to be obtained by purchase, or by blood. 36.

29 the inhabitants of Zion shall keep the Sabbath day holy. 30-32.

21 this is Zion, the pure in heart. 25.

70-75 land around the land of Zion to be bought with money. 103. 22-24.

29-35 concerning the redemption of Zion, by gathering together the strength of Israel.

31 Saints to be tried, that they may receive the glory of Zion.
