In the churches established by our Savior and his apostles, the Holy Ghost manifested itself in the development of a variety of gifts. Of so great importance did the apostle Paul consider these gifts, to the well being and edification of the Saints in Rome, that he wrote, "For I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end ye may be established;" Rom. 1. 11.

The inspired writings do not indicate that these gifts were limited to any period of time, or to any one dispensation, but they are spoken of by the apostles, as ever characterizing the operations of the Holy Spirit.

In the twelfth chapter of the apostle Paul's first epistle to the Corinthians, we are assured that "there are diversities of gifts by the same spirit;" verse 4. "But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal;" verse 7. From this we learn that the presence of the Spirit in a man is manifested by some gift. It is evident from the general tenor of this chapter, that these gifts will always be manifest in the church of Christ, for its members will ever have the Holy Ghost abiding in them, and, where that is, the gifts of the Spirit will be manifest.

The Book of Mormon speaks very plainly of the necessity of these gifts in the church. "Again I speak unto you, who deny the revelations of God, and say that they are done away, that there are no revelations, nor prophecies, nor gifts, nor healing, nor speaking with tongues, and the interpretation of tongues. Behold I say unto you, he that denieth these things, knoweth not the Gospel of Christ; yea, he has not read the scriptures; if so, he does not understand them;" Mormon 9. 7, 8.

In a revelation to Joseph, the prophet, given March 8, 1831, the Lord gives much instruction concerning spiritual gifts; "For all have not every gift given unto them; for there are many gifts, and to every man is given a gift by the Spirit of God;" Doc. & Cov. 46. 11. The Lord also adds, "That unto some it may be given to have all these gifts, that there may be a head;" verse 29.

Bible.

1 Cor. 1. 7 so that ye may come behind in no gift.

9 to another faith, to another the gift of healing by the same Spirit.

10 to another the working of miracles, to another prophecy.

11 but all worketh that one and the self-same Spirit.

31 covet earnestly the best gifts.

12 forasmuch as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts.

1 Peter 4. 10 as every man hath received the gift, so minister.

Book of Mormon.

Omni 1. 25 believe in the gift of speaking with tongues, and interpreting tongues.

Alma 9. 21 having the spirit of prophecy and revelation.

3 Nephi 29. 6 shall say the Lord no longer worketh by prophecy, nor gifts.

Moroni 10. 9-19 an enumeration of spiritual gifts.

Doctrine & Covenants.

Sec. 46. 10-26 an enumeration of spiritual gifts.

27 it is given to those ordained to watch over the church to discern all these gifts. 29.

See A Pamphlet by O. Pratt.
