"There are two personages who constitute the great, matchless, governing, and supreme, power over all things, by whom all things were created and made, that are created and made, whether visible or invisible, whether in heaven, on earth, or in the earth, under the earth, or throughout the immensity of space.

"They are the Father and the Son—the Father being a personage of spirit, glory, and power, possessing all perfection and fulness, the Son, who was in the bosom of the Father, a personage of tabernacle, made or fashioned like unto man, or being in the form and likeness of man, or rather man was formed after his likeness and in his image; he is also the express image and likeness of the personage of the Father, possessing all the fulness of the Father, or the same fulness with the Father; being begotten of him, and ordained from before the foundation of the world to be a propitiation for the sins of all those who should believe on his name, and is called the Son because of the flesh, and descended in suffering below that which man can suffer; or, in other words, suffered greater sufferings, and was exposed to more powerful contradictions than any man can be.

"But, notwithstanding all this, he kept the law of God, and remained without sin, showing thereby that it is in the power of man to keep the law and remain also without sin; and also, that by him a righteous judgment might come upon all flesh, and that all who walk not in the law of God may justly be condemned by the law, and have no excuse for their sins.

"And he being the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth, and having overcome, received a fulness of the glory of the Father, possessing the same mind with the Father, which mind is the Holy Spirit, that bears record of the Father and the Son, and these three are one; or, in other words, these three constitute the great, matchless, governing and supreme, power over all things; by whom all things were created and made that were created and made, and these three constitute the Godhead, and are one; the Father and Son possessing the same mind, the same wisdom, glory, power, and fulness—filling all in all; the Son being filled with the fulness of the mind, glory, and power; or, in other words, the Spirit, glory and power, of the Father, possessing all knowledge and glory, and the same kingdom, sitting at the right hand of power, in the express image and likeness of the Father, mediator for man, being filled with the fulness of the mind of the Father; or, in other words, the Spirit of the Father, which Spirit is shed forth upon all who believe on his name and keep his commandments; and all those who keep his commandments shall grow up from grace to grace, and become heirs of the heavenly kingdom, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ; possessing the same mind, being transformed into the same image or likeness, even the express image of him who fills all in all; being filled with the fulness of his glory, and become one in him, even as the Father, Son and Holy Spirit are one.

"From the foregoing account of the Godhead, which is given in his revelations, the saints have a sure foundation laid for the exercise of faith unto life and salvation, through the atonement and mediation of Jesus Christ; by whose blood they have a forgiveness of sins, and also a sure reward laid up for them in heaven, even that of partaking of the fulness of the Father and the Son through the Spirit. As the Son partakes of the fulness of the Father through the Spirit, so the saints are, by the same Spirit, to be partakers of the same fulness, to enjoy the same glory; for as the Father and the Son are one, so, in like manner, the saints are to be one in them. Through the love of the Father, the mediation of Jesus Christ, and the gift of the Holy Spirit, they are to be heirs of God, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ;" Doc. & Cov., Fifth Lecture on Faith.

"And now Abinadi said unto them, I would that ye should understand that God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people; and because he dwelleth in flesh, he shall be called the Son of God: and having subjected the flesh to the will of the Father, being the Father and the Son; the Father, because he was conceived by the power of God; and the Son, because of the flesh; thus becoming the Father and Son; and they are one God, yea, the very eternal Father of heaven and earth;" Mos. 15. 1-4.

"And shall be brought and be arraigned before the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy Spirit, which is one eternal God, to be judged according to their works;" Alma 11. 44.

"Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. I was with the Father from the beginning. I am in the Father, and the Father in me; and in me hath the Father glorified his name;" 3 Nephi 9. 15.

"And after this manner shall ye baptize in my name, for behold, verily I say unto you, that the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one; and I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and the Father and I are one;" 3 Nephi 11. 27.

"I bear record of the Father, and the Father beareth record of me, and the Holy Ghost beareth record of the Father and me. * * And whoso believeth in me, and is baptized, the same shall be saved; and they are they who shall inherit the kingdom of God.

"And whoso believeth not in me, and is not baptized, shall be damned. Verily, verily, I say unto you, that this is my doctrine, and I bear record of it from the Father; and whoso believeth in me, believeth in the Father also, and unto him will the Father bear record of me; for he will visit him with fire, and with the Holy Ghost.

"And thus will the Father bear record of me, and the Holy Ghost will bear record unto him of the Father and me; for the Father, and I, and the Holy Ghost are one;" verses 32-36.

"God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted Man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens! That is the great secret. If the vail was rent to-day, and the Great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by his power, was to make himself visible,—I say, if you were to see him to-day, you would see him like a man in form—like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a man; for Adam was created in the very fashion, image, and likeness of God, and received instruction from, and walked, talked, and conversed with him, as one man talks and communes with another;" His. J. Smith, April 7, 1844.

Bible.

Matt. 11. 25 I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth 26, 27.

Luke 10. 22 no man knoweth who the Son is but the Father, and who the Father is but the Son.

John 1. 14 the glory as of the Only Begotten of the Father. 18.

22 the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son. 23.

26 as the Father hath life in himself, so hath he given to the Son.

27 hath given authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of Man. 30.

45 think not that I will accuse you unto the Father.

37 all that the Father giveth me shall come to me. 44-46.

9 he that hath seen me hath seen the Father. 11, 13, 16.

26 but the Comforter whom the Father will send.

3 eternal life is to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. 5, 11, 24, 25.

10 all mine are thine, and thine are mine.

21 that they may be one, as thou, Father, art in me and I in thee.

22 the glory which thou gavest me I have given them, that they may be one, even as we are one.

23 I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one.

24 Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am.

Acts 2. 33 received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost.

Rom. 1. 20 being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead.

1 Cor. 2. 4 in demonstration of the Spirit and of power.

Gal. 4. 4 when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman.

Eph. 3. 11 to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus.

Col. 1. 19 for it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell.

Heb. 1. 8 to the Son he saith, thy throne, O God, is forever.

2 Peter 1. 17 for he received from God the Father, honor and glory.

1 John 2. 1 we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. 23, 24.

Rev. 1. 18 he that liveth and was dead, and am alive forever more.

Book of Mormon.

1 Nephi 10. 18 for he is the same yesterday, to-day and forever.

19 wherefore the course of God is one eternal round.

32 the Son of the everlasting God was judged of the world.

2 Nephi 2. 4 for the Spirit is the same yesterday, to-day and for ever.

Mos. 3. 5 is from all eternity to all eternity.

Alma 7. 16 he shall have eternal life, according to the testimony of the Holy Spirit.

44 Christ, the Father and the Holy Spirit, one eternal God.

3 Nephi 9. 18 Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end.

Mormon 6. 22 the Father, yea, the eternal Father of heaven and earth.

Moroni 7. 22 God knowing all things, being from everlasting to everlasting. 28.

Doctrine & Covenants.

Sec. 14. 9 Jesus Christ created the heavens and the earth.

41 the Lord God cast Adam out of the Garden of Eden.

41 all things are by him and of him, even God for ever and ever.

24 this is eternal life, to know the only wise and true God.

See Sermon by B. Young, J. of D., Vol. 1, page 46.

" " B. Young, " " 4, " 215.

Article Mil. Star, Vol. 15, page 301.
