The Book of Mormon is the name of a record which was engraved upon plates of gold, about 400 years after the crucifixion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by a celebrated prophet named Mormon. These plates were deposited by his son, Moroni, in a stone box, in a hill in the western part of the State of New York, called by the Nephites, Cumorah. The language in which this record was made was said by Mormon to be Reformed Egyptian. On the 22d of September, 1823, Moroni discovered the stone box which contained these plates, the Urim and Thummim, a sword and breastplate, to the young Prophet, Joseph Smith, Jr., and he, by the aid of the Urim and Thummim, translated the record from the plates into the English language. This is the most ancient, the most accurate and reliable history of America, its ancient inhabitants and its antiquities, that is now extant; and has since been translated from the English into the French, German, Italian, Danish, Swedish, Welsh, Kanaka, Hindostanee, Dutch and Spanish. It has also been printed and published in all those languages except Spanish, Hindostanee and Dutch, and will soon be published in the Spanish also.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A COMPENDIUM OF THE DOCTRINES OF THE GOSPEL ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE
