WOMAN'S VOICE IN THE PRESS OF UTAH—THE WOMAN'S EXPONENT—MRS. EMELINE WELLS—SHE SPEAKS FOR THE WOMEN OF UTAH—LITERARY AND PROFESSIONAL WOMEN OF THE CHURCH.

And the women of Zion have a press. More than up to their Gentile sisters are they in this respect. Few of the church organizations of Christendom can boast a woman's journal. There are but few of them in all the world, and they are mostly edited and supported by the heterodox rather than the orthodox element.

The Woman's Exponent is one of those few. It is published by the women of the Mormon Church, having a company organization, of which Eliza R. Snow is president. Mrs. Emeline B. Wells is the practical editor. It was established June 1st, 1872.

The Woman's Exponent, in a general sense, may be considered heterodox, seeing that it is an advocate of woman's rights on the marriage question and female suffrage, but it is also apostolic, and devoted to the Mormon mission. It represents the opinions and sentiments of the Mormon women. All of their organizations are fairly represented in its columns, and it is thus a means of intercommunication between branches, bringing the remotest into close connection with the more central ones, and keeping all advised of the various society movements. Its editorial department is fully up to the standard of American journalism.

Mrs. Wells, the editor, like many prominent Mormon women previously mentioned, is of Puritan descent, being a native of New England, and of pure English extraction. Her family name was Woodward, and she was born in Petersham, Mass., February 29, 1828. At an early age she began to manifest a penchant for literature, and while in her teens produced many literary fragments that, as if by manifest destiny, pointed in the direction of her present profession. In 1842 she was baptized into the Mormon Church. It is needless to say that this was a cause of mortification to her many associates and friends, and especially so to a select few, whose appreciative kindness had pictured a glowing future for the young litterateur. Her mother, who was also a convert to the Mormon faith, fearing that the persuasions of friends might lead her into error, sent her to Nauvoo, in the spring of 1844, that she might be away from their influence. The people to whom her mother confided her, apostatized shortly after her arrival, but Emeline remained steadfast. Some time thereafter she became a plural wife. In the exodus, her mother, who had joined her the year before, succumbed under the accumulation of hardships that the saints had then to undergo, and, dying, joined the immortal company of martyrs who fell in those days of trial.

At winter quarters she was engaged in teaching, until her journey to the valley in 1848. Here, since the organization of relief societies, and more especially since the women of Utah obtained the right of suffrage, she has employed a large portion of her time in public labors, for the benefit and elevation of woman. In addition to her present editorial duties, she fills the responsible position of president of the organization that, since November, 1876, has been engaged in storing up grain against a day of famine. Under the energetic management of this organization, vast quantities of grain have been stored in the various wards and settlements of Utah.

Sister Emeline is also a poetess of no little merit. As a set-off to the popular idea that the Mormon women in polygamy have no sentiment towards their husbands, the following exquisite production, from her pen, entitled "The Wife to her Husband," is offered:

It seems to me that should I die, And this poor body cold and lifeless lie, And thou shouldst touch my lips with thy warm breath, The life-blood quicken'd in each sep'rate vein, Would wildly, madly rushing back again, Bring the glad spirit from the isle of death.

It seems to me that were I dead, And thou in sympathy shouldst o'er me shed Some tears of sorrow, or of sad regret, That every pearly drop that fell in grief, Would bud, or blossom, bursting into leaf, To prove immortal love could not forget.

I do believe that round my grave, When the cool, fragrant, evening zephyrs wave, Shouldst thou in friendship linger near the spot, And breathe some tender words in memory, That this poor heart in grateful constancy, Would softly whisper back some loving thought.

I do believe that should I pass Into the unknown land of happiness, And thou shouldst wish to see my face once more, That in my earnest longing after thee, I would come forth in joyful ecstacy, And once again gaze on thee as before.

I do believe my faith in thee, Stronger than life, an anchor firm to be, Planted in thy integrity and worth, A perfect trust, implicit and secure; That will all trials and all griefs endure, And bless and comfort me while here on earth.

I do believe who love hath known, Or sublime friendship's purest, highest tone, Hath tasted of the cup of ripest bliss, And drank the choicest wine life hath to give, Hath known the truest joy it is to live; What blessings rich or great compared to this?

I do believe true love to be, An element that in its tendency, Is elevating to the human mind; An intuition which we recognize As foretaste of immortal Paradise, Through which the soul will be refined.

Among the more prominent contributors to the Exponent is Lu. Dalton, a lady in whose writings are manifested the true spirit and independence of the Mormon women. The vigor and vivacity of her poetic productions are suggestive of a future enviable fame.

Mrs. Hannah T. King, mentioned elsewhere, is a veteran poetess of well-sustained reputation. She ranked among the poetesses of England before joining the Mormon Church, being on intimate terms with the celebrated Eliza Cook.

Another of the sisters who has won distinction as a poetess of the church, is Emily Woodmansee. She is also a native of England, and began her poetic career when but a girl. Several of her poems have been reproduced in literary journals of the East, winning marked attention.

Miss Sarah Russell, who writes under the nom de plume of "Hope," is also a poetess of promise; but she is younger to fame than the before-mentioned.

Emily B. Spencer may also be mentioned in this connection.

Miss Mary E. Cook is an apostle of education, in the church. She is a professional graduate, and has held prominent positions in first-class schools of St. Louis and Chicago. Coming to Utah several years ago, Miss Cook, being a passionate student of ancient history, was attracted by a cursory glance at the Book of Mormon. On a careful perusal of it she was struck with the account therein given of the ancient inhabitants of this continent; and especially was she impressed with the harmony existing between that account and the works of Bancroft and others concerning the ancient races of America. She unhesitatingly pronounced the book genuine. Miss Cook has been instrumental in establishing the system of graded schools in Utah. Her success has been marked, in this capacity, and she is also a rising leader among the women of the church. With her should also be mentioned her sister, Miss Ida Cook, who is now one of the most prominent teachers of the territory. Nor should we omit to mention Orpha Everett, who is another prominent teacher.

The ladies are also represented in the historian's office of the church, in the person of a daughter of Apostle Orson Pratt, and Miss Joan M. Campbell. Miss Campbell has been an attache of the historian's office since a mere child. She is a clerk of the Territorial Legislature, and a Notary Public.

Mrs. Romania B. Pratt, wife of Parley P. Pratt, Jr., is a medical professor. She is a graduate of the Woman's Medical College, Philadelphia, and is now connected, as a practitioner, with the celebrated water-cure establishment at Elmira, N. Y.

Sister Elise Shipp is another Mormon lady now under training for the medical profession in the Woman's Medical College, Pennsylvania.

Thus it will be seen that, in the educational and professional spheres, the Mormon women are making a creditable showing.
