There is that in youth, untarnished by the world's experience, that invites the whisperings of diviner things.

"Very fine! Very fine!" exclaimed Professor Strausbey as the last note of the girl's violin died away in its tender pianissimo.

Little Venna drew a long breath of satisfaction, shook her curls as if freeing herself from some unseen power and looked up smiling.

"I almost lost my breath," she said, smiling. "Do you know, Professor, when I play that wonderful music, I can scarcely breathe, and it feels as though some one was holding my hand for me and making my bow move!"

The Professor laughed his answer. "Genius gripping your hand, my dear!" Then seriously, "Don't you think you could do just one more hour's practice a day? You know I'm expecting very big things of you at April's concert. Only one month more!"

"Oh, yes, indeed I can! And I'll surprise even you at that concert! I'll have everyone bowing low to my genius!" she added, her brown eyes fairly dancing with the eagerness of ambition.

"Maybe! You won't, if you slide over your lessons as shamefully as this one," he returned in a suddenly changed tone. "That last was the only good one today."

To himself he was reiterating "Genius! Genius!" but he seldom praised without regretting the fact and immediately serving the antidote to his overconfident pupil. He was quite sure flattery was poison.

To herself, Venna's fourteen wise years were as constant testimony that she knew all things, lived all things, and would finally conquer all things.

One of her relatives who criticized her self-confidence, wrote in her album,

"When ambitious youth, secure and proud, Ascends the ladder, leaning on a cloud! O then, Venna, beware!"

Venna immediately wrote under it,

"Better to ascend and have a fall Than to sit down and never climb at all. If I fall, I'll climb still higher. But wait until the cloud is drier!"

There was no doubt about Venna's brilliancy—the family and all her friends agreed upon that. But her self-confidence—it was almost appalling. She was so bewitchingly lovable that no one called it conceit, but—well, we will not analyze her character too closely at this early period. She was a bundle of possibilities, presumably exceptional.

Venna took the Professor's rebuke with pretended sobriety.

"Of course, I'll try to do better. You know I hate monotony and dislike practicing the same thing over and over again. I'd much rather play just what I feel like." Then suddenly beaming with assurance, she smilingly declared, "I'm sure I'd do wonders if you would let me show you how I wish to be taught. Just let me take up theme after theme, just as I wish to, and develop naturally. I should follow nature! 'Consider the lily, how it grows'"—

"Enough, young lady!" interrupted her Professor with dutiful sternness. "You'll do as I wish, if I'm to teach you. Of course, you are too young (here Venna's curls gave a pronounced shake) to appreciate anything scientific yet, but nevertheless you must accept what I tell you. Music is science as well as poetry, and the science of it, I am here to teach."

"Oh, yes, I suppose I must imbibe it all," the girl answered dubiously. "But science! How I hate the word. It reminds me of all kinds of animals and creeping things being cut up on our laboratory table at school—just before lunch hour at that. Professor! Just think of it! But poetry! O how I love it! But let me play one more etude to please you. Which one shall I dissect? They all belong to the same species of black beetle crawling up and down the eternal scale!"

"Venna, shame on you!" came with a soft drawl, the tone of which seemed to say, "Venna, I'm charmed with you!"

The girl turned to see her aunt's round, mild face peering through the portieres.

"O auntie, have you been in the recess all the time? Why didn't you tell me and I would have said just the right thing!"

Here Professor Strausbey struck a vehement introductory chord which Venna understood to mean the finale of patience.

Taking her violin, she began her etude with slow, deliberate carefulness.

The lesson over, Venna helped her Professor into his coat, re-assuring him at the same time, "My next lesson will be perfect."

"I've heard that before," he laconically returned, taking his hat and half smiling into the bright upturned face with its large brown eyes and inquisitive, tilted nose. Bright brown curls artistically framed this picture of life, temperament and joyousness. So he thought, but he said tersely, "Plan less and do more!"

As the door closed upon him, Venna pulled aside the portieres.

"Auntie, isn't he the dear old bear?"

"He's right, dear," returned her aunt, pausing in her knitting. "You are too 'bubbly.' You must learn to concentrate more. But I suppose you are young"—

"Young! Oh, how I dislike that word! I get it every turn I make. Young! Just because I'm not tall like other girls! Indeed, I'm not too young for anything, auntie. Do you realize I'm four-tee-e-n?"

"Just think of it!" her aunt replied, laughing, as she drew Venna down beside her and stroked the rebellious curls. "Fourteen! Do you know what Longfellow says? 'Standing with reluctant feet, where the brook and river meet.'"

"But my feet are not reluctant," Venna replied gaily. "I can hardly keep them from running down the bank and jumping in. I long to set sail, auntie!"

"So did your mother, dearie," came the answer, suddenly serious. "Sail carefully, Venna, there are many hidden rocks."

Venna's bright face sobered and her energetic little figure relaxed as she kneeled down beside her aunt.

"Poor, dear mother! How I wish I could have known her and kissed away all her tears!"

For a moment, both were silent, thinking of the mother who died leaving a tiny baby to its lonely father and a faithful aunt. Venna had often heard the story.

The mother had loved a man unworthy of her affections. Her parents had begged the impulsive girl not to marry him. But she coaxed her own way, and after years of unhappiness, she was left a widow, broken in health and spirit. It was at this period of her mother's life, that Venna's father found, loved, and married her. For one year she knew the great love of a good man, and blossomed back into youth and joyousness, only to leave the world at the birth of her first child, Venna.

"Auntie, don't you think mother sometimes sees us here and knows how happy we are?"

As she asked the question, her eyes searched eagerly those of her aunt.

"That we don't know, dearie. Maybe. Some churches teach that our departed loved ones are in Paradise. Others say they sleep in their graves until the great resurrection day."

Venna gave a slight shiver. "I couldn't believe that. It sounds so awful to me."

"Why awful?" asked her aunt mildly. "If God has made it so, it must be all right."

"But, auntie, God loves us, and wouldn't let us stay in a cold, worm-eaten grave!" Again she shivered.

"If you didn't know it, what matter?" returned her aunt with a satisfied vagueness. "I wish you wouldn't take all those mysteries so to heart. Venna. It doesn't matter really, dear; you can believe the other way, if you wish."

"Can believe? How can I when no one tells me surely. Yes, I think I can," she added musingly. "It's like when I play my violin. There's some power I don't see brings music right into my soul. I feel it, but I can't explain. That same power makes me feel mother isn't in the grave. No, I'm sure she is often with us and knows how happy we are," she ended with confidence.

"Well, dearie, it's a good, happy thought and so keep it. You think so much about religion, Venna; don't you think you are old enough to join the Church?"

"Mercy, No!" was the laughing answer. "I wouldn't really know what to join. All my beloved aunties belong to different churches, and while I love you best, dear, how could I decide which was right. Besides, if I can be as good as Daddy, I'll be satisfied. He wouldn't join any one of them, and who can surpass him?"

"Your father is a great exception. However, he is a good Christian man, Venna; that is the secret of his life."

"Of course it is," replied the girl confidently. "And I want to be a Christian, too—just like him and like you, too, auntie," she added tactfully.

That night Venna was not home to dinner, so John Hastings and his sister sat alone in the cosy dining-room.

John Hastings was a rich man, and his home was one of the best on Fifth Avenue, New York. However, both he and his sister loved simplicity, and their city house as well as their country villa had no excess luxury, and spelled "Home" in every detail.

As they sat at this evening meal, the bright burning logs of the open fire-place lit up his strong, handsome features.

He smiled into the gentle, blue eyes of his sister.

"John," she said thoughtfully, "our little girl will be fourteen soon."

"Is it possible, Emily? My baby fourteen! Well, we must invite every mother's boy and girl we know and give her a dandy party!"

"Yes, of course, we'll do that. She's planning it already. But that's not what I'm thinking about."

"No? What then?" His keen, gray eyes looked surprised.

"It's just this, John. I've been thinking a great deal today about Venna's joining the Church. You know she's going to be a decided belle—her beauty, talent"—

"Naturally!" he interrupted gaily. "Why not, Emily?"

"Now don't you think she ought to enter life with some religious thought? Ought she not to join the Church, John?"

"Is she getting tired of her Sunday-school?" he asked, suddenly serious.

"Yes, I think she is. She says she's getting too big for it."

"Then why doesn't she teach? That would keep her in touch," he said with practical emphasis.

"That is just what I asked her and she replied, 'Dear me, auntie! If I had some youngsters under my wing, I'd teach them all the things I'd like to believe. Dr. Hansom would soon put me out!'"

John Hastings gave a delighted laugh.

"She could teach the Church all right, Emily!"

His sister crimsoned without answering.

"There, Emily! I know you love the Church and it's right and womanly you should. I didn't mean to hurt you. Yes, let Venna join. Of course she should. It will give her something to think of besides the frivolities. Every woman should have a ballast in her life. I'll tell her I certainly wish her to join the Church, Emily!"

"But she won't, John."

"Won't? Why not?"

"Because you're her ideal and you don't join. You are her stumbling block," she added more courageously.

Her brother looked thoughtfully into the fire.

"I am her ideal? Some joke! I'm no better than the next one!"

"In her eyes, you are, dear. I don't like to criticize you, John, but you have managed Dr. Hansom's business affairs of the Church for years, sat every Sunday in your pew, and yet haven't joined the Church. Don't you think it's about time you did?"

"No and yes, Emily! I think I prefer staying out of it. I'm paid for my services. That's simply business. I've often told you the Church to me is a fine religious organization—nothing more. I help it along, don't I? I'm no more a Congregationalist than I am Methodist, Presbyterian or any other Church follower."

"Yes, John, but Dr. Hansom is so broad. You can believe almost anything and yet be admitted to his Church."

Her brother laughed.

"Now you've hit it just right. And the churches that are not so broad are so narrow that you get completely cramped inside their portals!"

"But, John, if it would influence Venna to join, wouldn't you sacrifice your preference?"

"Well, I guess that is one point worth considering. Our girl should have some religious influence, that is sure. We won't always be with her. And to join the Church practically means no difference to me. Just add my name to the many other Dr. Hansom worshippers!"

Emily's mild face lit up with gentle enthusiasm.

"Then I can tell Venna you've decided to join?"

"Why, yes, if you wish it."

Emily met his half-amused, tolerant gaze, with affectionate adoration.

"John," she said, simply, "you always do the best thing when it's necessary."

So Venna and her father joined Dr. Hansom's Congregational Church. John Hastings' act was for his daughter's sake, and Venna's easy compliance resulted from her adoration of "Daddy."

—

Four years passed over the Hastings home. Scientists tell us our characters either progress or retrograde. If this be so, the progressing and retrograding must have struck an equilibrium in the last four years of John Hastings' life and that of his sister. He was the same cool, practical man of affairs, without a single gray hair added above his high intellectual brow. Emily was the same mild, adoring sister and aunt. Perhaps both had acquired a still deeper pride and affection for Venna,—if that could be called a change.

And Venna? Watch her enter the library where her father sat, book in hand in his customary arm-chair by the fire place.

She was a few inches taller and somewhat slimmer and more graceful. Curls still rebelliously clustered around the same bright but more thoughtful countenance. Her general bearing was more pronounced in its dignified calling of supporting the accumulated knowledge of the last four years.

"Daddy, it's wonderful!" she exclaimed, as she approached and slid down upon the cushion beside him. "We have made so many plans today, I can scarcely realize what a wonderful Daddy and Auntie you are!" she continued, taking her father's hand and cuddling it affectionately against her cheek.

With his free hand, Hastings stroked her curls.

"So my petty thinks her debut affair will be a success?"

"Oh, wonderful! Auntie is planning every detail, regardless of expense. Flowers, music, supper—all to be perfect! Everyone I like in the whole wide world is coming. Just think of it!"

"Just as I wish it to be, dearie. Strange how a little bundle like you can be one big man's whole ambition!"

Venna met his gaze lovingly.

"O Daddy! Why is it? I really don't deserve it all."

"Yes, Venna, you deserve all I can give you. Do you know you are so like your mother now, that when I make you happy it seems as though I am doing it for her also."

"Daddy, you are." Her countenance became pensively thoughtful as she searched her father's face earnestly.

"What fancy now?" he asked tenderly, used to her sudden change of mood.

"No fancy, Daddy, real truth. Do you know mother is with me very often? Maybe that is why I grow so like her?"

"You've said that before, Venna. Just what have you in mind?"

Venna contemplated the fantastic logs as she tried to answer.

"I don't see mother, Daddy, but I feel her presence—Oh! so surely! My thoughts are as illusive as those flames. First here, then there. I can't seem to get any clear understanding of it, yet I know it is true. Don't you believe that she could be near us? Dr. Hansom says there may be guardian angels for all of us."

"Do you think, girlie, it's wise to think too much about the may-bes? Your imagination is very strong, Venna. I really wish you were more practical, not so much of a dreamer, dear."

"Then you wouldn't have such a wonderful musician in your family," she returned, smiling.

"Very true. I guess I don't want you changed after all. You're just like your mother and I've never found her equal elsewhere."

Venna pressed her father's hand in sympathy, and there were a few moments of thoughtful silence.

Hastings noticed a wistful sadness come to the brown eyes—a look which always bothered him.

"Why so pensive?" he asked gently.

Venna gave a little sigh.

"Lately, I've been thinking quite a lot about the 'may-bes' in religion. I've been talking to Dr. Hansom a great deal and he's so full of 'may-bes.' So are you. Daddy dear."

"So is the whole Christian world, honey. You know the Bible tells us that we see through a darkened glass. But 'enough to know is given'" he added with practical satisfaction.

"That may be. 'Enough to know is given,' but do we ponder enough over what is given? We seem so unsure of almost everything. There's a girl in my class at school who is a Christian Scientist. She claims she understands everything, but when I ask her questions, her answers are so hazy and confused."

"Why puzzle over those things, dear? You're too young to bother your head this way. What this world needs is good, wholesome manhood and womanhood. Not a lot of dreamers, filled with catch-penny ideas. Be your own bright self and live your young life naturally. Don't we give you everything, dear, to make you the happiest girl in New York? If there's anything lacking, say the word," he added, patting her curls.

"Oh, you're wonderful. Daddy!" she replied, smiling brightly at him. "I'm never really unhappy. I just love to sometimes sit alone and dream." Then softly she added, "It is only then that I feel mother is near me."

Hastings' keen eyes scanned her face anxiously.

"I guess you had a hard last year at school. I'm glad you've graduated for good, and decided not to go to college. Just think of your music now, plenty of fresh air and lots of fun! It doesn't do for girls to get weak nerves!"

"Weak nerves! How funny! I'm strong as strong can be!" she said, laughing joyously.

Hastings shook his head.

"Moods show overstrain. Come, get your hat. We'll take a brisk walk and drop in at a show tonight."

Venna jumped up delighted. She would rather go out with Daddy than do anything else in the world.

In a few minutes they were in the brisk November air, John Hastings adjusting his usual quick pace to the shorter, slower step of his daughter.

With all her bright energy, Venna's walking seemed a contradiction. It was rather slow, very deliberate, and with a dignified bearing that was very attractive.

In the street, nothing ever escaped her notice. She would always prefer to walk rather than ride. She hated her limousine. Cosmopolitan New York was a constant delight, and a walk down Broadway a pleasurable habit.

The brilliant lights, the gay theatre throng, the queer, oddly contrasted styles of dress affected by the girls with the powdered noses—all these were never-failing amusements. But deeper than this light attraction was the real human throb of the great city's throng, hurrying to and fro, some laughing, some anxious, some with a self-important strut of achieved success, others with the dogged defiance of failure and chagrin.

"The Great White Way! Was there ever anything so interesting?" thought Venna, appreciating with her bright mind the appealing contrasts. As yet she was too young to be saddened by the undercurrent of human longing and unrest.

Suddenly Venna exclaimed, "Listen, Daddy! There's a bunch singing hymns on the next comer. How great that sounds!"

In strong contrast to the surroundings, the solemn chorus of mixed voices were filling the air with "Nearer, my God, to Thee."

"How strange," thought Venna, "God doesn't seem here at all."

"Some street missionaries," Hastings replied seriously. "They certainly get the crowd. They aren't paid for it either." ("like the ministers in the Churches," he added to himself mentally.)

As they neared the little group of workers a very young girl with a violin stepped forward and started to play. She looked upon the small crowd gathered. Her hand trembled. She stopped short with embarrassment.

"O Daddy, see! She's so nervous. She's tried and can't go on!"

The crowd smiled. Some laughed. Before Hastings realized what his daughter had done, Venna stepped forward to the girl's side.

"Won't you let me play?" she asked softly.

Surprised and glad, the girl handed Venna her violin.

Then Hastings saw what seemed to him one of the unrealities Venna had talked of. Was it a dream or the impossible truth? There she stood, his darling, her genius making the violin fairly plead with the mixed crowd.

Suddenly she turned to the group of young workers.

"Sing!" she commanded as she struck a few chords of "Jesus, Lover of my Soul."

In two minutes the air was filled with the beautiful melody. The whole crowd joined and Venna stood leading them with a look on her young face that her father had never before seen.

He certainly didn't approve of this publicity, but something held him back until the last note was sung. Then he hastily stepped forward, "Come, dear, don't delay longer," he said with a gentle firmness which Venna knew meant a command.

With a happy smile she handed back the violin.

One of the young men, tall, manly, with gray eyes of shining enthusiasm, stepped to her side.

"We can't thank you enough. You have certainly drawn the crowd for us. Now I can preach."

She looked up into the earnest face.

"I would love to stay to hear you. May I, Daddy?"

"Not this time, Venna. Come, we will be late."

Hastings spoke brusquely. The spell was broken and he felt annoyed at the crowd gazing so intently at Venna.

The young preacher compelled her gaze.

"No time for the gospel message? Read these, then," he added, smiling into her eyes, as he handed her a few tracts.

Venna took them with a "Thank you," and as she walked away with her father, she heard the young preacher's first words ring out to the crowd.

"My friends, that Divine music has thrilled your souls. What prompted that young lady to stop? It was the Spirit of God, working in this city of worldliness and"—

Venna heard no more—her father was walking her rapidly away. She folded the tracts, and put them in her bag.

"You're not angry with me, Daddy?" she asked at last, breaking the silence as they swung down Broadway.

"Angry, child? No! But don't do it again. Your aunt would never approve of such unconventionalism. You are too impulsive. Be dignified—even in religion."

"But Christ went into the highways. Oh, I like that young preacher so! He didn't look as though he had any 'may-bes!'"

"Forget him, Venna. Now what theatre shall we go to?"

Venna decided and they were soon sitting comfortably in their box, listening to the newest light opera New York had to offer.

But for the first time, the girl was out of tune with her surroundings. She kept hearing the young preacher's penetrating voice.

"My friends, what prompted that young lady to stop? It was the Spirit of God, working in this great city of worldliness."

"Was that true?" she asked herself. "What prompted me to stop?" She couldn't tell. She just wanted to. But how novel an experience! She liked it. She would like to know that preacher. He was different to her gentlemen friends. Novelty always appealed to Venna. Well, she couldn't know him. So it was no use thinking about it, she wisely decided.

But on kneeling down to say her prayers before retiring that night, she added simply,

"Dear Father in heaven, help the young street preacher in his wonderful mission work for Thee."

The next morning Venna slept late. She awoke with a confused idea that her dream was truly real, in which she saw a great throng of people in front of her home, she herself standing at the door-way, begging them to come no farther.

She knew they were coming in search of the young street preacher, and that he was hiding in her house somewhere.

But the crowd was pressing forward. In vain she remonstrated with them. Forcibly closing the door, she locked it securely. Then she turned with bated breath, to see the young missionary by her side, hat in hand, smiling down at her composedly.

"You are safe!" she exclaimed excitedly.

"Thank you. But do not fear for me. God takes care of His own. However, I will never forget this kindness. It is the Spirit of God in your heart."

With these words he turned the key and reopened the door. At his appearance the crowd fell back and divided itself. The voices of the mob became hushed. He turned to her calmly, "So shall it be in the latter days."

With these words he walked unmolested through the crowd, and Venna, spell-bound, watched him go.

Then it was that she awoke with a confused idea of the reality of life.

Her aunt stood by her bed.

"Well, dearie, I've let you sleep as long as possible. You know we have an engagement with Madame Amelia at eleven o'clock. She won't finish your dress if you don't keep the appointment."

Venna jumped up, now fully awake.

"I'll be ready in half an hour, breakfast and all, auntie!"

"Very well, dear. I'll order the car promptly at 10:30."

Venna gave her aunt an impulsive hug.

"What a gay time we'll have to-morrow night!" she exclaimed, the girl in her quickly responding to the preparations for her debut.

Her aunt flushed with happiness.

"We are going to make it the best money can provide!" she returned with gentle affection and pride, as she left her niece to dress.

The entire morning was taken up in making calls upon dressmaker and florist and completing the already much talked over preparations.

Venna was excitedly happy and her aunt's quiet joy seemed like the reflection of the young life she was so devoted to.

However, when they returned home and had lunched, Venna found herself tired—the natural reaction asserted itself.

"Auntie, I think I'll disappear for an hour, and have a good rest. Then I'll be ready for anything."

"Very well, dear. Sleep as long as you wish. There is nothing for you to do now but dream of the good time coming. Everything is done."

So Venna went to her room, removed her dress, and for a moment stood undecided beside her open wardrobe.

There hung three pretty kimonos, one red, one blue, and one nile green. It was a peculiar little habit with Venna to don the color that best suited her mood at the time of wearing.

She always said that if she felt very tired, she liked the green. If she felt excitedly happy, she liked the red. If very thoughtful, the blue suited her best.

This time she stood hesitating and laughed softly.

"I really don't know which I want to wear, so guess my feelings are all hopelessly mixed."

Her hand finally reached out for the blue, and with the soft color wrapped about her pretty girlishness, she lay down to sleep.

Let us take a peep around this room. Everything Venna did or had was characteristic of her, and her own cosy room was no exception.

It was oblong in shape, with an open fireplace at one end and her carved mahogany bed at the other.

Along one wall, between two windows, stood her mahogany dresser and dressing table. On the other side, with a door at one end, stood first a mahogany book-case, then a mahogany work table covered with sewing bag and magazines, and next to this a large Victrola, ready to give its series of concerts. In the centre of the room was another mahogany table, covered with more books.

The wall paper was a subdued buff, and a dark oriental rug covered the floor. The window draperies were of cream lace, lambriquined with the palest blue silk.

A few choice pictures with uniform frames of black and gold gave the finishing touch to a room more suited to a library than a boudoir.

Venna's aunt often suggested a change of furnishings.

"White maple or anything more girlish would be better," she said.

But Venna's ideas were unchangeable.

"Mahogany always looks so real—that's why I like it best," she invariably replied.

Neither her father nor her aunt knew just exactly what she meant, but if mahogany was Venna's taste, the best of its kind should be hers.

Venna did not sleep long. She awoke rather unrefreshed and tired. She thought of her last night's peculiar dream, and with the thought came the desire to read the tracts the young preacher had given her.

Arising and opening her bag, she found there were only three—one on baptism, one on the Second Coming of Christ and one named "Rays of Living Light."

She sat in her luxurious easy chair by the window and was soon absorbed in thoughts quite new and interesting to her ever receptive mind.

Meantime her aunt downstairs was undergoing quite a shock.

A few minutes after Venna retired, her cousin Luella Allen called.

She was a tall, thin spinster who had never married because the love of her early youth had died. Have you ever met that kind, reader? I mean the one who constantly reminds you of by-gone sorrows with a sort of weepy allegiance to the past which is pious in the extreme and forbids the thought of too much joyousness in the present. Also there is an accompanying tendency to dampen the happiness of others.

Such was Luella Allen, and as she entered the room Emily Hastings noticed the suppressed twitching of her long, thin features and knew this was a sign of strong inward emotions.

The two women saluted one another with the usual formal kiss and seated themselves.

"What news now, Luella?" asked Emily calmly, for she knew without news Luella Allen seldom called.

"O Emily! I know all about it, dear! I've come to talk it over with you. I saw the whole thing. It's so shocking I can hardly believe it. We really must take Venna in hand and make her realize she is too grown up to act ridiculous now and disgrace us!"

Emily stiffened and flushed.

"I don't understand you, Luella. Venna couldn't disgrace anyone. She is as near perfect as any girl could be."

"Didn't John tell you then? The poor dear! He didn't want to shock you, did he? But I think you ought to know."

Here she paused and lifted her black bordered handkerchief to her nose to indulge in a sympathetic snuffle.

"Please explain, Luella!" Emily's voice was unusually impatient and short.

"Oh, I know John will blame me for telling you Emily, but I'll do my duty," she said righteously. "Last night I was on Broadway and in the crowd my car was stopped. I looked out of the window and I saw—I can scarcely believe it yet—I saw our Venna standing in the street with a handful of those wicked Mormons—(yes, I found out afterwards, they were Mormons)—playing her violin to a mixed New York crowd. Just think of it! Our Venna!"

Emily Hastings had suddenly paled.

"Luella, it can't be true! Where was John?"

"I don't know, Emily dear." Luella's tone now changed to one of complete satisfaction at desired results. "He must have been somewhere near and found it out. I always said Venna has her mother's impulsiveness. Of course, she didn't mean any harm—but think what might have come of it. Those Mormon preachers are in the East for only one purpose. You know that, Emily. Just to entice pretty girls like Venna to go to Utah to their destruction, and they use the cloak of religion, too! More's the shame. I'm so thankful the child is safe."

Emily's color had returned and burned each cheek.

"I'm sure, Luella, you are mistaken. I shall bring Venna here to tell you so," and Emily sailed from the room with a majestic disdain, quite uncommon to her quiet, even composure.

Gently she opened Venna's door.

"Should she awaken her? No, Luella must be crazy!" she thought disdainfully. Yet it might be true. Venna was so impulsive. However, there was no harm done. Venna was safe—she must be talked to, of course.

So quietly she closed the door and went back to the library.

"Venna is sleeping," she said, her mild self again. "Thank you, Luella, for telling me. I shall speak to John about it."

"Oh, I wish I could advise the dear girl myself!" Luella returned disappointed.

"I can't disturb her. These are very busy days in her young life."

Luella arose. "Then, Emily, I'll be going. I have an engagement myself, but just stepped in to warn you. The dear girl shall certainly have my prayers," she added, and with another formal kiss and good-bye, she was gone.

Emily Hastings took a deep breath. The air seemed freer for her going. Down in her heart, she disliked her cousin immensely, but John always said, "Be kind to her," and what John said, Emily did.

When Venna finished reading her tracts, she laid them upon the table and slowly began to dress. While so doing, she was very thoughtful.

Who were these good missionaries who had such interesting thoughts to pass around? She had heard of a very questionable "Mormon" Church in Utah—everyone knew them to be very immoral and treacherous, but how did these missionaries get connected with that Church and have these inspiring tracts? The more she thought about it, the more confusing it was. Surely here was a paradox! She was still wondering, when the door opened gently and her aunt entered.

"Are you going out, Venna? If not, I would like to talk with you awhile."

"No, I was just wishing to talk to you, auntie dear. I'm very puzzled about something. Do you know very much about the Mormon Church?"

Emily Hastings' face flushed as she met the girl's direct questioning gaze. "The idea of Luella Allen ever imagining Venna would hide anything," she thought indignantly.

"As much as I care to know, dear," she replied. "They are a very dangerous people, as everyone understands, and it is well to keep away from them. What possessed you to join them on Broadway? I can scarcely bear the thought of you doing anything like that."

"Did Daddy tell you about it? Really, auntie, I didn't know they were Mormons—I thought they were some good Christian missionaries. I don't know what possessed me. I just wanted to help the little girl who couldn't play her violin. But really, I can't think that young preacher is wicked. He seemed so earnest."

"Appearances are very deceptive, girlie," replied her aunt mildly, "Nothing good could come from the Mormons. Dr. Hansom paid a lecturer from Utah to come to tell us all about them. I don't remember all he said, but it was quite enough for me," she added complacently.

"I would like to talk to Dr. Hansom myself," Venna replied.

"You can this very afternoon. He will be here soon to talk with me about some improvements for the old ladies' home. He's so interested in all our charities. Such a wonderful man! There's the bell now. I guess that is he. As soon as you're dressed, come down, dear. I'm sure he will give you a few moments of his valuable time," and she left the room, happy in the thought that Dr. Hansom would talk seriously to Venna, and so prevent her ever being so reckless again.

When Venna had finished her toilet, complete in every dainty detail, she went downstairs.

As she reached the door of the library, with a bright "May I come in?" Dr. Hansom arose from his seat at the farther end of the room, and approached her with a genial smile.

"Ah! Venna! Come in. We're just talking about you!" he exclaimed, taking her hand and shaking it warmly, and then, placing her arm in his, he led her to a comfortable chair by the fire.

Dr. Hansom, short, thick-set, gray-eyed, with a determined stiff pompadour over a somewhat low-browed, broad face, had a way of doing everything genially. When he crossed a room it was with a free and easy swing, invariably with one hand in his pocket. When he walked down the avenue, his "hail-fellow-well-met" attitude toward all mankind was expressed in his free and careless stride. His smile, too, had a broadness and frankness quite irresistible to the majority and he was universally declared to possess a "wonderfully magnetic" character.

On a trolley car, he more often than not stood upon the platform and talked genially to the conductor, thus impressing all with his spirit of democracy.

In short. Dr. Hansom was one of the popular metropolitan ministers.

All the East knew of him, and his influence at mass meetings for men was a topic of great interest.

Men liked a man like Dr. Hansom. Consequently they fell in line with the religion he taught.

It was a practical, common-sense religion—founded upon the Bible, of course—but eliminating anything that the ordinary man of the day could not easily grasp.

Sin is an evil—he taught that. The consequences of sin, his oratorical powers set forth. This also was taking and helped men to determine to do better.

But when it came to the personality of Satan, the inspiration of the Old Testament, or the Second Coming of Christ, or numerous revelations and prophecies—all these subjects were hazy and too impractical to be discussed by the masses. Therefore Dr. Hansom dismissed them with a smile of inconsequence and assured the slumbering spirituality of his flock that there were more important things than the mysteries.

In this way Dr. Hansom avoided a great deal of real thinking and made many friends.

His large congregation of two thousand, including men, women and children, were all "Hansomized." What Dr. Hansom said went.

On the other hand, he was a mouthpiece for the sentiments of the general public.

His mind was like the disc of a phonograph, upon which public sentiment made an impress to be reproduced later from his pulpit at the inspiration of his desire to please.

Also he could be very stern and frankly abusive at times. But this, too, was part of the impression upon the disc, for the public enjoy strong censure and fearlessness.

They never realized this fine gift of Dr. Hansom's. Erroneously they thought he was original.

"I hear, Venna, you are puzzled about the Mormons?" he asked, sitting down opposite to her, and leaning slightly forward, placing both hands emphatically on the arms of his chair.

"Yes, Dr. Hansom. Are they really such awful people?" she asked seriously.

"Awful is no word for it, my girl. They are the most insidious menace in the religious world today! They lie, they lead immoral lives, and all under the cloak of religion! Your aunt told me of your indiscretion last night." Here he smiled indulgently. "Of course, we know our girl didn't realize what she was doing, but it ought to be a lesson to you. Never be led away with any sensational religion. You are liable to get trapped into anything if you do. I'm glad you are safe. But where was your father?"

Venna colored. "Father was not to blame. I did it before he realized what I was doing."

"Very true. You certainly took me by surprise, Venna," her father's voice laughingly exclaimed, and they all turned to see John Hastings enter the door, his keen eyes twinkling with amusement and cynicism.

"Ah, Hastings! I'm glad you joined us," exclaimed Dr. Hansom, jumping up and extending his hand. "We were telling Venna what the Mormons really are!"

"Umph! And what really are they?" he asked, as he seated himself with the group.

Dr. Hansom was always slightly less confident when talking to Hastings. He had a vague idea that here was one man in his Church whose ideas he did not exactly reflect. However, they were excellent friends.

"Why, Hastings, you don't have to ask that, do you? Didn't our lecture satisfy you concerning them?"

"No man's lecture satisfies me concerning any sect," returned Hastings quietly.

"But it is not one man's opinion, Hastings. All Christendom is against them," urged Dr. Hansom.

Venna looked from one to the other, intently listening.

Her aunt flushed with mild annoyance. Surely John was spoiling Dr. Hansom's influence over Venna.

Hastings leaned back in his chair with an air of boredom.

"How all the sects do enjoy biting and snapping at any new thing in their midst. Why doesn't each one live and let live?" he asked quietly.

"You don't mean you wish to defend the Mormons?" Dr. Hansom asked impatiently.

"Defend? No, neither do I mean to criticize. We in the East know very little about them, except what paid lecturers tell us, and that is rather 'commercialized truth,' don't you think?"

"Is it not an established fact that women influenced by Mormon missionaries have gone to Utah to their destruction?" persisted Dr. Hansom.

"Haven't the slightest doubt of it," was Hastings' smiling answer. "Also, it is an established fact that women have fallen in love with some Orthodox ministers and even Catholic priests, and followed them to their destruction. That doesn't denounce the Church politic, does it? There are black sheep in every fold."

Dr. Hansom frowned. He hated contradiction.

"I tell you, Hastings, the Mormons are outside of any fold—they are a menace that every Christian should strive to wipe off the map of this country!"

Hastings made no reply, but Venna spoke up confidently.

"Dr. Hansom, you certainly know more about these people than I do, but I'm sure that young preacher we met last night is sincere and good."

"How do you know? You scarcely spoke to him."

"O, but don't you think there are some people you meet, you just simply feel are good?"

"There you are, my dear girl," replied her pastor, with a deprecatory wave of the hand. "Led by your emotional nature again! If you don't stifle that tendency, Venna, it will get you into all kinds of trouble."

Venna's direct gaze was unwavering. "I don't say this from any emotion, Dr. Hansom, but Paul says, 'Spiritual things are spiritually discerned' and I felt his spirituality in his look and tone of voice."

"Doubtless you thought you did," returned Dr. Hansom, a little taken aback. "But you are a very young girl to have such decided ideas about spiritual matters. It would be wise to trust to those who have had more experience."

Hastings' brow contracted as he gazed intently into the fire without comment.

Dr. Hansom noticed his expression and disliked his silence, both of which had disconcerted him before.

He arose to go.

"I must be off now," he said. "Just six more calls to make this afternoon and then I suppose I'll find a number waiting for me at the Parish house when I return." He smiled a happy smile of genial importance, and after the usual hearty hand-shakes was gone.

Aunt Emily hid her disappointment in John's behavior by a quiet exit.

Now alone with her father, Venna drew her chair close to his and laid her small hand on his big, strong one.

He turned his gaze affectionately upon her.

"A little child shall lead them," he thought, but did not say. After all, it was wiser for Venna not to rely too much upon her own discernment.

"Girlie," he said aloud, "don't be governed too much by appearances. As Dr. Hansom says, you might go woefully adrift in your judgements."

"But, Daddy, don't you think that young preacher was sincere?" she persisted.

"I don't think about it, dear," he returned practically. "He might be or he might not be. Just leave all questionable people alone and stick to your Church, which you know is about as good as you'll find these days."

And so the subject was dismissed, but when Venna returned to her room she took the tracts and carefully put them in a drawer which held her special treasures.

"I know he is God's man," she said softly, as she laid them away.
