In the full glare of the dazzling footlights of social life, we are blinded to the softer, purer rays that proceed from the "holy of holies" within our hearts.

John Hastings' Fifth Avenue mansion was ablaze with light. He had cautioned his servants, smilingly,

"Don't let one electric bulb be forgotten in any nook of our home to-night. There must be an abundance of brightness!"

The servants promised gaily, and went about their several duties with a delight, not only the result of high wages and exceptional treatment, but because each one individually loved Venna with a respectful adoration.

The long reception rooms were one garden of palms and roses.

As Venna stood by the side of her aunt, under a canopy of green, her silvered white dress sparkling as she moved, her beauty was never so enchanced. So thought her social friends, as one by one they approached to shake hands and congratulate the radiant debutante.

The hidden orchestra, screened by palms, played dreamy music while Venna beamed happy and smiled upon her delighted guests.

"Was I ever so happy?" she asked herself joyously.

There were several men who lingered unnecessarily over their congratulations, and with each occurrence Venna laughed to herself.

She knew how much they admired her and it seemed delightfully amusing. As yet, love was no serious consideration in her life.

But now almost the last one entered—a man of thirty, dark, with handsome straight features and very upright bearing.

As he took her hand, his direct gaze was very compelling.

"This occasion. Miss Hastings, is, I hope, the beginning of a better acquaintance with one another."

The words were very simple, but the look said much more, and the firm pressure of her hand was hardly necessary.

She had met him only once before. Why should she blush? Her admirer noticed her embarrassment with satisfaction.

"Yes, I hope so, Mr. Hadly," she said simply, withdrawing her hand as soon as she politely could.

"May I have the first dance?" he asked, still compelling her gaze.

She laughingly handed him her card.

"See! There is only one left—right near the last, too!"

"Ah! That is my punishment for being late! Well, that one will furnish my anticipated joy for the whole evening," he returned, writing his name on the card and handing it to her reluctantly. Then he passed on to make room for Dr. Hansom and his wife who were next in turn.

"Dear me! Is this little sparkling lady my little Venna grown old enough to enter society! It seems just yesterday when I took you in my arms and baptized you, Venna Hastings!"

His thin, mild little wife smiled and nodded, with a gentle "That's so, Venna!"

"Eighteen long, long years. Dr. Hansom," said Venna gaily.

"Eighteen long, long years in which nature has labored to produce one of the most beautiful and talented young artists in New York City!" exclaimed Dr. Hansom, turning and speaking in a distinct voice for all to hear him.

At this the whole assemblage clapped loudly and Venna bowed her acceptance.

Oh, the dance! The delight of it! As soon as Venna was released from the formalities, her feet were gliding over the polished floor with a lightness corresponding to her joyous mood.

One by one her partners claimed her for their succeeding numbers, each one reluctantly giving her up to the next one in turn.

Mr. Hadly was constantly on the floor also. He was the most graceful dancer among the men. Though politely attentive to his partners, Venna felt his gaze constantly upon herself, and several times blushed as she met his ardent look of admiration.

She was quite surprised with herself to think that any man could make her so self-conscious.

Finally came the dance promised to Mr. Hadly. He approached her smiling.

"I wonder if you would like to sit this out in the conservatory," he said in a tone which asked her to do so.

They were soon seated among the palms and Venna leaned back among the cushions with a sigh of happiness.

"You have been radiantly happy this evening, haven't you?" he asked softly.

"And how could I not be?" she asked, smiling.

"Very true. The freshness of youth commands happiness."

How alluring she was to this man of the world!

"I won't have long with you to-night—just these passing moments of one dance. I want you to set a date when I may call. I have your father's permission, Miss Hastings. After I have called, then I wish to beg you to allow me to escort you to a number of social functions this winter, that I know will be worth while. Your dancing is wonderful. I'm very fond of the art myself. I think we ought to be very good partners."

He surveyed her from head to foot with keen appreciation.

Venna felt his thoughts. Surely, it was pleasure to be admired by this handsome man of affairs. She was getting accustomed to him now, and her embarrassment had left her. She looked up pleased.

"I'm ready for good times this winter. Father insists on me enjoying life—for a time anyway."

"For a time anyway?" he repeated. "Why not always?" he asked, studying her intently.

"Oh, one couldn't take life always as a holiday," she brightly returned.

"As long as one can," he replied, his eyes slightly darkening. "The good time is here if you know how to get it. There! I've hardly had time to speak to you and the music is stopping. You haven't told me when I shall call."

Venna appointed the evening and then together they returned to the dance.

When supper was served, Venna found Mr. Hadly sitting directly opposite to her. He used his opportunity well, and compelled her to meet his glance many times even when she was talking to others.

"How handsome he is!" she thought. "And such a forcible character, too."

He certainly attracted Venna more than any of her gentlemen friends. Yet with the attraction, she felt a slight repulsion she could not understand.

—

The wonderful evening over, and the guests departed, Venna stood alone with her father under the green canopy where she had received her friends.

Her cheeks were flushed and her eyes as bright as in the early evening. No sign of fatigue was evident.

"O Daddy, I could have danced all night!" she exclaimed happily.

"Some success, wasn't it, dearie?" he returned, putting his arm lovingly around her. "Now, I suppose this winter will be one whirl of gayety for you."

"Nothing will ever be just quite as nice as this, Daddy," she said, kissing him. "I'll never, never, never forget it!"

"We wouldn't want you to, Venna," he replied, immensely pleased. "By the way, I noticed you have a new admirer."

Venna blushed.

"Whom do you mean?" she asked with assumed unconcern.

"Mr. Hadly, of course. He's one of New York's rich catches. It seems the girls have been after him for some years, but he isn't caught yet. A nice sort of fellow, but—understand, young lady, you don't give your heart away for some time yet. Daddy's too selfish."

"Never fear. Daddy! It'll be a very long time before that happens; Daddy's enough for me." And her arms stole around his neck in an impulsive hug.

And so we will leave them in their oneness of heart, father and daughter, inseparable in their sweet companionship until a higher power shall sever their lives.
