Life is measured, not by time, but by experience.

Her father's sudden death left Venna an heiress, but never having known anything but luxury, she did not value her wealth. In fact, it might have been a considerable burden to both Venna and her aunt, both of whom were entirely ignorant of business, but Mr. Hadly took everything in hand, attending to details, and leaving as little as possible to the lawyers. This, he assured them, was the only safe way, and gratefully they accepted his services.

Both Venna and Emily Hastings were almost inconsolable in their grief. The latter found some consolation in Dr. Hansom's visits, but to Venna these were no comfort. She naturally turned to him, but his faith was the kind that handled the world's troubles en masse, and in personal grief, he had few words to say.

Venna asked him many questions about the hereafter, to which he gave many vague answers.

"It is not for us to know anything definitely. Faith leaves it all to God," he assured her in conclusion.

"But surely the Bible gives us some certainties, Dr. Hansom," she pleaded, hungry for spiritual truths.

"So much depends on how you interpret the Bible, my dear. I declare very few certainties to my people, because there are very brainy men who all differ. Of course there's a hereafter, and your father was a good member of the Church, so we know he is happy. I'm very glad he joined the Church before it was too late."

"Do you mean my dear father would not have been saved if he had not joined the Church?" Venna asked credulously.

Dr. Hansom had to clear his throat before answering.

"Really, my dear, I don't like to hurt you. I loved your dear father always, but if he had not joined himself to the House of the Lord, I would be forced to believe he was lost."

"Then God loved my father less than you or I did—we wouldn't see him lost, would we? Oh, Dr. Hansom, religion teaches many a paradox today. I don't wonder there is so little spirituality in the Churches."

Dr. Hansom turned the subject with a fatherly pat of her curls and the admonition,

"Don't judge, little girl, don't judge. There may be a hidden life in the Church which you cannot see!"

But Venna decided the "hidden life" brought her no satisfaction or comfort and gradually she drifted away from the Church.

Hadly took this opportunity to show his devotion at every turn.

Her aunt thought him about perfect and spoke in his praise continually.

Venna acquiesced in all she said, but for a long time refused to marry him. However, he had determined to win out and persisted constantly, asking no love of Venna in return for his.

At last her aunt's persuasions and Hadly's determination won out, and one year after her father's death, they were quietly married. Venna felt a certain satisfaction that she was delighting her aunt and also making happy the greatest friend she had known through her sorrow.

Many times she puzzled over the fact that her coldness did not worry Hadly at all. But she decided that men were unfathomable in their affections, and such devotion as his was certainly noble. She wished she could love him—perhaps some day she would.

She made all kinds of plans for her married life. Hadly had promised to let her work among the poor to her heart's content. No plan of hers ever met with the slightest objection, and her aunt continually reminded her what an ideal husband he was.

"But am I an ideal wife?" Venna asked doubtfully.

"Anyone should be glad to win you, dearie," was always her aunt's proud answer.

She longed to live in the old home, so Hadly, as usual, consented.

It was just six months after her marriage.

Venna was in the dear old library sorting out some books to use in her settlement work. Her husband's business caused him to travel so much that she had practically all her time to herself. After all, her married life had been a very smooth, contented affair.

When at home, her husband was completely devoted to Venna and her aunt. But when he was away she felt a joyous relief at her freedom and worked with zeal.

It never occurred to her to inquire into his many business trips. All business was a bore to her, and she was glad to leave it entirely in his hands. She hoped she would never show her pleasure at his absence, for she earnestly longed to please him as he deserved.

Today she was rather wishing her husband were home. There were some important business details to be attended to and she needed his advice. But this trip would be an unusually long one for him. He had written only this morning that he could not be home for another week.

Just as she finished her work in the library, Stella brought in a card announcing a caller—"Miss Hedgeway."

"But I don't know her, Stella," said Venna, wonderingly. "Ask her her business, please."

Stella obeyed and soon returned with the short reply, "Very personal. That's all she would say."

"That is the method all the agents use. Tell her I'm sorry, but too busy today to see strangers."

"All right, ma'am," replied the girl.

Venna left the library and was going upstairs when she heard voices below.

"I tell you I must see her. It's important. I won't leave this house until you take me to Mrs. Hadly."

"But, madam, I have to obey orders. She refuses to see anyone at present."

"Tell your mistress what I say," came the confident answer.

Stella ascended the stairs reluctantly and Venna met her half way.

"I heard her, Stella. I will see her for a few moments—in the library."

"You wish to see me?" Venna asked pleasantly as she re-entered the library.

The woman, still standing, eyed Venna from head to foot critically before speaking.

Venna had the impression of a rather good looking, stout brunette with small, restless dark eyes. She was fashionably dressed, with a style more attractive than refined.

"So you are Mrs. Hadly!" she exclaimed rather than asked.

"I am Mrs. Hadly," replied Venna with dignity, "Why did you wish so to see me?"

"When you know what I have to say, you'll be glad you let me speak with you," the woman replied in a low, even tone. "Are we entirely alone? Sit near to me, please," she added, seating herself and drawing a chair close to her own for Venna.

"Is your business so private?" Venna asked curiously, as she seated herself, calmly amused at her visitor's impertinence.

The woman's face softened.

"You look rather young and innocent. I thought somehow you would be different. More like one of the haughty society women who wouldn't cast a glance at anyone outside their set!"

"All society women are not so," returned Venna, smiling. "But why should you picture me like that?"

"Only as his wife," the woman replied bitterly. "You're not his style, believe me. But the money did it—always the money does it."

"I don't understand you," returned Venna, rising indignantly. "If you have come here to insult me, whatever your motive, I must ask you to leave."

The woman rose, too, and laid a hand on Venna's arm.

"I tell you, I'm sorry for you. I don't want to hurt a girl like you. But now I'm here, I'll have it out. I came to hurt him, not you. I hate him. You understand? I hate him. I gave him five years of my youth, and we—yes, your husband and myself—have a little girl. I loved him—my God! How I loved him! I gave him more than you ever gave. And then he threw me over to marry money. Not you, girl, but your money! And I searched him out. I came to New York to find his wife and ruin him. Here, girl! Don't take it so hard; sit down. You're faint, aren't you? I'm sorry I let it out so blunt. I should have gone easier—yes, you've got to suffer, too, poor thing!" And she put her arm around Venna for support.

But Venna, recovering, drew herself up haughtily.

"How dare you come here with such falsehoods!" she exclaimed indignantly. "Leave my house at once."

"That is how we all act, until we find out what men really are," replied the woman with a scornful pity. "It's hard to wake up to what the world really is, isn't it? Perhaps you don't think I'm sorry for you!"

"I will not listen to you," exclaimed Venna proudly. "Will you please go?"

The woman scrutinized Venna keenly. "No, you are not acting," she said coolly. "You'd rather believe in him than in me—naturally. But he'll soon run through all your money as he did his own, and then you'll be glad to have me tell you a little more about your ideal. Here is my card," she added, laying one upon the table. "I will come when you send for me," and with a smile, half contempt, half compassion, she was gone.

For a moment, Venna stood, deep in troubled thought. Who was this woman? What did it all mean? As her anger cooled, awful doubts crept into her mind and she trembled with fear. Could there be any truth in it? Had she been unwise not to listen? Yet that would have been treachery to Will. But suppose—she heard her aunt's voice calling her. Hastily she put the woman's card in her dress.

"Auntie must not know of this," she determined. A dull, heavy depression seized her. This was her first experience with a hidden trial, for trial it would be until Will could explain—of course, he would explain—but she would have to ponder over the mystery of it for a week.

It seemed unbearable. She decided to write to Will and ask him to come sooner.

She took up a pen and tried to write, but couldn't. Was it not wrong to doubt him that much even? Was it possible she could be so disloyal? In her self-condemnation, she was as unhappy as in her doubt.

Unobserved, her aunt entered.

"Why, Venna, how troubled you look! What is the matter, child?"

Venna was startled. Calm and pale, she faced her aunt.

"Nothing much, auntie dear. My head bothers me to-day, and there are some business details that need attending to."

"Business? Why, don't worry over that. Will will attend to everything when he returns."

"Yes, of course, it's foolish of me to bother," returned Venna. Her aunt's complete trust seemed to make her feel surer ground.

Emily Hastings, putting both arms around her niece, kissed her fondly.

"Girlie dear, I have a great secret to tell you," she said, gently smiling, her mild face flushed.

"At last?" asked Venna, smiling back knowingly.

One month after John Hastings' death. Dr. Hansom had lost his faithful little wife. It was a real sorrow to the great preacher, for not many women were to be found with a character so suited to meet all his requirements in a wife. After her death, he was a very frequent visitor at the old Hastings house. Gradually it dawned upon him that the mild, gentle Emily Hastings had a temperament most wonderfully like the dear woman he had lost. She was so unaggressive, so gentle, so adoringly submissive to whomsoever she loved. She would make a fine minister's wife.

It didn't take Dr. Hansom long to make up his mind. He doubled his attentions and visits, keeping silence, however, until the proper time had elapsed.

And now the wonderful hour had come.

It seemed an impossible joy laid at Emily Hastings' feet.

"If only your dear father could know!" she exclaimed, looking young in her new happiness.

"He does," returned Venna softly. "He knows all that happens to us," she added with a sudden pang at the thought of her own trouble.

"But, dearie. Dr. Hansom wishes us to marry very soon—of course, it will be a very quiet wedding. Do you think it is too soon?"

"No," returned Venna, lovingly patting her aunt's cheek. "The sooner you are made happy the better. I shall certainly hurry you off!"

"O Venna, if you were not married, I would never leave you. But now you have such a perfect husband, and he must give up his traveling when I go. I wouldn't have you lonesome for the world. Of course, we'll see one another all the time, but it won't seem just like living together, will it?"

Looking around the old familiar room her eyes suddenly filled with tears.

"Every rose has its thorn, but let's forget the sting and think only of the joy of it all," replied Venna, bravely choking back a sob.

There is a time in every girl's life when she finds herself suddenly a woman. The time of this change from girlhood to womanhood is not marked by the marriage ceremony. No, the period of happy girlhood extends to that time when some sharp experience awakens her soul to the realities of life. Then the illusions vanish and the woman in her lives. Not less capable of joy does she become, but absolutely and forever lost to the fantastic, unreal dreams of early youth.

Venna's awakening came simultaneously with her aunt's rejuvenating engagement announcement, which occurred one week after Dr. Hansom's proposal.

As soon as Hadly returned, Venna lost no time in asking him for an explanation of Miss Hedgeway's visit.

At first he denied knowing the woman, but his nervousness convinced his wife that he was not telling the truth.

"Will," she said, suddenly indignant, "if you do not tell me the truth, I shall find it out myself. What is this woman to you?"

He had never seen scorn in her eyes before and it was confoundedly unpleasant. Quickly he decided there was only one way—to make a clean breast of it.

"Yes, Venna," he said, frankly, "I have lied to you,—because I didn't like to destroy your innocent trust in me. She's nothing to me now, but she was an escapade of the past. I treated her fair enough—she always had money of her own—never wanted for anything. I didn't deceive her—she went into it with her eyes open like all those women do—I never deceived any woman. It was just a case of give and take. She's meaner than I thought to rake up a man's past before his wife's eyes. As a rule, they don't do that sort of thing."

He paused for a moment, but Venna made no remark. She was earnestly listening to his every word.

"Now, my dear," he continued more confidently, "you have, of course, always been sheltered so by your father, that you are ignorant of life in many respects. Please don't think your husband a monstrosity. I'm no better than the next man—no worse, either. I've lived in the world, seen all sides of it, too, but that is why I am all the more able to appreciate a girl like you—by contrast, you know, dear."

"I suppose, then, there were other women, too?" Venna demanded in a sharp, unnatural voice.

"Don't use that tone, Venna," he said impatiently. "It isn't like you. It's not becoming. Yes, I'll treat you fair and hide nothing. My extreme youth was rather wild, but that's all past now. From the day I first called upon you, I've led a clean, straight life—that was my duty toward you."

Venna gave a hard little laugh.

"What about your duty toward the other women?" she asked coldly.

"I don't understand you," he replied angrily. "If you are going to play censor with me, young lady, you have the wrong party. I've been frank with you, which every man is not, and you return it with rudeness."

Without a word Venna quietly arose and left the room.

"Well, if women aren't incorrigible!" he exclaimed in disgust, lighting a cigarette to calm his perturbed thoughts.

Venna sought her own room, dismayed at her state of mind. She felt as though some one had roughly shaken her and awakened her from the dream of one world to the stern realities of another.

With the awakening came an alarming disgust and hatred for her husband. She stood alone, reasoning, struggling with her new thoughts. Her ideas, at first confused, began to shape themselves definitely and bitterly. Three hours later she came from her room, a pale, determined woman.

When she calmly informed Hadly that from then on they would be as entire strangers, his first sensation of genuine surprise gave way to angry fear.

"You're not going to make fools of both of us, are you? What on earth are you making such a fuss about? Are you looking for a divorce? You can't get one. I'll tell you that right now. And your business affairs are tight in my hands, so don't try to be too independent."

"You refuse to let me go?" asked Venna, pale but unwavering.

"You can go anywhere and everywhere you please," he returned with sarcasm. "Considering what a loving wife you've been, the parting of the ways will not be so difficult to bear. But I warn you, if you make a fool of me in society by repeating this foolish gossip—even to your aunt—it won't go easy with you."

"Never fear," returned Venna bitterly. "No one shall suffer but myself. It is plain to be seen you will not. I shall leave town for the summer as soon as aunt is married, in a few weeks. As to money matters my lawyer will consult you."

Venna ostensibly busied herself with her aunt's rushed preparations for her quiet wedding, and Hadly found occasion to disappear on another business trip.

With the advent of her womanhood, came the power to smile and laugh with a breaking heart, and to hide from all her friends her sadness and trial.

The heart of a girl is easily read, but the heart of a woman is a hidden mystery.
