To a materialist, a miracle is an impossible contradiction to Nature. To the spiritually minded, it is the expression of that Higher Power which controls Nature.

Until Anna and her husband came home, Venna found herself entirely alone with her visitors. Those were two days to be remembered. It was steadily storming without, so they all stayed indoors, and talked and discussed from morning until night. Doubts in her mind that had remained unanswered for years, these two young preachers answered satisfactorily, always going to the Bible to show the authority for their claims.

Venna's interest pleased them and they never tired of her constant queries.

"You have great patience," said Venna, smiling.

"It takes no patience to answer questions," returned Brother Hallock. "The patience is required when no one is interested enough to ask them."

The third day brought Mr. and Mrs. Halloway home. Venna's explanations about the Mormons quite satisfied them.

"Of course, you were right, dear," said Anna in her big-hearted way. "The very idea of their being treated so! Why, we met a number of Mormons when we were West. They are very fine people, indeed. But don't let them take your thoughts away from Christian Science. I don't know much about 'Mormonism' but I imagine it's not at all spiritual."

"On the contrary," returned Venna, very enthusiastically, "it makes one live in a wonderfully spiritual atmosphere!"

"I'm afraid you're being influenced," said Anna anxiously.

"I'm afraid I am," admitted Venna, smiling.

"Oh, dear me! We must place their belief side by side with Christian Science. I'll keep them here until you see I can prove to them they're wrong. We'll have some good arguments—respecting one another, of course!"

"No one could help respecting you!" exclaimed Venna, delighted with the thought of delving deeper into truth.

But the discussions were unfortunately postponed.

The day after Anna's arrival, baby Anna became very ill. Mr. Halloway and Venna both wanted to send for the doctor, but Anna wouldn't hear of it.

"Do you think God will forgive me if I refuse to trust my precious lamb to His care?" she asked, trying to be calm and true to her Christian Science teachings. "This is my test—my first test of faith!"

All day, and all night, Anna knelt by her babe in prayer.

The next morning, little Anna was worse.

Mr. Halloway had to go to the city, and for the first time, he was angry with his wife.

"Anna, you see to it that you have a doctor today. I insist upon it!" and so he left her.

Anna buried her head in the bed-clothes and wept.

"O God!" she murmured, "tell me—should I obey?"

It was an agonizing morning for Anna. She did not admit even Venna to the room, but prayed unceasingly. Her momentary doubt had left her as soon as her husband's presence was gone.

Downstairs, Brother Johnson and Brother Hallock tried to console Venna.

"Oh, but if baby Anna dies without a doctor, it is too awful to think of," exclaimed Venna. "What ought I to do? Compel her to have one?"

"It is her child," said Brother Hallock seriously.

"Yes, but she will never forgive herself afterwards."

"I can't advise you, Mrs. Hadly. It is very sad, indeed. When Mr. Halloway comes home, I think he will take the matter in his own hands."

There was a sound of crying outside, and Venna recognized Bud's tearful tones and Bessie's soothing voice.

Venna stepped to the door to admit her young friends.

"Bud, dear, what is the matter?" she exclaimed as Bud entered in sobs, with Bessie's protecting arms about him.

"My—my—cat—Missus Hadly—my cat—she died of salvation—way out in the woods—with me—here—an' never knowin'!"

"What does he mean?" asked Venna of Bessie, who was trying to look sympathetic.

"Why, Bud's pussie got lost in the woods, and never came back for weeks. Now he's found her dead, so he thinks it was starvation killed her."

"Yes, an' I'll never—pump—the organ in Mr. Soffy's church again, 'cause I don't like religion any more. I prayed that Flip would come home, an' a lot o' good prayin' does!"

Bud was inconsolable. Venna told him he must not talk that way. God knew why Flip had to be taken from him.

"That's jes' it! An' that's why I won't pump that organ any more!"

Venna turned to Bessie.

"I can't visit with you now, dear. Did you know baby was very sick?"

"Baby is sick, is she?" spoke up Bud. "How'd you feel if she died?"

Venna trembled at the suggestion.

"We must all pray for her to get well. Bud."

"A lot o' good prayin' ull do!" declared Bud defiantly. "Did it help Flip? You better git the doctor hustlin' or she'll be a goner, too. Seems ter me there's lots a dyin' goin' on."

"There, there! Bud! Run along and ask Stella for some real sugar cookies. They'll change your thoughts."

"Never! Think I'm thet mean ter eat sugar cookies the day Flip died o' salvation? Ter-night—yer may see me helpin' round. Good-bye!"

Her visitors gone, Venna excused herself from the young missionaries and went upstairs. Perhaps she could persuade Anna.

Gently she knocked at the door, but there was no response.

She quietly opened it. There upon the floor lay Anna, white and motionless. Trembling, Venna knelt by her side.

"Anna, dear Anna!" she exclaimed, shaking her gently.

But there was no response.

Venna hurried downstairs and phoned for the doctor to come at once.

"May I go up and try to revive her?" asked Brother Hallock.

Together they went up to Anna's room. Brother Hallock looked from the prostrate mother to the moaning babe.

"My! This is sad!" he exclaimed. "But don't worry. Let us bathe her head. She has fainted with exhaustion, that is all."

Anna soon opened her eyes, and looked around with a dazed, helpless expression.

"Baby! baby! Where is she, Venna? Have they taken her away?"

"No, dear, she is right here on the bed. We'll help you to the couch and you must lie perfectly still. I'll take care of baby. The doctor is coming, Anna."

"As you say," returned Anna, too weak to resist, and again she swooned as she was being helped to the couch.

Venna felt great relief when the bell rang and the old village doctor appeared. Entering the room brusquely, he made a general survey. First he went to Anna.

"Revive her again quickly, and give her plenty of hot milk. Worn out, that's all."

Then he went to baby Anna. After a careful examination, he turned to Venna and slowly shook his head.

"I need a consultation here. This is a serious case—very serious."

Venna paled.

"O Dr. Jensen! consult with the best doctor you know. Is there time to get one from New York?"

"No!" declared Dr. Jensen, "she must be attended to quickly, or you'll lose her to-night. It may be paralysis."

Venna's heart beat wildly.

"Oh, no! no! Don't say it is that awful disease!"

She had been reading the papers, telling of the little ones dying daily in New York.

"We'll hope not. I'll not lose a moment. I'll go myself after Dr. Becker." And he hurried off.

Brother Hallock looked at the babe in serious thought. This was a time when the Lord could show these good women the power given to His servants.

Venna was speaking soothing words to Anna, who was again regaining consciousness.

"O Venna, if baby should die, I would never forgive myself," she murmured brokenly.

Venna's ready tears came.

"My dear Anna, be brave. God can save her even now. Have faith."

"What has my faith done for me?" she asked bitterly.

Brother Hallock quietly withdrew and joined his companion.

It seemed a long time before Dr. Jensen returned. In reality it was only half an hour.

The two doctors consulted long and earnestly.

In the adjoining room Venna and Anna awaited their decision fearfully.

Finally they were called and looked into the serious faces of the two doctors with anxious questioning.

Dr. Jensen cleared his throat and then spoke huskily.

"My dear ladies, we regret to tell you, there is no hope. The child cannot live many hours. It is paralysis."

Dr. Jensen caught Anna as again she swooned.

"Don't think of the child," he said brusquely, turning to Venna. "We must attend to the mother, she's in bad shape."

Dr. Jensen then gave directions to Venna, who immediately went downstairs to get the required restoratives.

Brother Hallock met her in the hall. Quickly she told him the sad news.

"Have the doctors given her up entirely?"

"Yes," returned Venna, striving to keep back her tears.

"Then may we administer to the child?"

"For what?" asked Venna puzzled.

"For recovery," returned the young missionary. "You have sought man's aid. Will you refuse God's?"

"But Anna tried faith?" returned Venna.

"Sometimes faith is so strong that it works even in error. But it is not God's way. God's commands are sure. If you do not believe we have His divine authority to heal, will you let us have permission to try?"

Venna looked into Brother Hallock's earnest gray eyes and felt the power of his convictions.

"Yes," she answered simply.

The doctors gone, Venna sat by Anna's bed, soothing the tired head in its restless forced sleep, the result of Dr. Jensen's quieting medicine.

In the next room she heard the missionaries, moving quietly as they administered to baby Anna.

A great unaccountable peace suddenly came over her, and she felt the presence of Divinity surrounding her.

"Surely there are guardian angels, as Brother Hallock teaches," she thought with a sudden great joy.

She looked up. Brother Hallock stood in the doorway. He motioned her to come. She arose and followed him to the bed of baby Anna.

Could it be possible? Was she dreaming? There lay the wee babe, looking up at her with its sweet, winsome baby smile.

"You have saved her," exclaimed Venna in joyous gratitude.

"We have done nothing. God has saved her. We are but the humble instruments in His hands!"
