"I wonder if St. Peter at the Gate of Heaven will distinguish between the 'Pious' and the 'Godly'?"—Irony of Boss Holden.

Bud lost no time in circulating the news that baby Anna was sick, and would doubtless die like Flip. Due to the character of the "simple life," most of the women forgot their prejudices and only thought that some neighbor was in trouble, so those that did not immediately run up to the house, at any rate phoned to see what they could do.

Brother Hallock and Stella were kept busy answering the phone or door bell, and delivering messages to Venna.

"How kind hearted they are after all!" exclaimed Venna, gratefully.

When Dr. Jensen came back to see Venna about quarantining the house, he was amazed to find her all smiles.

"O Dr. Jensen," she said joyously, admitting him, "baby is fine and Mrs. Halloway is almost in hysterics with joy."

"I don't understand you," said Dr. Jensen, looking dazed.

"Come and see!" exclaimed Venna.

He followed her upstairs to the room he had left such a short time ago.

Here in the little bed lay baby Anna, laughing at her toes. Beside her, sat Anna, with tears of joy streaming down her face.

"I'll be—!" But he checked his exclamation as he looked at Venna, dumfounded.

"You may well be surprised. Doctor. But with God nothing is impossible."

"I—I must have made a mistake—but yet—we were both so sure; strange! It's beyond me!"

Then Venna told him about the young preachers' gift of healing.

"Pooh! Nonsense!" exclaimed Dr. Jensen. "Don't let yourself believe such nonsense! Well, I must hurry off to the Board of Health and confess that we made our first mistake. It couldn't have been paralysis!"

So Dr. Jensen reported his error to the authorities, but Anna and Venna thanked God for the miracle.

When Mr. Halloway returned he was told the wonderful story. But, contrary to their expectations, he was not at all sceptical.

"I saw her this morning and I see her tonight," he said, very much impressed. "That is what I call proof!"

Anna and Venna asked the young preachers to prolong their stay.

"Both of us—and Mr. Halloway also, want to understand your beliefs thoroughly."

So the young missionaries consented to stay until they had given their message to its fullest extent.

When Bud spread the story of baby Anna's miraculous recovery, sentiment swayed like a pendulum, and the prejudice, temporarily overcome by sympathy, now asserted itself with greater force. Mr. Allworth was seen talking to groups of his parishioners and always gravely shaking his head.

"It is the work of Satan," he declared more than once.

He even felt it his duty to call upon Miss Haskell and consult with her upon this awful menace that had entered Ashfield!

"Is there no legal way of putting these young men out of town?" asked Mr. Allworth.

"Not unless you can persuade Mayor Holden they are doing mischief. It's hard to convince a man like him who is so worldly and not in touch with the Lord."

"Yes," spoke up Miss Mary piously, "but we might pray before attempting to convince him."

"You are right," said Miss Harriet with decision, "I'll go to him myself. Though he did insult me in his store, I'll show him I'm not afraid of him!"

So the "trio" prayed, after which Miss Harriet set out upon her dutiful errand. It was in the afternoon, so she would have a chance to see him alone. Sure enough, as she entered the store, there sat the postmaster, proprietor and Mayor, making out his monthly post-office report for Washington. Not a soul was in the store.

Boss Holden looked up with an inward groan. His monthly report was anything but pleasant, and here was Miss Harriet! He could tell by her expression that she had official business to transact!

"What can I do for you?" he asked, with rough kindness.

"I've come, Mayor Holden, to enter a protest against those young Mormon preachers remaining in town!"

"What have they done?" asked Holden, laying down his pen, and settling back in his chair comfortably.

His simple question and keen glance disconcerted Miss Haskell for a moment. Then she felt the fighting spirit rise within her.

"What haven't they done. Mayor Holden? They've gained such an influence over the young girls, I believe they'd all leave for Utah tomorrow, if asked, and they're spreading around town that they saved baby Anna from certain death. If they did, it was, because Satan helped them to it. Are all our labors in the churches to come to naught, while you sit calmly by and say nothing, 'till it's too late?"

Boss Holden smiled unpleasantly.

"To put the complaint in a nutshell. Miss Harriet, they've really done nothing yet, except get themselves liked and saved a baby! Can't oust them on that!"

"You refuse, then, to put them out?" asked Miss Harriet, stiffening with righteous scorn. "I can plainly see, Mayor Holden, how you never could enter a church! If you encourage evil influence here, you have no right to be Mayor of Ashfield!"

"Perhaps you'd like the job?" asked Mayor Holden, with rising anger.

"When women get the vote, they may have such opportunity," returned Miss Harriet, sharply. "I ask you again, do you refuse?"

"Damm't, I do! And I hope those decent fellows will stay here long enough to hand out their influence. To hell with all this gossip!"

Miss Haskell shuddered.

"Such language in the presence of a lady! I might have expected it. Well, Mayor Holden, if you won't do your duty, I shall!"

And with great dignity she left the store.

Holden mopped his brow with his handkerchief.

"What fool trick will she be up to now?" he muttered. "Join that church bunch? Guess not, Holden! You have too much respect for yourself," he chuckled.

Miss Harriet, Miss Mary and Mr. Allworth united forces in their great cause of duty toward Ashfield. They sent out notices to their neighbors, writing both mothers and fathers to attend meetings, in which the trio took turns in disclosing the "awful evils" in the "Mormon Menace." No children or young girls were admitted. The parents were horrified at the disclosures.

At these meetings, Mr. Allworth exerted his influence in true Methodist style. With tears and pleadings, he begged the people to "Beware!" The response was quick and decisive. They forbade their girls to go near Mrs. Hadly. The girls sullenly obeyed, but openly defended "The Mormons." This intensified the impression of the diabolical influence they possessed.

Meanwhile, all unconscious of the village murmurings, Venna, Anna and her husband were enjoying their visitors to the utmost. Anna's deep gratitude for the recovery of her babe helped the young missionaries in their convincing arguments.

Both Venna and Anna demanded Biblical proof for all doctrines. But Mr. Halloway accepted Mormonism after a few short talks.

"You go on reasoning, Anna," he said kindly, "but I've got enough proof right here in these two young men themselves. If ever God was with men. He's with these two. Haven't I seen enough of the world to know they have something different to other men? I've led the practical life and have learned to know men directly I meet them. They couldn't fool me. These men are not doing Satan's work. How do I know it? Because I know men. Now, if they're not of Satan, they have to be of God—or how did they save our babe? That's all the reasoning I want. I'm ready to have them teach me religion now. Thank God, there's some real religion in the world—something substantial to work on!"

Venna wondered at the girls' absence, but was too busy to give it much thought.

Toward the end of the week Bud came in the back door with a mysterious caution.

"Say, Stella, don't yer squeal I've been here. I want ter see Missus Hadly alone!"

"Come here. Bud," called Venna from the sitting room, as she heard his voice.

Bud entered cautiously, his eyes round with wonder.

"An' yer sitting here so calm like!" he exclaimed in open admiration.

"And why not, Bud dear?" she asked, laughing.

"Yer too good for Ashfield, Missus Hadly!" said Bud, gingerly touching one of her curls. "The divil's got holt o' this place!"

"What do you mean, Bud?"

"I mean I come ter warn yer an' yer friends. There's goin' ter be a des-tin-ation ter-night."

"Destination? You've got your big word wrong again. Bud. Use a smaller one."

"I tho't a big game ought ter hev a big word. Well, there's goin' ter be a show down o' feeling."

"Oh, you mean demonstration. I see—well, a demonstration of what feeling. Bud?"

"Feeling agin the Mormon fellers! Outside yer house ter night! I overheard Mister Allworth talking wi' Miss Harriet. I'll never like a minister again! Nasty, mean, isn't it?"

Venna looked serious. "Tell me everything you heard, Bud."

"Heard only words now an' then. I almost fell off the roof a' listenin'. Mother'll paddle me if she finds me here. Must be goin'. This house is got an awful name—all for nuthin', jes 'cause angels like you ain't the style no more."

Venna put her arms around Bud and hugged him close.

"You blessed lambie—if all the world were as fair as you!" she exclaimed, kissing both his round cheeks, much to Bud's pleasure.

"Run along now, dear. Don't get in trouble about us. You're good to warn us—we'll be prepared? Sugar cookies in the kitchen, you know!"

When Bud left her, Venna stood for a moment in troubled thought. "Is it possible that Christians can do these things to those who love the same God?" she asked, for the first time coming in conflict with the religious intolerance of the day. She had blissfully imagined that religious intolerance was a thing of the past. But Venna was only upon the threshold of religious experience.
