When we undertake to defend Christendom we often assist the devil.

It was almost dark when the Halloways, Venna and the missionaries had finished their evening meal. Venna decided to say nothing about Bud's information, as doubtless the warning grew out of his own imagination after hearing some unfavorable comments upon the "Mormons." No doubt the village was hating them. Brother Hallock said most of the Eastern people believed the lies circulated about the Church.

Venna felt a little uneasy as they all went into the sitting room. Suppose Bud had spoken the truth?

"Oh, it couldn't be," she decided.

She pulled down the shades and turned on the lights. She felt a strange comfort tonight in shutting out the outside world. Soon she was entertaining them with her violin. Never did she play better. Her music expressed her mixed feelings—now sad, now questioning, now joyously triumphant. Brother Hallock watched her with a wrapt expression, entirely lost to his surroundings.

At last her notes died away in a gentle trembling pianissimo. No one spoke as she laid down her violin. For a few moments each one enjoyed the spell of her genius.

Venna seated herself by the window and, drawing the shade aside, looked out. Suddenly she started. Coming down the hill, she saw a large group of about forty villagers, led by Mr. Allworth and Miss Harriet. What did it mean? She thought of Bud. She watched them as they approached. They were all talking excitedly.

"What interests you, Venna?" asked Anna.

"Quite a crowd are coming this way," she said, anxiously, as she turned to her friends. "I fear from what Bud said today, they are antagonistic to Brother Johnson and Brother Hallock."

"They are, are they?" spoke up Mr. Halloway brusquely, as he arose, went to the window and looked out. "Just let them utter any sentiments around here, and there will be trouble."

"Oh, dear, please don't pay any attention to them," pleaded Anna. "We'll lock the doors and not answer the bell at all. We are not interested in what they think."

The young missionaries looked serious.

"I'm sorry we've brought trouble to you good people," said Brother Hallock.

"You've brought us everything good; it's these people who bring us the bad," returned Halloway, as he went out to secure the locks.

The crowd had neared the house and as Halloway re-entered the sitting-room, the bell rang loudly.

"Let them ring," said Halloway in disgust. "Mayor Holden shall hear of this. He's not the kind to allow it."

"I'll go myself to the Mayor if they annoy you," said Brother Hallock.

"Oh, no! You must stay here," said Venna anxiously.

He smiled at her fears.

Once again the bell rang.

Receiving no answer, one young Methodist boy of sixteen shouted—

"Come out here, you Mormons! We want to give you your walking papers. If you don't go soon, we'll make it hot for you!"

No one made any attempt to stop the lad. He evidently expressed the opinion of the crowd.

"I'm not going to have you annoyed this way. I shall see the Mayor myself," said Brother Hallock, jumping up and going to the door.

Venna stepped in front of him and held the door fast, while the others were excitedly talking in the sitting-room, and did not notice.

"Do not open it," she said; "I fear for you."

He looked down into her anxious face with a calm smile.

"This—is nothing for us. We are used to almost any abuse. I shall never forget your kindness, though," he added earnestly.

And gently he took her hand from the door, and turning the lock, he opened it.

Standing face to face with the villagers who had crowded through the gate, he looked from side to side without a word. The dignity and fearlessness of Brother Hallock subdued them, for as he made to go down the steps, they moved apart to let him pass.

Silently he made his way through their midst, and Venna watched him walking leisurely toward Mayor Holden's, the crowd staring after him in wondering surprise.

Quickly she closed the door again.

"Well," said Miss Harriet sharply, "we all acted as though we were afraid. What's the matter with us all anyway?"

"It's the devil's power," said Mr. Allworth, shaking his head slowly. "I felt as though he cast a spell around us."

"And I, too," said Miss Mary, meekly.

"It will take more than our good intentions to get rid of that man!" declared Miss Harriet. "We'd better go home."

And so the crowd slowly turned tail. From under the stoop, a little figure bobbed up, and gazed after the retreating forms.

"Golly! That's no game fight!" said Bud, disappointed. "Tho't we'd had somethin' 'citing and could ha' used my water pistol. Gee! All he had ter do was ter look at 'em!"

The next day an official poster was put up on the post outside of Holden's store.

"Anyone attempting to annoy their neighbor, will be dealt with according to law.

"Signed

"Mayor Holden."

And at mail time Bud stationed himself beside the post, with hands thrust into pockets filled with gum-drops. As each citizen approached, he nodded his head sideways.

"See that sign? Some law here alrighty! Pity the feller thet breaks it!"

—

The afternoon after this unpleasant experience, Mr. Soffy called.

"I want to assure you, Mrs. Hadly, Miss Haskell told me nothing of her intentions—I presume because she knows I would have prevented her. I guess they all feel pretty small now, however."

"I was sure you had no knowledge of it," returned Venna, seriously. "But I do think your influence in this matter is needed. Won't you defend these two good men at your morning service next Sunday?"

"I—I—hardly think I could do that" returned Mr. Soffy, coloring to his temples. "You see, Mrs. Hadly, I know they are fine men, but to declare the fact in the little church would cause considerable antagonism and really do no good."

"The declaration of truth always does good finally."

"Well, yes, figuratively speaking, but we ministers have to be practical, too, you know."

"Mr. Soffy, what avails the Church if it countenances error? I thought you were above that 'worldly wisdom' reasoning!" she said, looking up into his face with great disappointment.

How beautiful she was as she stood pleading the cause of the Mormons! His whole soul thrilled with the perfection of her! If he should sacrifice a little materially, what was that to gaining her love?

"And if I should grant you this request, what would you do for me?" he asked, smiling down at her.

"Oh, anything you could ask of me!" she declared in extravagant delight.

Before Venna realized what had happened, his arm had encircled her waist and his kiss was upon her cheek.

Venna drew back quickly and faced him in astonished anger.

"How dare you!" she said, trembling like a frightened child.

"I dare because I love you, Venna. God knows how much. It's the best that's in me that loves you, not the worst. It is not my fault that I love you, or that you love me, as I believe you do. You resent my love from duty, don't you? You think I'll think less of you if you love me? No, dear, love is love's excuse. The world wouldn't understand, but the world needn't know. You and I can love ideally without the aid of the law, can't we?"

Venna listened to this man, and watched his fine eloquent eyes convey his devotion to her while speaking. There was no doubting his sincerity.

What a paradox! A Christian minister asking love of a married woman without a twinge of conscience! Surely the world was whirling around and morality was simply a question mark!

Steadily she looked at him in silence, trying to fathom his nature and understand.

"You are angry with me?" he asked gently.

"No, Mr. Soffy, I don't think I am. But I pity you; oh! how I pity you!" she said sadly.

"You don't love me, then?" he asked in a tone of agitation and fear.

"No, Mr. Soffy, I don't even respect you."

"Why?" he asked, his pride clearly hurt.

"I hardly think you could understand," returned Venna sadly. "There is a great barrier between us, a barrier of spiritual understanding. I realize your sin. You do not."

"Wherein have I sinned?" he asked. "Is it a sin to devote one's life to his ideal, and love her above all else?"

"Yes," returned Venna, "when we love her more than our duty."

"And what is duty?" he asked, cynically.

"Ask your God, Mr. Soffy. He will answer you so that you may understand. Good-bye," she added, holding out her hand.

He took it and pressed it hard.

"When can I see you again?" he asked eagerly.

"Never, Mr. Soffy."

"You don't mean that?" he asked, growing suddenly pale.

"Yes," she answered simply, looking at him with a great pity in her lovely eyes.

Without a word, he slowly dropped her hand and left her.

She looked from the window and watched him walk down the steps, his head bowed in thought.

When he reached the gate, he met Brother Hallock. The two shook hands and exchanged a few words.

"What a contrast!" thought Venna, watching the two men. "The one sacrificing all for duty—the other sacrificing duty for self!"

Brother Hallock came directly into the room to Venna.

"Mrs. Hadly, Brother Johnson and myself have decided to resume our journey tomorrow."

"Oh, we will all be so disappointed if you go so soon," returned Venna, suddenly feeling that she needed this man's presence.

"We couldn't think of staying after the affair last night. It wouldn't be fair to you. Besides, our duty calls us away now. You know we missionaries are not out to enjoy ourselves," he added, smiling.

"There are so many things I want to ask you yet," she said, hoping she might detain him a few days longer.

"And we will be so glad to answer them. Uncle Sam's post-office will handle our correspondence, I hope. We will never forget you all, and when you return to New York, we will call, and I will introduce you to our Mission President's family and other saints. I know you will enjoy our meetings."

"I know I shall," returned Venna, happy in the thought. "I appreciate your religion more and more by contrasting it with others," she added.

"It will bear the light," replied Brother Hallock seriously. He looked at her intently a moment and then added, "No good thing needs to be hidden in the dark. Only evil fears the light."

Venna dropped her eyes. Could it be possible he divined Mr. Soffy's love for her?

She felt his persistent gaze. She raised her eyes and fearlessly met his.

"I agree with you, Brother Hallock. I hope God will always give me power to make my life an open book!"

He gave a quick sigh of relief.

"Thank God for that sentiment!" he returned earnestly.
