The happiness derived from doing our duty is the greatest joy the world affords.

"How I miss Brother Hallock and Brother Johnson!" exclaimed Anna, as she and Venna settled down to a quiet afternoon with their sewing and books.

"Yes, we will all miss their influence—even babe," returned Venna, looking at little Anna playing on her pillow.

Baby smiled her assent.

Anna leaned over and kissed her.

"My precious little angel!" she said, hugging her wee one tight. "You know, Venna, I always called her 'angel,' but now my pet name for her has a significance!"

"Yes," replied Venna, "how much more beautiful life seems, now that we have learned so many wonderful truths. You know, Anna, life has a different perspective for me now. When I think of the wonderful purpose God had in placing us here and the short period of probation that our lives afford us, I have no other thought than to do my highest duty."

"And that is?" asked Anna.

"First, living up to all my vows. I know you'll be surprised at my decision. Read this letter I received this morning from Will."

Anna took the letter and read:

"Dearest Venna:

"I'm in a strange mood tonight. I feel as though life had ended for me. I don't know why I should write to you since you have cast me off as worthless. But somehow I'm not myself. I'm weak stuff to write to one who despises me. But love makes a fool of a man anyway. The counterfeit of love ruins a man's youth, and then when the real thing comes along, it's just about as bad. No satisfaction in any of it! I'd be glad to finish myself tonight—but I love you too much to create a scandal. Are you so hard that you can't even write me a friendly word? I'll be true to you, whether you love me or not. You might be at least kind. Write me a letter—any kind of a one, won't you?

"Venna, if you ever love a man you think good enough for you, let me know and I'll slip out. You haven't the least conception of my love for you. You're so ignorant of the world. You think of those other women. They were nothing to me. I guess you're right about men not stooping to such actions, but there are two sides to every question, Venna. They tempt the young men. They deserve all they get. I'm sorry for my past because of you. I don't pity them.

"It's useless to write more. You'll write the same hard, uncompromising note in return, I suppose.

"Well, throw my devotion to the dogs if you wish. You may need it, though. If so, it's yours.

"Always your devoted husband,

"Will."

As Anna handed back the letter to Venna, her eyes were filled with tears.

"There's lots of good in your husband, Venna," she said seriously.

"And I am stifling it," returned Venna quietly. "In the light of the Gospel, I see myself as I really am. I'm not living to save souls, but to save myself from unpleasant experiences. Anna, I'm going back to Will."

Anna's eyes glistened through her tears.

"You dear girl! Now you've struck the right keynote to your life. God will bless you for it."

"He has already. I have never felt so happy as since I wrote this letter. Read it."

Anna read eagerly.

"Dear Will:

"I shall come home tomorrow. We will begin all over again and make our lives a success.

"Yours faithfully,

"Venna."

Anna looked up with a smile. "Wonderful, Venna! But couldn't you write 'Yours lovingly?'"

"It wouldn't be true," replied Venna, coloring.

"You can't love him then?" asked Anna doubtfully.

"No, but I love duty, Anna, and I'll pray God to make me love him in time. I'll do my best."

"You can't do more," returned her friend. "So I am to lose you also. I don't think I'll stay here long alone. I've come to dislike Ashfield so."

"It don't seem the same, does it? We mustn't forget, however, that here we received the Truth."

So the following day Venna quietly left Ashfield. None knew of her going, and as she sat in the train, bound for New York, she was thankful she was leaving the "simple life" which only two months ago she was idealizing.

At the New York station, Will Hadly met her. She felt shocked at the change in him. He was thin and pale, with that drawn look upon his face which betokened mental worry.

Her heart smote her. Pity surged within her, and she looked up at him with real concerned emotion, which he mistook for love.

"Dearest," he whispered, "I can scarcely believe my exile is over! I received your letter this morning. The servants are so delighted you're coming. They're hustling all day to make the home fit to receive their queen!"

When they reached the Fifth Avenue home, Venna entered with a strange, trembling fear. A new life was before her—a happy life, but one of sacrifice—and sacrifice was a new experience!

As they entered the door, the fragrance of roses greeted her. Everywhere flowers! Hadly had spared no expense to have the home filled with nature's best.

"A garland of roses for my bride!" he said, gaily laughing at her surprise. "And now to the feast!" he exclaimed, leading her into the dining-room. Here the daylight had been shut out, and all the lights were ablaze.

The table was set for two, with every conceivable dainty for a joyous feast.

"Does my bride approve?" he asked tenderly.

Venna looked up at him tearfully. "You couldn't have done better." was all she said.

The dinner over, Venna and her husband went into the old library. Venna looked around and vivid memories of her life filled her eyes with tears.

"What troubles you?" Hadly asked, fearing she was regretting her step.

"This room makes me think of dear father. It was almost his room."

"Yes, I know," returned Hadly, relieved. "Look over your shoulder, you will see a present for my bride."

Venna turned and there upon the wall, she beheld a life-sized portrait of her father, gazing down upon them, with an almost life-like smile.

"O Will!" she exclaimed.

She could say nothing more, but moved slowly to the picture and stood gazing up at the familiar face with an expression of intense yearning. She did not even hear the bell.

Hadly heard it, however, and stepped to the hall.

"We see no one tonight," he instructed the servant. Then he quietly closed the door and stepped over to Venna's side. Putting his arm about her, he gently drew her to him.

"You like it?" he asked, pleased.

"Oh, it was so thoughtful of you!" she exclaimed gratefully. "I can feel his presence here tonight."

The door opened so quietly that neither one noticed it.

Hadly stooped and kissed Venna.

A loud laugh made them turn suddenly.

"The kiss of death!" mocked a woman's voice in scorn.

There in the doorway stood a woman heavily veiled.

She leveled a pistol at Hadly and a loud shot followed.

Her aim was true. Hadly fell heavily at Venna's feet. The woman turned and fled.

No sound escaped Venna's lips. White as death she stooped and gently lifted his head. The servants, hearing the shot, rushed in. She ordered them to summon aid. In fear and trembling they instantly obeyed.

Alone with her husband, a terrible fear possessed her. Was he dead? Was she too late with her pity?

Slowly his eyes opened and looked up into her face.

"Venna girl," he whispered, "it's all over—my dream—it's a rude awakening, but it's best—best for you—Venna, my bride!"

"No! No! Will! We will save you! Have courage!"

She stooped and tenderly kissed his forehead, then gently stroked his hair.

He smiled happily.

"The kiss of death! Yes—how sweet! Good-bye, Venna—find a man worthy of the best—little"—

The sentence was never finished. When help came, they found Venna sobbing hysterically with Hadly in her arms!—dead!
