"Our extremity is God's opportunity."

It was just a month since Will Hadly's death.

Pale and serious in her black mourning gown, Venna sat alone in the library answering letters. This was her first opportunity, as every minute of her time had been so far taken up with lawyers.

She had found her financial affairs in excellent condition, new and careful investments having been made by her husband. However, she was surprised that his supposed fortune was entirely gone. He died penniless, having gambled away everything he possessed.

This was a sad revelation to her, but money from him was not needed. How conscientious he had been with her own!

She took up two letters from Brother Johnson and Brother Hallock. They were filled with sympathy and good advice.

In a few weeks they would be through with their country work and be living in New York.

How she longed to see them! Religious longings had grown within her since the tragic death of her husband.

She answered both letters slowly, asking many questions and requesting answers. She was in that nervous condition which makes one feel that not one minute of life can be lost, and every problem must be immediately solved.

As she was folding up these letters, the maid announced a caller.

"I can't see any one yet," said Venna, shrinking from the outside world.

"The lady told me to give you this card, and you might make an exception."

Venna took the card. "May a friend of Brother Hallock's see you a few minutes?" was informally written.

"I will see her," said Venna.

A short, stout woman entered the room and held out a friendly hand to Venna as she came forward.

"I'm so glad to meet you, dear Mrs. Hadly," she said in a quiet, pleasant voice. "Brother Hallock wrote me that you might like to have one of our faith call upon you. I hope I'm not intruding?"

"No, indeed," returned Venna, feeling a quickening influence from this bright, motherly person.

"I'm Sister Maddon. My husband is president of the —— Company, so we have to live East now. I miss the West so much, but I'm thankful we have a conference of our people here. I want you to meet all the Latter-day Saints right soon, won't you?" she asked cordially.

Venna looked down at her black dress.

"Yes, I know," continued her new friend, sitting next to Venna and taking her thin white hand in her own large, capable one. "Don't think because I don't dwell upon it, that I fail to understand your sorrow. It's kinder to help one forget and not bring sad things to the surface. It won't do anyone any good to sit at home and grieve. Let me tell you about our people here, and then perhaps you will want to meet them soon."

For the next hour Venna completely lost herself in listening to her caller's vivid description of the Eastern Conference work, its leaders and their difficulties. When the hour had passed, she felt as though she had known this woman many years. She expressed herself to this effect.

"It is the Spirit of the Lord, dear girl, that draws us together," she explained with a bright, happy smile. "The spirit of the world never does that, does it?"

"No, indeed!" exclaimed Venna. "Somehow I never shrunk from the world as I do now."

"When you have the Gospel firmly written on your heart, you will be eager to enter the world and help it."

When her visitor left, Venna promised to spend the following Saturday with her.

"No one will be there but you and I and the children. We'll have a cosy day that will take you out of yourself," assured Sister Maddon.

—

As Sister Maddon left the house, Mrs. Hansom entered.

"My dear Venna," she said, putting her arms around her niece affectionately, "you look pale as death. I insist on your packing up some things and coming home with me for a month."

"No, no! Auntie dear, I couldn't stand it, really. So many people all the time. If it were only you, dear, but"—

"Don't you know everyone understands and sympathizes with you?"

"Of course—that's just it. They sympathize and condole, until I can't stand it. Don't think I'm ungrateful, but just leave me alone for a little while. Just you come to see me, dear, and I'll come around finely."

"Who was that lady who just went out?"

Venna hesitated. She had told her aunt nothing of her Mormon faith. She hardly felt equal to her disapproval, but she couldn't deceive. It was plainly her duty to declare herself.

"Auntie dear," she said quietly, "that lady is a friend of a Mormon missionary who visited us in the country. He is a wonderful young man, and quite converted Anna, her husband and myself."

Mrs. Hansom at first look puzzled, then suddenly frightened.

"You don't mean you entertained a Mormon?"

"Yes, two of them," returned Venna, slightly smiling.

"And—and Anna allowed it?" queried her aunt, dismayed.

"Not only allowed it, but felt sad at their going." This was too awful for words. Mrs. Hansom gazed at her niece with shame and sorrow.

"You weren't influenced by such people, were you? What do you mean by 'Converted?' Wasn't your father's faith good enough for you, Venna?"

"I've lost nothing of dear father's faith," returned Venna, looking up at his picture, as her eyes became moist. "How sad it is that Christians won't understand these good Mormon people! I have simply strengthened the weak and tottering faith I possessed by learning and accepting added great truths. Oh, if you only knew these missionaries, you would feel their power!"

"Evidently you have felt their power," returned Mrs. Hansom cooly. "I never thought I would live to see this day!"

There was no anger in the keen, searching look Venna gave her aunt. She was trying to read her soul and fathom the mystery of this un-Christian attitude toward the Mormons. There seemed only one explanation.

"Auntie, those anti-Mormon lecturers, who have poisoned the minds of so many Church people, are terribly responsible before God for their lies. When Brother Hallock returns to the city, I'll have you meet him and then you'll know the truth."

"I would not have him enter my door!" returned Mrs. Hansom.

"You wouldn't, then, consider the other side?" asked Venna.

"Not in the case of the Mormons."

Venna did not answer for a moment. Her eyes wandered again to her father's picture.

"Father would have listened," she said softly.

Her aunt colored.

"Yes, I believe dear John would listen to anyone. He was too soft-hearted for this world. Yes, and in those days I would have, too, I suppose. But Dr. Hansom has taught me that compromise kills. I am much stronger for his great influence," she added with pride.

Venna looked at her aunt with a great pity. How she had changed. She seemed to reflect her husband's character as far as her weak nature would permit.

"Auntie, if you refuse to hear the defense how can you judge?"

"It isn't always well to listen to Satan's defense—it often blurs your conceptions—those are Dr. Hansom's exact words. I've heard him give them more than once."

Venna smiled in spite of herself.

"I'm talking to auntie—not to Dr. Hansom," she said kindly.

"Dr. Hansom and I think alike on all subjects," she returned firmly. "Now, Venna, I hope you'll get over this foolishness very quickly. We could never tolerate it, you know. I must get home now, for the 'Auxiliary' meeting is at my house. You won't return with me?"

"Not to-day, auntie. Please come often, won't you?"

"I'm afraid you need it, child!" exclaimed her aunt anxiously. And with a kiss and a pat of the rebellious curls, she was gone.

Venna stood in front of "Daddy's" picture and the tears streamed down both pale cheeks.

"Dear Daddy, if you were only here! You were so fair to everyone. You would understand. Oh, how I need you!"

Suddenly a great wave of happiness swept over her being. She felt a presence in the room. She turned. There in the door-way, with arms outstretched, stood Daddy, her Daddy, with the same old loving smile of approval and understanding.

Motionless she stood, gazing with unspeakable joy.

What a great love shone from his eyes—a protecting love that seemed to thrill her with new confidence and hope.

"Daddy!" she exclaimed and stepped toward him.

She was about to clasp his hand, but he vanished from her touch.

Venna, dazed, stood alone. But the influence of his presence remained with her. New rapturous emotion filled her breast, new hopes, new determination were hers!

She knelt down and prayed.

"O God! I thank Thee for this wonderful vision! Help me to be worthy!"

She arose from her knees with a radiant countenance.

"Daddy is not dead!" she murmured happily. "He knows! He will help me!"
