To be popular and also truthful is beyond the power of man.

Sister Maddon was busy bustling about the kitchen, giving directions to her maid for the lunch to be prepared for their new visitor, Mrs. Hadly.

"Now, Mary, make the table look just as cheery as you can. Put the flowers at both ends, and choose the doilies with the brightest colors."

"Me, too, mudder?" piped up the three-year-old urchin tugging at her skirts.

"Yes, sugar plum, if you're awfully good and don't ask for anything at the table."

"Me good!" exclaimed the delighted child, dropping his mother's skirts and running in to tell his older sister.

"That means I'm to wash you up," said eight-year-old Eleanor, catching the youngster and smothering him with kisses.

The kitchen door opened to admit a noisy boy of ten.

"Golly! mother! Things smell good around here. Going to be a company dinner?"

"Yes, Teddy, and if you don't look just as clean as wax, you can't enter the domains!" returned his mother, smiling.

"Me for a wash-up!" exclaimed Teddy, throwing his hat high in the air. "Just watch me! I wouldn't miss a feed for anything."

Mother indulgently handed him a fresh cookie as he went out.

"You're the bestest ever!" he exclaimed.

Another minute brought twelve-year-old blue-eyed Grace to the door.

"Mother dear, I can't find baby's best dress. I have her all fluffed up except that. May I dress now?"

"Yes, dearie. I'll finish baby myself."

And so when Venna arrived, everyone, spic and span, was ready to meet her.

When Venna first entered the large living room in the Maddon home, it seemed to her that children popped out of every corner.

Mrs. Maddon proudly introduced each one, even holding out baby Ann for inspection.

"And this is our smallest, teeniest one," she said, as Venna took the bundle of lace.

"You little angel," said Venna, smiling. "I've been loving another baby Ann this summer." Then Venna told of the child's sickness and recovery.

"Brother Hallock is a man of great faith," said Sister Maddon. "I know him well. We'll be glad to get him back."

When they were all seated at the table, every little head bowed with their mother's.

"I think Grace may ask the blessing," said Sister Maddon.

"God bless the food prepared for our use. May it strengthen and help us for the work before us. Amen," said Grace softly.

Venna looked from one face to the other with admiration.

"What a perfect home picture, Sister Maddon! And this custom of asking the blessing—I like it so much. Something you seldom see in the East."

After a "homey" lunch, which Venna enjoyed more because of the merry faces of the children, Mrs. Maddon and Venna went upstairs alone.

"I want to show you some pictures of the West," she said, taking out a large portfolio full of photographs.

"This was my home," she said, looking fondly at a picture of a large, comfortable house with surrounding porches, upon which played the children.

"Bless their hearts! How they did love the freedom out there. There's no open places for them to play here."

"Are all Mormon families as large as yours?" asked Venna.

"Most of them are larger," returned Sister Maddon, laughing.

"How do you ever manage?" asked Venna in wondering admiration.

"That's what all the Eastern women say! My dear Mrs. Hadly, women in the East don't know how to really enjoy life. They think they do. They imagine that 'dolling up,' going to balls and theatres and whist parties, give them a good time. But they're not as happy as we are. They pity us and—we pity them!"

"No, I don't believe they know true happiness. One or two children is the limit as a rule—except among the lower classes."

"The lower classes then are the best off."

"But suppose, Sister Maddon, a husband turns out badly. Then a woman must have a struggle to get along."

"That happens sometimes," returned Mrs. Maddon. "But as a rule our men are as near perfect husbands as the Lord ever intended. You see our boys are brought up to be chaste and pure. There is an equal standard of morality for our boys and girls, so they don't sow their wild oats before they're married and then offer their wife a remnant of manhood. We Mormon women can't understand how some Eastern women marry these worn-out sports. I wouldn't want one for the father of my children. My darlings are my whole ambition in life. I believe I was created for that ambition and its attainment."

"Don't any of your girls ever long for a career?" asked Venna.

"Oh, yes, many of them. And Mormon parents always try to develop every talent a girl has. But even our ambitious women finally marry and have large families. They have to be in the world a few years to realize that the highest womanly ambition is to be a mother."

There was a general shouting among the children downstairs.

"Something is pleasing them," said Mother Maddon, laughing.

In a few minutes Teddy bounced in.

"What d'you think, mother? Brother Hallock's come back!" he declared excitedly.

"Already? Why, that's fine, to be sure. We'll come down directly."

"You bet it's dandy!" agreed Teddy, bouncing out again and going downstairs two steps at the time.

Mother Maddon turned to Venna.

"How those children do adore him! You see he lives with us when in the city and every spare minute he spends with those children—he certainly deserves a good, wholesome wife. But I don't have to worry about him yet. He has another year of mission work, and missionaries aren't allowed to speak of love to any woman. So I have a whole year to give him good advice!" she said, laughing. "Come, we must go down to him."

Venna needed no urging. She was anxious to talk with him.

Brother Hallock received both women with great friendliness. The children, fearful of letting him go, clung around him as he held out both hands.

There was great sympathy in the keen glance he gave Venna. He realized her state of mind by the great change in her.

"A little while with these youngsters would bring the roses back to your cheeks, Mrs. Hadly," he said, kindly.

"I'm sure it would," returned Venna, looking at the children with a wistful smile. "How fortunate this woman is!" she thought.

He noticed her expression.

"What do you think of a 'Mormon' family?" he asked.

"I think it is Theodore Roosevelt's idea of what every American family should be," returned Venna.

After a very happy afternoon and a promise to come again, Venna took her leave. Brother Hallock escorted her home.

"Won't you come in?" asked Venna when they reached the house.

"Not to-night, thank you. But if you are willing, I will call to-morrow afternoon."

And so they parted. Venna to a good night of refreshing sleep. Brother Hallock to a rather restless night, with dreams of his saving Venna from all kinds of catastrophes.

The next afternoon Venna lost herself in more discussion and explanation of the "Mormon" faith. Her afternoon in Brother Hallock's company would have been perfect, but for the fact that her Aunt Emily came in upon them unexpectedly. Venna introduced her to Brother Hallock. She frigidly acknowledged the introduction, said a few parting words to Venna—she was going away for two weeks with Dr. Hansom—and then quickly left the house.

Brother Hallock relieved Venna's embarrassment.

"Don't feel badly on my account," he said, smiling. "There are very few ministers' wives that tolerate us at all. We expect that."

The next morning's mail brought a short letter to Venna.

"Dear Venna:

"Dr. Hansom and I are grieved beyond words. Are you so under the spell of those evil-minded Mormons that you intend to disgrace us all? Do you stop for a moment to consider that all your friends will cast you off? Dr. Hansom said, 'I wouldn't want to acknowledge a Mormon as a relative.' But he is so good and kind he would not cast you off, for my sake. O, Venna, recover yourself, before it is too late and your life is ruined! Dr. Hansom will ask all his people to pray for your deliverance. I gave him your message, asking him to discuss the subject with you. He says, "There is nothing to discuss. As soon waste time talking over fairy tales."

"So you see his great and generous mind has only pity for you, dear. When we come back, let us come to the dear old Venna we always loved, with her simple faith.

"Yours always lovingly,

"Aunt Emily."

Venna laid the letter down with a sigh. Then she opened another from Ashfield.

"Dear Venna,

"This is just a short note from your Anna. How we all miss you more and more! I can't return to the city until the paralysis epidemic is over, so you have the advantage over me. I suppose by the time we come back you'll know all the good Mormons in the city.

"Mr. Soffy called and asked for your address. I told him you left word that I should give it to no one. He got very red and walked out with a very angry expression. Bud also wanted to write, so I held his hand and helped spell his words. Here is his letter enclosed. Let me know how you are and if you are overcoming your great sorrow. Time will show you, dear, it was all for the best.

"Lovingly,

"Anna."

Venna smiled as she unfolded Bud's letter.

"Dear Missus Hadly:

"Wot I can't spell, yer friend will. Ashfield is so powerful lonesome since yer went. They have it yer in Utah with the Mormons and thet yer husband has tin other wives. Yer friend says taint true, so don't yer think I believe it.

"Mr. Soffy give a sermon on Delusions—I got thet word right this time for I said it over an over all week. Every one said it was sure fine. Miss Mary said it was meant ter hit yer, an I up an' told her, Mr. Soffy was dirty mean ter cast inflections on yer. Miss Mary told ma wot I said, and she up an gave me a lickin. But wen I wus sore all over, I felt a sort o satisfactory in suffrin fer won I love. I up an tole Boss Holden this, an' he says yer worth all the humiliation we can give yer.

"Write ter me to yer friend so ma won't see it.

"Yours always in emotion,

"Bud."

"Dear Bud!" said Venna softly, "some day your devotion shall be repaid!"
