"Somewhere in France."

In a convalescing tent sat a young officer, writing. When finished, he took up the letter for perusal.

"Venna Dearest:

"You have doubtless worried at my long silence.

"A month ago I was brought here from the front, seriously wounded. When I finally came to myself, I feared worrying you, so did not let you know until all danger was past. I prayed to live to go again to the front, and God granted my prayer.

"O Venna, my brave little wife! How I long to clasp you again in my arms! But we are many miles apart. God grant that this cruel war will soon be over, and that you and I may meet again in dear old, free America.

"In one week I shall go to the front again.

"The doctors cannot understand my miraculous recovery, but you and I, dear, know what faith can do. Pray for me always.

"Your devoted husband,

"Walter."

While he was folding the letter in an envelope, a private entered.

"A message for you, Capt. Hallock," he said, saluting his superior.

Capt. Hallock took the message and read.

He turned pale and grasped the chair convulsively.

When left alone, he covered his face with his hands and sobbed.

"My Venna killed! God! How can I stand it!" he cried in agony of spirit.

He felt a hand laid upon his shoulder. With quick self-control he turned and looked up into the face of one of his comrades.

"Bad news, Hallock?"

"My wife is dead!" returned Hallock with a stern compression of his lips.

There was silence for a moment while his comrade looked his sympathy into his friend's eyes. Then he held out his soldier's hand which Hallock grasped.

"Remember, Hallock," he said with emotion, "when you converted me to your Mormon faith, you comforted me with the thought that my dead wife had simply passed on before. There is no death. We will both have our loved ones soon—probably very soon, for next week comes the German drive with you and I at the front!"

Hallock straightened himself up bravely.

"As God wills!" he calmly returned.

—

The battle was finished. On the field lay the wounded and dying. The night was fast closing in to add its darkness to the horror and the gloom of it all.

Most of the prostrate forms were quiet in death, but many were moaning piteously.

"Is there no help near?" asked one of them. "Water! Oh, for a drink!"

Hallock felt for his flask. It was empty.

"No," returned Hallock. "No help yet."

"Comrades," he cried, raising his voice as high as his feeble condition would allow—"we are all soon to go to that other shore from which no man returns. Let us go gladly, heroically—like soldiers, not like cowards caught in the jaws of death. Remember! We are entering a glorious life!"

With the last words he fell back and the blackness of night settled over the battlefield.

A bright shaft of light suddenly shone high above Hallock's head. It drew nearer and nearer, until it dazzled him with its brilliancy.

With a thrill of unearthly joy Hallock beheld, approaching through the wondrous light, Venna! His glorified Venna!

His arms outstretched in welcome.

"I have come to take you over," she said, softly, as she encircled her arms about him.

"For all eternity!" he murmured happily.
