On the shores of Eternity, Venna and Walter communed together.

"At Last!" said Walter joyously. "How wonderful our life is here!"

"And to think that greater glory will yet be ours as we eternally progress!" exclaimed Venna in ecstasy.

"Is it not strange," returned Walter, "that our earthly troubles seem as though they had never been!"

"Ah! dear heart! If the world could only see beyond the veil!"

At this moment she looked along the shore with sudden joy.

"Here comes Daddy!" she said as a holy joy suffused her radiant countenance.

Beside him walked a beautiful woman.

"It is your mother, Venna!" said Walter.

Venna pressed her cheek fondly against Walter's.

"If this is Paradise," she whispered, "I dare not think of Heaven!"

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VENNA HASTINGS: STORY OF AN EASTERN MORMON CONVERT ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE
