Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

1

JESUS AND THE GOSPELS

KENT P. JACKSON

As Jesus spoke to the Father in his great intercessory prayer, he uttered these words: "And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was." (John 17:5.) What was the glory that Jesus had with the Father "before the world was"? Abraham, beholding that time in vision, reported that Jesus was "like unto God." (Abr. 3:22, 24.) Into the hands of him who later was to become his Only Begotten in the flesh, the Father had given all power and all authority in the universe. Jesus was "the brightness of [the Father's] glory, and the express image of his person," who upholds "all things by the word of his power." (Heb. 1:3.) Such divine acts as the creation of worlds without number, the governing of the earth and millions of others like it, the revelation to the prophets, and the atonement for all of God's children were entrusted into the hands of Jesus Christ, Jehovah, the Lord God of the universe, the Father of heaven and earth. Jesus was, as Paul taught, "in the form of God" and "thought it not robbery to be equal with God." (Philip. 2:6.) How mighty this man was as a spirit son of God in premortality that the Father would endow him with all of the attributes of deity save only those that pertain to the possession of a physical body. How we, his spirit siblings but spiritual underlings, must have stood in awe of him as we followed him in the course that the Father laid out for his children. How we must have admired the indescribable wisdom with which, even then, he administered the Father's plan. How we must have marveled at the unutterable courage with which he stepped forward to accept the burden of the holy atonement. If the present sensitivities that we feel for him, his sacred eternal work, and his gospel plan are any indication of the admiration that we had at that time in his presence, then heaven is a glorious place indeed. And if it is glorious because of the presence of the Son there, how glorious it must be because of the presence of the Father, the source of all glory in eternity.

From Glory to Glory

Jesus' mission was not limited to his acts of creation, his governing of the worlds, or his communication with prophets. As the Word of God, as the living embodiment of the Father and the Father's divine will in all things, his mission also included treading the paths of mortality, coming to earth to descend below all things—to be tested in all things to an even greater degree than we are, yet without committing sin. His coming to earth in the humblest of circumstances disguised his identity and the mission for which he was sent. Yet it was his coming under those very circumstances that made his work effective and his mission complete. As the children's hymn so sublimely testifies,

He came down to earth from heaven,

Who is God and Lord of all,

And His shelter was a stable,

And his cradle was a stall;

With the poor, and mean, and lowly,

Lived on earth our Saviour holy. [^1]

As Paul wrote, Jesus "made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself." (Philip. 2:7-8.) The letter to the Hebrews teaches: "Wherefore in all things it behooved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted. . . . For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feelings of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin." (Heb. 2:17-18; 4:15.)

Indeed, one of the reasons for his descending from his divine throne to become as we are was to establish the pattern for all men and women to follow. Christ became one of us so he could demonstrate that commandments can be kept and that a righteous walk through life can be accomplished. To the millions who have experienced sorrow in their mortal existence, it is of great worth to know that there is One who has sorrowed more. And those who have suffered trials and temptations can know that there is One who not only has overcome such adversity but who also empathizes with those who are still learning how.

For he is our childhood's pattern,

Day by day like us He grew:

He was little, weak, and helpless,

Tears and smiles like us He knew;

And He feeleth for our sadness,

And He shareth in our gladness. [^2]

But Christ's mortality was much more than this. It included his atoning suffering—suffering that is beyond the comprehension of men. He descended below all things, suffered more than we can suffer, and sorrowed more than we can sorrow. And all this was done for others, an expression of his incredible grace, the greatest of his many divine attributes. Paul bore witness: "He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross." (Philip. 2:8.) As we ponder Paul's testimony, let us not forget of whom he spoke. This was Jehovah, Almighty God himself, who descended, humbled himself, suffered, and died—for us.

Jesus' atonement, the ultimate act of sacrifice and servitude, was also his greatest triumph. In carrying out this labor of supreme love, he demonstrated for all people in all places in all eternity what greatness really consists of. His atonement shows us how petty are our own vain delusions of grandeur and our obsession with rank and status and their symbols in whatever form they may be found. All definitions of worth must be measured against the example of Christ. Our man-made scales do not measure real value; they pervert it instead. When James and John and their mother came to the Master with requests for status and position in the hereafter, he gently taught them that real greatness comes not in rank but in service and commitment: "Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant: even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many." (Matt. 20:25-28.) Jesus knew this better than anyone else, for he who was greatest of all had descended to the lowest, so that when he returned to his rightful place of glory, he could take others—some of us—with him.

And Jesus did return to his place of glory. Paul taught: "Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name: that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, . . . and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father." (Philip. 2:9-11.) He who was called the sacrificial Lamb of God in mortality is now "KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS." (Rev. 19:16.) But even with that, his work is not yet accomplished, for his eternal mission, like that of his Father, is to "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life" of all who will receive it. (Moses 1:39.)

And our eyes at last shall see Him,

Through His own redeeming love;

For that Child so dear and gentle

Is the Lord in heaven above;

And He leads His children on

To the place where He is gone.

Not to that poor lowly stable,

With the oxen standing by,

We shall see Him, but in heaven,

Set at God's right hand on high;

When like stars His children crowned,

All in white shall wait around. [^3]

The Vocabulary of Messiahship

The words used in sacred literature to describe Jesus proclaim his divinity and the nature of his mission. Let us examine a few of these.

First, he has saved us—all who ever have or ever will be born into mortality—from the bonds of physical death, the separation of body and spirit. All will be resurrected from the dead: those who have lived righteously to a resurrection of glory, and those who have lived unrighteously to a resurrection of damnation. That this is a marvelous gift of grace from the Lord is attested in the scriptures (see especially 2 Ne. 9:7-10).

Second, he has saved us from spiritual death, which means alienation from God, death as to the things of righteousness. We attain this condition when we sin in any degree. In doing so, we cut ourselves off from God and make it impossible for us to return to his presence, for "no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of heaven" (Alma 11:37), and God "shall not save his people in their sins" (Alma 11:36). When we sin, we become unclean and therefore unworthy to enter his presence. Christ saved us from the eternal consequences of this situation. Yet the salvation that he brought about from spiritual death is not dispensed to the unworthy; it is conditioned on our faithfulness. We are indeed saved by grace, the unearned and eternally unmerited grace of Christ. Yet Christ has decreed that only those who live faithfully, in accordance with gospel standards and covenants, will be the recipients of his saving work. While we can never "earn" salvation from the bonds of spiritual death, it is only on condition of faithfulness to the laws and ordinances of the gospel that Christ will grant that saving blessing to us. In the Garden of Gethsemane and on the cross, he paid the price in full and did all of the work that brings salvation. It was "an infinite and eternal sacrifice." (Alma 34:10.) Yet out of his incomprehensible love, he will grant his saving grace to us, his unworthy servants, if we will only do his will. We will be in his debt throughout all eternity.

In all things the atonement is the focus. Repentance is not a self-existing principle; it is possible only because Christ has already paid the penalty for our sins and thus can remove them from us if we repent of them. Our repentance, our resurrection, our redemption, and our ultimate exaltation are all products of Jesus Christ and his atoning work.

The Testimonies of the New Covenant

The word testament means "covenant." It is used in this sense in both the Old and the New Testaments, and both volumes of scripture derive their name from this source. The New Testament refers to the new testament of Christianity, which is found within its pages. In the Old Testament, Jeremiah quotes the Lord concerning a new covenant that God would establish with his people—not the old covenant that was written on tablets of stone, but a new covenant to be written in the hearts of faithful Saints. (Jer. 31:31-33.) The epistle to the Hebrews uses similar terminology. (Heb. 8:8-13.) At the Last Supper, Jesus introduced the sacrament as a "new testament." (For example, Matt. 26:28; Mark 14:24; Luke 22:20; 1 Cor. 11:25.)

Testament also means "testimony." The New Testament is not only the record of God's new gospel covenant; it is also a testimony to its divinity. The Gospels are testimonies of Christ. They do not fit into the traditional categories of biography or history, but they fulfill well their role as witnesses to the divine mission of him whose life and works they record. In the titles of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John in the Joseph Smith Translation, the words "The Gospel According to . . ." have been changed to read "The Testimony of. . . ." The modern scriptures—the Book of Mormon: Another Testament of Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price, which are also latter-day testaments of Christ's eternal work—stand alongside the testaments of ancient Israel and the early church of Christ.

Reading and Understanding the Gospels

Perhaps nothing we do can have a more profound effect on our lives than to study the life of Christ. What we spend our time doing inevitably influences our personalities and the way we look at the world. If we immerse ourselves in the mission of the Savior and learn from his example and his words, we cannot help but feel the purifying influence of his character. Reading scripture is a life-changing exercise, and reading the Gospels will draw us nearer to Christ.

For various reasons, some find the scriptures, particularly the Bible, difficult to read. The New Testament comes from a culture that in many ways is quite different from our own, with a historical setting that may be strange to modern readers. Different customs are found throughout its pages, and words are expressed in ways unfamiliar to us in the twentieth century. Things that were common and quite simple in their original ancient setting have been obscured by the passage of time, requiring that the reader have other skills or resources from which to draw. No modern readers are native speakers of the ancient Greek language in which the New Testament was written, and translation very often fails to convey the intentions of the original author. Even in translation, readers of the King James Version must deal with an English text that is over 350 years old and in a dialect that few modern readers can understand without considerable effort. Yet Bible readers who pay the price of serious and prayerful study and thought will find great satisfaction in their reading.

I suggest the following four keys to gaining the most from reading the Gospels:

NOTES

Kent P. Jackson is associate professor of ancient scripture and Old Testament area coordinator at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hence the question of the apostles to the risen Christ in Acts 1:6:"Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?"
[^2] The numbers come from the records of the Assyrian king Sargon, Annals 11-17. (See James B. Pritchard, ed., Ancient Near Eastern Texts [Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1950], p. 284.) They indicate that the deportation was not total—in fact, that only a minority of the population was actually taken from Israel.
[^3] It was shortly before this catastrophe, in about 600 B.C., that the Lord warned the prophet Lehi and his family to leave Jerusalem.
