Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

2

THE SETTING OF THE GOSPELS

STEPHEN E. ROBINSON

The Monarchy

In the years after the death of Saul, the first king of Israel, his successor, King David, was able to unite the various tribes into one nation under a strong central government and then to build Israel into something of a Near Eastern superpower. Under King David, the nation enjoyed growth and prosperity. There was a king, a high priest, a prophet. Israel's army was victorious, and its commercial and political interests outside of Israel were expanding. Under the son of David, Solomon, the temple that had been planned by David was finally built so that the rites of the temple could be properly observed and the Ark of the Covenant could be properly housed. Israel was never again to have such prosperity coupled with such complete enjoyment of its traditional institutions. In later years, Jews would remember the golden age of David and Solomon and would long for another "son of David" who could restore the glory of those days to the kingdom of Israel. [^1]

After the reign of Solomon, a civil war divided the twelve tribes and the nation they had formed. The kingdom of David and Solomon was divided into the northern ten tribes, who continued to call themselves Israel but who followed the rebel Jeroboam, and the two southern tribes of Judah and Benjamin, who served Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, and called themselves the kingdom of Judah. The modern terms Jew and Judea are derived from the name Judah. These divided kingdoms, Israel in the north and Judah in the south, were weaker than the original kingdom of David had been, and in 721 B.C. an Assyrian army defeated Israel and deported 27,290 of the aristocracy, the educated—anyone who might give the people leadership—to Assyrian territory. [^2] Most of these people never returned to Israel and are still referred to as "the Lost Ten Tribes of Israel." But Assyrian colonists did come and settle in the land of Israel in their place. The descendants of these colonists who intermarried with the remaining Israelites ultimately were known as Samaritans, and the territory that had been called Israel was then called Samaria. The southern kingdom of Judah did not fall to the Assyrians, although Judah was forced to pay tribute to Assyrian kings.

Exile and Return

Eventually the Assyrians themselves were conquered by a new superpower in Mesopotamia, the Babylonians, and in 587 B.C. the Babylonians conquered Judah and destroyed both the city and the temple of Jerusalem. [^3] Like the Assyrians before them, the Babylonians had a policy of deporting conquered peoples, and now, like Israel before them, it was Judah's turn to go away into exile. These mass deportations made it easy to integrate conquered territory and conquered peoples into the Babylonian Empire. The land, emptied of its original owners, could be parceled out to Babylonians and others whose loyalty was assured. At the same time, the conquered people, spread out in a foreign land, were too busy learning to cope with a new language and a new culture to worry about any further resistance. It was intended that such exiles would simply be absorbed into Babylonian society, but for generations the Jews in Babylon preserved their religion, their culture, and their sense of national identity by excluding Babylonian influence wherever possible. The tremendous commitment felt by many of the exiles is reflected in Psalm 137: "If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy." (Psalm 137:5-6.)

With this kind of commitment, the Jews in exile were able to retain their identity and remain loyal to the institutions of their fathers and grandfathers. Unfortunately, one negative result of such single-minded devotion to the institutions and traditions of Judaism was a certain amount of Gentile phobia. The effort necessary for the preservation of Judaism in exile also resulted in an exclusivism that often reappeared in later times. [^4]

In 539 B.C., the Babylonian Empire was conquered by Cyrus, king of Persia. Cyrus allowed the descendants of those nations that had been deported by the Babylonians to return to their ancestral homes. This policy was very successful in winning him the loyalty of those peoples. When Cyrus allowed the Jews to return to the land of their forefathers, the Jews repaid him and the Persians with loyalty and support as long as the Persian Empire lasted. Even afterward, in the time of Jesus, most Jews looked eastward to Parthia [^5] rather than westward to Greece or Rome for a friendly ally.

After the fall of Babylon, the Jews returned to Judea in several stages over many years. In one stage of the return, associated with the governor Zerubbabel and with the prophets Zechariah and Haggai, the Jerusalem Temple was rebuilt (ca. 515 B.C.). At a later time, Nehemiah rebuilt the city walls of Jerusalem and thus secured its political future (ca. 444 B.C.). Later still, Ezra the scribe edited and published a new edition of the Hebrew scriptures and led the people in renewing their covenant with Jehovah (ca. 400 B.C.).

But the Jews who returned from exile were not the same Jews who were deported. By and large, the returnees were the children and grandchildren of the original exiles, returning to a land they had never seen. Also, the majority of Babylonian Jews chose not to leave Babylon, the land of their birth, and for centuries Babylon remained a center of Jewish population and intellectual life. [^6] Despite all their efforts, Jews were influenced in many ways by Babylonian and Persian culture. For example, during the captivity, Aramaic replaced Hebrew as the common Jewish language, and the Jews also adopted the Babylonian alphabet and calendar.

The Greek Period

In 334 B.C., the young king of Macedon in Greece, Alexander, invaded the Persian Empire. By 331 Alexander had conquered Asia Minor, Syria, Palestine, and Egypt, and by the following year he was the master of Persia. By his thirty-third birthday, Alexander the Great had conquered most of the known world and ruled an empire that extended from Greece to India. When Alexander died in 323 B.C., his empire was divided among his four generals. Ptolemy, the ancestor of Cleopatra, got Egypt and Palestine. But some years later, Palestine was taken from the Ptolemies by descendants of Seleucus, another of Alexander's generals, who ruled in Syria and Babylon. It should be noted that from the time of Alexander the Great, most of the rulers and ruling families in the known world were Greeks, and as they ruled they imposed the Greek language and culture on the conquered peoples. The conquest of the world by Alexander created a great melting pot in which the native cultures were melted down and recast in Greek terms. In time and through a process of endless compromise, the effect was the creation of a universal language, Koine Greek, and a universal culture called Hellenism, a blending of Greek and native cultures with the Greek predominating. [^7] This was the culture of the world in the days of Jesus.

In many ways the hellenistic world was much like our own. Very few people found much spiritual satisfaction in mainstream Greek religion anymore, except as a purveyor of a kind of bland ethical morality. Certainly very few Greeks could find meaningful answers to life's great questions in the worship of the Olympian gods, and many people in the hellenistic world were looking for answers in new religions. [^8]

Greek intellectual life was not what it had been in an earlier period. For example, the classical philosophy of Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle had largely been succeeded by the rhetoric of the Sophists. Rhetoric is a discipline in which more value is placed on how one says a thing than on what one says, and the Sophists were professional intellectuals who placed a higher value on skillful arguing than on reaching correct conclusions; for them, therefore, everything was negotiable. Packaging became everything, content nothing. Those disciplines that dealt with human questions and problems seemed to have lost their way, or, to use Professor Murray's famous phrase, experienced a "failure of nerve." Many of the arts as well had lost their originality and creativity. [^9] Even so, the hellenistic age, like our own, was a technological age, and scientific knowledge made great advances. It seems that having despaired of finding the answers to life's great questions, hellenistic culture focused on finding answers to little questions instead. Many philosophers of this period had given up the search for objective truth entirely and had adopted a view of truth in which accommodation, flexibility, and compromise were the highest values. Thus, it was a thoroughly ecumenical age, since ecumenism is always easiest when people are least certain of their beliefs.

For a hundred and fifty years or so, the Greeks ruled Judea, and every effort was made to hellenize the Jews, that is, to make them adopt the values and culture of the rest of the world. In many ways, these attempts were successful. For example, Jews did adopt hellenistic dress and social customs. [^10] Many of the institutions and practices known to us from the New Testament are hellenistic. Tenant farmers, tax collectors, moneylenders, customs officials, and landowners who hired day laborers—all of these come from hellenism and its institutions. During this period it became common for Jews to have Greek names like Nicodemus, Philip, or Stephen. Many Jews even left Judea and settled in Greek cities, such as Alexandria in Egypt (which was named after Alexander the Great). These Jews living in Greek lands were called collectively the Diaspora (a Greek word meaning dispersion). Perhaps the most famous of the Diaspora Jews was Saul of Tarsus, otherwise known as the Apostle Paul. Coins that circulated in Judea bore the "image and superscription" of hellenistic rulers, even though the law of Moses, as interpreted by the Jews, forbade such "graven images." [^11] Even the governing council of the Jewish people, the Sanhedrin, had acquired a Greek name (sunhedrios). In fact, hellenism as a popular culture had such tremendous appeal and influence, and yet was so contrary to the values of traditional Jewish religion, that by 175 B.C., after 150 years of hellenistic Greek rule, Judaism was in real danger of being completely compromised. Even the high priests of the Jewish religion had become hellenized and cooperated slavishly with the Greek rulers in their attempts to make the Jews more like everyone else.

Finally, in 167 B.C., apparently with the full support of the reigning high priest, the Greek king of Syria-Palestine, Antiochus IV Epiphanes, outlawed the practice of circumcision and made it illegal to possess the Jewish scriptures. The temple at Jerusalem was converted to allow the worship of Zeus, and pigs were offered upon the altar in sacrifice to the pagan god. [^12] Greek soldiers were sent to the towns and villages of Judea to enforce the ban on traditional Judaism and to encourage the people to offer sacrifice to Zeus. The Greek king was extremely anxious that his Jewish subjects finally comply with hellenistic religious ideas and the hellenistic spirit of compromise.

The Maccabean Period

In the village of Modin, north of Jerusalem, a local priest named Mattathias killed the Greek officer sent there to institute pagan worship, and with his five sons he went into the hills to wage a guerrilla war against the Greeks. Mattathias challenged all of Judea, saying, "Let everyone who is zealous of the law and supports the covenant come out with me!" [^13] When Mattathias died, his eldest son, Judah, became the military leader of the Jewish rebels. The family name was Hasmon, and they are therefore referred to as the Hasmonean family, but because of Judah's prowess and success against the Greeks, he was also called the Maccabee, a word that means something like "the hammer." After Judah, the family is often referred to as the Maccabees as well as the Hasmoneans, and the Jewish revolt of 167 B.C. is called the Maccabean revolt. Time and again, Judah and his followers were able to defeat the Greek generals and their armies even though they were greatly outnumbered. In the fall of 165 B.C., Judah retook Jerusalem, and by December the Maccabees had torn down the altar of the temple, which had been desecrated by the sacrifice of swine, and had rebuilt it. They also replaced the Jerusalem priesthood, which had been disloyal, with "blameless priests who were devoted to the Law." The Jerusalem Temple was thoroughly cleansed and was rededicated to the worship of Jehovah on the twenty-fifth of the Jewish month of Kislev (December) amid great rejoicing, an event that is still commemorated every year in the Jewish festival of Hannukah.

The Maccabean revolt, which had begun as a fight for religious freedom, became a struggle for political freedom as well. Nevertheless, the Greeks were not completely driven out of Judea until 143 B.C. In the meantime (161 B.C.), Judah the Maccabee was killed in a battle in which he had been outnumbered twenty-five to one.

In 140 B.C., Simon, the last of the five Hasmonean brothers, was established as both high priest and political ruler (ethnarch) of the Jews. Moreover, these titles were declared to be hereditary, and thus the Hasmonean dynasty was founded. This was a momentous occasion, for although members of the Hasmonean family were priests, until the outbreak of the Maccabean revolt the high priesthood had been in the hands of one family, the Zadokite Oniads. Now the high priesthood had passed into the family of the Hasmoneans. While most Jews supported the Hasmoneans in their assumption of both political and religious power, there were those who believed that the high priesthood could not legitimately be taken away from the Oniad family. It was in this period that the Essenes withdrew to live in their desert communities, probably feeling that the Hasmoneans had usurped religious power. On the other hand, other Jews believed that the Maccabees had brought about the Messianic kingdom, or even that they were themselves Messiahs.

After 129 B.C. the Greek Seleucid kingdom was too troubled by internal problems to challenge Jewish independence. The Hasmonean rulers of Judea were able to extend their territory, defeat old enemies, and settle old scores. In 129-128 B.C., John Hyrcanus attacked the Samaritans around ancient Shechem and destroyed the Samaritan temple on Mount Gerizim. [^14] He also conquered the Idumean towns of Adora and Marisa and forced the Idumeans (the Edomites of the Old Testament) to convert to Judaism. [^15]

Decline of the Hasmoneans

Despite all the military successes, the decline of the Hasmonean family was rapid. Within a generation or two, the descendants of the Maccabees had become as weak and corrupt as the rulers and priests their fathers had replaced a century earlier. John Hyrcanus broke with the Pharisees and reinstated as religious authorities the Sadducees, who had direct ties to the corrupt establishment overthrown by Mattathias and his five sons. The son of John Hyrcanus, Alexander Jannaeus, used foreign troops to put down a rebellion against his corrupt rule, a rebellion in which fifty thousand Jews died. On one occasion, Jannaeus crucified eight hundred Pharisees in Jerusalem and then had their wives and children killed before them as they hung on the crosses.

Between 67 and 63 B.C., the two sons of Jannaeus, Hyrcanus II and Aristobulus II, fought over the succession to the throne and high priesthood. Hyrcanus was the rightful heir, but he was weak and incompetent. His chief supporter and adviser was the Idumean leader Antipater, the father of the future King Herod. Antipater knew Hyrcanus was weak, but he realized that his own fortunes would be better under a weak king than a strong one.

The rising power in the ancient world at that time was Rome; Roman legions had been in Syria since 65 B.C. Both Hyrcanus and Aristobulus had been trying to win Roman support for themselves but had succeeded only in drawing Roman attention to their vulnerability. When the Roman general Pompey decided in 63 B.C. to enter Jerusalem with his army, the supporters of Hyrcanus opened the gates to him, but the followers of Aristobulus and whoever else opposed Roman intervention barricaded themselves on the Temple Mount. When Pompey stormed the temple, twelve thousand Jews died, including the priests who were sacrificing at the altar and would not be distracted from their duties. When the fighting was over, Pompey himself entered the Holy of Holies, but he did no physical damage to the Temple. He installed Hyrcanus as high priest and nominal ruler of Judea, but Jewish independence had been lost; from that time forward Judea was in bondage to Rome.

The Roman Period

In the years following Pompey's incursion into Judea and the establishment of Hyrcanus upon the throne as a Roman puppet, the Idumean Antipater sat like a spider on Hyrcanus's shoulder, always looking for and taking advantage of ways to better the position of himself and his family. He was the true power behind the ineffectual Hyrcanus, and the Romans soon realized this. Antipater took pains to be of service to Rome, cheerfully supplying both troops and money as they were needed and often before they were requested. After the death of Antipater, his son Herod inherited the position and continued the tactics of his father.

In 40 B.C., the Parthians invaded all of the Roman Near East, including Palestine. The Parthians were a dynasty of the Persian Empire (the Arsacids) who fought with Rome for control of the Near East for three centuries. The Jews of Palestine looked upon the invasion of the Parthians as a liberation from the despised Romans. Jews had been on good terms with the Persians ever since Cyrus the Persian let them return home and rebuild after the Babylonian exile. Also, hundreds of thousands of Jews were still living in Babylon who fared better under Parthian rule than the Jews of Palestine were treated by the Romans. The invading Parthians deposed the Roman puppet Hyrcanus and placed his nephew Antigonus on the throne. Herod fled to Rome, where the senate decided to reward his constant service and loyalty to the empire and to do away with the figurehead Hasmonean kings altogether. Recognizing him as the real power behind the Jewish throne, the Roman senate appointed Herod, son of Antipater and the grandson of an Idumean forced to convert to Judaism, as king of the Jews.

Herod the Great

It took Herod three years of Roman support to reconquer Judea. He began by marrying Mariamne, the granddaughter of Hyrcanus. This gave him a connection to the royal Hasmonean family and strengthened his claim to the throne. However, it also caused him considerable trouble in that it made Herod's sons more acceptable to the people than Herod himself, since they were Hasmoneans by blood and he was not. In the end, Herod executed several of his sons and other relatives for real and imagined offenses. [^16] Even his wife, whom he appears to have genuinely loved, was put to death. Herod was totally ruthless whenever his own interests were involved. He was a master politician and was able to stay on good terms with the Romans, even when Cleopatra, queen of Egypt, plotted against him.

In many ways Herod was an admirable ruler. He built or rebuilt public edifices on a magnificent scale, not only in Palestine but also throughout the eastern Mediterranean. He turned the rather modest temple in Jerusalem into one of the seven wonders of the ancient world. Personally, he was strong and athletic, and his skills as a warrior were extraordinary. He was disciplined, patient, and intelligent. He was also a monster. Nothing, no person, no matter how beloved or how innocent, no principle, could stand in the way of his ambition. Herod was larger than life, a truly great man, yet one who with all his extraordinary powers worshiped only himself. Josephus tells us that as Herod lay dying, in 4 B.C., the people found out and rejoiced. When Herod learned of this, he ordered the eldest sons from six hundred leading Jewish families to be arrested and held at the racetrack in Jericho. He wanted them all put to death when he died to ensure that the Jews would mourn the day of his passing. [^17] His own son Antipater was executed just five days before his death.

When Herod died, his kingdom was divided among his three remaining sons, Archelaus, Antipas, and Philip, with Archelaus getting Judea. Archelaus had most of his father's vices and ambitions but few of his talents, and after nine years the Romans deposed him (A.D. 6). Antipas received Galilee and Perea (Trans-Jordan). He was the Herod who, according to the New Testament and Josephus, [^18] beheaded John the Baptist. He was deposed and sent into exile by the emperor Caius (Caligula) in A.D. 39. Philip's territory was north and east of Galilee. When Archelaus was deposed in A.D. 6, the kingship was abolished and a Roman governor was appointed. From that time forward, Judea (but not Galilee or Perea, which until A.D. 39 were still ruled by Antipas) would be controlled directly by a Roman administration rather than through puppet kings.

In A.D. 26, Pontius Pilate was appointed governor of Judea. Pilate was described by contemporaries as vindictive, cruel, greedy, and stubborn. [^19] Pilate resented the concessions that had been made to Jews by previous governors because of their religion, and he attempted on several occasions to ignore or revoke them. He also enjoyed teaching the crowds a lesson by unnecessarily setting his armed soldiers loose on them. Finally, in A.D. 36, he was removed from office by Vitellius, the Roman legate of Syria, and was sent back to Rome. [^20]

In A.D. 38, two years after the departure of Pilate, the Roman emperor Caius (Caligula) ordered that his statue be placed in the Jerusalem Temple. Roman emperors since Augustus had been declared divine, but Caligula took his divinity seriously, and it irritated him that the Jews would neither believe in nor worship him. Moreover, Caius ordered the governor of Syria, Publius Petronius, to take half the legions in Syria with him and enforce the order. To the Jews, it seemed like a return to the decrees of Antiochus IV which precipitated the Maccabean revolt. Petronius, however, was a reasonable man. He knew the order was insane and that to obey it he would have to slaughter most of the Jewish nation. First he stalled, insisting that Caius should wait until after the harvest season, but finally he simply asked Caius to revoke the order. Enraged, Caius ordered Petronius to commit suicide, but since Caius himself was assassinated shortly afterward, neither the order for the statue nor the order for the suicide was ever obeyed. [^21]

During this same time, between A.D. 37 and 41, a grandson of Herod the Great, Herod Agrippa, received first from Caius and then from Claudius (both of whom he had grown up with in Rome) all the lands that had been ruled by his grandfather. Agrippa was popular with the Jewish people for his piety according to the law of Moses and also for his persecution of the young Christian community (Acts 12). When he died after a very short reign, in A.D. 44, Palestine was again administered by Roman governors.

The First Revolt Against Rome

After the brief reign of Herod Agrippa, Roman policy in Judea grew increasingly oppressive. The later governors showed little of the intelligence and abilities displayed by their earlier counterparts. They robbed private citizens, despoiled the temple, and so ignored the administration of civil affairs that anarchy soon reigned. Finally, in A.D. 66, after several bloody confrontations with the governor, the Jews had had enough. First the temple sacrifices for the emperor were stopped; then the Roman garrison in Jerusalem was attacked. Although the Romans surrendered in exchange for a safe-conduct, they were all killed. Cestius Gallus, the military governor of Syria, came with his troops to Judea and barely escaped with his life. This would be a serious war.

At first, the regular Jewish authorities remained in charge—the chief priests and scribes. Later, as the Romans under Vespasian and his son Titus made advances and as conditions in the city of Jerusalem got worse and people grew more fanatical, the Zealots gained control. The moderate Jewish leaders who had begun the revolt were then put to death on the absurd charges of being too soft or too pro-Roman. Worse than that, the Zealots themselves split into factions and fought one another instead of the common enemy. While the besieging Romans patiently waited outside the city, the Zealot factions on the inside fought each other and mindlessly burned each other's food supplies.

In August of A.D. 70, Jerusalem fell. Thousands of its inhabitants were slaughtered and thousands more were sold as slaves or sent to the arenas as victims for Roman entertainment. The great Jerusalem Temple, the center of the Jewish religion and one of the seven wonders of the ancient world, was burned to the ground. About nine hundred rebels held out until A.D. 74 at the fortress of Masada on the shore of the Dead Sea, but when they chose mass suicide rather than be captured, the First Jewish Revolt was over. [^22]

The Second (Bar Kokhba) Revolt

In A.D. 132, there was a second Jewish revolt against Rome. A certain Simon bar Kosiba (sometimes called Bar Kokhba, "son of the star") claimed to be the Promised Messiah. Rabbi Akiba, one of the most influential rabbis of the day, accepted and supported his claim; consequently, enough people followed him to bring the whole country into rebellion. The revolt lasted about three and a half years, and hundreds of thousands of Jews lost their lives or their freedom. When it was over, Jerusalem was so thoroughly destroyed that the site could be plowed. The emperor Hadrian built there an entirely new, pagan city named Aelia Capitolina. Jews were forbidden to enter on pain of death. Not until our own time would a Jewish Jerusalem be reestablished.

Religious Diversity

Just as the modern world we know has its religious denominations, so also were there denominations of Jews in the culture that Jesus knew. These sects had begun to develop in the period between the Babylonian exile and the revolt of the Maccabees. [^23]

The Pharisees

In the first century, the most prominent of the Jewish sects was the Pharisees. The precise origin of the term Pharisee is unclear, but it seems most likely that it is derived from the Hebrew word parash and should be interpreted to mean something like "separatist." Certainly the Pharisees prided themselves on being "set apart" or "separated" from the rest of the Jews by their strict observance of the minutest requirements of the law of Moses. According to Josephus, there were approximately six thousand Pharisees in the first century. [^24] They were the party that was most popular with the masses, and their interpretation of the scriptures was the one most readily accepted, even by those who were not themselves Pharisees. They were the popular party, the religion of the great mass of Jews—even though their actual membership was small.

Much of the Pharisees' influence was due to their control of what is called the "oral law." The Pharisees claimed that Moses had received the law on Mount Sinai in two parts—one written and one oral. The written part of the law made up the five books of Moses, which were accepted by all Jews: Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy. But according to the Pharisees, another part of the law had also been given to Moses orally and had been handed down and preserved by the Pharisees and their predecessors. This oral law, as interpreted and expanded by the Pharisees, was sometimes called "the tradition of the Fathers." Wherever the written scripture failed to give clear instructions, the Pharisees appealed to the oral law (which they alone controlled) for answers. For example, even though the written law directs that all debts are to be canceled in the seventh year, in the first century B.C. the Pharisaic rabbi Hillel was able to introduce an innovation called the prosbul, which allowed lenders to avoid cancellation of debt in the seventh year. He did this by insisting that the principle of the prosbul had actually been contained in the oral law since Sinai. In actuality, the antiquity of the oral law was largely a fiction, but it allowed the Pharisees to adapt the written law to new situations without admitting that any change had been made or that anything new had been added. [^25] This tactic was necessary because the Pharisees denied that God could ever change or add anything to the revelation given once and for all on Mount Sinai. They insisted that any doctrine God was ever going to give, or ever could give, was already contained in "the one whole Torah [both the oral and written law] of Moses our rabbi." There could never be additional revelation. Nothing could be added—ever. [^26] Jesus rejected the "tradition of the Fathers" [^27] and insisted that the law of Moses was not immutable and ought in fact to be changed as he directed. [^28]

Besides accepting both the written and the oral laws, the Pharisees believed in the existence of angels and demons. In this they differed from the Sadducees, who did not believe in the existence of these beings. The Pharisees also steered a middle course on the issue of free agency, believing that God predestined some things but that human beings could still be held accountable for their actions.

The Pharisees' strength was in the local synagogues, which they controlled; and their religious leaders were called rabbis (meaning teachers or masters). In matters pertaining to national government or to the administration of the temple and its rituals, they recognized the authority of the Sadducean priesthood, for the Pharisees were generally scholars and preachers rather than priests. From extant records, it appears that Jesus had more in common with the Pharisees than with the other Jewish sects known to us, and he was himself called "rabbi" on many occasions (as in John 1:49; 3:2).

Politically, the Pharisees were mildly anti-Roman. They believed that the Roman control of Judea was illegitimate, and they passively resisted Roman rule but stopped short of armed rebellion. After the Jewish revolt against Rome in A.D. 66-73, the Pharisees were the only Jewish sect to survive; consequently all later forms of mainstream Judaism are descended from the Pharisees. Modern-day Judaism is the offspring of the Judaism of the Pharisees.

The Sadducees

The Sadducees were a small party of very wealthy and influential aristocrats. Most Sadducees were priests, and the high priestly families (those families from whom the high priests traditionally came) controlled the sect and its membership. The term Sadducee comes from the name of Zadok, who had been high priest at the time of King Solomon, and whose descendants had served in the office ever since, except for the time of the early Maccabean period. The name thus underscores the nature of the Sadducees as an exclusive circle of wealthy and influential high priestly families and their followers.

The Sadducees controlled the Jerusalem Temple and derived their wealth, power, and influence from it. The temple generated tremendous revenues from the sacrifices and concessions, [^29] and these riches were controlled by the Sadducees. The Sadducean high priest was also the head of the Sanhedrin (the governing council of the Jews), and therefore Sadducees were also very prominent in government. In any society, it is the aristocracy that resists changes in the status quo, since they benefit from things as they are. [^30] Thus, politically the Sadducees cooperated with the Romans in return for the continued exercise of their many privileges. But it also followed that the Sadducees exerted almost no moral influence on the common people, who resented them for their aristocratic attitudes and for their cooperation with Rome.

Like Jesus, the Sadducees did not accept the Pharisaic oral law, the "traditions of the elders," and insisted that only the written Torah was valid. They did not believe in the existence of angels and demons, and they did not believe in the resurrection of the dead or in the continued existence of the spirit after death. [^31] However, they did believe in free agency. The First Jewish Revolt in A.D. 66 spelled the doom of the Sadducees, for those who were not killed as traitors by their fellow Jews lost their base of power, their wealth, and their function in Jewish society when the temple was destroyed.

The Essenes

According to Josephus, the third major Jewish sect was the Essenes. It appears that there may have been more than one type of Essene, but those that are best known to us lived in a desert community on the shores of the Dead Sea. During the first Jewish revolt, when the Roman tenth legion scoured the Jordan River valley, the Essenes of this community, now called Qumran, buried their religious books in nearby caves. In 1947, the caves were discovered, and many of the books have come to light as the Dead Sea Scrolls. Through these scrolls, we know a great deal about the Essenes of Qumran, although how they differed from other Essenes is still unclear.

Basically, Essenes believed that the Sadducean Jerusalem priesthood was illegitimate and that all who associated with Sadducean priests were apostate. [^32] The Essenes withdrew into their own wilderness community to wait for the end of the world and their own vindication. They believed that they were living in the last days, that the end of the world was near at hand, and that the Messiah would soon come to establish his kingdom and restore legitimate priests (Essenes, of course) to serve in a renewed temple. In the meantime, they withdrew as much as possible from what they perceived to be an apostate Jewish society.

Essenes were more strict and rigorous than even the Pharisees, whom they called "seekers after smooth things," that is, those who look for the easy way. Yet in their beliefs they were very close to the Pharisees, and it appears that the Essenes and Pharisees were two branches of a single movement that had its beginnings in Maccabean times. Like the Pharisees, the Essenes believed in the validity of some kind of oral law. [^33] They believed in the existence of angels and demons, in the continued existence of the spirit after death, and in the resurrection of the body. Like the Pharisees, the Essenes were anti-Roman, and in the first Jewish revolt, Essenes were active in the fighting.

The Dead Sea Scrolls reveal that Essenes had many doctrines and practices in common with early Christianity. They practiced a ritual by immersion and believed in the necessity of receiving the Holy Ghost. They had a ritual meal of bread and wine (or perhaps grape juice) in which they anticipated the coming of the Messiah. Their leadership structure employed a group of three associated with a group of twelve. Individual communities were governed by an overseer who looked after the temporal welfare, controlled admission to the community, and acted as a common judge. They practiced communal living and "had all things in common." Nevertheless, the Essenes were not Christians, and many of the above beliefs and practices can also be found in other Jewish sects of the time. Moreover, Essenes believed many things that were contradicted in the teachings of Jesus and the early church. [^34]

The Zealots

Strictly speaking, the Zealots should probably be considered as a branch of Pharisaism, because their theology was basically that of the Pharisees. However, the Zealots were rabid nationalists who actively resisted Roman rule of the Jews even to the point of armed insurrection. In the Old Testament, zeal for the law was always a positive thing. Out of zeal for the law, Phineas slew the Israelite man and the Midianite woman (Num. 25:1-8), and Mattathias slew the Greek officer (1 Macc. 2:15-28). Even Jesus was moved to violence when he drove the money changers out of the temple; John reports that the disciples remembered, "The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up." (John 2:17.) So there was ample precedent for Jews to resort to instant violence out of religious zeal.

Zealots believed that if Jews would only rise up and fight, God would send them victory as he had in the days of Judah the Maccabee. The Zealots, as an article of faith, would recognize no authority in Palestine but that of God and his appointed servants, and they rejected any kind of compromise or accommodation with Rome. Josephus and the New Testament call them "robbers" or "thieves." [^35] Toward the end of the first century A.D., the Zealot movement grew stronger as the excesses of the Roman governors grew increasingly intolerable. The militant wing of the Zealot movement, called the Sicarii (Latin for "the Daggers"), practiced political assassination and other acts of terrorism directed both at the Roman occupation government and at those Jews, primarily the chief priests and scribes, who collaborated with Rome. Finally, in A.D. 66, the Zealots were able to precipitate what they had long sought, a general revolt against Rome. The war lasted for seven years, and when it was over Jerusalem had been conquered, the temple had been destroyed, and thousands upon thousands of Jews had lost their lives. Thousands of the survivors were sold into slavery and dispersed throughout the Roman world. Zealots, Essenes, and Sadducees were all gone forever; only the Pharisees remained to rebuild Judaism in their own image and create rabbinic or "orthodox" Judaism, the Talmudic or classical Judaism of a later time.

The Samaritans

According to 2 Kings, chapter 17, when the Assyrians conquered the northern kingdom of Israel, they took "all of Israel" out of the land and brought Assyrian colonists to replace them in the cities of Israel. When God sent ferocious lions among the colonists in their new home, they sent back to Assyria for an Israelite priest who could show them how to worship and appease the God of the land of Israel. However, they continued also to worship their foreign gods and thus polluted the religion of Israel. In the first century A.D., most Jews considered Samaritans to be only slightly less unclean than Gentiles, and certainly not bona fide members of the house of Israel.

Samaritan and Assyrian records show, however, that some of the account in 2 Kings may be exaggerated. It does not appear that the Assyrians deported all the Israelites, but only 27,290 of them. This would be only a fraction of the whole population. [^36] Moreover, Samaritan religion shows no influence from Assyrian ideas during this time, and the Samaritan version of the Pentateuch is very close to the Hebrew and implies a religion almost identical to Judaism, at least as far as the law of Moses is concerned, though naturally the Samaritans, like the Sadducees and Christians, rejected the oral law of the Pharisees and popular Judaism. Samaritans worshiped the God of Israel in a temple on Mount Gerizim, with rites similar to those of Judaism. So while it is certain that Israel lost its leadership along with large portions of its population in the deportation of 721 B.C., and that the Samaritans were a mixture of the Israelites who remained behind (predominately) and the Gentile colonists who moved in (partially), by and large the Samaritans were still descended from Israel and practiced a corrupted version of the religion of Israel. This explains why Jesus proselytized among the Samaritans, [^37] though he intentionally avoided contact with Gentiles.

When the Jews returned from their Babylonian exile, the Samaritans attempted to establish cordial relations with them but were rebuffed, and an adversary relationship soon developed that was largely a continuation of the ancient hatred between Israel and Judah. (See Ezra 4:1-4.) The antagonism reached its peak, however, during the Maccabean period, for the Samaritans did not join the Jews in revolt against the Greeks, nor did they support the Jews who did. It was in retaliation for this policy, which the Jews viewed as treachery, that John Hyrcanus destroyed the Samaritan Temple in 128 B.C. After that event, there could be no friendly relations between Samaria and Judah. Such was the bitter state of affairs in the New Testament period that Jewish pilgrims from Galilee were often molested as they passed through Samaria, and Josephus wrote of Samaritans defiling the Jerusalem Temple at Passover by strewing human bones in the courts and sanctuary. [^38] After about A.D. 300, the Jews treated Samaritans in all respects as Gentiles, except that they were not allowed even to become converts.

The 'Am Ha-'aretz

The vast majority of the population in Jewish Palestine did not go to church, that is, they did not have an active affiliation with any of the Jewish sects. Most people accepted the views of the Pharisees on the interpretation of the law, but few actually became Pharisees. These nonaffiliated Jews were called the 'am ha-'aretz, the "people of the land," and they made up probably 90 percent of the crowds and multitudes to which John the Baptist and Jesus preached.

Scribes and Publicans

The terms scribe and publican do not refer to religious affiliation at all, but rather to occupation. Scribes or publicans could be Pharisees or Sadducees. They should not be conceived of as secretaries or clerks. The scribes were the lawyer class of Jewish life, the "doctors of the law." They were college-educated intellectuals, trained in the practical or civil aspects of the law of Moses, in applying and interpreting the law in everyday life to all denominations of Jews alike. Therefore the scribes represented, along with the Pharisees and the priests, a very influential class in Jewish society. Many scribes sat in the Sanhedrin, the ruling council of the Jewish people, just as many prominent lawyers become active in politics today.

The publicans were tax collectors. In Roman times, the right to collect transport tolls and other minor taxes in a given area was farmed out to private companies or individuals who bid for the privilege. Whatever they could collect above their bid was their profit. It was a system that invited and rewarded incredible dishonesty. Those who participated in such a business were considered by the Jews to be totally without moral scruples. Publicans were believed to be so certainly dishonest that they could not legally give testimony in a Jewish court. The owners of these tax franchises were usually Romans, but they often hired Jews (like Matthew/Levi) to do the actual tax collecting. These Jewish publicans were despised even more than the Romans. Not only did they rob and cheat their brethren, but they also served the enemies of their people. Thus they were viewed as both robbers and traitors.

Jewish Institutions

The Sanhedrin

The Greek term sanhedrin is a generic term for a council, and so there were many sanhedrins in different areas of Jewish life. However, when the term is used without explanation, usually the Great Jerusalem Sanhedrin, the ruling council of the Jewish nation, is meant. It was a body of seventy-two [^39] influential men, appointed for life, which combined in one the legislative, executive, and judicial functions. The Sanhedrin interpreted the laws, enforced the laws, and judged those who broke the laws. Since the law of the land was the law of Moses, most of the members were scribes (doctors of the law), but the Sanhedrin was presided over by the Jewish high priest, and there were many of the "chief priests" (most of whom were Sadducees) in their number.

The Sanhedrin established the correct interpretation of the law when Pharisees and Sadducees (or others) disagreed, usually deciding in favor of the Pharisees. They declared war, supervised the activities of the priesthood, directed public works, adjusted the calendar, engaged in diplomacy with foreign governments, pronounced excommunications, and heard criminal cases. Local courts were also scattered about that were sometimes called sanhedrins, and they also heard criminal cases. The Jerusalem Sanhedrin sometimes decided points of law for cases before the local courts or occasionally took over a case that could not be decided by the local court, but the Jerusalem Sanhedrin was not an appeals court in the usual sense of the term.

The Romans did not interfere with the normal functions of the Sanhedrin or of the other Jewish courts. Rather, they set up parallel legal and governmental systems for non-Jews. As long as Jewish courts confined themselves to Jewish matters, the Romans let them alone. Where Roman and Jewish interests intersected, the Roman system had the last word.

Christian interest in the Sanhedrin has usually focused on its role in the trial and death of Jesus. It has often been claimed that the procedures by which Jesus were tried were grossly illegal under Jewish law. However, all such claims are based upon the Jewish laws as they are found in the Mishnah, which was not written down until the third century A.D., and which may not reflect the actual legal conditions at the time of Jesus. To criticize the trial of Jesus using the Mishnaic legislation would perhaps be like declaring illegal all the courts in colonial America for not abiding by the state codes of the 1980s. [^40] Little is known about exact Jewish court procedures in Jesus' time.

The Synagogue

The Greek word synagogue means a place of gathering together. The synagogue in first-century Judaism was not primarily a place of worship, but a place of study. Worship in the strict sense was reserved for the temple in Jerusalem, which was the only "house of God" in Judaism. The local meetings in the synagogue were merely supplements to the actual worship that took place in the temple. Moreover, in the temple the worshiper was under the direction of the (Sadducean) priests, while in the synagogue the student was usually under the direction of the (Pharisaic) teacher or rabbi.

Synagogues seem to have developed during the Babylonian exile and were designed as places to pray and to educate the people in the religion of their fathers in the absence of the lost temple of Solomon. Especially after the destruction of Herod's Temple in A.D. 70, the synagogues began to take on even more elements of the lost temple, for example, being built on elevated points, facing east, and the torah scroll being kept in an ark behind a curtain in a holy of holies supported by two pillars.

In the first century, the local synagogue served as a sort of community center. The leader of the synagogue was a public official who administered floggings prescribed by the courts (as in Matt. 10:17). Charity drives and town meetings were held in the synagogues, and during the week they were used as schools. However, no eating, drinking, or sleeping was allowed; hence they could not be used for Christian worship where the sacrament of the Lord's Supper was administered. Synagogues could not be used as shelters or as places to conduct business.

Normally, in a synagogue service there was a series of recited prayers (the Eighteen Benedictions) and then the Shema'. (Deut. 6:4-7.) This was followed by a reading from the Hebrew Bible, which was delivered standing. Then the scripture was explained or commented upon by some qualified person. The explanation was delivered sitting down. (See Luke 4:16-21.) Gentiles were allowed to attend the synagogues but generally sat in the back or were somehow separated from the Jewish members. Women were not allowed to read or expound the scriptures in the synagogues. [^41]

The Temple

The great Jerusalem Temple was the spiritual center of first-century Judaism. At one time there had been several different temples in Palestine, but after the Babylonian exile the priests and scribes insisted, more for political reasons than for religious ones, that there could be only one, and that one was in Jerusalem. [^42] However, there was a Samaritan temple on Mount Gerizim near Shechem until 128 B.C., and there was also a full-scale Jewish temple at Leontopolis in Egypt (operated by priests descended from the Oniad family) until the second century A.D.

The temple built by Solomon in Jerusalem, which was destroyed by the Babylonians in 587 B.C., is usually called the First Temple. The temple built by Zerubbabel after the Babylonian exile is usually called the Second Temple. This was the temple, greatly remodeled by Herod, that stood in the days of Jesus.

As it stood in Jesus' day, the temple consisted of a huge area called the Temple Mount, surrounded by a wall. It was equivalent to our own Temple Square. Unclean persons and Gentiles could come up onto the Temple Mount. This was sometimes called the "Court of the Gentiles." This was where the Sanhedrin met and where there was a synagogue and also the concessions that made Jesus angry—the money changers and those who sold sacrifices to the pilgrims. [^43] Inside the Court of the Gentiles, and placed a few steps higher, was an enclosure marked off by a low stone wall. Gentiles could not pass inside this wall. Within the enclosure was the Court of Women, also separated by a wall, and connected to the Court of Women and accessible from it was the Court of the Israelites. Here women could not come. A low barrier separated the Court of Israel from the Court of the Priests, where the actual sacrifices took place and where nonpriests could not enter. In the center of the Court of Priests stood the temple building itself. There was an outer porch, an inner room called the Holy Place, and, accessible only from the Holy Place, the innermost chamber, called the Holy of Holies. This was separated from the Holy Place by the veil of the temple. Only the high priest was allowed to enter the Holy of Holies, and that occurred only once a year on the Day of Atonement (Yom Kippur).

Individuals might attend the temple as they chose, but there were also temple assignments made up from twenty-four temple districts. The obligation to participate in these deputations fell on priests, Levites, and Israelites alike. However, those who were known to break the commandments or who were excommunicated were excluded from the temple. Temple worship in Jesus' time consisted mainly of the sacrifices, both personal and public, that were offered to God in the temple. An individual might bring his own personal offerings, but the assigned individuals were there to stand by the public offerings.

Those entering the temple first put aside their personal possessions and took off their shoes. They then performed a ritual washing and put on white clothes. Prayers, hymns, blessings, and the reading and expounding of the Torah were also part of the temple services in the first century. [^44]

NOTES

Stephen E. Robinson is associate professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The data to do so do not exist. The material is simply not available. We do not know how he spent his youth, who his friends were, what part he played in church and civic affairs, how he conducted himself within the frame-work of the Jewish family system, and hosts of other things. Though we know a great deal about the historical and social circumstances of his day, very little authentic information is available of his actual life from either secular or spiritual sources. What Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John put in their Gospel accounts was written as their testimony of a small part of his divine doings. Personal items are scarcely mentioned. The Gospels contain only . . . those glimpses of selected acts and deeds, which the Spirit knew beforehand should be preserved for presentation to the unbelieving and skeptical masses of men into whose hands the New Testament would come. Even God will not pour more knowledge and light and intelligence and understanding into human souls than they are prepared to accept. Such would be and is contrary to his whole plan for the advancement and growth and ultimate perfection of his children. The Importance of the Church and Kingdom of God. Matthew's work is appropriately known as the "Gospel of the Church." It is, indeed, the only canonical Gospel to use the term church (Greek ekklesia) in referring to the Christian community. Peter's confession at Caesarea Philippi ("Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God") was acknowledged and commended by the Savior as of divine origin. The Lord continued: "And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven." (Matt. 16:13-19, emphasis added.) The significant contribution of Matthew's Gospel in this regard (the matter of the church) is grasped by simply comparing the Synoptics in parallel. Mark's account (8:29-30) contains 23 words, Luke's account (9:20-21) contains 22 words, while Matthew's description of the occasion consists of 128 words. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 148; cf. Rom. 10:17.
[^2] No mortal man, no matter how gifted he may be in literary craftsmanship, and no matter how highly endowed he may be with that spiritual insight which puts the words and acts of men into a true eternal perspective—no mortal, I say, can write the biography of a God. A biography is but the projection through the eyes of a penman of what the writer believes were the acts and what he feels were the thoughts and emotions of another man who had like feelings with his own. How, then, can any mortal plumb the depths of the feelings or understand in full the doings, of an Eternal Being? [^4] Jesus' Condemnation of First-Century Judaism and Its Traditions. Jesus chided the Jews of his day for becoming enamored with externals, with means rather than ends. He attacked their empty formalism and hypocrisy. This theme is far more prominent in Matthew than in any of the other Gospels. [^34] See Bruce R. McConkie, Docrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73), 1:55-56.
[^3] Jesus Christ as the Fulfillment of Prophecy. Matthew presents Jesus, appropriately, as the fulfillment of God's promise to Israel. The Gospel of Matthew was written by one intent on building a bridge between the old covenant and the new, or between what we have come to call the two testaments. His was the witness, like Jacob's in the Book of Mormon, that "none of the prophets have written, nor prophesied, save they have spoken concerning this Christ." (Jacob 7:11.) In The Ante-Nicene Fathers, 10 vols., ed. Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1981), 1:153.
[^4] The Mortal Messiah—From Bethlehem to Calvary, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1979-81), 1:xv-xvi.
[^5] Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, 10 vols., trans. C. F. Cruse (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1977), 3.24.
[^6] Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1965), pp. 21-22.
[^7] Invitation to the New Testament (New York: Doubleday, 1969), p. 83.
[^8] W. F. Albright and C. S. Mann, Matthew, volume 26 in the Anchor Bible Series (New York: Doubleday, 1971), p. xxii.
[^9] Invitation to the New Testament, p. 81.
[^10] Irenaus, Against Heresies, 3.8, in Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1:428.
[^11] Teachings, p. 365.
[^12] A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985), p. 402, emphasis added. Note also the following from President Spencer W. Kimball: "How else do you think Moses, many hundreds of years later, got the information he compiled in the book of Genesis? These records had been kept, and he referred to them and got the history of the world, which wasn't in any library other than that." (President Kimball Speaks Out [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1981], pp. 55-56.)
[^13] See Teachings, pp. 119, 160.
[^14] Doctrinal New Testament Commentary 1:65.
[^15] Ibid., p. 69.
[^16] See Melvin J. Petersen, "A Study of the Nature and Significance of the Changes in the Revelations as Found in a Comparison of the Book of Commandments and Subsequent Editions of the Doctrine and Covenants," Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1955; Robert J. Woodford, "The Historical Development of the Doctrine and Covenants," Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1974.
[^17] The definitive work on this subject is Robert J. Matthews, A Plainer Translation: Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible—A History and Commentary (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1975). For a brief treatment of the process of translation, see Robert L. Millet, "Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible: A Historical Overview," in The Joseph Smith Translation: The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Robert L. Millet (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1985), pp. 23-49.
[^18] From The Other Gospels, ed. Ron Cameron (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1982), pp. 69-70, emphasis added. See also Morton Smith, The Secret Gospel (New York: Harper & Row, 1973), p. 15.
[^19] Teachings, pp. 9-10.
[^20] See Charles H. Talbert, What Is a Gospel? The Genre of the Canonical Gospels (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1977); Philip L. Shuler, A Genre for the Gospels: The Biographical Character of Matthew (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1982).
[^21] Merrill C. Tenney, New Testament Survey (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1961), p. 133.
[^22] These matters are, in the words of Joseph Smith, those things which constitute the "fundamental principles of our religion." All other things that pertain to our religion, he noted, are only appendages to them. (Teachings, p. 121.)
[^23] "We understand," stated President Brigham Young, "from the writings of one of the Apostles, that if all the sayings and doings of the Savior had been written, the world could not contain them. I will say that the world could not understand them. They do not understand what we have on record, nor the character of the Savior, as delineated in the Scriptures; and yet it is one of the simplest things in the world, and the Bible, when it is understood, is one of the simplest books in the world, for, as far as it is translated correctly, it is nothing but truth, and in truth there is no mystery save to the ignorant." (Journal of Discourses 14:135-36, emphasis added.)
[^24] The Twelve: The Story of Christ's Apostles (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1957), pp. 27, 42-43. See also Edgar J. Goodspeed, Matthew: Apostle and Evangelist (Philadelphia: John C. Winston Company, 1959), pp. 13, 16-17.
[^25] Some might contend that the written source referred to here would be something from the Old Testament record concerning the birth of Jesus Christ. If such be the case, then the ancient source must certainly be more complete and detailed than anything we now have in the Old Testament. Others may feel that such is a reference to the Gospel of Mark, which most scholars believe to have preceded Matthew. (See S. Kent Brown, "The Testimony of Mark," chapter 4 of this volume.) This seems unlikely, inasmuch as Mark simply omits a discussion of the Annunciation and the Lord's early years.
[^26] "Fragments of Papias," in Ante-Nicene Fathers 1:155.
[^27] In Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 5.8.
[^28] Goodspeed, Matthew: Apostle and Evangelist, pp. 101, 103. The following statement from Eusebius regarding the spread of the gospel to all parts of the earth is most interesting. Regarding one Pantaenus of Alexandria (ca. A.D. 180), Eusebius has written: "Pantaenus also was one of them and [is] said to have gone to India, where the story [goes] that he found the gospel according to Matthew, [which] had preceded his arrival, among certain people there who had learned of Christ; that Bartholomew, one of the Apostles, had preached to them; and that he had left the writing of Matthew in Hebrew letters, which also was preserved to the time indicated." (Ecclesiastical History, V. 10, emphasis added.) For a detailed study of this tradition in Matthew's Gospel, see Matthew Black, An Aramaic Approach to the Gospels and Acts, 3rd ed. (London: Oxford University Press, 1967).
[^29] See F. F. Bruce, The New Testament Documents: Are They Reliable? (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1974), p. 31.
[^30] Though it is a common presupposition of some biblical critics to prefer the shortest document as the oldest (thus assuming that the longer ones evidence embellishments and additions), Latter-day Saints should take seriously Nephi's vision of the corruption of the earliest biblical texts (1 Ne. 13). Is it not just as reasonable to suppose that Mark, having before him the longer Matthew or the longer Luke, chose to prepare an abbreviated Gospel, placing less stress upon sermons and parables and more stress upon the movements and actions of our Lord? William R. Farmer has argued for the primacy of Matthew. See his discussion in Jesus and the Gospel (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1982), pp. 3-7. Further, Albright and Mann feel it is unnecessary to suppose that Matthew and Luke drew upon a single source of sayings: "All that an examination of the 'Q' material in Matthew and Luke seems likely at this stage to produce is evidence that more than one source was employed by all three evangelists." (Matthew, p. liii.)
[^31] "The Doctrinal Restoration," in Nyman and Millet, eds., The Joseph Smith Translation, pp. 17-18. See also Doctrinal New Testament Commentary 1:69-71.
[^32] A detailed treatment of the impact of the JST on Matthean themes is Robert L. Millet, "Joseph Smith and the Gospel of Matthew," Brigham Young University Studies, vol. 25, no. 1 (Winter 1985), pp. 65-80; see also "The JST and the Synoptic Gospels: Literary Style," in The Joseph Smith Translation, pp. 147-61.
[^33] H. C. Thiessen, Introduction to the New Testament, p. 138.
[^34] See Millet, "Looking Beyond the Mark: Insights from the JST into First-Century Judaism," in The Joseph Smith Translation, pp. 201-14.
[^35] Teachings, p. 276.
[^36] Doctrinal New Testament Commentary 1:219-20.
[^37] Adapted from Raymond E. Brown, The Birth of the Messiah (New York: Doubleday, 1977), p. 98. Citations in Mark include 15:28, citing Isa. 53:12. Citations in Luke include 18:31, a formula without any citation; 22:37, citing Isa. 53:12; and 24:44, a formula without citation.
[^38] The Birth of the Messiah, pp. 98-99.
[^39] 39. The exact number is disputed, but the best possibilities are that there were seventy (or seventy-one) council members and two (or one) presidents.
[^40] 40. For information on the trial of Jesus, see Ernest Bammel, ed., The Trial of Jesus (Naperville, Ill.: A. R. Allenson, 1970). On the Sanhedrin, see S. Safrai and M. Stern, The Jewish People in the First Century, 2 vols. (Assen, Amsterdam: Van Gorcum, 1976), 1:379-400, and Schurer, The History of the Jewish People 2:199-226.
[^41] 41. For information on the synagogues in general, see Safrai and Stern, The Jewish People in the First Century 2:908-44.
[^42] 42. In Old Testament times, the prophet Samuel served at a sanctuary at Shiloh. There were others at Bethel (which means "house of God"), Nob, Gibeah, Arad (maybe), and elsewhere.
[^43] 43. These concessions began as a service to pilgrims who otherwise would have had to go into town to change their foreign money into temple coin (which had no images on it and which alone could be used for the payment of religious obligations) and to find unblemished sacrifices. But what began on the pretext of being a service soon became a major source of revenue to the high-priestly families who controlled the concessions and who were taking unfair advantage of the tourists. There were also concessions that sold the wood and incense for the sacrifices.
[^44] 44. Two good sources for understanding the temple and its worship are Menahem Haran, Temples and Temple Service in Ancient Israel (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978), and Safrai and Stern, The Jewish People in the First Century 2:865-907.
