Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

3

THE TESTIMONY OF MATTHEW

ROBERT L. MILLET

The gospel is "the glad tidings . . . that he came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness; that through him all might be saved whom the Father had put into his power and made by him." (D&C 76:40-42.) Before ascending into heaven, the Master delivered a charge to his apostles to preach that gospel to all the world.

Oral and Written Testimonies

Acceptance of Christ and his gospel was accomplished first through the power of verbal human testimony: faith came by hearing the word of God, as taught by legal administrators whose oral witness was attended by the spirit of prophecy and revelation. [^1] Much of the earliest scripture—that delivered by the power of the Holy Ghost (D&C 68:3-4)—in the meridian dispensation (as perhaps in all dispensations) existed in an oral and unrecorded form. [^2] The kerygma or proclamation of the gospel, the logia (sayings of Christ), and the agrapha (unwritten things) circulated among the Saints as the witness of the apostles spread from Jerusalem to the ends of the known world. The gospel was preached then, as now, by word and by power, whether by mouth or by pen. In our own day, genuine faith-promoting stories circulate throughout the Church orally at the same time that written accounts of the events are readily available. It does not require too much stretch of the imagination to suppose that in the first-century church, written documents recounting many of the events of the life of Jesus were contemporaneous with the members' reminiscences and personal oral testimonies of the same. The manner in which oral traditions were valued in early Christianity is highlighted by the following statement from Papias, bishop of Hierapolis in Asia Minor (ca. A.D. 130-140): "I will not hesitate to set down for you alongside my interpretations all that I ever learned well from the elders and remembered well, guaranteeing their truth. . . . Also, if ever a person came my way who had been a companion of the elders, I would inquire about the sayings of the elders—what was said by Andrew, or by Peter, or by Philip, or by Thomas or James, or by John or Matthew or any other of the Lord's disciples? . . . For I did not suppose that what I could get from books was of such great value to me as the utterances of a living and abiding voice." [^3]

The Challenge of the Gospel Writer

How does one write the story of a God, sketch the outlines or prepare the epoch of an Infinite One? "No man," observed Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "can write a Life of Christ in the true sense of the word, for two very good and sufficient reasons:

It would seem, therefore, that an initial obstacle facing the inspired author/editor is one of being able to discern the words and ideas that most closely approximate the ineffable. Indeed, some matters are such that "no tongue can speak [of them], neither can [they] be written by any man, neither can the hearts of men conceive so great and marvelous things." (3 Nephi 17:17; cf. D&C 76:115-16.) In the face of such overwhelming literary obstacles, however, it was given to certain chosen representatives to construct a limited but living and descriptive testimony of the Messiah—a carefully constrained chronicle of the life of the Son of God.

A second potential barrier encountered by the Gospel writers was the passage of time, the interval between the actual events and the accounts of those events. Most serious students of the New Testament feel that much of the material in our present canonical Gospels did not take final form until a number of years after the death and resurrection of Christ. In fact, the passing of years does occasionally lead to a loss of detail. The Lord Jesus did promise to his disciples, however, that "the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, . . . shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you." (John 14:26.) No doubt this was the case with Matthew and John, members of the original Twelve, who prepared Gospel accounts based upon their personal experiences with the Master. In regard to Mark and Luke—devoted disciples who may never have known the Savior intimately during his mortal ministry—we feel confident that the spirit of inspiration guided their minds and their pens and directed them to interview and inquire of persons whose firsthand dealings with Jesus needed to be preserved.

From another point of view, the passage of time also leads to a perspective and a breadth of clarity and context. Nephi began his small plates approximately thirty years after leaving Jerusalem (2 Ne. 5:28-32), but we as readers are so much the richer as a result of this period of rare and valuable spiritual gestation. With his eyes open to the works and wonders of the Lord during the previous three decades, Nephi the prophet/writer set forth in remarkable fashion his intriguing account of how the "tender mercies of the Lord are over all those whom he hath chosen." (1 Ne. 1:20.) Joseph Smith's 1838 account of the First Vision (the one contained in our Pearl of Great Price) was dictated some eighteen years after the dispensation-opening experience in the Sacred Grove. During that interval, Joseph the Prophet grew in spiritual graces and gained a mature frame of reference that sharply defined the significance of the appearance of the Father and the Son. In similar fashion, the Gospel writers, moved upon by the Holy Ghost, reflected upon personal or reported experiences with the Master, and then with mature minds and a grander vision set out to construct an extended written testimony of Jesus the Christ. Time frequently yields a peak in overall perception.

"Of all the disciples," wrote Eusebius, the fourth-century church historian, "Matthew and John are the only ones that have left us recorded comments [concerning the ministry of Christ], and even they, tradition says, undertook it from necessity." [^5] What was the necessity for written Gospels? Why was it essential that the gospel be formed into a Gospel, that the oral become textual? First of all, it is important to note that the power and the impact of oral traditions are bounded by the limitations and inabilities of human transmitters. George Reynolds and Janne Sjodahl have suggested that the written Gospels took shape to insure continuity and orthodoxy of doctrine:

It may be supposed that those Disciples of Christ . . . like Matthew and John, would keep journals while they followed their Master, witnessing His works and listening to His teachings. These journals would, after the Crucifixion and Ascension, naturally be read in private and in public. They would be copied and distributed in the various branches of the Church and form texts for sermons and otherwise discourses, and thus be augmented with such incidents or sayings which were still retained in the memories of those who had been eyewitnesses. In this way several versions of the doings and sayings of our Lord began to circulate, some no doubt contradicting others, until the necessity became universally felt to have some authentic record showing exactly what was reliable of the many circulating reports, and what was not reliable. And the result is the four Gospels according to Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. [^6]

A "standard work" was needed in the first century as much as it is needed in the twentieth century in order that the Saints of the former day might "speak the same thing" and thus be "perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment." (1 Cor. 1:10.) The authorized Gospels helped to establish precise doctrinal and historical lines between orthodoxy and heresy, between the accepted and the aberrant. W. D. Davies has described the process as follows: "In the Graeco-Roman world, the Palestinian Gospel came into contact with all sorts of religious and philosophic movements. Men challenged it and could have perverted it by turning it into a metaphysical system or a mystery or Gnostic cult, without connection with that historic figure who gave it birth; that is, they could have cut it from its root. To prevent this, the Gospels came into being; they kept the Church attached to its base." [^7] Two other biblical scholars have explained:

The infant Christian community demanded that oral tradition be rightly evaluated to avoid misunderstanding, in the knowledge that the original disciples would soon be dead and the community faced with the need to have more or less fixed patterns for recalling God's redemptive act in Jesus. There were other factors at work, too. We know from the evidence of both archaeology and secular writers that conditions in Palestine after A.D. 60 were fraught with uncertainty and pending civil strife, and that in these years (even before the fall of Jerusalem in A.D. 70) thousands of people left the country. In such a situation, it is understandable that only Christians would feel the need to record and preserve the earliest oral memories of the ministry of Jesus and its culmination.

Because of the nature of the Gospel proclamation, the original oral repetition of the story of Jesus and his teachings did not satisfy the early Christians for long. It was of the essence of the Gospel—supremely exemplified in Matthew and in Paul's teaching—that all Israel's experience had been gathered up, fulfilled in Jesus. But how, and in what manner, had it all been fulfilled? If the earliest Christians had the Old Testament as scripture, and presumably followed the old synagogue pattern of reading and prayers, then it is obvious that the Gospel had to be put into a form in which it could be similarly used. We know from Paul's letters (cf. Col iv 16) that he was able to order his letters to be read aloud in his convert-congregations, and we may infer from this that during worship there was teaching by the apostles and elders. It is only logical to assume, therefore, that there was pressure to have on record an authentic account of what Jesus had said and done, the better to show Christianity's roots in Israel. [^8]

At the same time, the Gospels were written to secure and maintain the precious witness of those who had originally walked and talked with the Savior. "When these witnesses began to pass away," Davies has written, "their testimony had to be preserved. This is one of the fundamental reasons for the emergence of the Gospels—in part, at least, they were designed to supply the witness of those witnesses who were no longer alive." [^9]

The Formation of the Gospels

Irenaus (ca. A.D. 180), in speaking out against doctrinal heresies of the second century, taught that "it is not possible that the gospels can be either more or fewer in number than they are." He further compared the four Gospels to the "four zones of the world in which we live," as well as the "four pillars" of the church. Jesus Christ, he added, "has given us the Gospel under four aspects, but bound together by one spirit." [^10] Irenaus's statement was obviously intended to discourage and discount any and all apocryphal Gospels. At the same time, it is wise for us to recognize the hand of Providence in the formation, inspiration, and preservation of the four Gospels. Surely Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John were foreordained in premortality and raised up in mortality to make their particular contributions. Joseph Smith taught, "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before the world was." [^11] The impact of the ministries of our Gospel writers did not end with their own deaths; their compositions continue to turn men's minds toward their Redeemer twenty centuries later.

As noted earlier, there should be no doubt among Latter-day Saints that the canonical Gospels were compiled, composed, organized, and written by the spirit of revelation. At the same time, we in no way detract from the spiritual significance of the writers to suggest that Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John were also divinely directed editors as well as creative authors. Moses was a choice seer and a man familiar with and open to the revelations of the Lord. He was also a gifted compiler and editor of earlier records. "The only biblical account of the creation," writes Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "was revealed directly to Moses, but we are left to suppose that he copied or condensed the historical portions of Genesis from the writings of Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, and the patriarchs. The fourteenth and fiftieth chapters of Genesis, both as restored by Joseph Smith, must have been written respectively by Melchizedek and Joseph (the son of Jacob) in the first instance." [^12] Likewise, Mormon was an inspired author/editor whose timely commentary and whose "and thus we see" passages in the Nephite record help wondrously to demonstrate the wisdom of the ways of God. The Gospel writers undertook the task of producing authorized and written testimony-narratives, based upon accurate and authentic accounts and directed by that Spirit which Jesus had promised to send.

All four of the Gospel writers were prophets, men endowed with the testimony of Jesus, which is the spirit of prophecy. (Rev. 19:10.) [^13] They all loved and served the same Lord. And yet their written testimonies of the Lord Jesus were expressed in varying ways and in a manner peculiar to each author. For example, Elder McConkie wrote: "It appears that Matthew was directing his gospel to the Jews. He presents Christ as the promised Messiah and Christianity as the fulfillment of Judaism. Mark apparently wrote with the aim of appealing to the Roman or Gentile mind. Luke's gospel presents the Master to the Greeks, to those of culture and refinement. And the gospel of John is the account for the saints; it is preeminently the gospel for the Church, for those who understand the scriptures and their symbolisms and who are concerned with spiritual and eternal things." [^14] Each writer "had especial and intimate knowledge of certain circumstances not so well known to others," and thus each "felt impressed to emphasize different matters because of the particular people to whom he was addressing his personal gospel testimony." [^15]

Also worthy of consideration is the possibility that the four Gospels may not always have existed in their present state or condition. First of all, we need to recognize the appropriateness for a writer—even an inspired writer—to add to or take away from his work as he matures or gains new or added perspective. In our Book of Mormon story, Moroni returned to his record after a period of fearful anticipation and (since he was still alive—see, for example, Moroni 1:1) provided additional doctrinal and historical insights to that which had previously been written. In the preparation of the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants (1835), Joseph Smith made prophetic editorial changes in certain revelations that he had previously received and recorded in the Book of Commandments (1833). [^16] The same is true of Joseph Smith's inspired translation of the King James Bible: whereas the Prophet and his scribe had formally completed the work of translation by July 1833, Joseph continued to labor with the manuscripts, making changes where he felt the need to do so, until the time of his death. [^17] Future discoveries may well reveal, therefore, that different editions of the Gospels existed through the years. In this connection it is worthwhile to consider an excerpt from a somewhat controversial document known as the "Secret Gospel of Mark." This document was discovered in 1958 by Morton Smith in the Mar Saba monastery, some twelve miles southeast of Jerusalem.

Now of the things they keep saying about the divinely inspired Gospel according to Mark, some are altogether falsifications, and others, even if they do contain some true elements, nevertheless are not reported truly. For the true things being mixed with inventions, are falsified, so that, as the saying goes, even the salt loses its savor.

As for Mark, then, during Peter's stay in Rome he wrote an account of the Lord's doings, not, however, declaring all of them, nor yet hinting at the secret ones, but selecting what he thought most useful for increasing the faith of those who were being instructed. But when Peter died a martyr, Mark came over to Alexandria, bringing both his own notes and those of Peter, from which he transferred to his former book the things suitable to whatever makes for progress toward knowledge. Thus he composed a more spiritual Gospel for the use of those who were being perfected. Nevertheless, he yet did not divulge the things not to be uttered. [^18]

It may be that the Gospels as we now have them represent a truncated version of the Gospels as first written by Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. Nephi saw in vision the day when the Old and New Testaments would suffer a willful interference by a church whose dominions were great and whose desires and actions were abominable. "Plain and precious things [would be] taken away from the book, which is the book of the Lamb of God" (1 Ne. 13:28); that is to say, "many important points touching the salvation of men, [would be] taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled." [^19] We need, therefore, to be extremely grateful that the Lord has seen fit to preserve those portions of the Gospels that have been secured for us.

In forming the message of the gospel into what we have come to call a Gospel, the writers became the initiators of a remarkably important literary genre. The Gospels are not, as we have seen, purely biographical, in the modern sense of revealing or developing the thoughts or personalities of the main characters; possibly not more than thirty days of the life of Christ receive treatment through all four Gospel accounts. On the other hand, the Gospels represent laudatory biographies written to elicit faith and emulation. [^20]

The four Gospels "do not claim to be exhaustive accounts of all that Jesus said or did." Rather, "each gospel was selective according to the purpose of the author, and is complete in the sense that it carries out his intent." [^21] The Gospels were "standard works" in the sense that they were given to guide the Saints in emulating the Sinless One as well as to transmit the witness that Jesus died, was buried, rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven. (See 1 Cor. 15:3-4.) [^22] The Gospels were written to convey the "portion of the word" (to use Alma's words—Alma 12:9-11) that is appropriate for persons who are gaining or strengthening a conviction of Jesus as the Messiah. They were not written to convey the esoteric teachings of the Lord, those sacred truths preserved for those persons able to bear the added enlightenment. In a sense, the Gospels are public documents, created for display purposes. Surely there are "many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written." (John 21:25.) [^23]

Matthew as a Gospel Writer

Matthew (Levi) was a member of the original Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, a publican or tax gatherer before his call. Edgar Goodspeed has suggested the following regarding the author of the first Gospel: "Matthew was probably a man of somewhat more education, as we would call it, than some of his fellow disciples. He must have been able to read and write, and to use the elements at least of arithmetic, in his work as a tax collector. . . . Matthew is more likely to have known Greek than any of the rest, for he was a tax collector. He is likelier to have been readier with the pen than most, perhaps than any, of the group, and he may even have jotted down for his own use not a few of Jesus' striking sayings, especially after the missionary travels of the Twelve about the Jewish towns." [^24]

In the preparation of his Gospel, Matthew would no doubt have drawn upon his own reminiscences and notes, as well as other extant oral or written sources. After providing the genealogy of Jesus Christ, Matthew records (1:18): "Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise . . ." The Matthean infancy narrative follows. Joseph Smith's translation of the same verse (JST, Matt. 2:1) reads: "Now, as it is written, the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise . . ." This prophetic alteration of the King James text seems to point toward the possibility of a written source available to the apostle that predates his own Gospel. [^25]

Christian tradition holds that Matthew collected the logia (sayings) of Jesus in Hebrew (presumably meaning Aramaic) and later translated the same into Greek. From Papias we have the following fragment: "Matthew put together the oracles [of the Lord] in the Hebrew language, and each one interpreted them the best he could." [^26] Likewise, according to Irenaus, Matthew "produced his gospel written among the Hebrews in their own dialect." [^27] Indeed, "if Matthew had made notes from time to time of things of especial interest and importance that Jesus had said, he would naturally have done so in Aramaic, the language Jesus spoke and they all used." Further, "in Antioch [the traditional source of Matthew's Gospel], of course, his public was largely Greek, and he naturally translated the sayings into that language as he had occasion to use them, or unwritten things that he simply remembered. This is doubtless the background of Papias's remarks." [^28]

The "Synoptic Problem"

A close comparative study of Matthew, Mark, and Luke shows that they have much in common. Thus they are called "synoptic," meaning that they take a "similar look" at Christ. We find, for example, that the substance of 606 of the 661 verses of Mark appears in Matthew and that 380 of Mark's verses reappear with only slight alteration in Luke. From another perspective, of the 1,068 verses of Matthew, about 500 contain material also found in Mark; of the 1,149 verses in Luke, about 380 are paralleled in Mark. There are only 31 verses in Mark not found in Matthew or Luke. [^29] To look at this another way, consider the following chart, which illustrates the material common and exclusive to each of the Gospels:

Gospel Exclusive Common

Mark 7% 93%

Matthew 42% 58%

Luke 59% 41%

John 92% 8%

In other words, 93 percent of the material in Mark is included in the other Gospels, while only 8 percent of the information in John is included in the other Gospels, and so on.

What is one to make of such statistics? What is the chronological and literary relationship between the Synoptic Gospels? The issues underlying these relationships constitute what biblical critics have come to denote the "synoptic problem." Since the nineteenth century many scholars have concluded that the resolution of the problem was to be found in stressing the priority and primacy of Mark, the shortest of the Gospels. The general consensus has been that Mark's was the first Gospel written and that Matthew and Luke drew upon Mark in preparing their own Gospels. This approach, known as the "Markan Hypothesis" or the "Two-Document Hypothesis," contends that Matthew relied upon Mark, upon a "sayings source" or collection of sayings of Jesus (known as the "Q Document," from the German word Quelle, "source"), and added his own peculiar style, perspective, and experiences (called "M") in preparing the Gospel we know as Matthew. Supposedly Luke did the same. In short, the Two-Document Hypothesis for the composition of Matthew and Luke is: Matthew =Mark + Q + M. Luke =Mark + Q + L. [^30]

For Latter-day Saints, it is not difficult to believe that God could reveal the very same words to Matthew and Luke that he inspired Mark to record. In short, one resolution of the problem might well be the matter of revelation: all of the Gospel writers were inspired by the very same source. At the same time, it would not be out of harmony with principles of truth for one Gospel writer to utilize the writings of another. "Our understanding of the prophetic word," taught Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "will be greatly expanded if we know how one prophet quotes another, usually without acknowledging his source." Then, after giving illustrations of this principle (Micah and Isaiah; Zenos, Nephi, and Malachi; Paul and Mormon; John the Baptist and John the Beloved), Elder McConkie observed: "Once the Lord has revealed his doctrine in precise language to a chosen prophet, there is no reason why he should inspire another prophet to choose the same words in presenting the same doctrine on a subsequent occasion. It is much easier and simpler to quote that which has already been given." He concluded, "We are all commanded—including the prophets among us—to search the scriptures and thereby learn what other prophets have presented." [^31]

Until further light and knowledge of the doings of the first century are available, we are left to our own reasoning as to the exact manner and time in which the Gospels were formed and prepared.

Prominent Themes in Matthew

Some of the most prominent themes in the Gospel of Matthew are (1) the importance of the Church and kingdom of God; (2) Jesus' condemnation of first-century Judaism and its traditions; and (3) Jesus Christ as the fulfillment of prophecy.

Instructions on regulating the church are given in Matthew 18. Among the subjects discussed, the following are paramount: the need for conversion (vv. 1-5); removing harmful elements from the members' lives and thus from the church (vv. 12-14); resolving differences between individual Saints (vv. 15-17); and the need in the church for genuine forgiveness (vv. 21-35). The instructions regarding the resolution of differences between members (compare the similar counsel in D&C 42:84-92) conclude with the following: "And if he [the accused] shall neglect to hear them [witnesses], tell it unto the church: but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as a heathen man and a publican." (Matt. 18:17, emphasis added.) The Joseph Smith Translation of Matthew is an even stronger witness than the King James Version that one of Matthew's areas of stress is the place of the church in administering the gospel to the Saints. The Joseph Smith Translation places a stronger emphasis upon the place of commandments (for example, JST, Matt. 5:50; 6:29-30; 9:35-36; 16:25-29) and ordinances (for example, JST, Matt. 5:1-4; 18:10-11). [^32]

In a related manner, Matthew placed great stress upon the King and his kingdom. Messiah is a royal title, and Jesus' royal/messianic status was critically important to Matthew. The genealogy of Jesus given in Matthew (1:1-17) is the Lord's royal line. Matthew laid out the genealogy in such a manner as to divide the forty-two generations into three sections of fourteen (from Abraham to David, from David to Babylonian captivity, and from exile to Jesus). For Matthew, the very number fourteen has royal significance. How so? The name David in Hebrew consists of three Hebrew consonants, each having numerical equivalents. Thus: Dahlet (d =4) + Vav (v =6) + Dahlet (d =4) =14.

Aspects of the Savior's life that highlight his royal status in Matthew include such things as the wise men searching for the King (messiah) of the Jews (2:1-12); Herod's alarm over the birth of a potential rival king (2:7-16); parables of the kingdom (13:1-52); the triumphal entry (21:1-11); Christ's mention of his eventual position at the throne of glory (25:31); and the inscription prepared by Pilate and placed above Jesus' head on the cross—"This is Jesus, the King of the Jews" (27:37). In the words of one New Testament scholar, "Matthew is the Jewish Gospel, dealing with the King and the Kingdom. In Greek, the term 'kingdom of heaven' occurs thirty-three times, and the term 'kingdom of God' four times." [^33] Indeed, the ever-present plea of the disciple to the Father in the Gospel of Matthew is "Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven" (6:10).

In the purest sense, Jesus was an observant Jew. He loved and honored the law of Moses and sought to keep the statutes and ordinances associated with it. "Christ Himself," said the Prophet Joseph Smith, "fulfilled all righteousness in becoming obedient to the law which he had given to Moses on the mount, and thereby magnified it and made it honorable, instead of destroying it." [^35] The Master thus taught that until the infinite atonement was accomplished, the law was to be kept and observed. "Heaven and earth must pass away," he taught, "but one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, until all be fulfilled. Whosoever, therefore, shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so to do, he shall in no wise be saved in the kingdom of heaven; but whosoever shall do and teach these commandments of the law until it be fulfilled, the same shall be called great, and shall be saved in the kingdom of heaven." (JST, Matt. 5:20-21.) Had the Pharisees been more intense in their study of the pure law, rather than the traditions of the elders, the commentary upon the law, and more eager to apply its teachings, rather than seeking for further things they could not understand (see Jacob 4:14), they might have distilled the central message of the Torah and thereby recognized Jesus of Nazareth as the giver of the law and the promised Messiah. Such was not, however, the case. One of the most interesting contributions of the Joseph Smith Translation may be found in chapter 9 of Matthew's Gospel. Note the relationship between rejecting (or ignoring) the law and rejecting the Christ:

KJV, Matthew 9:15-16

And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bridechamber mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? but the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast.

No man putteth a piece of new cloth unto an old garment, for that which is put in to fill it up taketh from the garment, and the rent is made worse.

JST, Matthew 9:16-22

And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bridechamber mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them?

But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast.

Then said the Pharisees unto him, why will ye not receive us with our baptism, seeing we keep the whole law?

But Jesus said unto them, Ye keep not the law. If ye had kept the law, ye would have received me, for I am he who gave the law.

I receive not you with your baptism, because it profiteth you nothing.

For when that which is new is come, the old is ready to be put away.

For no man putteth a piece of new cloth on an old garment; for that which is put in to fill it up, taketh from the garment, and the rent is made worse. (Emphasis added.)

Not only does this addition in the Joseph Smith Translation provide a marvelous topical transition and establish the social and doctrinal setting for the discussion of new cloth and new bottles (Jesus has rejected the baptism of the Pharisees—compare D&C 22), but it also underscores the fact that those who accept and follow divine direction come to recognize and accept the Divine Director, while those who set the law at naught and seek to become a law unto themselves are condemned by the law and rejected by the Lawgiver.

In the Sermon on the Mount, the Lord instructed the Twelve: "Beholdest thou the scribes, and the Pharisees, and the priests, and the Levites? They teach in their synagogues, but do not observe the law, nor the commandments; and all have gone out of the way, and are under sin. Go thou and say unto them, Why teach ye men the law and the commandments, when ye yourselves are the children of corruption?" (JST, Matt. 7:6-7; compare JST, Matt. 23:21.) In that same sermon, the Joseph Smith Translation uncovers an agnostic or atheistic attitude present among some of the Jews of the first century. The Twelve have voiced a concern about their missionary approach to the leaders of the Jews, anticipating the manner in which they would be spurned and rejected: "Then said his disciples unto him, they will say unto us, We ourselves are righteous, and need not that any man should teach us. God, we know, heard Moses and some of the prophets; but us he will not hear." (JST, Matt. 7:14, emphasis added; compare JST, Luke 16:19-21.) Perhaps more than any other place in the Gospels, this passage demonstrates the static and inert condition of the days of Jesus. It appears that the spirit of true inquiry was all but gone. Absent was the awareness of the need for the spirit of prophecy and revelation.

Jesus spoke clearly and directly to Simon and Andrew at the beginning of his ministry when he called them to their discipleship: "And he said unto them, I am he of whom it is written by the prophets; follow me, and I will make you fishers of men." (JST, Matt. 4:18, emphasis added.) At the Sermon on the Mount, the Savior repeatedly called the disciples to a higher righteousness. He who had delivered the law to Moses anciently on a holy mount (3 Ne. 15:5) now spoke again from a mount. "Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets," he said. "I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil." (Matt. 5:17.) Of this statement Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "Jesus came to restore that gospel fulness which men had enjoyed before the day of Moses, before the time of the lesser order. Obviously he did not come to destroy what he himself had revealed to Moses any more than a college professor destroys arithmetic by revealing the principles of integral calculus to his students. Jesus came to build on the foundation Moses laid." [^36] Jesus' repeated declarations of "Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time . . . but I say unto you . . ." (Matt. 5:21, 27, 31, 33, 38, 43) bear fervent testimony of him as the Lord of the law and the one qualified to amend and build upon the principles of the law. The Mediator of a new and everlasting covenant, the Mediator of Life was now on earth; one greater than Moses was in their midst. (See JST, Gal. 3:19-20.)

Perhaps the most important Matthean peculiarity is Matthew's desire to represent Jesus of Nazareth as the literal fulfillment of the law and the prophets, the realization of the hopes and prayers of the faithful for centuries. Matthew utilized what scholars have come to know as a "formula citation" method of tying the life and doings of Jesus Christ with the Old Testament prophecies of the same. Matthew used this approach as many as fourteen times in his Gospel, and of these, eight seem to come directly from the prophet Isaiah. The formula citation method appears to be a Matthean peculiarity, for although there was a constant reference during the years of early Christianity to Jesus as the fulfillment of the prophecies, yet the other three Gospel writers do not apply this literary technique in just the same way Matthew does. John uses nine formula citations, but on five of those occasions John speaks in very broad terms concerning the "fulfillment of scripture" rather than a specific prophet.

Matthew's citations take the familiar form of "Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying . . ." (Matt. 1:22), or "for thus it is written by the prophet . . ." (Matt. 2:5), or "then was fulfilled that which was spoken by . . . the prophet" (Matt. 2:17). The following is a list of the formula citations in Matthew [^37]:

Matthew Citing

1:22-23 Isaiah 7:14

2:5b-6 (cf. JST) Micah 5:1 and 2 Samuel 5:2

2:15b Hosea 11:1

2:17-18 Jeremiah 31:15

2:23b perhaps Isaiah 4:3 and Judges 16:17

3:3 Isaiah 40:3

4:14-16 Isaiah 8:23-9:1

8:17 Isaiah 53:4

12:17-21 Isaiah 42:1-4

13:14-15 Isaiah 6:9-10

13:35 Psalm 78:2 (though Matthew mentions Isaiah)

21:4-5 Isaiah 62:11 and Zechariah 9:9

26:56 a formula (cf. Mark 14:49) without citation

27:9-10 Zechariah 11:12-13 see also Jeremiah18:2-3;

32:6-15)

There can be little doubt that Matthew used his citations to attract the attention of uninterested (and possibly even hostile) Jews who still awaited a Messiah. Matthew's purpose was to declare with boldness that the Messiah had come and that they should "believe the gospel, and look not for a Messiah to come who has already come." (D&C 19:27.) At the same time, a major function of the formula citations may have been didactic as well as apologetic. "The formula citations," writes Raymond Brown, "had a didactic purpose, informing the Christian readers and giving support to their faith. Some of the citations are attached to the minutiae of Jesus' career, as if to emphasize that the whole of Jesus' life, down to the least detail, lay within God's foreordained plan." [^38]

During the last week of his life, the Lord delivered a scathing denunciation of the pretense and perverted priorities of the Jewish leaders. Matthew 23 is a stinging rebuke of those who should have known and acted better than they did. Note the following statement at the close of that sermon: "Behold, your house is left unto you desolate! For I say unto you, that ye shall not see me henceforth, and know that I am he of whom it is written by the prophets, until ye shall say, Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord, in the clouds of heaven, and all the holy angels with him. Then understood his disciples that he should come again on the earth, after that he was glorified and crowned on the right hand of God." (JST, Matt. 23:38-41, emphasis added.)

NOTES

Robert L. Millet is assistant professor of ancient scripture and New Testament area coordinator at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Mark was an interpreter of Peter. This should not surprise us, since Peter, who was a moving force in the mission to Gentiles as well as to Jews, would not have spoken Greek with fluency, coming as he did from the fishing colony along the shores of the Sea of Galilee. That Mark served as a companion to Peter is also attested by 1 Peter 5:13. Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 3.39.15. The translation of this passage appears in Martin Hengel, Studies in the Gospel of Mark (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1985), p. 47.
[^2] Mark "wrote accurately, although not in order, all that he recalled" of the Lord's words and deeds. Mark has frequently been characterized as a writer who imposed his own order on the events that he narrated. [^4] Whatever discrepancies may have existed in the memories of early Christians regarding the order and completeness of Mark's account, the order of his narration must have derived ultimately from Peter, who, in his preaching, "used to adapt his instructions to the needs" of the moment. Hengel, pp. 47-50, and William L. Lane, The Gospel According to Mark (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1974), pp. 7-9, both accept the authenticity of Papias's notice. For an opposite view, see Dennis E. Nineham, The Gospel of St. Mark (Baltimore: Pelican Books, 1963), pp. 26-27, and Werner Georg Kummel, Introduction to the New Testament (Nashville: Abingdon, 1966), pp. 43-44. These authors both find reason to mistrust Papias, but Hengel advances the more compelling arguments.
[^3] Mark himself was not one of Jesus' disciples, an observation that makes perfect sense because it is certain that he was the John Mark whose mother's home in Jerusalem served as a meeting place for early disciples (Acts 12:12-17) and who later accompanied Paul and Barnabas on their missionary journey to Cyprus and Perga in Pamphylia (Acts 12:25-13:13). Thus, Mark grew up in Jerusalem, was doubtless young when Jesus came there before his crucifixion, and was therefore probably not among Jesus' Galilean disciples. Hengel, p. 150, note 55. See also Hugh J. Lawlor and John E. L. Oulton, trans., Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea: The Ecclesiastical History and the Martyrs of Palestine (London: SPCK, 1954), 2:114-15.
[^5] Against Heresies 3.1.1. Translation is that of Hengel, p. 2.
[^6] A point made by Hengel, p. 2; also p. 119, note 14.
[^7] Ecclesiastical History 6.14.6-7. Translation is that of Lawlor and Oulton, vol. 1, p. 189.
[^8] As Hengel has noted (p. 4), Clement's view buttressed his own high opinion of John's Gospel as compared to that of Mark.
[^9] See Hengel, pp. 120-21, notes 24 and 27; p. 137, note 160.
[^10] One must realize that a work is not written in a vacuum. It is a fact that even forgeries betray the circumstances under which they were created.
[^11] Hengel, pp. 7-28.
[^12] The latest and most serious was that of William R. Farmer, The Synoptic Problem (New York: Mercer University Press, 1964). See also Jesus and the Gospel (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1982).
[^13] See the summary of the evidence in Kummel, pp. 35-60. To say that Luke and Matthew employed the Gospel of Mark as a source for their own works should not disturb us. If it was Peter's recollections that stand at the foundation of Mark's work, as I have already tried to show, this fact would have been known to Mark's readers. Such would have been reason enough to recommend Mark's Gospel to Matthew and Luke.
[^14] Hengel, p. 8.
[^15] Hengel, pp. 9 and 123, note 53.
[^16] Hengel, pp. 9-10.
[^17] This has been noted by many; see Hengel's summary, pp. 10-11.
[^18] Such would include the question of an Aramaic source behind Mark's account as well as possible borrowings from collections of Jesus' sayings, as, say, those in the Gospel of Thomas and in the hypothetical "Q" source believed to have been used by Matthew and Luke.
[^19] Lane, pp. 24-25; Hengel, p. 29; Kummel, p. 70.
[^20] Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 3.5.3. Against those who discount the authenticity of this information, see the arguments of Hengel, pp. 130-31, note 111.
[^21] An expectation grew up that Nero would appear alive again, coming from the East: "Nero redivivus," see Hengel, pp. 25-28. Lane takes a completely different tack, avoiding the difficulty posed by the masculine participle (pp. 465-69).
[^22] Hengel, pp. 18-20.
[^23] Lane, pp. 12-17; Nineham, p. 42; Hengel, pp. 21-25.
[^24] For a review of this situation and the lament of Tacitus the historian about having little to report, see Hengel, pp. 22 and 132, note 125.
[^25] Compare Mark 13:13. The damage caused by the fire is summarized by Lane, pp. 13-14; for the hatred directed against Christians, see Hengel, p. 133, note 133.
[^26] For these events, see Hengel, pp. 22-23.
[^27] Consult Hengel's long discussion on pp. 31-58, especially pp. 50-56.
[^28] Mark 6:33-44, feeding the five thousand; 8:1-9, feeding the four thousand; 4:37-39, stilling the storm (compare 6:51).
[^29] See Hengel's very intriguing remarks on the possibility that the distinctive literary form of the Gospel went ultimately back to Peter (pp. 54-56). Most have postulated that it was Mark who was to be credited with initially composing the type of literature that came to be known as Gospels; compare Nineham, pp. 28-29, and Kummel, pp. 31-33.
[^30] Rudolph Bultmann, The History of the Synoptic Tradition, 2nd ed. (New York: Harper & Row, 1968), the quote coming from pp. 2-3. The other studies were Karl Ludwig Schmidt, Der Rahmen der Geschichte Jesu (Berlin: Trowitzsch & Son, 1919), and Martin Dibelius, From Tradition to Gospel (London: Ivor Nicholson and Watson, 1934).
[^31] Axel Olrik, "Epische Gesetze der Volksdichtung," Zeitschrift fur deutsches Altertum und deutsche Literatur 51 (1909): 1-12.
[^32] An entire school has grown up at Uppsala University in Sweden which studies the methods and achievements of oral transmission among ancient societies, generally concluding that the oral recitation of stories, poems, and sagas is more reliable than the written mode. As an example, see Birger Gerhardsson, Memory and Manuscript, 2nd ed. (Lund, Sweden: C. W. K. Gleerup, 1964). Concerning the rapidity with which legendary elements can replace sober, historical accounts, see Hengel's remarks on the rapid growth of fanciful stories about Alexander the Great (pp. 11 and 124-25, note 70).
[^33] The three major studies, now in English translation, focused on the Synoptic Gospels: Gunther Bornkamm et al., Tradition and Interpretation in Matthew (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1963); Willi Marxsen, Mark the Evangelist. Studies on the Redaction History of the Gospel (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1969); Hans Conzelmann, The Theology of St. Luke (New York: Harper & Row, 1961).
[^35] For the variety of views current more than thirty years ago, see the essay by Joachim Jeremias, "The Present Position in the Controversy Concerning the Problem of the Historical Jesus," Expository Times 69 (1954): 333-39. I personally follow Hengel's results (pp. 53-56).
[^36] Proponents of this view include Kummel, pp. 64-65, and Nineham, pp. 40-41, who calls the Gospel writer "a Gentile author . . . without the formal education to express himself in better Greek."
[^37] The issue concerns the sequence of "Bethphage and Bethany" as Jesus approached Jerusalem from Jericho (11:1). See Hengel's explanation on p. 148, note 51. For an opposite though less compelling view, see Nineham, pp. 294-95.
[^38] Without maps, one would have necessarily relied on the descriptions of those who had visited distant places. One can also note the interesting fact that peasants in Ptolemaic Egypt were forbidden by law to travel from their villages of residence; see William W. Tarn, Hellenistic Civilization, 3rd ed. (New York: Meridian Books, 1961), p. 187, and Michael Grant, From Alexander to Cleopatra (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1982) pp. 41, 43.
