Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

5

THE TESTIMONY OF LUKE

RICHARD LLOYD ANDERSON

In 1961 the oldest copy of Luke (P75) was published, in which the scribe added his note at the bottom of the last chapter: "The Gospel According to Luke." This was about A.D. 200. Then he moved down a few lines and started the next book with the similar title, "The Gospel According to John." [^1] An independent copy of John of the same age exists, with the same title at the head. [^2] Thus the authorship headings were part of the Gospels as early as records now exist. Evidence of four Gospels reaches back to midsecond century, and plural Gospels are indicated intermittently back to New Testament times. Anyone starting a new record of Jesus, as the opening of Luke describes, would of necessity distinguish his from records that had gone before. "According to" is a Christian formula with only minor variation in the handscripts; such essential unanimity suggests that "according to Luke" was on the earliest copies of that Gospel.

Some very significant things can be said about Luke, but the most prominent fact about him is that he was not prominent. With normal early Christian modesty, he does not directly name himself in his writings, nor is he mentioned except incidentally in the New Testament. So a relatively obscure person consistently appears as the author of Luke and Acts, the largest and most impressive block of writing in the New Testament from a literary and historical point of view. Contrary to the patristic debate that arose from the lack of "Paul" within the book of Hebrews, alternative authors are not suggested for the Gospel of Luke in the probings of the Ante-Nicene Fathers. For instance, several decades before the P75 scribe made his oldest known copy, Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons, repeatedly named Luke and quoted from his Gospel in order to expose the inconsistencies of heretics. [^3] History regularly speculates on what is probable, but it is most responsible when dealing more realistically with what is known. On the level of likelihood, a number of careful scholars ask about the authorship of Luke: "If people were guessing, would they not be much more likely to come up with an apostle?" [^4] And on the restricted question of fact, Luke is the only author mentioned by the prominent church fathers and important hand-written copies of the Gospel in the early Christian centuries.

Paul profiles Luke. Besides giving Luke's general greetings in two letters (Col. 4:14; 2 Tim. 4:11), the apostle was specific at the end of Colossians, describing him as "the beloved physician" (Col. 4:14). While Christian leaders regularly addressed their converts by "beloved," this term of endearment applied to a fellow laborer amounts to a designation of intense trust. Paul was most sensitive about who instructed the volatile branches, so here he really designated Luke as an apostolic associate whose spiritual—and historical—knowledge could be trusted. This relationship gives important color to Luke's preface; he could record what apostles knew because he was their intimate companion. Luke was also called "physician," a term used only here outside the Gospels and clearly in a literal sense. If we did not have a hundred pages of Luke's prose, what kind of physician he was might be in doubt. But he reveals himself as a well-informed and careful thinker, qualities that evidently characterized his training and profession. Ancient medicine was obviously in its infancy by today's standards, but the best practitioners used pragmatic science within the limits of their technology. When such a man turned his whole attention to the Christian movement, he was in a unique position to investigate the healings, including the greatest healing—Christ's resurrection.

Paul adds a third insight to Luke that is clear but not as obvious. Before noting the "beloved physician" in his letter from Rome to Colossae, the apostle mentioned three companions "of the circumcision" and immediately added the Greek phrase that they were his "only fellow workers" in the work of the kingdom of God. (Col. 4:10.) There certainly were such Jewish companions at other times and places, but Paul's concern to point out faithful Jewish companions makes an important point about Luke. For he is listed afterward with the Gentile missionaries laboring with the apostle. Paul's full characterization of this associate is importantly reflected in Luke's Gospel, but nothing is so evident as Luke's attraction to Jesus' concern with all classes and all nationalities. This emphasis in the selection of his materials reflects both Luke's non-Jewish origins and his experiences with Paul in the Gentile missions.

The other reliable insights to Luke's life come from his writings, since Christian traditions about him are late and carry no discernible link to the first century. But looking at Luke through his Gospel is only half the story, for he contributed two major books to the New Testament. Since he wrote the Gospel, he also wrote the Acts of the Apostles, for its preface tells Theophilus that the "former treatise" recorded Jesus' life to the resurrection and ascension. (Acts 1:1-2.) Theophilus appears twice in the New Testament, on both occasions in the prefaces tying Luke to Acts. Since this name basically signifies "friend of God," this could be Luke's literary device for writing to those who "feared God," the Gentile seekers who infiltrated the Jewish synagogues in Acts and Josephus; "Theophilus" could also be a well-educated Christian convert who merited "most excellent," a title of social or administrative status. (Luke 1:3.) In either event, Acts clearly continues the Gospel and adds significant insight into Luke and his purposes. The two books are also welded together by a distinctive prose that favors classical style and formal grammar not characteristic of other New Testament writers.

While Acts says nothing of Luke directly, there are autobiographical glimpses. The most subtle is worth passing mention. Ante-Nicene fathers sometimes gave Luke's home as Antioch, though it is hard to be sure whether this is valid tradition or an inference from Acts. If only the latter, it is still worth considering, for Luke's vivid detail about Paul begins about the time that Luke became a companion of the apostle. Paul had labored in Jewish areas and branches for about a decade until his official call to the Gentile work, when Barnabas came from the Twelve and brought Paul from Tarsus to Antioch. (Acts 11:19-26.) Before that event, Luke's record of that apostle is spotty, but full detail on his missionary work begins immediately after Paul comes to Antioch. Luke features only the Gentile missions from this time, either because of the subject, his own call, or first knowing Paul in the vicinity of Antioch, the base of operations for Paul's international labors. These interrelated possibilities justify an educated guess that Luke first knew Paul soon after the converted Jew from Tarsus was called to labor with Gentile converts in Antioch, some fifteen years after the crucifixion.

The more definite data from Acts concerns Luke's "we" passages. Roman historians of Luke's time typically begin their histories with no identification and minimal personal comment, but occasionally inject first-person observations into the body of their works later. Acts is normally written with the descriptive pronouns of the third person: he, she, and they. But in several significant sections Luke drops into we, identifying himself as one of the party in Paul's travels. [^5] Thus Acts fits the three Roman epistles that name Luke as Paul's companion, and it adds further times when "the beloved physician" was with Paul. These "we" passages bring Luke from Asia Minor to northern Greece after Paul left Antioch with the apostolic revelation on duties of Gentile converts (Acts 16:10-13); they resume as Luke left northern Greece and traveled with Paul's party to Jerusalem with the Gentile welfare contributions. (Acts 19:5-15; 21:1-18.) They then dot the narrative after Paul spent two years in Palestine waiting for release. After the appeal to Rome, Luke boarded ship in Caesarea with Paul and his military escort (Acts 27:2), and references to "we" and "us" continue through the various stages of the trip until arrival at Rome (Acts 28:16).

Sources and Time of Writing

Did Luke remain in the Christian homeland while Paul stayed there in prison (about A.D. 59-61)? He virtually said that his mission was to attend Paul until freed. Right after the appeal to Rome, "it was determined that we should sail into Italy." (Acts 27:1.) Since he took for granted that he was a necessary member of Paul's party, the implication is that he was attending Paul prior to that. Indeed, Luke emphasized how Paul's associates were free to visit him throughout the Palestinian arrest. (Acts 24:23.) Luke was evidently saying that he was one of these attendants during the imprisonment, since he was one both at the beginning and the end. On any analysis Luke had substantial opportunities to locate those still on the scene who could speak firsthand on the Lord.

By the time Luke wrote about his trip to Judea with Paul, he had already penned his "former treatise," the Gospel of Luke (Acts 1:1), with its preface insisting that Christian beliefs stood solidly on the experience of those "which from the beginning were eyewitnesses" (Acts 1:2). The key term of time in that preface is repeated in the intensely personal account of his arriving at Jerusalem with Paul. This visit was highly significant for the historian, for as soon as the apostle's party arrived in Palestine, the style suddenly switched from generalizing to naming individuals. The trusted associate wrote moving accounts of Paul's forebodings and farewells to the Asian-Syrian churches, but adult saints and their hosts are nameless "disciples." Yet on landing at the Roman capital of Palestine, the personal pronouns intensify in ten verses that name the Christian pioneers that Luke met, all of which could give history of Jesus or of the early days of his Church.

Luke wrote about first arriving in Israel: "We entered into the house of Philip, the evangelist, which was one of the seven." (Acts 21:8.) Such a reference is more than accidental in a work marked by literary foreshadowing, retrospective emphasis, and specific illustrations of characteristic Christian events. [^6] Personal contact with his source is the obvious point of Luke's labels of Philip, for when he wrote them, the historian had already written up the episode of choosing of the seven welfare assistants (Acts 6:1-6) and also the long stories of Philip's preaching to Samaria and to the Ethiopian eunuch (Acts 8:5-40). And the same direct contact is apparent as Luke next mentioned Agabas coming to meet Paul's party staying in Caesarea "as we tarried there many days." (Acts 21:10.) Not long before writing these words, Luke had explained how this prophet came to Antioch prophesying of famine in Jerusalem, where he resided. (Acts 11:27-30.)

So Luke worked with the double level of history and implied historical accuracy as he next crafted his report of entering the city of Christ's preaching and passion. The early Christians just named at Caesarea were obviously sources for Acts. And Luke next named an earlier Christian that he met in Jerusalem, one apparently given as an example of contemporaries of Christ behind Luke's Gospel. The individual was the otherwise obscure "Mnason . . . an old disciple, with whom we should lodge." (Acts 21:16.) Here the Greek mirrors the preface of the Gospel, where Luke insisted that personal observers "from the beginning" had furnished facts for faith. The noun there is arche, which is the variant form of the adjective applied to Mnason, archaios, meaning in this context that he was a "disciple from the beginning." The latter term is emphatic because it is never used elsewhere by this writer in a Christian context. So Luke's dramatic mention of an original follower of Christ on coming to Jerusalem is personal foreshadowing like the earlier introduction of "a young man" named Saul, who guarded the clothes of those who stoned Stephen. (Acts 7:58.) Luke had introduced Paul in dramatic forecasting of the main theme of his subsequent story of how the Gospel went to the Gentiles. Likewise, "the disciple from the first" bridges the knowledge gap between Paul and Jesus, Luke's main theme prefacing his first work. Since this "we" passage puts the earliest disciple in the emphatic position as the first one met in Jerusalem, Luke essentially made a parenthetical comment on the authenticity of his writings before carrying on the main story of giving the welfare supplies to James, the brother of the Lord, the resident apostle.

Most scholars comment on the literary relationships of Luke and Acts, but the point here is the relevance of the people in Acts for Luke as a biographer of Jesus. The morning after arrival, "Paul went in with us unto James; and all the elders were present." (Acts 21:18.) Was meeting James the beginning of the historian's inquiries about Mary's experiences in the miraculous events of Jesus' birth? Luke's is the only Gospel that mentions them. One good result from Paul's subsequent arrest was that Luke spent substantial time, if not all of his time, in the land of the Lord with access to many individuals who had personal experiences with him. After naming the above four people first met in Palestine, Luke dropped himself out of the record in favor of the notable imprisonment of the apostle about the years A.D. 59 to 61. But the aware physician did not drop out of life. Whom he talked to in Judea in this period is not known, but one would lack a healthy curiosity not to ask. James was articulate and literate, and might well have furnished family records. He was just past thirty during Jesus' ministry, and highly competent to remember early events when Luke saw him at about sixty. There were other men in the same category, especially in the villages, not to speak of women, a larger group because of their longer life span. Females between twenty and forty during Jesus' ministry were still available for Luke's inquiries three decades later when he waited for Paul. In fact, five years before this arrest, Paul had insisted that the majority of the 500 who saw Jesus in the resurrection were still alive. (1 Cor. 15:6.)

Luke's contacts with Jesus' generation about A.D. 60 perhaps completed a process of gathering information during the previous decade, when Luke is known to have been a companion of Paul. The date when the physician wrote his two volumes on Christian beginnings is not known. There are educated guesses, and this paper will argue briefly for the earliest choice. However, the authenticity of Luke's two records should not depend on whether they were written about A.D. 63, soon after A.D. 70, or a decade beyond that. These later dates are claimed by a majority of commentators but on highly debatable arguments of when early Christian theology had evolved to Luke's point of view, or of how some details of Jesus' prophecy against Jerusalem (Luke 21) must have been written after the seige in A.D. 70. The latter reasoning fails to impress one who accepts the possibility that prophecy can really predict. About the only objective data is the sudden ending of Acts, since its preface defines it as Luke's second work. Toward the end, Luke built suspense through Paul's appeal to Caesar to avoid risking assassination in Palestine. Then the exciting close of Acts brings the apostle to Rome, but only to wait two years for trial, where the final verse leaves the apostle in loose custody, waiting and preaching. Here is a strange anticlimax from a literary artist, which convinces me that the story stopped then because at the time of writing Paul had not yet appeared before the imperial court. On this ground Acts was composed about A.D. 63, and the Gospel would have been written earlier. This reasoning envisions Luke finishing the fact-gathering process in Palestine before Paul came to Rome about A.D. 61 and afterward compiling the Gospel and Acts while he waited for Paul's trial, the period when Paul's letters from the capital include Luke's greetings.

Luke's Historical Reliability

To repeat, Luke's date of composition should not affect the great historical value of that Gospel. His preface gives the reason for this view, backed up by insights in Acts and New Testament letters of the Christian historical process at work. A modern translation better communicates Luke's introductory thoughts, and the New International Version answers that purpose here: "Many have undertaken to draw up an account of the things that have been fulfilled among us, just as they were handed down to us by those who from the first were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word. Therefore, since I myself have carefully investigated everything from the beginning, it seemed good also to me to write an orderly account for you, most excellent Theophilus, so that you may know the certainty of the things you have been taught (Luke 1:1-4)." [^7]

Luke's goal was verification. Records of Jesus already existed, one of which was surely Mark. Other possibilities are the Gospel of Matthew and/or its predecessors that officially collected the main teachings of Jesus, a subject beyond our scope here. Buy why would Luke write another account after admitting that several already existed? He obviously thought he could add something, and the stated purpose of his account is to doublecheck earliest Christian events. Here is a man of education insisting that the Christian story could stand up under his own standards. "Investigated" is a preferred translation now, but on any analysis Luke took pains to be independently informed about the founding story and certified that it was correct. [^8]

This process puts Luke at the second stage of information, which came from "eyewitnesses and ministers of the word." "Minister" (huperetes) was used in that period in the sense of an assistant or helper, regularly applied to administrators of some status. So the strong implication is that eyewitnesses are the apostles who in every Gospel have the commission to carry the word or message to the world. Some scholars have sought to put Luke at the third stage after eyewitnesses, getting his information from anonymous Christian preachers who taught traditional stories to a later generation. However, we have seen Luke picturing himself through the "we" passages as in contact with the generation that knew Jesus. Thus, as many scholars insist, the "eyewitnesses and ministers of the word" are to be taken together. [^9] They were really those who knew Jesus personally and who were also commissioned to preach the gospel. Luke opened Acts with just such an example. Matthias was chosen as an apostle from the body of those who walked with Jesus. (Acts 1:22-23.) Then he was given the second status of an eyewitness invested with the preaching authority of the Twelve. (Acts 1:25-26.) This eyewitness-apostle combination throws light on Luke's own definition of those who had already written accounts of Christ's work. He later recorded the same double description of Paul, qualified through his call and vision to be "a minister and a witness." (Acts 26:16.) In the light of these dual descriptions of the apostles Matthias and Paul, "eyewitnesses and ministers of the word" in Luke's preface should be seen as a combination term referring to the Galilean Twelve with personal knowledge of Christ and delegated authority to testify of him. Thus Luke gives two main ideas in his preface: that he was one step away from original information from the first leaders, and that he could go back to those who could verify written records.

Yet critical New Testament scholarship is generally not satisfied with Luke's straightforward testimony. Form criticism is heavily stressed by analysts representing the academic establishment, though there are protests. In this theory, authors of the Gospels merely gathered up circulating stories that were remembered for their religious message but had changed in the retelling. This skeptical approach attempts to go behind the New Testament record by speculating about earlier forms of the main stories about Jesus. But by distrusting the objectivity of the Gospels, scholars have created a crisis of subjectivity. One expert on Luke reacts to this intellectual maze: "It is notorious that today questions regarding the ministry and teaching of the historical Jesus have become immensely complex and difficult, so much so that some scholars (wrongly, in our opinion) have despaired of ever answering them." [^10]

For this reason the New Testament student will find many current books on the Gospels to be shortsighted. Rather than read heavily in secondary literature, serious students should define people and places with the aid of an up-to-date Bible dictionary and mainly search the Gospels themselves, perhaps with the aid of a harmony printed in parallel columns. Most commentaries and some Bible dictionaries state theoretical positions as though they were proved. With the New Testament as the base, one should develop insights and explanations that are justified by the New Testament, for Luke had access to those who knew and to the earliest records, each of which told a consistent story of the miraculous powers of the Lord. One clear New Testament example of what was available to Luke is 1 Corinthians. About A.D. 56 Paul wrote that letter, predating Luke's Gospel and probably Mark's. The apostle opened his testimony of the resurrection (1 Cor. 15) with language close to Luke's preface about what was received from eyewitnesses before him. Paul listed resurrection appearances (1 Cor. 15:3-7) and also summarized the Last Supper (1 Cor. 11:23-25). Both of these short histories harmonize with the Gospels that appeared later. So evidence supports Luke's model of a settled historical record rather than today's fashionable hypothesis of evolving oral stories.

This is not to say that Luke even attempted verbal photography or mechanical sequence. His writing structure suggests that the "order" of his preface means effective presentation, and his prose suggests that he valued artful expression. But for the best ancient historians, such views did not place rhetoric above accuracy: they sought excellence of form and content. This means that Luke may have paraphrased, since he tended to avoid Jewish titles and phrases that would not be understood by non-Jewish readers. But he clearly stayed close to his sources, since he retold incidents from Mark with a tendency to summarize but with care, and he quoted his Matthew source verbatim in long sentences of agreement between those two Gospels. In fact, Luke's goal of a new presentation was clearly limited by the historical framework already established in writing a gospel. Since his events generally harmonize with Matthew and Mark, the three are called "synoptic," taking a "common view" of their material. Such correlated history sharply distinguishes the canonical Gospels from second- and third-century compilations that plagiarized and imitated them to serve the ends of Christian Gnosticism or exaggerated piety. Luke's preface is backed up by a gospel that says by its content that prior writings on Jesus told the truth but did not contain a complete record of Jesus. Moreover, John wrote late in the first century with Luke's same goals, to verify and supplement.

Scholars study interrelationships of Matthew, Mark, and Luke under the label of the "synoptic problem." Its solutions amount to seemingly endless searching for their order of composition and ultimate sources. The majority vote goes today for the two-document hypothesis, claiming that Mark came first and was used by Matthew and Luke independently, together with mutual use of a common collection of Jesus' sayings. But continuing books of dissent prove that Mark before Matthew is not proved, though the existence of an early-sayings source is suggested by historical and literary investigation. That fits Luke's preface describing existing written sources plus additional personal investigation. The latter produced his unique addition of two long chapters of family history on the birth and youth of John the Baptist and Jesus, and also about ten middle chapters that have a missionary theme in reporting Jesus' work in Gentile areas bordering Israel.

Obviously Paul's missionary companion to the Gentiles was interested in similar work in the Savior's life. Each Gospel reflects not only Jesus but also special interest in Jesus in the mind of each author. The pendulum swings high in this area of study today, labeled by the question-begging term redaction criticism. Since redaction is simply another word for editorial revision, the concept is that the writers of Gospels took stories in general circulation and refashioned them to support the evolved theological needs of a later church. Thus the Gospels are supposedly compilations of religious folklore. They are "a mixture of historical reminiscence, interpreted tradition, and the free creativity of prophets and the evangelist." [^11] Thus it is now commonly said that the Gospels tell us little about Jesus but much about the author of each Gospel. As with many exaggerations, there is truth in the position, provided the historical concern of the writer is balanced against the obvious fact that every historian reveals himself in writing about others. But to deny Luke a passion for accuracy is to contradict his prefaces and his Christian commitment to truth. The extreme forms of redaction criticism write about Luke the theologian instead of Luke the historian. This is a crude either-or fallacy, for he was both.

There are three accounts of Jesus healing the woman with chronic bleeding. Here the synoptic authors reveal different points of view, but they also verify Christian history by agreeing on a dozen main details of the miracle. With the distantness of an official record, Matthew objectively stated that the woman had been afflicted twelve years; with blunt personal details fitting Peter as the source behind Mark, Mark's Gospel says that the woman had endured physicians, "and had spent all that she had, and . . . rather grew worse" (Mark 5:25-26); but Luke empathizes with both the woman and the physicians: she "had spent all her living upon physicians, neither could be healed of any" (Luke 8:43). Here there is definite but limited injection of personality by each evangelist. Yet editing here is not modifying details, but selective omission and selective comment. Different personalities thus strengthened the historical record of Jesus, for Luke and John added many tested incidents to the first writings. In doing so they served their personal interests but also the cause of history.

The Contributions of Luke

Distinctive features of Luke include: the detailed birth account, which correlates with Luke's contact with Jesus' family; Luke's unique parables on love, which correlate with his lack of sexual or racial bias, as well as Paul's characterization of him as "beloved"; his insightful summary of the Last Supper, which correlates with his probable contact with John, who was there, and his close association with Paul, who gave us our earliest known record of blessing the bread and wine (1 Cor. 11:23-25); the summary record of Jesus' trial, which correlates with Luke's travels in the Empire and his sense of the legal and political realities behind Pilate's moves; and finally, the most detailed account of Christ's resurrection by the most informed early Christian on psychology and physiology, the areas that Luke had practical experience with as a physician. All of these contributions reflect the keen interest of an individual inquiring at a time when first-generation memories were broader than written records. The breadth of Luke's Gospel matches the unusual journeys, probably visiting with traveling apostles and perhaps even going to villages where miracles took place, such as Nain, where he gave the touching sketch of Jesus' healing of the widow's son. Of course, it is not known where Luke learned of the events that he alone reports, but it is known that he insisted that information come to him accurately, whether from apostles with Jesus or from participants in their homes.

This essay makes no attempt to summarize Luke's Gospel. No explanation of it can take the place of experiencing its impact through consecutive reading. Luke blended documents and oral history into a powerful statement of the divinity of Christ. In the words of Thucydides, the Greek pioneer of careful history, Luke produced "a possession for all time." He insisted that he did not alter but organized his stories after establishing them as true by personal inquiries. The reader of this introduction to his introduction should have a feeling for the man behind the third Gospel, and his commitment both to truth and to Christ, who came to bring gospel truth. Luke's interests were broad, his spirit tolerant, his mind inquisitive, his experiences international. He brought a strength to the Christian witness as a convert with special qualifications to examine who Jesus was and what he did.

After John later finished his Gospel, there were three apostolic testaments of Christ: from Matthew, whose Gospel preserves the great discourses of the Master and no doubt reflects Matthew's record-keeping abilities as a tax collector; from Mark, whose detail of events consistently reflects personal knowledge, which, according to traceable Christian tradition, came directly from Peter; [^12] from John, who could say of himself and his fellow apostles, "We beheld his glory" (John 1:14), and give the intimate details of divine love and power displayed by the Lord. These three Gospels incorporate information and insights on Jesus stemming from the inner circle. The problem with such incredible events is that they reach so far beyond comfortable normality. But incredible break-throughs in medical or scientific research are finally believed because additional investigators can duplicate laboratory conditions and validate the discoveries.

The historical process has analogies here, as Luke reverified by going back to observers. He was in the position of an accountant charged with making an independent audit. The three other evangelists were Jewish, Palestinian, not highly educated, and had direct contact with the Lord. Luke was a polished outsider who had become a convert. Yet true education produces multiple loyalties, and Luke was deeply educated or he would not have written the polished preface that shows knowledge of the histories of his period, nor would he have used the most extensive vocabulary of the New Testament and the most literary style of any evangelist. The point is that Luke had seen the world, had glimpsed much truth outside of a Christian context, and would not narrowly commit himself to something questionable. That he saw the need of verification in his preface shows that. So the strength of Luke's testament is the support of the insider's story by an informed outsider. He was virtually the journalist assigned to get at the bottom of an incredible event, the one whose writings featured participants telling the world what it was and how it was.

Luke's introduction shows that other accounts of Jesus were written before he organized his own. And writing is a firm act of preservation that guards against change. Since Luke's gathering process preceded his writing, the autobiographical glimpses in Acts show that by A.D. 60 he was probing, comparing, and finding the consistency that he described in the prologue of his Gospel. Paul's similar testimony was given at A.D. 56 in 1 Corinthians 15, insisting that all the apostles told the same story of Christ's resurrection, the summit event in Luke's biography of Christ. Thus basic records of the resurrection are clear by mid-century, a mere two decades after it took place. At this time literacy and Christian conviction were at work to publish private records and recollections, and Luke's Gospel was a part of that process.

Those who write family history rescue detail from oblivion. And Luke saved specifics on the most significant individual of all history. Because of his concern and discipline in writing, there is a clearer understanding of Jesus' private meditations, personal compassion, and timeless challenges to all to believe, to live with strict integrity and generous empathy, and to enter and sacrifice for God's kingdom. Luke's ultimate authentication is his fuller record of the first day of the resurrection. Reality is constructed from ingredients and particulars, and Luke satisfied himself that Jesus returned that day not in the minds, but in the sustained physical experiences of the apostles. The short eight verses that establish this obviously came after many questions directed to at least some of the ten who first stood together in Jesus' presence. Luke recorded their conversation just before Jesus appeared, their total shock at seeing him, his firm assurance of comfort and identity, and his invitation to examine his "flesh and bones," which they accepted. Only Luke added the truth that Jesus ate before these overwhelmed associates in a final assurance of materiality that they could not doubt. It is tempting to see the physician's preoccupation with anatomy at a time when much about the body was known. Luke's resurrection account reveals the same inquiring mind glimpsed in the opening verses of his Gospel. Such a man probed Jesus' private life, public works, teachings, miracles, and the ultimate miracle of conquering death. On all of these he left his stamp of verification.

Postscript: Some Textual Issues in Luke

The Gospels are mutually illuminating, and studying them brings far more benefits than studying any number of commentaries on them. Yet accurate understanding of wording is a barrier in the King James Version, which uses a number of archaic meanings not apparent in casual reading. The "GR" footnotes of the recent Latter-day Saint edition of the Bible help; so do modern translations, which also raise textual problems. Most modern versions choose the shorter Greek readings on the general theory that pious scribes were prone to additions. On the other hand, careless scribes tend to delete, a statistically more likely case for the average manuscript difference, though each problem needs to be settled on a case by case basis. The reader without Greek has a fuller statement of these variant readings and a longer text in the New King James Version. Yet most variants are doctrinally and historically insignificant, though three main textual questions emerge in the sections of Luke most commonly studied by Latter-day Saints. The King James Version rarely indicates alternative readings because its translators used a traditional text without notes on differences between manuscripts, many of which were more recently discovered.

The first variant in sequence is the vivid description of Gethsemane, with the bloody sweat and the comforting angel. (Luke 22:43-44.) Such a verse obviously caused problems with Christian Gnostics and orthodox theologians, who were uncomfortable with Jesus' physical nature and human passions. Thus a knowledgeable patristic scholar considers deletion in many manuscripts on both grounds: "perhaps omitted by Marcion for docetic reasons, and by Alexandrians as doctrinally difficult." [^13] Such double jeopardy for this verse has specific grounds because the heretic Marcion manufactured a shortened version of Luke, and earliest-known New Testament manuscripts stem from Egypt, the center of Christian revisionism on the nature of God. Although the A.D. 200 Lucan copy deletes the verse, some thirty years before that Irenaeus insisted on the physical passion by reciting that Christ "sweated great drops of blood." [^14] And a decade before that, Justin Martyr specifically quoted the "memoirs . . . drawn up by his apostles and those who followed them," where it was written that Christ's "sweat fell down like drops of blood while he was praying." [^15] Thus there are two witnesses to the bloody sweat prior to the oldest copy of Luke, one of them naming the Gospels.

The next relevant textual problem concerns Jesus' prayer for his enemies on the cross: "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." (Luke 23:34.) At first glance one remembers that Luke is the Gospel stressing both prayer and forgiveness, for that evangelist added special parables and examples of Christ's compassion, as well as produced the only note of Jesus' prayers at the special occasions of his life—his baptism, temptation, choosing the Twelve, and transfiguration. The earliest extra-biblical evidence for the incident is Irenaeus, who about A.D. 180 quoted Christ's words of forgiveness that he "exclaimed upon the cross." [^16] So even though these words do not appear in the A.D. 200 copy of Luke, they were already attributed to Jesus by a bishop who insisted that knowledge of Jesus came only through the four Gospels. Some scholars think the prayer was deleted because forgiveness seemed to go against Jesus' recent prophecy of the destruction of Jerusalem, reiterated in warning to the women who wept as he carried the cross to Calvary. But there is a more likely contradiction to cause the deletion, for Peter expressly told the Jews that national forgiveness would not come until the latter days (Acts 3:19); the other side of that coin was Luke's report of Jesus saying that Jerusalem would be in bondage until the age of Gentile dominance was over (Luke 21:24). Joseph Smith, who preached on the delayed forgiveness of corporate Israel, noted in his translation that the forgiving words from the cross applied to the Roman soldiers. But an early copyist, feeling that Jesus' prayer was not restricted and therefore would be interpreted as a contradiction, perhaps acted to save Luke from ridicule at an early point when anti-Christian polemics were harsh and increased the danger of persecution for the faithful. The hard fact remains that the words are quoted from Jesus before the earliest manuscripts and by a traditionalist who insisted that authentic teachings of Jesus came from the four Gospels. [^17]

The final textual problem has a lesson attached to it. Luke obviously thought deeply and apparently inquired carefully about the Lord's appearance to ten apostles on the first day of the resurrection. Luke's account uses a progressive heightening as Jesus led the disciples from one level of stunned realization to the next. After the opening shock and assurances, Jesus extended his hands in invitation to touch, followed by the natural crescendo of Luke's narrative: "And when he had thus spoken, he shewed them his hands and his feet." (Luke 24:40.) However, a fifth-century Greek manuscript, labeled D, omitted this verse and a number of others in the resurrection account of Luke 24. Since D contains intriguing additions to Acts, Westcott and Hort developed a theory that the omissions of this manuscript reflected an earlier shorter text. Conservative scholars protested, but from about 1900 to 1960 this position carried the day, resulting in the omission of Jesus showing his hands and feet in both the Revised Standard Version and the New English Bible. In both cases a footnote printed the verses as added by other manuscripts, a type of notation that was misleading because only one known Greek manuscript deleted the verse out of hundreds of significant ones that included it. Yet a majority of textual scholars clearly supported the reasoning behind these deletions.

The industrious LDS New Testament student, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., protested such treatment in a compilation of conservative quotations and also in a concise pamphlet. [^18] Calling the proponents of deletion "extreme textualists," he lamented the doubt that had been projected to "become the ruling text." [^19] His dissent was vindicated when the A.D. 200 copy of Luke was published in 1961, containing the verse wherein Jesus showed the apostles his hands and feet, as well as the other segments of Luke 24 deleted in the atypical fifth-century manuscript. Scholarly opinion has since reversed itself to the point that mainstream Joseph Fitzmeyer labels the former Luke 24 deletions a fad. [^20] Thus the later committee translations have included the verse where Jesus shows his hands and feet. [^21] The whole episode sustains Luke's testimony of the physical resurrection and serves as a warning that agreement of Bible scholars on any theory is no substitute for evidence.

NOTES

Richard Lloyd Anderson is professor of ancient scripture and director of Bible research in the Religious Studies Center at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Leon Morris, Reflections on the Gospel of John: The Word Was Made Flesh, John 1-5 (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Book House, 1986), p. 72.
[^2] R. H. Charles, The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1913), 2:195.
[^3] The translator states that a cor is about 120 gallons. Ibid., pp. 497-98.
[^4] See Stephen D. Ricks, "No Prophet Is Accepted in His Own Country," chapter 12, in this volume.
[^5] The argument that Luke incorporated another's diary is not convincing because of "the overwhelming linguistic evidence that the author of the book was also the author of the diary." (G. B. Caird, Saint Luke [New York: Penguin Books, 1963], p. 16.) Furthermore, interjecting personal comments in a third-person narrative was a recognized pattern in ancient literature, and Luke's preface shows that he followed the polished practices of his day in presentation of his material.
[^6] For Luke's practice of giving typical cases instead of exhaustive detail, see Richard Lloyd Anderson, Understanding Paul (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1983), pp. 45-46, 48, 57, 61.
[^7] I have changed "servant" to "minister" in this translation for reasons explained in the following discussion.
[^8] Luke's verb means literally that he "followed along" or "followed up," and the two connotations here roughly reflect the modern debate that contained some hair splitting. The preface represents Luke as coming after the eyewitnesses to certify to Theophilus that information from them is correct. Since "follow" fits into an investigation context, recent translations have Luke "go over," "trace," or "investigate" the founding events. For current comments, see E. Earle Ellis, The Gospel of Luke (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1975), p. 66; Joseph A. Fitzmeyer, The Gospel According to Luke (I-IX) (Doubleday, 1981), pp. 296-97.
[^9] For a strong opinion on this pairing, see I. Howard Marshall, The Gospel of Luke (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1978), p. 42: "The syntax demands that the eyewitnesses and servants are one group of people." My argument is that Luke's vocabulary and thought on succeeding apostles show an intent to combine the "eyewitnesses and ministers of the word" of the preface. Rengstorf correctly sees Luke's purpose in making the two groups the same, since the resulting expression "establishes continuity between the preaching of Jesus and the history of Jesus." (Gerhard Friedrich et al., Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, trans. Geoffrey W. Bromiley [Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1972] 8:543.)
[^10] I. Howard Marshall, Luke: Historian and Theologian (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1970), p. 217.
[^11] Norman Perrin, What Is Redaction Criticism? (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1969), p. 75.
[^12] For a convenient reprinting of the Peter-Mark information gathered by early second-century bishop Papias, see Theron, p. 67 (quoting Eusebius), and also p. 45 for the "tradition of the early elders" from Clement of Alexandria. See also S. Kent Brown, "The Testimony of Mark," chapter 3 in this volume.
[^13] G. W. H. Lampe, commenting on Luke in Matthew Black and H. H. Rowley, eds., Peake's Commentary on the Bible (London: Thomas Nelson & Sons, 1962), p. 841.
[^14] Against Heresies 3.22.2.
[^15] Dialogue with Trypho 103.
[^16] Against Heresies 3.18.5.
[^17] Irenaeus is characterized by a number of apparently naive arguments that there can be only four Gospels, but they are really analogies because of his insistence that the imitation gospels of his century contradict "the Gospels of the Apostles" (Against Heresies 3.11.9). Luke is expressly included in this terminology (ibid., 3.1), an accurate statement in the sense that Luke's data came from apostles.
[^18] The detailed treatment is Why the King James Version? (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1956).
[^19] "Our Bible," reprint of the 1954 pamphlet by J. Reuben Clark, Jr., in David H. Yarn, Jr., ed., J. Reuben Clark: Selected Papers (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1984), p. 89.
[^20] Fitzmeyer, pp. 130-31.
[^21] The following committee translations include the verse: The Jerusalem Bible (1966), The New American Bible (1970), The New International Version (1978), The New King James Version (1982). Editors made no qualifying comment in these versions except for the last: "Some printed New Testaments omit this verse. It is found in nearly all Greek manuscripts." Compare the comment of Bruce M. Metzger on the application of redaction criticism to ancient editorial decisions in copying the D-type text of the Gospels: "Scholars have begun to give renewed attention to the possibility that special theological interests on the part of scribes may account for the deletion of certain passages in Western witnesses." (A Textual Commentary on the Greek New Testament [New York: United Bible Societies, 1975], pp. 192-93.)
