Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

6

THE TESTIMONY OF JOHN

C. WILFRED GRIGGS

A brief article on the Gospel of John cannot pretend to be a commentary, for any brief part of the text can command a response as lengthy as (or more so than) this brief essay. During a long discussion on John, I once asked a very learned friend why he had not written a commentary on that Gospel. The response seemed frivolous at first, but it was seen to be insightfully accurate with the passage of time: "I would have to write some eight hundred pages—and then I could move on to verse two." This essay, then, will simply reflect some of the impressions I had during one reading of the text. Each reading has brought different insights and new ideas. The purpose of this chapter is to suggest a few themes and ideas that will enhance understanding of and appreciation for John's testimony of the Word of God, whom John served as an apostle for much of the Christian church's first century.

Authorship and Date

No Gospel author identifies himself by name in his work, but the uniqueness of each writer's style serves as an identification for his writings. It is generally agreed, for example, that the same person is responsible for both Luke and Acts. Likewise, even a casual reading of John, 1 John, and Revelation would show sufficient similarities in vocabulary and style to argue for common authorship. Although they are brief, 2 John and 3 John also display characteristics that would argue for Johannine authorship. While modern scholars commonly deny authorship of the Gospels to those whose names are associated with them, or argue for multiple redactions, the practice is more illustrative of theories of literary analysis than of dependence upon firm historical evidence. The earliest available evidence unquestionably attributes the Gospels to their respective authors, and the lack of historical evidence in the early decades of the early church relating to alternative authorship possibilities further supports the traditional assignations. One need not feel intellectually shy about an assertion that John the Beloved Apostle is the author of the fourth Gospel.

The date of the writing of the Gospel is not easily determined, and many of the reasons usually given for assigning it to the end of the first century are not so compelling as they seemed to be in recent decades. Some have argued that the highly stylized vocabulary of opposites, such as light and dark, spirit and flesh, or truth and falseness, was a response to an incipient gnosticism at the end of the first century. But discoveries of ancient documents, like the Community Rule and War Scroll of the Dead Sea Scrolls, demonstrate that precisely the same vocabulary was used in Jewish circles before the time of Jesus and the apostles. Others have contended that the uniqueness of John (compared with the three Synoptic Gospels) occurred partly because the author was filling in gaps of information or otherwise responding to them in some particular way. Such a theory is based on the untenable assumption that there was one developed Gospel format from which any other must be considered a later deviation or derivation.

Arguments for a later first- or second-century completion of the fourth Gospel based on perceived redactional or editorial layers, or on imaginative developments between Jews and Gentiles in early Christian communities, must likewise be accepted only as hypothetical. The reader should understand that the genius of the proponents of such theories is their greatest support, for we cannot identify such communities by name or documented history, nor can we identify the editors, either by name or by extant texts of the earlier forms of the Gospel. Textual variants do occur in the manuscripts of John, but not to the extent expected in a much-edited work; and much can be known about early Christian communities, but not enough to say which ones might be Johannine in origin or development.

In sum, attractive arguments can be put forth for a late dating of John, but they are not sufficiently strong or decisive to rule out the possibility of an early date, perhaps even as early as A.D. 35 to 45. It is less important to choose a date than to realize the tenuousness with which we must do so. It is natural that proposing reasons for writing the Gospel and assigning a date for its composition will be closely related to each other, but no one should become so attached to either the purpose of writing or the date as to preclude a reevaluation of one in the face of new or conflicting evidence relating to the other.

An excellent case can be made for each of the synoptic Gospels (Matthew, Mark, and Luke) being a missionary tract to a particular audience. I believe that John, however, is written to those who were already disciples of Jesus and who were to be guided into a more profound understanding of and appreciation for the redeeming mission of Jesus. Events and discourses illustrate and illuminate rituals and doctrines that were part of the liturgy of the apostolic church and some that were practiced and accepted even before Jesus' atonement. The Gospel of John presents these materials in such detail that instruction appears to be the primary goal of the author.

All spiritual teaching can lead to conversion, and John's testimony has doubtless brought many to discipleship. But the contents of the Gospel of John are not likely to be comprehended well until a person has embraced the practices and beliefs they elucidate. The Gospel of John was written to the Saints to teach them about the Savior and his mission. The miracle of the wine at the wedding in Cana, the miracle of the loaves and fishes in feeding the five thousand men (plus women and children), and the Sermon on the Bread of Life enhance understanding of the sacred sacramental meal rather than argue for acceptance of it. The act of washing and anointing to give light and knowledge to a man blind from birth likewise is not so much to use in preaching to investigators of Christianity as to enlighten disciples in the meaning of sacred rituals. Even the conflict between Jesus and those who opposed him can be seen in the context of a great conflict in a ritual drama that culminated during the Last Supper with the dismissal of Judas. After explaining some matters relating to the great drama of his mission, Jesus concluded the discourse of the Last Supper with the statement, "But take heart, I have conquered the world." (John 16:33.)

Old Testament Allusions

Each of the Gospel authors begins his account with reference to the Old Testament, either by quotation or by allusion. John takes the reader to the introduction of the Old Testament with his opening phrase, "In the beginning . . ." Apart from observing that numerous (and often better) translations could be given for the early verses in the Gospel, John brings all of the essential elements of the Creation account into focus. God is the major reference in verses 1 and 2, and all things were brought into their present state by His Word (who also is a God). Life, light and darkness, and the coming forth of a man from the presence of God are mentioned by John, but not in the same way as in Genesis. The light and darkness of the Gospel do not simply designate day and night, for the light is the life of God in everyone who comes into the world, and the darkness was unable to capture or resist the light shining in it. John wrote of a man sent from God, John the Baptist, whose purpose was to bear witness of the light and life of the world. In verses 10 and 11, the reader notes that the world did not know its Creator and, more specifically, that his own people rejected him when he was in the world. This rejection is especially poignant, for whereas God's presence and glory were veiled in the tabernacle or temple of the Old Testament when Israel usually rejected God, in John's day "the Word also became flesh and was tabernacled in our midst, and we saw and observed his glory, glory as of an only-begotten from the Father, full of grace and truth." (John 1:14, translation mine.) People now rejected God even though they could see and associate with him.

In this spiritual account of the Creation and the mortal tabernacling of God on the earth, men become begotten children of God as they receive him and receive authority to be born through him. Thus the relationship between Genesis and John's opening verses can be summarized: Although the world was created by God and the law for men was given through Moses, the fullness of life and light within the Creation can be achieved only through Jesus Christ, who was tabernacled in flesh so that men might see his glory, accept him, and come to God through him.

Among the few incidents from Jesus' life that John selected to relate, the making of wine at a wedding in Cana (John 2:1-11) has special Old Testament connections. There is no way of knowing from the text whose wedding was being celebrated (there are numerous reasons why it could not have been Jesus' own wedding, as some have suggested), but it was apparently a grand affair lasting for many days. Extending proper hospitality to the guests was a serious obligation for a host, and to run short of wine before the end of the feast could even result in a lawsuit. [^1] Knowledge of this requirement and concern for the hosts may have motivated Jesus' mother to approach him when the wine supply ran out. His response (better translated, "Of what concern is that to you and me, mother? My hour has not yet arrived," for the word translated mother is technically woman, but is more polite than the English word suggests) shows the reader that he is already thinking of a different wine that he will produce when his hour arrives.

Just as the Creation account in Genesis provided John an opportunity to teach the role of Jesus in the spiritual creation and birth of each person, so also the miracle at Cana gives a setting in which one can learn of the wine of life. Wine was a symbol of life and fertility throughout the ancient world, and its association with a wedding feast in this episode reinforces that meaning. The six stone vessels that were to contain water for purification rituals or washings are also significant in this context. A Jew was not to pray, worship, or eat, even at a public wedding banquet, without first washing off the filth and corruption of the world around him, and thus arose the necessity for having a number of large vessels available for the guests invited to this feast (stone vessels are better than ceramic ones in that they did not have to be destroyed if inadvertently touched by unclean hands). At an earthly feast for a bride and bridegroom, then, the Heavenly Bridegroom provided the necessary and desired wine from jars in which water was placed for the cleansing and purification of the mortal body. When his hour came, however, this Bridegroom would provide through the shedding of his blood the wine of eternal life and the means for cleansing the spiritual being. The number seven signifies perfection and completeness in John's writings (and elsewhere, to be sure), and some suggest that only Jesus can compensate for the incompleteness or imperfection of the six water vessels. (See the number six associated with the beast in Revelation 13:18, for example.)

Even if the reader does not wish to attribute special significance to the number of vessels, the amount of wine Jesus miraculously produced deserves attention. Each vessel had a capacity of twenty to thirty gallons, making the total in excess of 120 gallons. In the revelation of Enoch, held to be scriptural and authoritative by Christians and many Jews in Jesus' day, both before and after the distinction was made between Jew and Christian, many prophecies are found relating to the Messianic age, to the end of the world, and to the eternal destinies of men. In one of the Messianic passages, Enoch foretold of the abundant life the coming Messiah would provide in the last days: "And then shall the whole earth be tilled in righteousness, and shall all be planted with trees and be full of blessing. And all desirable trees shall be planted on it, and they shall plant vines on it: and the vine which they plant thereon shall yield wine in abundance, and as for all the seed which is sown thereon each measure (of it) shall bear a thousand, and each measure of olives shall yield ten presses of oil. And cleanse thou the earth from all oppression, and from all unrighteousness, and from all sin, and from all godlessness: and all the uncleanness that is wrought upon the earth destroy from off the earth. And all the children of men shall become righteous, and all nations shall offer adoration and shall praise Me, and all shall worship Me." (1 Enoch 10:18-21.) [^2]

Even more specific in its reference to the abundant production of wine in the Messianic era is the Apocalyptic work entitled 2 Baruch. The prophet states that when the "Messiah shall begin to be revealed, the earth also shall yield its fruit ten thousandfold and on each vine there shall be a thousand branches, and each branch shall produce a thousand clusters, and each cluster produce a thousand grapes, and each grape produce a cor of wine." (2 Baruch 29:5.) [^3]

The great miracle of producing a vintage wine miraculously at a wedding feast is thus a fulfillment of a Messianic prophecy, in addition to which Jesus satisfied a very real social need and presaged the greater miracle of the eternal "wine" that his own suffering would produce.

One of the best-known allusions to Old Testament history in the Gospel of John occurs immediately after Jesus miraculously fed five thousand men (plus women and children) from five barley loaves and two small fish. (John 6:1-15.) To ensure that the reader not overlook or underestimate the greatness of this accomplishment, John observed that the disciples picked up twelve baskets of leftovers from the five loaves (the number five is repeated for emphasis of the small beginning amount of food in 6:13). His is the true leaven or yeast that can make much from little, as opposed to the leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, which could not give any increase. It is within this context that the sermon often entitled "The Bread of Life," was given.

During the night following the miraculous feeding of the thousands, Jesus walked across the Sea of Galilee to the boat in which his disciples were struggling against a strong wind. In this episode, the disciples took him into the boat, and they immediately arrived at the shore of the lake. The crowds sought Jesus the next day, and, taking boats to Capernaum, they found him in the synagogue. To their query concerning his means of travel to Capernaum (and therefore emphasizing for the reader his miraculous crossing), Jesus responded that they should not work for perishable food, but for eternal nourishment that the Son of Man alone can give. (See John 6.) Just as with the making of wine at Cana, where Jesus had performed a miracle that resulted in satisfying physical needs and at the same time conveyed a spiritual lesson, so the reader here also should expect a spiritual lesson to be taught through the recent miracle of the feast. The crowd challenged Jesus anew to perform a miracle so that they might have confidence in him, and specifically referred to the heavenly gift of manna to their fathers as the kind of miracle they expected. (From this John infers that most of the crowd in Capernaum did not really comprehend the heavenly source of the previous day's feast.) Jesus first applied a corrective to his audience, declaring that it was his Father, not Moses, who gave the heavenly bread. He then explained that he, Jesus, is the Bread of Life who had been sent from heaven as the true manna for mankind. His assertion that he had been sent from heaven by his Father caused an argument to erupt in the synagogue (6:41), not over the doctrine of the Bread of Life but concerning his supposed parentage and birthplace. He then repeated that he is the Bread of Life, adding that their fathers had eaten manna and still died (6:49). Only by partaking of his flesh could they have eternal life. The crowd became violent in response to a doctrine they considered blasphemous and cannibalistic (6:52). The sermon concluded in that hostile atmosphere with him telling them that they not only must eat his flesh but also drink his blood in order to have eternal life. Far from building upon the foundation of the Old Testament stories to learn spiritual lessons as Jesus invited them to do, the majority of his disciples—to say nothing of those not yet in that circle—henceforth refused to associate with him (6:66).

Jesus had earlier taught that Jewish unwillingness to accept the Old Testament, and specifically the writings of Moses, as a witness of his Messianic role would be a source of condemnation to them (5:45). He even went so far as to say that rejecting him meant that they were also rejecting Moses: "For if you had faith in Moses, you would also have faith in me, for he wrote concerning me. For if you do not believe in his writings, how will you believe in my words?" (5:46-47; translation mine.) It is clear that believing in the lore of the ancients involved more than simply being steeped in their traditions, but few in Jesus' day were willing to add commitment to knowledge. The indictment was given in John 1:11-12: "He came into his own creation and his own people did not accept him. But to as many as did accept him, to those who have confidence in his name, he gave authority to become children of God." (Translation mine.) The Old Testament provided analogues from which spiritual lessons could be taught, but most were unwilling to follow Jesus in his interpretation of the scriptures and to gain confidence in him.

The synagogue audience to whom Jesus spoke concerning the Bread of Life either could not or would not understand the doctrine being taught. Although a reader might suspect the latter in the way John narrated the incident, the ideas Jesus presented may simply have been too strange for their orthodox minds to grasp or accept. In John 1:11-12, the word translated received also included the sense of accept, employ, or ascertain. The inability of the Jews to accept Jesus, whether because of sins (3:19) or traditions (5:39-40), is restated in the Bread of Life sermon, for he declared: "No one is able to come to me unless my Father who sent me shall draw him to me" (6:44, translation mine; compare with verse 65, where the wording is "except it were given unto him of my Father"). Elsewhere in the Gospel, it is clear that rejection of God is the real reason for rejecting the One whom God had sent (5:37-38, for example).

Lack of acceptance was not always accompanied by lack of understanding, however, for the actions of Jesus' hearers often demonstrated that they knew well what he meant, even if they did not agree with him. In John 8:39-59, a group of Jews declared themselves to be children of Abraham, to which Jesus responded that if they were really children of Abraham, they would do as Abraham did, rather than try to kill him. The Jews then declared God to be their father, but Jesus countered by saying that he came from God, and that they should love him if they were of God. He further charged that they were acting as if the devil were their father, and they rejoined by name calling, saying that Jesus was a Samaritan (a strong ethnic slur) with an evil spirit. This war of words concluded with Jesus stating that Abraham had seen his day and rejoiced, and that he was ("I am") before Abraham was born. This assertion is a clear reference to the name given to Moses in the Old Testament ("I Am that I Am"—Exodus 3:14). For their conclusion to the discussion, the Jews picked up stones to kill him for blasphemy, bearing witness by such action that they had at least understood what he had said and meant.

Similarly, a group of Pharisees heard Jesus discourse about sheepfolds and shepherds after the healing of the man born blind, which will be considered below (John 9, with the discourse in John 10). The antagonism of the Pharisees toward Jesus was established in the narrative of the trial of the man whom the Savior had given sight. They not only prejudged Jesus to be a sinner, but they also excommunicated the healed man from fellowship in Judaism because he would not likewise condemn his benefactor. Despite their antipathy toward Jesus, these men listened to him as he spoke using the imagery of the pastoral world so commonly found in the Old Testament. The portrayal of the sheepfold, or a shepherd protecting the sheep from harm in a sheepfold, and the love of the real shepherd for his sheep would have brought the great shepherd king David to the minds of Jesus' Jewish audience, and the statement "I am the good shepherd" would have been a clear reference to Psalm 23 and other Old Testament passages. His clear reference to this psalm constituted a claim to his divinity ("The Lord is my shepherd"), and this identification with Deity was not missed by the Pharisees. Some argued that he was a demoniac, while others asked if a demoniac could heal a blind person. As the division grew more heated in succeeding days, some of the Jews again displayed their understanding of the matter, though not their acceptance of his claim, by taking up stones to stone him. The reason was clear, for Jesus asked them the charge behind their action. They declared it to be blasphemy, saying, "Although you are a man, you make yourself a god." (See 10:33.)

Style and Historicity

The Old Testament provides the scriptural foundation upon which the New Testament is built, and the Gospel of John does not depart from the pattern of using Old Testament prophecies and stories to establish continuity and fulfillment. When John did allude to the Old Testament, he did so primarily to illustrate spiritual analogues for prophetic words and deeds. Furthermore, incidents were not simply recorded for narrative value in the fourth Gospel as they often are elsewhere in the New Testament, for the author selected a few miracles and teachings that best illustrated the spiritual themes he wanted his readers to consider and understand. His narrative style is both more probing and more analytic than is common elsewhere in the New Testament, and there is purposeful ambiguity in his choice of words that allows a reader to find many meanings and levels of understanding in the text. This highly selective and didactic technique was not new with John; one of its best practitioners in ancient times was the Greek historian Thucydides, long recognized as the best historian of Classical Antiquity. The artist and historian combine to give form and meaning to real events beyond the skills of a less skilled writer or editor. Prejudice and ignorance have combined to prevent modern scholars from giving John similarly high marks for the historicity of his Gospel, but such judgments should not overly concern us. Negative assessments of such historians as Herodotus and Caesar have seen reversals in recent years as scholars reevaluate the canons and criteria for writing historically accurate accounts. John's work should not suffer in future reexaminations of the historicity of his Gospel, for there is growing scholarly opinion that literary artistry and symbolism are not incompatible with historical accuracy.

Light and Darkness

One of the literary characteristics of John most often observed by commentators is his use of opposites to emphasize key doctrines. Not all can be considered here, but a brief demonstration of some occurrences will illustrate the author's methods.

The first juxtaposition of opposites occurs in 1:4-5: "That which has come to be through him is life, and his life is the light of man; and his light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not overtake it." (Translation mine.) The light is equated with the life that came into the creation through the Word, and that (see verse 9) illuminates everyone who comes into the world. The Word is a God, and the light and life he bestows in the creation are to be considered of God. The darkness therefore represents the opposites of God and life, such as death, ignorance, selfishness, and all else associated with a devilish realm. The verse quoted above states that darkness did not overtake the light, and much of John's Gospel is an exposition of that assertion. The light and darkness are in constant conflict, and the darkness is always trying to overcome the light, but Jesus, the Light of the world, clearly triumphs at the end. One episode that illustrates well the conflict between light and darkness is the healing of the blind man in John 9. When Jesus and his disciples happened upon the man who had been blind from birth, the disciples asked if sin had caused the problem, sin either by the man's parents or by himself in some premortal setting. Jesus' answer was that the man's blindness was not a result of sin (there is no indication here that sin and physical ills are never related), but that his blindness occurred so that God might work through him. Jesus continued: "It is necessary for us to accomplish the works of the One who sent us while I am in the world. I am the light of the world" (9:4-5; translation mine). Jesus then granted sight—light—to the man, first by anointing his eyes and then by sending him to wash in the pool of Siloam. (Siloam means sent, corresponding with John the Baptist, who was sent from God, Jesus who was sent from God, and so forth. All who are sent from God are to give sight and light to the blind, to those who are in darkness.) As soon as the man received his sight, the darkness tried to overtake him in the form of a Jewish council of Pharisees. These representatives of darkness tried to catch the man in his words, threatened him, berated him, and even called in his parents to bring pressure against him. When all failed and the man who could now perceive light held firmly to his joyful testimony of gaining sight and overcoming blindness, the council reacted by excommunicating him from their association. There was to be no light shining in their darkness!

Jesus heard of the man's ordeal and its result and sought him out to give even more light and truth to the one not overtaken by darkness. "Do you have faith in the Son of Man?" he asked. The man answered, "And who is he, sir, that I might have faith in him?" Jesus said to him, "You have now seen him, and he is the one who is speaking with you." The individual's final recorded response was, "I do have faith, sir," and he then fell down and worshipped him. (See 9:35-38.) By Light, light. Jesus stated that his purpose was to bring sight—light—to those who do not see, but that those who claim to see would become blind in their darkness. Some of the Pharisees heard Jesus and asked if he really thought they were blind. He answered, "If you were blind, you would have no sin, but because you claim to see, your sin remains." (See 9:41.) Now the reader understands better the opening remarks by the disciples concerning the man's blindness and sin. Because his blindness was not caused by sin, he could receive light and sight, but those who were blind because of their sins must remain in their darkness. Stated yet another way, the darkness in its sin, especially pride and greed, is not able to overcome the light in its righteousness.

Another example of light - darkness contrast is found within the context of Jesus' meeting with Nicodemus. That experience is also set in a larger contrast with another meeting, that between Jesus and the woman of Samaria. The light - darkness theme will be treated in greater detail here, and the other meeting will be given only brief attention in this essay. [^4]

Jesus had been performing numerous miracles in Jerusalem (the use of imperfect indicative form of the verb in 2:23 denotes repeated activity), and many were gaining testimonies of his divinity based upon the signs they saw. One of them, a Pharisaic ruler named Nicodemus (his name means "prevail over the people," a fitting definition in view of his position in society and his role in this episode), came to him professing his knowledge that Jesus was a teacher from God, since nobody could do such marvelous deeds unless God be with him. Nicodemus actually used the editorial "we," as if he were including others in his declaration of knowledge, but he may also have been trying to impart a greater sense of personal authority by implying that he represented a group rather than only himself. John mentions that Nicodemus came to Jesus "at night," and many have assumed that he did so out of fear that his peers would see him, or for some other similar reason. That may be so, but reason will be given later to show an alternative way of understanding that phrase.

Because miracles and signs are not a proper base upon which testimonies are founded, Jesus invited Nicodemus to be born "from above" and become able to really see the kingdom of God (the reader should perceive a foreshadowing of the experience with the blind man in John 9, which has been treated already). Nicodemus turned Jesus' spiritual invitation back to an earthly interpretation, asking how a man can enter into the womb a second time to be reborn. Jesus patiently explained that one must be born of water and spirit in order to enter the kingdom of God. He further challenged Nicodemus to begin thinking in spiritual rather than physical terms, repeating his statement that a man must be born from above. The ambiguity of verse 8 can be seen only in the Greek, but the word translated wind can also be spirit. Nicodemus had a choice of hearing Jesus say that the wind blows where it wishes, and one may not know the origin or destiny of the wind, just that he is blown by it; or, the Spirit breathes wherever it desires, and a man may not know whence the Spirit comes nor where it will lead him, just that he hears the voice of the Spirit. Thus, said Jesus, is everyone who is blown by the wind or begotten of the Spirit. Nicodemus was unable to pursue the matter or unwilling to make such an obvious choice, so he begged out of the conversation by declaring, "I don't understand these things at all." (See 3:9.) It should not be surprising, in view of Nicodemus's earlier declaration that Jesus was a teacher from God and his subsequent inability or unwillingness to grasp even the rudiments of spiritual rebirth, that Jesus should give him a stinging rebuke: "Are you the teacher of Israel, and yet you do not understand these things." (See 3:10.) One does not know precisely what Nicodemus's position was, but Jesus called him the teacher, not a teacher, of Israel. The chastisement continued: "Verily I say to you that what we know we speak and what we have seen we bear witness, but you [plural] do not receive our testimony." (See 3:11.) Nicodemus had begun the conversation with a declaration of knowledge based on what he had seen, but his knowledge was not from God, as he had inferred, nor was it spiritual knowledge about Jesus, even though Jesus was the declared object of his knowledge. Jesus continued explaining to Nicodemus that he spoke of heavenly, not earthly, knowledge, and that he was qualified to speak of such knowledge because he had descended from heaven and would be raised up again. He likewise sought to raise man to eternal life through spiritual knowledge, but although "the light had come into the world, men loved the darkness rather than the light, for their deeds were evil." (See 3:19.)

The meeting with Nicodemus was finally placed within the context of light and darkness: being reborn through water and the Spirit brings one to the light. It is surely obvious now that Nicodemus had come to Jesus not only "at night" but also "in the dark." Unfortunately, he preferred to remain in the darkness of spiritual ignorance rather than come to the light of spiritual insight through being born from above. Even more tragic than his darkened condition was the claim he brought of being able to see—of being in the light. As Jesus would later tell the Pharisees after healing the blind man, "Although you claim to see, your sin (and your blindness) remains." (See 9:41.)

Nicodemus came declaring knowledge of Jesus as a teacher from God, and from all prospective indications he was a candidate for Christian baptism. We might compare him to those who seek out Latter-day Saint missionaries, declaring that they know Joseph Smith to be a prophet, for nobody could translate the Book of Mormon or establish such a religious community without God's help. However laudable such assertions, they are not sufficient for conversion without spiritual confirmation, and no number of external proofs or social benefits will compensate for the heavenly revelation. Nicodemus would not make the transition from physical to spiritual in his approach to Jesus, although he at first seemed a likely candidate to do so.

Jesus' next encounter in John's Gospel was with a person who seemed to be almost an exact opposite of Nicodemus in spiritual background and capacity. Because this person was a woman, traditional avenues of educational and religious training were not open to her; because she was a Samaritan, her social status was that of an outcast in Jewish society; and because she had lived with five men before her present male companion, her moral standing was considered the worst imaginable. We cannot easily think of a less likely candidate for spiritual conversion under normal circumstances than such a person, and her meeting with Jesus did not begin on an auspicious note.

At midday, as Jesus and his disciples were passing through Samaria to Galilee (itself an unusual route for Jews, who usually went around Samaria rather than through it), Jesus sat on the edge of Jacob's well while the disciples went to the nearby village to purchase food. The woman came to the well with her bucket attached to a rope in order to draw water from the deep well. She was shocked at Jesus' request for a drink, surmising either from his clothes or his accent that he was a Jew, and knowing that Jews did not associate with Samaritans. He responded to her surprise with the observation that if she knew who he was, she would ask him for living water. The reader already knows that Jesus was not referring to well water, but to spiritual refreshment. The woman, however, who had no pretensions to such matters as Nicodemus had, countered by noting that Jesus had no bucket or rope, and, in case he hadn't noticed, the well was deep. She taunted him, asking if he was greater than Jacob, who gave the well from which men and animals had drunk water for centuries. Jesus answered that the water he promised would quench thirst forever, and it would, in fact, be a free-flowing spring and not simply a well. The woman still could not grasp the spiritual level of his comments, but she did ask for the water so that she would not have to return often to the well with her bucket. Having finally captured her interest in his offer of spiritual water, Jesus told her to go home and bring back her husband, but she demurred, stating that she was not married. Then the revelation from Jesus of her immorality followed, after which the woman expressed a surprising interest in matters relating to worship. At the conclusion of that portion of the dialogue, she even expressed the hope that when the Messiah did appear, he would teach everything to the people. Jesus then identified himself to her as the Messiah, following which she departed for the village to announce him as the Messiah, since he had made known her deeds (4:28-29).

The terms light and darkness are not used in this pericope, but there can be no doubt that the woman came to the light out of darkness in a way that Nicodemus had refused to do. Both Nicodemus and the Samaritan brought a bias toward physical rather than spiritual interpretations of their conversations with Jesus, and both had misconceptions about what was important in religious understanding (he regarding miracles, and she concerning the place of worship). The fact that Nicodemus came to Jesus and initiated a religious conversation, coupled with his extensive training and prominent position as the religious teacher of Jews, should have made him susceptible to Jesus' invitation to think spiritually. Likewise, the deficiencies in the very same areas would seem to rule out the Samaritan woman's susceptibility toward spiritual matters, but receptivity to spiritual light is not determined by worldly criteria such as status or education.

The light - darkness contrast in John occurs elsewhere, but enough has been presented to show how it is woven like a literary thread through the tapestry of the fourth Gospel. Other threads are likewise found in John's testimony of Jesus Christ, but consideration of them must be deferred to another time and place.

Conclusion

This brief essay has dealt with two significant aspects of John's Gospel, the Old Testament foundation on which it is based and the use of opposites to emphasize particular doctrines. Both could have been treated in greater length, and numerous other themes deserve consideration as well. Another major focus in John is on the sacred ordinances of Christianity, which are emphasized greatly in the later chapters of John. Much of this will be discussed in subsequent chapters of this book. The ancient world was suffused with ritual activities, all growing out of and centering on a cosmic drama of creation and renewal. Scholarly awareness of the importance of early Christian ritual has increased in recent decades, and John's Gospel should be read and evaluated from that perspective as well.

The richness of John's Gospel in its multiple levels of meaning should explain in part why this work has been the most popular in the New Testament for commentators of a wide range of religious and theological persuasions. It was the first Gospel to attract a commentator (one of the so-called Gnostics), and it has enjoyed the uninterrupted attention of writers ever since. Such attention, even if occasionally misguided and faulty in scope, is deserving of the testimony of this ancient apostle. In any study of John, however, the reader must be aware of the ancient author's own stated purpose in selecting and including particular sayings and events of Jesus in his account:

There are many other signs (wonders) which Jesus did before His disciples, which have not been written in this book; but these things have been written in order that you might have faith that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that because you believe you might have life through His name. (John 20:30-31, translation mine.)

Now there are also many other things which Jesus did, which, if each one should be written, I do not believe the world itself could contain the books that would be written. (John 21:25, translation mine.)

NOTES

C. Wilfred Griggs is professor of ancient scripture and director of ancient studies research in the Religious Studies Center at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Logos "is never the mere word as an assemblage of sounds, but the word as determined by a meaning and conveying a meaning." [^4] In other words, it is the outward form that expresses the inner thought. Jesus Christ was to be the outward and dynamic expression of both his Father's essence and his Father's will. John 1:3-9: The existence of light as a fundamental part of the logos, which he shares freely with all who come into the world. Our relationship with the Light, Raymond E. Brown, The Gospel According to John, I-XII, Anchor Bible 29 (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday & Co., 1966), p. 18.
[^2] While logos does not represent the mere "assemblage of sounds," neither does it represent the thought itself. Logos is tangible, whether it represents "a phrase or sentence, or a prolonged discourse, or even a book." [^5] Jesus was eminently suited to this task, for he had developed the very same character and attributes as His Father. John 1:10-13: Our free agency to accept him or reject him, and the right and power given to those who accept him to become children of God. The rebirth and our use of agency, and M. Dods, "The Gospel of St. John," The Expositor's Greek Testament, W. Robertson Nicoll, ed. (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1974), 1:683.
[^3] Logos from God is always dynamic. It does not just exist as a static lump. "The Word is seen to be a heavenly force which creatively accomplishes its work on earth." [^6] Isaiah referred to the word of God in this same way when he said: "For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater: so shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it." (Isa. 55:10-11.) Logos from God always has purpose and always has power. We should not confuse the issue and think that they are the same individual. They are clearly separate. John 1:14-17: The actual achievement of that relationship, together with an emphasis on the Savior as role model and the very embodiment of those principles which develop our capacity to be sons and daughters. The process of "grace for grace" as we partake of his fullness. Hugh Nibley, Nibley on the Timely and the Timeless (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1978), p. 282.
[^4] C. H. Dodd, The Interpretation of the Fourth Gospel (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1965), p. 263.
