Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

7

THE PROLOGUE OF JOHN (John 1:1-18)

J. PHILIP SCHAELLING

The Prologue of John (John 1:1-18) has long been favored as a jewel in the crown of biblical scholarship. One author has written: "If John has been described as the pearl of great price among the NT writings, then one may say that the Prologue is the pearl within this Gospel. In her comparison of Augustine's and Chrysostom's exegesis of the prologue, M. A. Aucoin points out that both held that it is beyond the power of man to speak as John does in the Prologue. . . . All these attestations of sublimity, however, do not remove the fact that the eighteen verses of the Prologue contain for the exegete a number of bewildering textual, critical, and interpretative problems." [^1]

Modern revelation can help us with some of these problems, but the Prologue of John is still one of the most intriguing, exciting, challenging, and absolutely transcendent passages ever written. Let no one feel that these eighteen verses carry no depth. They not only have depth—they transcend both time and space to reveal to us the purpose of Christ's ministry. These verses crystallize, in the testimony of one who knew, not only our heritage but also our eternal destiny as children of the living God.

John is a witness. His stress is on those things he had seen and experienced himself: "That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked at and our hands have touched—this we proclaim concerning the Word of life." (1 John 1:1, NIV.) The first eighteen verses of his Gospel serve as a prologue. Before John started his actual story, he wanted to give a preview to define the parameters of his account. His purpose was not to catalog all of the deeds and works of the Savior during His mortal life: "If they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written." (John 21:25.) The Gospel of John is not a hodgepodge of randomly remembered recollections, but a carefully constructed historical account with design and purpose. "That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ." (1 John 1:3.) A fundamental purpose of John's Gospel is to show us how we can have fellowship with the Father and the Son. The purposes of the Prologue are to summarize that process of achieving fellowship so that we will not miss it as we proceed through the account of the Savior's ministry, and to set the stage for this story of eternal sweep by introducing us to the Savior in his eternal context.

Setting the Stage

"In the beginning" (1:1). This phrase is identical in the Greek of the Gospel of John with the beginning of the book of Genesis in the Septuagint. There are many "beginnings" in our span of forever. Though we have always existed, there was a "beginning" when we became children of our Heavenly Father; there was a "beginning" when the great premortal council was held and plans for this earth were laid; there was a "beginning" as the creation of this earth was initiated.

"Was the Word" (1:1). The word was does not do justice to the Greek verb tense. In Greek, the author could have chosen from either the aorist or the imperfect verb tense. While the aorist refers to a single, completed occurrence, the imperfect defines an ongoing, continuous state. The use of the imperfect tense here defines that which lies beyond time. "In the beginning, place it where you may, the Word already existed. In other words, the Logos is before time, eternal." [^2] John is telling us that when time began, the Word not only already existed, but the Word already existed in a timeless state, and existed as the "Word."

Next we must deal with "Word." In verse 14, the "Word" is identified as the Savior. Would it not have been easier to have said, "In the beginning was Jesus Christ"? Why use the personification? What was John trying to tell us by identifying the Savior as the "Word"? In the English translation, "Word" is probably the best translation of logos, but it is also a very limited translation. Logos is a word replete with nuances and great depth. It can refer to a single word, a phrase, a discussion, or even a whole book. Hugh Nibley uses it in this broad sense when he translates John 1:1 as, "In the beginning was the Logos [counsel, discussion], and the Logos was in the presence of God, and all things were done according to it." [^3] Many useful articles and books are available that discuss logos. For our purposes, and for the sake of brevity, let us simply note a few aspects of this intriguing word.

"In the beginning, the logos already existed." The reason for the personification is to help us understand that Christ was to be the outward expression of the Father's inner nature, having the same purpose and the same power. This principle helps us to better comprehend the Savior's statement to Philip, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father" (John 14:9) and gives new depth to the following passage: "Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works. Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me." (John 14:10-11.)

John's introduction helps us understand that Jesus, in fulfilling his destiny in the eternal plan of salvation, was the dynamic expression of the Father's inner being. He was and is, since before the beginning, the actor and doer of the Father's will, filled with his purpose and power. While on earth, he was the visible expression of his Father's inner nature. If we wish to learn more about the Father, we merely need to learn more about his Son. Through Joseph Smith much of this concept was revealed in modern times: "He was the Word, even the messenger of salvation." (D&C 93:8.) The Plan of Salvation is eternal, and for us, the embodiment of that plan is Jesus Christ.

"And the Word was with God" (1:1). "The word with (in the Greek), while emphasizing the communion of the Logos with God, yet safeguards the idea of his individual personality: it expresses nearness combined with the sense of movement towards God, and so indicates an active relationship. The Logos and God do not simply exist side by side, but are on terms of living intercourse, and such fellowship implies separate personality." [^7]

"And the Word was God" (1:1). In the Greek, the word God comes first in this phrase, which gives it special emphasis. Though it comes first, it is predicative and without an article. This means that John wanted us to know that in the beginning, the logos had already achieved Godhood: He had developed within himself the divine nature. By this we do not merely mean that he developed a divine nature. The absence of the article implies that he has acquired the very same character and divine attributes as The God with whom he associated in the previous phrase. The emphatic arrangement of this word gives special stature to the logos. Not only was Jesus to be the one who would actively implement the plan of our Father, not only did he have a close and personal fellowship with the Father, but "in the beginning" the Savior had already developed the very same attributes and character of the Father, thus attaining Godhood.

"The same was in the beginning with [the] God" (1:2). I have placed a bracketed the here simply to mirror John's emphasis; the word the exists in the Greek text. John has wanted to communicate clearly that while the logos has developed the qualities of the Father, he is also a distinct and separate individual. The repetition and structure of this phrase is so emphatic that it may imply an attempt by John to address any misunderstanding or confusion on the doctrine of the trinity within the early church. This is a very difficult thing to translate because the absence or presence of articles (that is, the) in English does not communicate the same thing as it does in Greek.

Thus we can see that there are three things that John wanted to establish in these first two verses:

Achieving Fellowship

After John established the majesty of the logos in its premortal eternal state, he gave us a brief outline of how the logos fits into the plan of salvation. This is divided into three stages:

The Light

"And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not" (1:5). As soon as John identified light with logos, he informed us that a great rivalry exists in the universe between the logos and "the Prince of Darkness." Light and darkness are active elements and are personified, as was logos. John did this to help us identify certain basic principles that pertain to the individuals thus personified. In this very powerful verse, he encapsulated one of the fundamental dramas of his entire narrative, the struggle that inherently exists between good and evil.

In King James's time, the word comprehend could mean either "to seize, grasp, lay hold of, catch," or "to grasp, take in, or apprehend with the senses." [^8] The Greek word from which it is translated has the basic meaning of seizing with hostile intent, or overtaking. In one verb voice, not used here, it can also be used to express an ability to understand or perceive. Certainly it is imperative that we develop the capacity to perceive the light. But in the only other place where John used this word, it was again in relationship to darkness, and assumes the active role of "to seize with hostile intent, to overtake": "Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you." (John 12:35.) "In these cases the sense cannot be doubtful. The darkness comes down upon, enwraps men. As applied to light, this sense includes the further notion of overwhelming, eclipsing. The relation of darkness to light is one of essential antagonism." [^9] Another interesting contrast is offered in this verse. The verb shineth is given in the timeless present tense, while the verb comprehended is in a tense that is used for a given point in time. The effect of this contrast is to say that this dispelling of darkness is an inherent and enduring quality of light and of the One who is personified as light. On the other hand, there was a time when the darkness, or the one of whom it is a personification, attempted to seize and overcome the light. It refers to a specific attempt, a single occurrence, not an ongoing, timeless quality. John was foreshadowing a main theme of his Gospel: a record of the specific time when, as the light shone in the darkness that had come upon this world, the Prince of Darkness attempted and failed to overcome and extinguish that light. A major effort of his Gospel is to mirror and witness the dynamic conflict between light and dark which was to culminate in the Savior's dynamic victory.

"That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world" (1:9). It is as though we are all in a huge arena, in total darkness, searching for a way out. Some panic, some give up, many search aimlessly, all are lost. Suddenly someone opens a door and the light shines in. He is the light that shines in the darkness! Now we can find our way out! Now we can go back home! He shows us the way and helps us be sensitive to the light. He also places within each of us our own little light, so that we can always see in the darkness. But it works only if we follow that light: "And he that repents not, from him shall be taken even the light which he has received." (D&C 1:33.) The possession of light gives us the ability to see our way out of the darkness of this world and find our way back to our Father in heaven. This understanding of light harbors intriguing implications in the definition of intelligence as found in D&C 93:36-39.

Becoming Children of God

"And the world knew him not" (1:10). The word translated knew can mean either perceive, realize or acknowledge, recognize. [^10]

"And his own received him not" (1:11). The word translated received, in this context, means to accept. [^11]

"To them gave he power" (1:12). The word translated power "does not describe mere ability, but legitimate, rightful authority, derived from a competent source which includes the idea of power." [^12]

"To become the sons of God, even to them that believe" (1:12). The word tekna, here translated as sons, is a neuter form and simply means children, without reference to gender. [^13] A contrast is here drawn between the first phrase and the last by the use of different verb tenses. The phrase "to become" is in the aorist tense, meaning that it is a specific event. The phrase "to them that believe" is in the present tense, implying an ongoing condition. The thrust of the passage is that becoming a child of God occurs only to those for whom belief has become an ongoing part of their very nature.

A word or two about the word believe is also appropriate. In the New Testament, the words belief and faith are used as translations for a single Greek word, pistis. Pistis in this sense is a "faith in the Divinity that lays special emphasis on trust in his power and his nearness to help, in addition to being convinced that he exists and that his revelations or disclosures are true." [^14] This describes what happens when we trust him to such an extent that we simply do whatever he tells us and refuse to do that which he tells us not to do. It is to such people that he gives both the right and the power to become "children of God."

"Which were born . . . of God" (1:13). Verse 13 amplifies the principle of belief or faith and causes the term to apply only to those who so thoroughly reconstruct their lives that they are no longer children of this world, but children of God. Elder Bruce R. McConkie described it as follows: "Those who are sons of God (meaning the Father) are persons who, first, receive the gospel, join the true Church, obtain the priesthood, marry for eternity, and walk in obedience to the whole gospel law. They are then adopted into the family of Jesus Christ, become joint-heirs with him, and consequently receive, inherit, and possess equally with him in glorious exaltation in the kingdom of his Father." [^15]

"And the Word was made flesh" (1:14). As a mortal man, the Lord Jesus was subject to all of the trials, tribulations, temptations, and vicissitudes of mortality. [^16]

"And we beheld his glory" (1:14). The word translated beheld means more than merely to see. It means that one has carefully observed. For this reason, one translator, attempting to bring out the full meaning, has rendered it: "And we gazed with attentive and careful regard and spiritual perception." [^17]

"The glory as of the only begotten of the Father" (1:14). Glory is being used here to describe the relationship that John had observed to exist between the Father and the Son. The Greek word used here, doxa, has as one of its base meanings opinion. When applied to another, it means "the opinion which others have of one, estimation, repute." [^18] In the New Testament it is also used to represent radiance or splendor, but its use here refers to the esteem that the Father holds for His Son. John wrote that during the mortal life of Christ, he (John), along with others, was able to observe the special relationship that existed between the Father and the Son, along with the esteem and honor given to Jesus by the Father. This is reinforced often in his account: "For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son: that all men should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father" (5:22-23). "As the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself; and hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man" (5:26-27). "The Father hath not left me alone; for I do always those things that please him" (8:29). "I and my Father are one" (10:30). "Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world" (17:24).

In the first verse of his Gospel, John tells us about the strong and special relationship between the Father and the Son. In this phrase he desires us to know that he personally witnessed this special relationship.

"Full of grace and truth" (1:14). When John observed that the Savior is full of grace and truth, it of course means that nothing exists in him that is not composed of these elements. There is no untruth in him, and there is nothing that does not partake of grace. The Greek word translated as grace is a challenging word to grasp, with many meanings and nuances. In the secular usage of this period, this word charis was employed as "a fixed term for demonstrations of a ruler's favour." [^19] In earlier antiquity it represented "the 'favour' of the gods." [^20] Some help in understanding this verse is given in verse 17 as John contrasted the law of Moses with the grace and truth that comes by Jesus Christ. The law of Moses was strict justice. Through Christ we receive the benefit of his love for us as a free gift. Though we must qualify for that gift, we in no way earn it; this gift is so glorious that it is far beyond our capacity to earn. In describing the Savior as being "full of grace," John wanted us to know that there exists in him nothing but pure, selfless love for us, which he gives freely and with joy whenever he can. Being "in His grace" also implies that we have special access to him and that he is readily available to listen to our needs.

"And of his fulness have all we received, and grace for grace" (1:16). This phrase described the process by which we acquire the same qualities and character as the Savior. It can be translated to mean that we can receive either "grace upon grace" or "grace in exchange for grace." In the Doctrine and Covenants we find this same phrase applied to Jesus and including both meanings. "And I, John, saw that he received not of the fulness at the first, but received grace for grace; And he received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness." (D&C 93:12-13, emphasis added.)

In the phrase "grace for grace," we understand that as we reach out with love and joy to bless freely those around us, we are blessed freely and with joy from above. As we give grace, we receive grace.

In addition, we move from "grace to grace." The Lord does not wait until we have developed the quality of grace fully before bestowing blessings upon us, but lets us move from level to level. We are always in his favor, but as we develop we are blessed accordingly. When no feeling exists within us except the desire to bless and bring joy, then he can reach out and bestow upon us that fellowship which brings a fullness of joy. "Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word; that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us." (John 17:20-21.)

As we have seen, verses 3 to 17 of chapter 1 take us through our eternal development in three stages:

The same sequence is mirrored in the actual record of John's Gospel. It begins with the witness to the Light (John the Baptist) that is so strongly stressed in verses 6 to 9 of the Prologue, then continues with the great rebirth discourse given to Nicodemus. John expands this with illustrations of how some reject the light and others accept it with faith. This section makes up a large portion of his record and includes stories of great faith as well as some of the great discourses and discussions with the Pharisees and Sadducees. John vividly portrays the love and compassion of the Savior and his greatness as a teacher, as he records the Savior's discourses on the choices that exist for all of us in this world. This section is followed by the only detailed account of the proceedings of the Last Supper, in which the Savior revealed to his disciples the great law of love: the foundation of grace. The structural organization of the Prologue mirrors the structural organization of John's Gospel.

Knowing the Father Through Christ

"No man hath seen God at any time" (1:18). Joseph Smith added, "except he hath borne record of the Son" (JST, 1:19). President Spencer W. Kimball noted: "It is noteworthy that the Father, God, Elohim came to the earth upon each necessary occasion to introduce the Son to a new dispensation, to a new people; then Jesus Christ, the Son, carried forward his work. This has happened again in our own dispensation when both separate beings, the Father and the Son, came again to the earth in person and appeared unto man. This holy occurrence was described by the devout and prepared young man who was the principal recipient of the vision." [^21] This highlights the point brought out in verse 1, that we are to learn of the Father through the Son.

"The only begotten Son" (1:18). The oldest and best ancient manuscript read, "the only begotten God." [^22]

"Which is in the bosom of the Father" (1:18). "The image is used of the closest and tenderest of human relationships, of mother and child (Num. xi. 12), and of husband and wife (Deut. xiii. 6), and also of friends reclining side by side at a feast (comp. xiii. 23), and so describes the ultimate fellowship of love. The exact form of the words is remarkable. The phrase is not strictly 'in the bosom,' but 'into the bosom.' Thus there is the combination (as it were) of rest and motion, of a continuous relation, with a realization of it." [^23]

"He hath declared him" (1:18). The Greek word translated declared means to "explain, interpret, tell, report, describe." [^24] John completed the Prologue with a restatement of the thought with which he began it. The purpose of Christ's ministry was to reveal to us the essential character of the Father and to dynamically bring about his plan. Through Jesus, we can learn about the Father's plan, discover his design for our personal destiny, see his power, and feel his love for us. Jesus is the visible personification of the Father. Jesus is the Word. [^25]

NOTES

J. Philip Schaelling is an instructor at the LDS Institute of Religion in McAllen, Texas.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bruce R. McConkie, The Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1979-81), 1:284-85.
[^2] James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972), p. 86.
[^3] Raymond E. Brown, The Birth of the Messiah (New York: Double-day & Co., 1977), p. 65.
[^7] The Birth of the Messiah, p. 127.
[^8] Frederic Farrar, The Life of Christ (Portland, Ore.: Fountain Publications, 1964), pp. 35-36.
[^9] Ibid., p. 33.
[^10] The Mortal Messiah 1:344.
[^11] Ibid., 1:347.
[^12] Ibid., 1:349.
[^13] Ibid., 1:353.
[^14] The Greek word used by Matthew (translated as "wise men" in the KJV) is magoi, rendered in English as magi. What does Matthew mean by magoi? A typical scholarly opinion is as follows: "Long before, Herodotus (Histories 1) had intrigued his Greek readers with a description of a priestly caste of magi among the sixth-century Medes, a caste that has special power to interpret dreams. The magi survived both the transfer of power from the Medes to the Persians (ca. 550 B.C.) and the emerging religious dominance of Zoroastrianism, so that by Herodotus' time (ca. 450) the magi were Zoroastrian priests. In the subsequent centuries there was a diversification in the functions of magi as the title was loosely applied to men adept in various forms of secret lore and magic. . . . Thus, the term 'magi' refers to those engaged in occult arts and covers a wide range of astronomers, fortune tellers, priestly augurers, and magicians of varying plausibility." (Brown, The Birth of the Messiah, p. 167.) This approach to the identity of the magi has been popularly received over the centuries, since it points to the role of Jesus Christ as Savior and King to all the world. Though this has some attraction, I agree with Elder McConkie's assessment (hereafter) that the magi were Jews of the dispersion.
[^15] The Mortal Messiah 1:359.
[^16] Alfred Edersheim, The Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1971), 1:211-12, emphasis added.
[^17] The reader should note the differences in the numbering of chapters and verses in early Matthew in the KJV and the JST. Joseph Smith began chapter 2 in his inspired version after the genealogy of Jesus (after KJV, 1:17). By Matthew 4 the KJV and the JST chapters are the same again.
[^18] The Mortal Messiah 1:358, emphasis added.
[^19] See McConkie, The Mortal Messiah 1:363; Farrar, The Life of Christ, p. 62; Edersheim, The Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah 1:214; Brown, The Birth of the Messiah, p. 204.
[^20] The Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah 1:214-15.
[^21] From "The Protevangelium of James," trans. A. J. B. Higgins, in Edgar Hennecke, New Testament Apocrypha, 2 vols., ed. Wilhelm Schneemelcher (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1963), 1:387. It is worthy of note that a very similar account of the death of Zacharias is found in an editorial in the September 15, 1842, issue of Times and Seasons (also found in Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 261). There is some question as to whether the editorial was indeed prepared by Joseph Smith, who was probably out of town at the time.
[^22] Flavius Josephus, "Antiquities of the Jews," XVII. 6.5, in Josephus: Complete Works, trans. William Whiston (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Kregal Publications, 1974), p. 365.
[^23] Ibid.
[^24] F. F. Bruce, New Testament History (New York: Doubleday & Co., 1972), pp. 23-24.
[^25] Three main points of view have surfaced in regard to the meaning of this prophecy: (1) Jesus as one who lived in Nazareth, as noted, the specific prophecy of which is unknown; (2) Jesus as a nazir, a Nazarite, one consecrated and made holy to God by a vow (see Num. 6:1-21); and (3) Jesus as neser, a branch, in fulfillment of the passage in Isaiah 11:1. For a detailed discussion of these matters, see Brown, The Birth of the Messiah, pp. 209-12.
