Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

8

THE BIRTH AND CHILDHOOD OF THE MESSIAH (Matthew 1-2; Luke 1-2)

ROBERT L. MILLET

Inasmuch as the four Gospels are testimonies of the Lord Jesus Christ, it is appropriate that Matthew and Luke should begin their faithful narratives with a brief discussion of the events associated with the miraculous birth and early childhood of our Savior. These earliest scenes are integral parts of the written testimonies of Matthew and Luke; they bear vital testimony of the hand of the Almighty in setting the stage for the greatest mortal life and ministry in all eternity. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written: "A God [was] coming to earth and everything connected with his birth and life and ministry and resurrection and ascension to eternal glory—everything!—must be perfect. It must conform to what the prophets have foreseen, foreknown, and foretold. . . . Truly Omnipotent Wisdom had left nothing to chance. A God was coming into the world, and the world must be ready for his Advent." [^1]

Whose Son Is He?

To the casual reader of the Bible, few things are more meaningless than the "begat" sections. In fact, many of us are prone to skip lightly through (or perhaps skip entirely) those chapters or portions of chapters that trace genealogical lines. To do so, however, is to miss an important message of the writer. Matthew, for example, was a student of Jewish history and culture and was careful to discuss the ancestry of Jesus, since he was addressing his Gospel to a people who needed to understand the position of Jesus of Nazareth as a son of David, a son of Abraham, and the rightful king of Israel. Comparisons are frequently made between the genealogies of Matthew (1:1-17) and Luke (3:23-38). Elder James E. Talmage has given us to understand that "Matthew's account is that of the royal lineage, establishing the order of sequence among the legal successors to the throne of David, while the account given by Luke is a personal pedigree, demonstrating descent from David without adherence to the line of legal succession to the throne through primogeniture or nearness of kin." [^2]

Genealogies help to establish one's place within the house of Israel, to establish tribal identity. "Another aspect of genealogies," writes one scholar of the New Testament, "may be related to the biblical concept of collective personality: if something of the ancestor is thought to reappear in the descendant, then one's genealogy may reflect on one's genealogy may reflect on one's character, personality, or traits. Related to this is the tendency to narrate stories about famous ancestors or descendants within the framework of a genealogy, so that history becomes an expansion of a genealogy." [^3] Finally, we might with appropriateness state that the genealogy of Jesus is far more than a record of man's biological productivity: it is evidence and demonstration of God's providence, a reflection of the Almighty working out his great and wondrous plan of salvation through history.

The Announcement of the Forerunner

As indicated earlier, all things must be in readiness for the coming of the Mortal Messiah. All things must bear record of his divine Sonship. Even the circumstances surrounding the birth of Christ's chief witness and forerunner were miraculous and wondrous. Luke chronicles (1:5-25) the inspiring story of the angelic appearance to the aged Zacharias and the miraculous birth of John to the faithful Elisabeth, a noble woman who was childless and "well stricken in years." The name of John, Yohanan in Hebrew, was especially appropriate: it meant literally "Jehovah is gracious." The details of the announcement of John's birth and the events surrounding his naming, circumcision, and setting apart will be treated in a subsequent chapter. [^4]

The Annunciation

A wealth of information is contained in the four short verses in Matthew (1:18-21) dealing with the preparation of Mary and Joseph for the conception and birth of Jesus. We simply cannot praise too highly the one chosen to bear the Son of God. "There was only one Christ," Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written, "and there is only one Mary. Each was noble and great in preexistence, and each was foreordained to the ministry he or she performed. We cannot but think that the Father would choose the greatest female spirit to be the mother of his Son, even as he chose the male spirit like unto him to be the Savior." [^5] Luke preserved the details concerning the visit of Gabriel to Mary and the subsequent Annunciation (the announcement), but Matthew wrote simply that Mary, engaged to Joseph, was "found with child of the Holy Ghost" (1:18). It was Nephi who was instructed by the Spirit of the Lord concerning the condescension of God the Father—that the Almighty Elohim would step down from his divine throne, join with one who was finite and mortal, and beget a son, an Only Begotten Son in the flesh. (1 Ne. 11:16-25.) In the words of Alma, Jesus Christ "shall be born of Mary, at Jerusalem, . . . she being a virgin, a precious and chosen vessel, who shall be overshadowed and conceive by the power of the Holy Ghost, and bring forth a son, yea, even the Son of God." (Alma 7:10.)

One can only imagine the agony and torment of uncertainty and doubt that must have filled the soul of Joseph the carpenter. Matthew teaches us that Joseph was a just man and hence was "not willing to make her [Mary] a publick example," choosing rather to "put her away privily." (Matt. 1:19.) Why was Joseph called a just man? First, he was just and upright in that he showed kindness and mercy toward Mary between the time that Mary was "found with child of the Holy Ghost" and the time that he learned in a vision [^6] that Mary was involved in a marvelous part of the divine drama whereby the Son of God would soon take upon himself a "tabernacle of clay." The unwritten part of this story is simply that Joseph showed mercy toward his beloved Mary, who was now, it seemed (what else was there to believe?), expecting someone else's child. Joseph chose not to accuse Mary publicly of immorality and thus not to subject her to trial.

Joseph's status as a just man is seen in his awe and respect for the plan of salvation, which he recognized in unfolding fashion in the conception of the Promised Messiah within his espoused wife. Thus the message of the angel in the vision—"Fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost" (Matt. 1:20)—was intended to assure the carpenter that a part of God's plan did include Joseph's marriage to Mary, and that he too had a significant role in the long-awaited Messianic era that was about to be ushered in.

Finally, some students of the Gospels have proposed that Joseph was a just man in that he was obedient to the law. Raymond Brown has written concerning this possibility: "The particular law that would have concerned Joseph was Deut. 22:20-21, which deals with the case of a young woman who is brought to her husband's home and found not to be a virgin. Deuteronomy required the stoning of the adultress; but in a less severe legal system the command to 'purge the evil from the midst of you' could have been met by divorcing her. In this interpretation, while Joseph's sense of obedience to the Law forced him in conscience to divorce Mary, his unwillingness to expose her to public disgrace led him to proceed without accusation of serious crime. He was upright but also merciful." [^7]

In summary, we conclude that of the three explanations considered, the first two understand the expression in verse 19 to mean "a just man and therefore not willing to make her a public example," while the latter means "a just man, but unwilling to make her a public example." Also worthy of note is the simple but important fact that within two short chapters we find Joseph receiving four separate visions in which he was given instructions regarding the birth and protection of Jesus and Mary. Obviously his soul was in tune with the Infinite. This is as it must be, for the step-father of our Lord had to be capable and ready to receive divine direction.

The Christmas Story

In what has become the traditional "Christmas Story," Luke records (2:1-20) the significant scenes surrounding the birth of Jesus. The drama begins with Joseph and his wife Mary, who was now in the advanced stage of her pregnancy, leaving their home in Nazareth. They traveled a distance of from eighty to ninety miles to Bethlehem, "to enroll their names as members of the house of David in a census which had been ordered by the Emperor Augustus. In the political condition of the Roman Empire, of which Judea then formed a part," Frederic Farrar has noted, "a single whisper of the Emperor was sufficiently powerful to secure the execution of his mandates in the remotest corners of the civilized world." Further, Farrar added, "in deference to Jewish prejudices, any infringement of which was the certain signal for violent tumults and insurrection, it was not carried out in the ordinary Roman manner, at each person's place of residence, but according to Jewish custom, at the town to which their family originally belonged." [^8]

When they had arrived in Bethlehem, the city of David, a city whose name means literally "house of bread" (appropriately, the place from which will go forth the true Bread of Life), they sought earnestly a comfortable setting for the birth of their baby. Because of the crowded conditions in Bethlehem and perhaps the insensitivity that too often exists in and among masses of people, "there was none to give room for them in the inns." (JST Luke 2:7.) Inns presumably refers to places of lodging that are sometimes called khans, or caravanseries. They were locations where caravans or companies of people settled down for the night. Such places may have consisted of no more than crudely constructed roofs over open courts. Farrar offered his own perspective (from the nineteenth century) of these locations. They were "perfectly public; everything that takes place in them is visible to every person in the khan. They are also totally devoid of even the most ordinary furniture." [^9] In the words of Elder Bruce R. McConkie: "In the area of Bethlehem, sometimes the whole khan, sometimes only the portion where the animals were kept, was located within a large cave, of which there are many in the area. But unless or until some of the saints—and such a thing is by no means improbable or beyond the realm of expectancy—see in a dream or a vision the inn where Joseph and Mary and Jesus spent that awesome night, we can only speculate as to the details." [^10] Thus here in the humblest of circumstances we become witnesses of the condescension of God the Son, the Holy One of Israel, leaving the courts of glory, coming down to earth, taking a tabernacle of clay, and becoming the most helpless of all forms of life—a human infant.

On the plains of Bethlehem, shepherds were "abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flock by night." (Luke 2:8.) "These were not ordinary shepherds nor ordinary flocks," wrote Elder McConkie. "The sheep there being herded—nay, not herded, but watched over, cared for with love and devotion—were destined for sacrifice on the great altar in the Lord's House, in similitude of the eternal sacrifice of Him who that wondrous night lay in a stable, perhaps among sheep of lesser destiny. And the shepherds—for whom the veil was then rent: surely they were in spiritual stature like Simeon and Anna and Zacharias and Elisabeth and Joseph and the growing group of believing souls who were coming to know, by revelation, that the Lord's Christ was now on earth. As there were many widows in Israel, and only to the one in Zarephath was Elijah sent, so there were many shepherds in Palestine, but only to those who watched over the temple flocks did the herald angel come; only they heard the heavenly choir." [^11]

An angel appeared and spoke with authority the long-awaited "good tidings of great joy," the singular message that the Lord of Life had been born, that the age of the Anointed One had now burst upon all creation. An angel had appeared to King Benjamin in the Americas over a century earlier and said: "I am come to declare unto you the glad tidings of great joy." (Mosiah 3:3, emphasis added.) What were those glad tidings? Simply that "the time cometh, and is not far distant, that with power, the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all eternity to all eternity, shall come down from heaven among the children of men, and shall dwell in a tabernacle of clay, and shall go forth amongst men, working mighty miracles." More specifically: "And he shall be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning; and his mother shall be called Mary." (Mosiah 3:5, 8.) Likewise Samuel the Lamanite taught that Jesus Christ "surely shall come into the world, and shall suffer many things and shall be slain for his people. And behold, an angel of the Lord hath declared it unto me, and he did bring glad tidings to my soul." (Hel. 13:6-7, emphasis added.)

"And this is the way you shall find the babe," the angel continued to the attentive shepherds: "He is wrapped in swaddling clothes, and is lying in a manger." (JST Luke 2:12.) After the preceding directions were given regarding our Lord's place of birth, the heavens resounded with anthems of praise: "Glory to God in the highest heaven! Peace upon earth among men of good will!" (Phillips Translation, Luke 2:14.) Or, as translated in a slightly different manner: "Glory to God in the highest heaven, and peace to men who enjoy his favor." (Jerusalem Bible.) Having found the humble dwellings of the holy family, and then no doubt having visited at length with Joseph and Mary and sensed the sacredness of the occasion, the shepherds were among the first mortals to bear Messianic witness, to testify of those "things which they had heard and seen, as they were manifested unto them." (JST Luke 2:20.) Many heard the inspired words of the shepherds and marveled at the implications of what had come to pass. "But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart" (Luke 2:19), "awaiting the day when she too will bear witness of all that she feels and believes and knows concerning the Son of David, who was born in the city of David, and who came to reign on the throne of David forever." [^12]

Messianic Testimonies on the Eighth Day

It had become customary among the Jews to name their children on the eighth day after birth, the same day on which males were to be circumcised. The act of circumcision was originally given to Abraham as a token, a reminder of the covenant God had made with his people. Jehovah had said to him: "I will establish a covenant of circumcision with thee, and it shall be my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations; that thou mayest know forever that children are not accountable before me until they are eight years old." (JST Gen. 17:11, emphasis added.) For almost two thousand years male infants were circumcised at eight days of age as a reminder to parents to teach and prepare their children for the time of moral accountability, the age of eight years.

At eight days the infant son of Mary was circumcised and given the name Jesus, or, more directly, Yeshua, literally "Jehovah is salvation," a name foreknown centuries before this occasion (Moses 6:52; 7:50; 8:24; 2 Ne. 25:19; Mosiah 3:8; Alma 7:10), and the name that had been given to Joseph and Mary by the angel Gabriel (Matt. 1:21; Luke 1:31). Mary, in obedience to the law of Moses, underwent a forty-day period of purification following the birth of her child (an eighty-day period was required for a female child). At the end of that period, she and Joseph, with Jesus, returned to Jerusalem to perform two ceremonial acts: to present the Christ child—Mary's firstborn—unto God, to "redeem him" from a life of priestly service through the payment of five shekels at the sanctuary (Ex. 13:1-2); and to present a sin offering at the temple, which offering would serve as a pronouncement of ritual cleanliness for the mother (see Lev. 12:1-8). "On this occasion Mary entered the Court of the Women; dropped the price of her sacrifice into one of the thirteen trumpet-shaped chests; heard the sound of the organ, announcing that incense was about to be kindled on the Golden Altar; made her way, as one for whom a special sacrifice was being offered, to a place near the Sanctuary; and there, while the ordinance was performed, offered up the unspoken prayers of praise and thanksgiving of a grateful heart. Thus she became Levitically clean." [^13]

While in the courts of the temple, on temple square as it were, the young Nazarean family encountered one Simeon, a man who was "just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel: and the Holy Ghost was upon him. And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should not see death, before he had seen the Lord's Christ." (Luke 2:25-26.) As Mary and Joseph underwent their solemn duties within the temple precincts, Simeon (whose name appropriately means one "that hears,") took the child into his arms and said: "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared before the face of all people." (Luke 2:28-31.) Simeon then broke forth into psalmic prophecy, speaking of the Savior's mission to Jew and Gentile and of his ministry as the Light of the world. And then in a poignant moment Simeon spoke prophetically to Mary of a painful but inevitable time yet future: "Yea, a spear shall pierce through him to the wounding of thine own soul also." (JST Luke 2:35; cf. John 19:25.)

Also in attendance at this early testimony meeting was a woman named Anna, a prophetess of the tribe of Asher. "She was of great age, and had lived with a husband only seven years, whom she married in her youth, and she lived a widow about fourscore and four years, who departed not from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers, night and day." Aged Anna, now over a century in age, was undimmed in her spiritual capacities, undaunted in her hunger and thirst for the things of the Spirit. Like Simeon, she rejoiced in the God of her salvation and bore witness of the newly come Christ "to all those who looked for redemption in Jerusalem." (JST Luke 2:36-38.)

The Visit of the Magi

Some time after the presentation of Jesus in the temple (a period that may have been as much as two years—see Matt. 2:7, 16), certain "wise men from the east" were led by a new star to Jerusalem. (Matt. 2:1). [^14] Christian tradition is replete with suggestions as to their native countries, their names, and their numbers. Were the eastern visitors from Babylon, Persia, or Arabia? Were they two in number, or perhaps three, as millions have supposed? We simply do not know, for our primary source, the Gospel of Matthew, is silent beyond the twelve verses contained in the second chapter.

About five years before the birth of Christ, Samuel the Lamanite prophesied of "a new star" that would serve as one of the signs of the Savior's birth. (Hel. 14:5.) Elder McConkie wrote: "As to the star, there is nothing mysterious about it. The Magi, if so they are to be designated, were not reading portents in the skies nor divining the destinies of men by the movement of celestial bodies in the sidereal heavens. The new star was simply a new star of the sort we are familiar with. No doubt it exhibited an unusual brilliance, so as to attract special attention and so as to give guidance to those who walked in its light, but it was, nonetheless, a star." [^15]

There seems to have been in Jewish prophecy or legend the knowledge that the Messiah's coming would be heralded by a special appearance of a star. Alfred Edersheim wrote: "There is . . . testimony which seems to us not only reliable, but embodies most ancient Jewish tradition. It is contained in one of the smaller Midrashim. . . . The so-called Messiah-Haggadah (Aggadoth Mashiach) opens as follows: 'A star shall come out of Jacob. There is a Boraita in the name of the Rabbis: The heptad in which the Son of David cometh—in the first year, there will not be sufficient nourishment; in the second year the arrows of famine are launched; in the third, a great famine; in the fourth, neither famine nor plenty; in the fifth, great abundance and the Star shall shine forth from the East, and this is the Star of the Messiah.'" [^16]

It is generally supposed that the wise men were Gentiles from foreign soil who had come to behold the babe in Bethlehem. This supposition seems at variance with the fact that these are men guided in personal religious quests for the Anointed One of Israel: "Where is the child that is born, the Messiah of the Jews? for we have seen his star in the east, and have come to worship him." (JST Matt. 3:2, emphasis added.) [^17] Elder McConkie concluded: "As to the men themselves, one thing is clear. They had prophetic insight. It was with them as it had been with saintly Simeon. . . . The probability is they were themselves Jews who lived, as millions of Jews then did, in one of the nations to the East." [^18]

Word of the inquiries by the wise men and the subsequent stir among the people reached Herod the Great. Herod "gathered all the chief priests, and scribes of the people together, [and] demanded of them, saying, Where is the place that is written of by the prophets, in which Christ [i.e., the Messiah] should be born? For he greatly feared, yet he believed not the prophets. And they said unto him, It is written by the prophets, that he should be born in Bethlehem of Judea, for thus have they said, The word of the Lord came unto us, saying, And thou Bethlehem, which lieth in the land of Judea, in thee shall be born a prince, which art not the least among all the princes of Judea; for out of thee shall come the Messiah, who shall save my people Israel." (JST Matt. 3:4-6.)

Herod learned from the wise men when they had first encountered the new star, and he asked them to bring word back to him once they had found the Christ, so that, in his own lying and deceitful words, "I may come and worship him also." (Matt. 2:8.) Having found the house to which the holy family had relocated, the wise men worshiped the Lord and presented him with gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh. That these souls were spiritually sensitive is attested by the fact that they were warned in an inspired dream not to return to Jerusalem to discuss the matter with Herod further. Consequently, "they departed into their own country another way." (Matt. 2:12.)

The Death of the Innocents

Perhaps nowhere do we gain greater insight into the depraved disposition of Herod the Great (of whom it was wisely observed by the Emperor Augustus that it was safer to be Herod's pig than his son!) than in the brief episode described by Matthew in which he, in demonic and paranoid frenzy, ordered the death of innocent children. After inquiring of the magi as to the time of the rising of the new star and subsequently finding that the visitors from the East had left the area (that he had been "mocked of the wise men"), this spineless creature ordered the death of all boys (not children, but boys—the plural of pais in Greek) in Bethlehem two years of age or younger. Considering that Bethlehem was a small town with a population of approximately one thousand to two thousand, as well as that there was a high infant mortality rate, with an annual birthrate of about thirty, then the number of boys killed probably did not exceed twenty. [^19] "But," wrote Edersheim, "the deed was none the less atrocious; and these infants may justly be regarded as the 'protomartyrs,' the first witnesses of Christ." Continuing, Edersheim remarked: "The slaughter was entirely in accordance with the character and former measure of Herod. Nor do we wonder, that it remained unrecorded by Josephus, since on other occasions also he has omitted events which to us seem important. The murder of a few infants in an insignificant village might appear scarcely worth notice in a reign stained by so much bloodshed." [^20]

Jesus was delivered from Herod's murderous decree through revelatory instruction to Joseph prior to the carrying out of Herod's order. An angel came to him in a vision, saying: "Arise and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and tarry thou there until I bring thee word; for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him." (JST Matt. 3:13.) The family remained in Egypt until word reached them of the death of Herod. One apocryphal source suggests how it was that John the Baptist was also spared.

But Elizabeth, when she heard that John was sought for, took him and went up into the hill-country. . . .

Now Herod was searching for John, and sent officers to Zacharias at the altar to ask him: "Where have you hidden your son?" And he answered and said to them: "I am a minister of God and attend continually upon his temple. How should I know where my son is?" And the officers departed and told all this to Herod. Then Herod was angry and said: "Is his son to be king over Israel?" And he sent the officers to him again with the command: "Tell the truth. Where is your son? You know that your blood is under my hand." And the officers departed and told him all this. And Zacharias said: "I am a martyr of God. Take my blood! But my spirit the Lord will receive, for you shed innocent blood in the forecourt of the temple of the Lord." And about the dawning of the day Zacharias was slain. And the children of Israel did not know that he had been slain. [^21]

Concerning the hideous manner in which the sadistic ruler met his death, Josephus wrote:

But now Herod's distemper greatly increased upon him after a severe manner, and this by God's judgment upon him for his sins: for a fire glowed in him slowly, which did not so much appear to the touch outwardly, as it augmented his pains inwardly; for it brought upon him a vehement appetite to eating, which he could not avoid to supply with one sort of food or other. His entrails were also exulcerated, and the chief violence of his pain lay on his colon. . . . And when he sat upright he had a difficulty of breathing, which was very loathsome, on account of the stench of his breath and the quickness of its returns; he had also convulsions in all parts of his body. [^22]

Fearing that his passing would not be accompanied by what he felt to be the appropriate level of remorse among his subjects, Herod ordered the mass death in the Hippodrome of "all the principal men of the entire Jewish nation," thus assuring himself of the "honour of a memorable mourning at his funeral." [^23] According to historians, Herod the Great died in March of 4 B.C. Just prior to his death, Herod made arrangements for the settlement and governance of his territories by his sons.

Herod's youngest son, Antipas, was now named heir to the throne. Antipas was Herod's son by a secondary wife, a Samaritan woman named Malthake. Herod had an elder son by Malthake, Archelaus by name, but he passed him over at this stage because his mind had been poisoned against him by Antipater [his son by his first wife, Doris]. . . . Four or five days before his death he ordered the execution of Antipater, and changed his mind once more about the succession, for in his last will and testament his kingdom was divided among three of his sons. Antipas was to rule Galilee and Peraea as tetrarch, his full brother Archelaus was to receive Judaea (including Samaria and Idumaea) with the royal title, while Philip, Herod's son by yet another wife (Cleopatra of Jerusalem), was nominated tetrarch of the territory which Herod had received from Augustus east and north-east of the Lake of Galilee. [^24]

Joseph feared to return to Israel when he heard that Archelaus had received the title from his father, but after receiving comfort and instruction in a vision, he settled his young family in Nazareth, a city in the province of Galilee. (JST Matt. 3:21-22.) Matthew explained that this settlement of the holy family was in fulfillment of a now unknown prophecy about the Messiah that "he shall be called a Nazarene." (Matt. 2:23). [^25]

Boyhood and the "Missing Years"

As to the preparation and training—the education—of a Jewish male child in the first century, Alfred Edersheim wrote:

. . . while the earliest religious teaching would, of necessity, come from the lips of the mother, it was the father who was "bound to teach his son." To impart to the child knowledge of the Torah conferred as great spiritual distinction, as if a man had received the Law itself on Mount Horeb. . . . Directly the child learned to speak, his religious instruction was to begin—no doubt, with such verses of Holy Scripture as composed that part of the Jewish liturgy, which answers to our Creed [the Shema—Deut. 6:4-6]. Then would follow other passages from the Bible, short prayers, and select sayings of the sages. Special attention was given to the culture of the memory, since forgetfulness might prove as fatal in its consequences as ignorance or neglect of the Law. . . . The earliest hymns taught would be the Psalms for the days of the week, or festive Psalms, such as the Hallel [Psalms of praise such as Ps. 113-18, 120-26, 135-36], or those connected with the festive pilgrimages to Zion.

The regular instruction commenced with the fifth or sixth year (according to strength), when every child was sent to school. There can be no reasonable doubt that at that time [the first century] such schools existed throughout the land. . . . From the teaching of the alphabet or of writing, onwards to the farthest limit of instruction in the most advanced Academies of the Rabbis, all is marked by extreme care, wisdom, accuracy, and a moral and religious purpose as the ultimate object. For a long time it was not uncommon to teach in the open air; but this must have been chiefly in connection with theological discussions, and the instruction of youths. But the children were gathered in the Synagogues, or in the School-houses, where at first they either stood, teacher and pupils alike, or else sat on the ground in a semicircle, facing the teacher. . . .

Roughly classifying the subjects of study, it was held, that, up to ten years of age, the Bible exclusively should be the textbook; from ten to fifteen, the . . . traditional law; after that age, the student should enter on those theological discussions which occupied time and attention in the higher Academies of the Rabbis. . . . The study of the Bible commenced with that of the Book of Leviticus. Thence it passed to the other parts of the Pentateuch; then to the Prophets; and, finally, to the Hagiographa [Writings].

Finally, in speaking of the atmosphere and training in the home of Joseph and Mary, Edersheim has suggested: "That [Jesus'] was preeminently a pious home in the highest sense, it seems almost irreverent to say. . . . We know that from earliest childhood [the scriptures] must have formed the meat and drink of the God-Man." [^26]

The scriptures are silent regarding particular incidents in the life of Christ between the ages of twelve and thirty. Luke records that at the age of twelve, Jesus, perhaps what would now be called a bar mitzvah, a "son of the commandment" and a man in his own right, accompanied his parents into the holy city for the Feast of the Passover. It was expected that those men who resided within a reasonable distance of Jerusalem would go to the city to celebrate three sacred occasions: the feasts of Passover ("feast of unleavened bread," in the spring of the year), Pentecost (the feast of "first fruits," fifty days after Passover), and Tabernacles (the "feast of booths," held during the fall of the year). Frequently large caravans of Israelites would travel together to enjoy the social benefits occasioned by the pilgrimages, as well as to protect themselves from marauding bands of robbers. It was at the end of a week of feasting and celebration following Passover that Mary and Joseph discovered, after a full day's journey from Jerusalem, that their twelve-year-old was missing. "And it came to pass, after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors [the scribes, the experts on the law], and they were hearing him, and asking him questions. And all who heard him were astonished at his understanding, and answers." (JST Luke 2:46-47, emphasis added.) Already we see in the mind and soul of the young Messiah the spiritual depth and infinite wisdom that would characterize his ministry. Even as a boy he demonstrated the originality and freshness and animation that comes only through one who is imbued with the powers of his Eternal Father. Indeed, Jesus "taught them as one having authority from God, and not as having authority from the scribes." (JST Matt. 7:37.)

Mary questioned his wisdom and seemed to stress the inconsiderateness of causing such anxiety to his parents: "Son," she asked, "why hast thou thus dealt with us? Behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing." Jesus responded with mature confidence, his words evidencing both his growing knowledge of his singular ministry and a firm assurance as to his Divine Sonship and relationship to his true Father: "Why is it that ye sought me? Knew ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" The account continues: "And [Jesus] went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them. And his mother kept all these sayings in her heart." (JST Luke 2:48-49, 51, emphasis added.) "What marvelous and sacred secrets were treasured in that mother's heart," writes Elder Talmage. "And what new surprises and grave problems were added day after day in the manifestations of unfolding wisdom displayed by her more than mortal Son! . . . At every new evidence of His uniqueness she marveled and pondered anew. He was hers, and yet in a very real sense not wholly hers." [^27]

Luke's statement that "Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man" (Luke 2:52) speaks volumes. He developed in understanding and intellectual powers. He developed physically, such that his body would prove a benefit and blessing to his work. He developed in his relationship with God, line upon line, precept upon precept. Jesus did not receive the fullness of light and power and glory at the first of his life but received "grace for grace"; that is, our Lord was blessed by his Father as he continually gave of himself to others in service. He thereby progressed "from grace to grace," from one level to a higher, from a lesser spiritual endowment to a greater. (See D&C 93:12-20.) Finally, Jesus of Nazareth developed socially, "in favor with man." Jesus loved people, for people were his reason for being: his work and glory were to "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

The Gospels of Matthew and Luke are accurate and appropriate in what they present in regard to our Lord's beginnings. During the time of the apostasy, men and women sought to fill in the gaps, to provide details as to the "missing years" of his life where details were not intended, to supplement the record. Many of the particulars of these accounts are readily discerned as spurious by those who are sensitive to the Spirit of the Lord; they stand in stark contrast to the sacred silence of the Gospels of Matthew and Luke. As I have written elsewhere: "The presence of sensational and titilating elements often evident in the apocryphal gospels are absent in the canonical Gospels. Absent also are attempts to explain the unexplained or to reconcile the seemingly estranged or disparate. There are no attempts to 'lie for God,' to appease the questioning mind, to conciliate by appending the authoritative. The canonical Gospels combine simplicity with the power of their message, and present a dignified and appropriate glimpse into the life and words of the Savior." [^28]

One final contribution from the Joseph Smith Translation of Matthew provides us with a temporal link to the formal ministry of our Lord: "And it came to pass that Jesus grew up with his brethren, and waxed strong, and waited upon the Lord for the time of his ministry to come. And he served under his father, and he spake not as other men, neither could he be taught; for he needed not that any man should teach him. And after many years, the hour of his ministry drew nigh." (JST Matt. 3:24-26.) What a remarkable manner in which to describe the divine process by which the Son of Man of Holiness made his transition from infancy through boyhood into manhood! Building upon a solid foundation, the time of his ministry was now at hand.

NOTES

Robert L. Millet is assistant professor of ancient scripture and New Testament area coordinator at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 157.
[^2] Ibid., p. 261.
[^3] See S. Brent Farley, "The Baptism and Temptations of Jesus," chapter 10 of this volume.
[^4] Teachings, pp. 275-76.
[^5] Ibid.
[^6] D&C 93:6-18. See Robert J. Matthews, A Burning Light: The Life and Ministry of John the Baptist (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1972), pp. 81-82, for statements by Elders Orson Pratt, John Taylor, and Bruce R. McConkie affirming the existence of such a record.
[^7] An extensive study is presented in the author's A Burning Light.
[^8] Frederic Farrar, The Life of Christ (Portland, Ore.: Fountain Publications, 1964), pp. 35-36.
[^9] Ibid., p. 33.
[^10] The Mortal Messiah 1:344.
[^11] Ibid., 1:347.
[^12] Ibid., 1:349.
[^13] Ibid., 1:353.
[^14] The Greek word used by Matthew (translated as "wise men" in the KJV) is magoi, rendered in English as magi. What does Matthew mean by magoi? A typical scholarly opinion is as follows: "Long before, Herodotus (Histories 1) had intrigued his Greek readers with a description of a priestly caste of magi among the sixth-century Medes, a caste that has special power to interpret dreams. The magi survived both the transfer of power from the Medes to the Persians (ca. 550 B.C.) and the emerging religious dominance of Zoroastrianism, so that by Herodotus' time (ca. 450) the magi were Zoroastrian priests. In the subsequent centuries there was a diversification in the functions of magi as the title was loosely applied to men adept in various forms of secret lore and magic. . . . Thus, the term 'magi' refers to those engaged in occult arts and covers a wide range of astronomers, fortune tellers, priestly augurers, and magicians of varying plausibility." (Brown, The Birth of the Messiah, p. 167.) This approach to the identity of the magi has been popularly received over the centuries, since it points to the role of Jesus Christ as Savior and King to all the world. Though this has some attraction, I agree with Elder McConkie's assessment (hereafter) that the magi were Jews of the dispersion.
[^15] The Mortal Messiah 1:359.
[^16] Alfred Edersheim, The Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans, 1971), 1:211-12, emphasis added.
[^17] The reader should note the differences in the numbering of chapters and verses in early Matthew in the KJV and the JST. Joseph Smith began chapter 2 in his inspired version after the genealogy of Jesus (after KJV, 1:17). By Matthew 4 the KJV and the JST chapters are the same again.
[^18] The Mortal Messiah 1:358, emphasis added.
[^19] See McConkie, The Mortal Messiah 1:363; Farrar, The Life of Christ, p. 62; Edersheim, The Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah 1:214; Brown, The Birth of the Messiah, p. 204.
[^20] The Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah 1:214-15.
[^21] From "The Protevangelium of James," trans. A. J. B. Higgins, in Edgar Hennecke, New Testament Apocrypha, 2 vols., ed. Wilhelm Schneemelcher (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1963), 1:387. It is worthy of note that a very similar account of the death of Zacharias is found in an editorial in the September 15, 1842, issue of Times and Seasons (also found in Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 261). There is some question as to whether the editorial was indeed prepared by Joseph Smith, who was probably out of town at the time.
[^22] Flavius Josephus, "Antiquities of the Jews," XVII. 6.5, in Josephus: Complete Works, trans. William Whiston (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Kregal Publications, 1974), p. 365.
[^23] Ibid.
[^24] F. F. Bruce, New Testament History (New York: Doubleday & Co., 1972), pp. 23-24.
[^25] Three main points of view have surfaced in regard to the meaning of this prophecy: (1) Jesus as one who lived in Nazareth, as noted, the specific prophecy of which is unknown; (2) Jesus as a nazir, a Nazarite, one consecrated and made holy to God by a vow (see Num. 6:1-21); and (3) Jesus as neser, a branch, in fulfillment of the passage in Isaiah 11:1. For a detailed discussion of these matters, see Brown, The Birth of the Messiah, pp. 209-12.
[^26] The Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah 1:230-34, emphasis in the original.
[^27] Jesus the Christ, pp. 115-16.
[^28] "'As Delivered from the Beginning': The Formation of the Canonical Gospels," in Apocryphal Writings and the Latter-day Saints, ed. C. Wilfred Griggs (Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1986), p. 211. See also Richard Lloyd Anderson, "Imitation Gospels and Christ's Book of Mormon Ministry," ibid., pp. 53-107.
