Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

9

A VOICE IN THE WILDERNESS: AN INTERVIEW WITH JOHN THE BAPTIST

ROBERT J. MATTHEWS

Most of us know two things about John the Baptist: he baptized Jesus, and he ordained Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery to the Aaronic Priesthood. These may be the two most important things about John, but they are not enough knowledge about him to satisfy us. As members of the Church, we will want to know a good deal more of this man about whom Jesus said, "Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist." (Luke 7:28.)

A biographical entry in an encyclopedia might read as follows:

John. Also known as the Baptist. Born: Judea, October, about six months before Jesus Christ. Parents: Zacharias and Elisabeth, tribe of Levi, family of Aaron. Blessed by his father at the age of eight days. Blessed also by an angel on the same day. Taken into the hill country by his mother to escape Herod's order that babies be slain. Grew to maturity in the desert. Food: locusts and wild honey. Clothing: the rough garb of the desert—leather girdle and raiment of camel's hair. Was baptized during childhood. At about thirty years of age received divine call to begin ministry to prepare a people to receive the Son of God. Went among the people of Judea and proclaimed that the Messiah would shortly appear. Baptized many people in Jordan River. His counsel was sought by common people, publicans, soldiers, and even Jewish religious leaders. Among his notable baptisms was that of Jesus, the Messiah. Gathered many disciples and at the height of his popularity was mistakenly thought by some to be the Messiah. This identification he vigorously denied. His popularity was felt throughout Israel, even in areas he had not visited personally. One of his admirers was Herod Antipas, a Roman appointee as tetrarch of Galilee and Perea. Herod later imprisoned him for several months (he was kept in chains and tortured) and then ordered his execution. Place of imprisonment: probably Machereus, on the northeast side of the Dead Sea. Buried by some of his disciples; place unknown. His total public ministry was about a year and one-half. He died in his thirty-second year. Nothing is known concerning wife or children, although it is almost certain that he had both. Resurrection: a short time after death. Ordained Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery to the Aaronic Priesthood, near Harmony, Pennsylvania, on May 15, 1829.

Having thus reviewed the basic facts of John's life and actions, we shall interview some of those who knew him personally. Among them are his father, Zacharias; his mother, Elisabeth; the angel Gabriel, who announced his birth; a disciple who was converted by him; a publican who was impressed by him; a Roman soldier who believed him; a lawyer who interrogated him; John the Beloved and Andrew, who followed him; Herod Antipas, who respected and feared him; two of his disciples who visited him; and Joseph Smith, who was ordained by him. The interviews are, of course, imaginary, but they are based on the knowledge we have of John and his contemporaries given to us in the holy scriptures and in the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. The inquirer is any man or woman. Let us talk to Zacharias first.

INQUIRER. Brother Zacharias, when did you first learn that you would have a son who would be a prophet and the forerunner of the Lord?

ZACHARIAS. It was when I was attending to my duties in the temple in Jerusalem. As I went to burn incense, the angel Gabriel stood before me and said that the Lord had heard our prayers, and my wife Elisabeth would bear a son, notwithstanding our old age. He told me to name him John, that he would be great in the sight of the Lord, that he would drink no wine or strong drink, and that he would be filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb. He specifically said that my son would turn many to righteousness and would make ready a people for the Lord. [See Luke 1:7-17.]

INQUIRER. How did this information strike you?

ZACHARIAS. It overwhelmed me. I could hardly believe it; therefore, the angel told me that I would be struck dumb until the baby was born and named. That meant I'd be unable to speak for nearly a year.

INQUIRER. Why do you think you and Elisabeth were selected to be the parents of John?

ZACHARIAS. We don't know why it was us, but one thing we do know. The office of the forerunner was a preparatory role and therefore came under the jurisdiction of the Aaronic Priesthood. In order for John to be a legal heir and hold the keys to that priesthood, he had to be a firstborn son of the family of Aaron. As you know, I am a priest, which means I am of that lineage. Elisabeth also was a direct descendant of Aaron. Our son John was the first-born of just the right lineage in order to be fully representative of the Aaronic Priesthood and the law of Moses. [See Luke 1:5-7; Ex. 30:30-31; 40:15.]

INQUIRER. Thank you, Zacharias. Your explanation is informative. I think our listeners would also enjoy hearing from John's mother. Elisabeth, would you tell us your feelings when you learned of the forthcoming birth of your son, John?

ELISABETH. It made me very happy, and yet I was awed by the responsibility. It was wonderful to know that the Lord had heard our prayers after all these years, and we would have a son. Then when Mary came to visit me and stayed for three months until the baby was born, we had many pleasant and inspiring times together. It was a great blessing to us to contemplate that Mary's son would be the Messiah and that my son would prepare the way before him. When Mary entered into my home, the Holy Ghost came upon me, and I knew that she had been selected to be the mother of our Lord. At the same time the Holy Ghost came also upon John, and he leaped for joy in my womb, even though he would not be born for three months yet. Thus, according to the prophecies in the scriptures, John had the Holy Ghost even from the time of the womb. [See Luke 1:15, 36-57; D&C 84:27.] I did not see the angel, but I believed the things the angel told my husband. I thanked the Lord in my prayers many times for his kindness and tender mercies to me.

When the baby was born, the neighbors and relatives wanted to name him Zacharias. I insisted that he must be called John because that is what the angel had said. But not until they inquired of my husband were they convinced. We had never had anyone in the family named John, and, as you know, it is customary among us to name children after near relatives. Zacharias couldn't speak, but he wrote the name for them to see. [See Luke 1:56-61.]

INQUIRER. Thank you, Elisabeth. Zacharias, do you want to say anything about the naming of the child?

ZACHARIAS. Yes, I do. It was one of the busiest days in John's early life. He was eight days old. On that day he was circumcised. I had not been able to talk for nearly a year. The relatives and neighbors knew that, so they handed me a tablet on which I wrote, "His name is John." Suddenly I could speak again. Everyone was awestruck. The Holy Ghost came upon me, and I gave my son a father's blessing. I first praised the God of Israel that he would send his Son into the world to redeem us. Then I blessed John and spoke of his mission to teach and baptize the children of Israel and to prepare the way before the face of the Lord. The blessing is now called "the Benedictus." The people saw and heard these things, and it was noised abroad, and they wondered what manner of child this would be. [See Luke 1:67-79.]

But what also made that day memorable is that an angel also came and blessed John and set him apart for his mission to wrest the kingdom from the apostate Jews, make straight the way of the Lord, and prepare a people to receive the true Savior, Jesus Christ. [See D&C 84:28-29.] This was to be a mighty task for one man—a mere mortal, my son. But he had been called of God in the premortal life. Born through the prescribed lineage and proclaimed by the angel Gabriel, he was a child of promise.

INQUIRER. We've mentioned the angel Gabriel several times. Let's see if we can talk to him. Gabriel, we understand that you are also Noah, the ancient patriarch and builder of the ark. [^1] You have certainly fulfilled some important assignments. Would you tell us about your announcement of the coming of John and Jesus?

GABRIEL. The Lord has given me the keys of the restoration of all things. [See D&C 27:6.] And it was a great honor bestowed upon me to make an announcement to Zacharias of the coming of John and then to tell Mary of the approaching birth of the Son of God. These were momentous events, and I was greatly honored that the Lord would choose me to make the announcements. As you know, John was selected in the grand councils of heaven before the world was formed to be the great forerunner of the Lord Jesus Christ. He was chosen by the Lord and sustained by those present. It was a most important mission. He was not only to baptize many of the people but was to baptize the Lord himself. And what a preacher he had to be! It was a time of great turmoil and wickedness among the Jews. He had to prepare a people to receive the Lord Jesus Christ. Several of the future apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ in New Testament times would be tutored by John. When the Lord chose a man in the premortal councils to fulfill this mission, he selected a man who could do the job—a man who could teach, explain, bear testimony, persuade, and perform—and do it magnificently. A man of intellect, courage, and stamina was needed. And he had to be of the lineage that would make him a legal heir to the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, which is the preparatory priesthood. John was that man in every way. He was in person what the law of Moses was on the tablets, and that was a schoolmaster to bring men and women to Christ.

INQUIRER. Thank you for that insight into the premortal calling and the personality of John. But we need to go back to Zacharias. Brother Zacharias, how long did you live after the birth of John? Were you able to be father to him during his formative and teenage years?

ZACHARIAS. That was one of the saddest times of my long life. When Herod the Great ordered the death of the babies in order to slay Jesus, my own son came under that edict. John's birth was well known throughout Judea, and everyone knew of the miracles involved, such as the angel's coming to me in the temple and my being struck dumb and regaining my speech when the child was named. And so the soldiers came to find him. I had previously sent Elisabeth and John into the hill country to hide. When I refused to tell them the hiding place, they killed me instead. Elisabeth was left a widow to rear him. I would have liked to be with them longer, but it was more important to save him alive. [^2]

INQUIRER. That is a very touching story. Thank you for sharing it with us. We will now inquire of one of the citizens of Judea who heard John preach and was baptized by him. We don't know his name, so we'll call him Disciple. Brother Disciple, what did you feel when you heard John preach?

DISCIPLE. I had never felt anything like it before. He was very open and to the point. First I heard him preach that Jesus would come and later that Jesus had come; and he told us, his disciples, to leave him and follow Jesus. I heard him bear testimony that when he baptized Jesus, he saw the sign of the dove. He also heard the voice of the Father declaring Jesus to be the Son of God. I heard John teach by the Spirit and give counsel to all who came to him. Multitudes from Jerusalem and Judea came to the Jordan to be baptized. For a year I heard him teach. He was fearless. How he could handle those Pharisees and Sadducees! He called them a generation of vipers and told them to bring forth fruits worthy of repentance. To retaliate, they said he had a devil. [See Luke 7:33.] He was so filled with the Spirit that most of us wondered if he were the Messiah. [See Luke 3:15.] But he would have no nonsense about that. He plainly told us that he was not the Christ but was sent to testify of him. We never ceased to marvel at his loyalty and devotion to his Master. He had an eye single to the glory of God. He told us that he must decrease, but that Jesus would increase. He told us that Jesus was the Lamb of God who would take away the sins of the world. [See John 3:22-36; 1:29.]

I heard him teach faith, repentance, confession of sins, baptism, and the necessity of receiving the Holy Ghost. He taught honesty, brotherly kindness, charity, fasting, prayer, moral cleanliness, Gentile adoption into the house of Israel, the resurrection, the Second Coming of Jesus, the burning of the earth, the judgment, and ever so many principles of the gospel. He didn't perform any miracles, but everything he told us about Jesus was true. I tell you, he was magnificent! He had a special dignity. Even the publicans, the soldiers, and Herod Antipas were impressed. He roused the people to action. [See Matt. 3:1-17;JST Luke 3:1-25; John 1:18-40; 3:25-36; 10:41.]

INQUIRER. We're glad we talked to you. We can feel your enthusiasm. Let's visit with one of those soldiers over there. Soldier, is it true that you and the others were on hand and that you believed the preaching of John the Baptist?

SOLDIER. Yes, that is true. We used to accompany the tax collectors ("publicans" to you) on their calls. When we'd press a customer, it was easy to collect a little extra for the collector and ourselves. But when we heard John preach about the coming judgment, we felt guilty, and so we asked him what we should do. He told us to do violence to no man, to be content with our wages, not to rob the people, and not to accuse anyone falsely. [See Luke 3:9, 14.] Here is one of the publicans. Ask him. He can tell you how it was.

INQUIRER. Incredible! We have heard it ourselves from a Roman soldier! Mr. Publican, sir, did John the Baptist really make that big an impression among the Jews and the Roman soldiers?

PUBLICAN. Yes, he was immensely popular. We had never seen or heard anything like him: dressed in rough clothing, claiming divine authority, testifying of what he had seen and heard. He told us that the Messiah was already born and was among us and would soon be made manifest. John was great, but he told us that the Messiah was much greater than he. We heard his testimony of Jesus Christ and his warning of a day of judgment. We were touched in our hearts; we wanted to confess our sins and be baptized. We asked him what we should do. He counseled us to exact no more taxes than that which was appointed to us. Many of us believed him and were baptized. [See Luke 3:9-13; 7:29.]

INQUIRER. Thank you. All of these people we have interviewed have spoken highly of John. We wonder if he had any enemies. A man is judged by who his enemies are as well as by who his friends are. What about those Pharisees and lawyers whom he called vipers? Let's find one of them and hear what he ways. Ah, here's one now. You can tell he's an important man; see how richly he's dressed—and such a pious look. Let's ask him. Mr. Pharisee, or Mr. Sadducee, or whoever you are, can you tell us anything about John the Baptist? We've heard of him from others, but we would like to hear from you.

PHARISEE. I'm a Pharisee! a lawyer! I work for the Sanhedrin. Yes, I heard John on several occasions. I even met him personally once. I, along with several others, was sent as an official delegate from the council in Jerusalem to the river Jordan to examine John and, if possible, to refute him. He was stealing our flock—baptizing them and telling them of an approaching Messiah. He called us vipers—snakes—yet he attracted thousands of the common people. He was so convincing and so successful that the council became worried and sent us to listen to his preaching and to cross-examine him. He was not hard to find, since multitudes were attending his meetings. But he was hard for us to talk to, since he knew the scriptures better than we did and insisted also on telling us of the revelations that he had received in addition to the written word. We asked John a number of questions. He always had answers.

INQUIRER. What did you ask him?

PHARISEE. We asked him if he were the Christ. He said he was not. There were some prophecies among us about the coming of a Messiah and of an Elias. The scribes often talked about them. So we asked if he were Elias. He did not deny being an Elias to prepare, but said he was not the Elias to restore. He made a distinction we had not understood before. We knew of a series of prophecies that when the Messiah came, he would baptize with water and also with the Holy Ghost. We also knew that an Elias would come. But when we asked John if he were the Messiah, he said he was not. [See JST, John 1:20-25.] So we asked him why he baptized, if he was neither the Messiah nor the Elias to restore. He said he had been divinely commissioned to teach and baptize and that we ought to be able to figure out for ourselves that he was not the Messiah, since he, John, baptized with water only, whereas the prophecies showed that the Messiah would baptize with water and with the Holy Ghost. John made it clear to us. He was the Elias to prepare, whereas Jesus was the Elias to restore, and Jesus came with both kinds of baptism, representing both the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods, whereas John exercised the Aaronic Priesthood only. We didn't understand those prophecies until we heard the explanations from John. [See JST, John 1:26-33.]

We were impressed with John, as were the people, but he told us he wasn't anything compared to the Messiah. He said he wasn't even worthy to untie the Messiah's sandals. The day after we questioned John, he showed us Jesus of Nazareth walking along the way. He said he knew for certain that this Jesus was the Lamb of God, because he had seen the sign at the time he had baptized him. For a while we were willing to rejoice in John's testimony. But before long we realized that if we believed what John said, we'd have to accept Jesus as the Messiah and give up our profession. So we rejected John and his testimony and helped Herod imprison him.

Later, on another official assignment from the Sanhedrin, we interrogated Jesus. He told us that John was a burning and a shining light, a righteous man, and he said that the preaching of John the Baptist would condemn us on the day of judgment. [See John 1:29-34; 5:32-35;JST Matt. 21:33-34.] We did not thank him for that. There was no mistake that John was loyal to Jesus and carefully proclaimed who Jesus was. And Jesus didn't leave John to struggle alone. He defended him publicly and testified of his greatness on many occasions. [See Luke 7:24-35; John 5:32-36; Matt. 21:23-32.] He told the people in our hearing that there never was a greater prophet born of woman than John the Baptist. [See Luke 7:24-30.] Our delegation didn't accept John or Jesus, but we knew absolutely who and what they claimed to be.

INQUIRER. Both friends and enemies say that John was loyal to Jesus, but I recall hearing that when John was in prison, he seemed to waver and to doubt that Jesus was the Christ, and so he sent two of his disciples to ask Jesus for reassurance. Is that not a weakness in John's testimony? Can anyone come forth and explain that for us? Through the crowd I see two young men approaching. Who are you, and why do you think you can reply to the question?

TWO DISCIPLES. We are the two men whom John sent to see Jesus. We were disciples of John. He often told us to leave him and follow Jesus, but we didn't do it. Finally, toward the end of John's life when he was in prison, we stayed with him, still hoping that maybe he was the Messiah. One day he told us that we should go ask Jesus himself. So we left John in the prison and searched until we found Jesus over a hundred miles away in Galilee. He had recently raised a man from the dead and was surrounded by a multitude. We told him who we were and that John had sent us to ask if he were the one to look for as the Savior. Jesus often would not give direct answers, for that would substitute for an inquirer's own responsibility to think and to have faith and gain his own testimony. So he told us of his works and of his words and told us to return to John. We didn't realize it at first, but Jesus was directing us to get a testimony for ourselves. It was not John who was wavering in his faith or devotion—it was us! Jesus also said that John was no "reed shaken with the wind." [Luke 7:24.]

INQUIRER. I see your point. It was necessary that you should experience a conversion for yourselves. Such conversions are born of faith, prayer, obedience, and a seeking for the witness of the Spirit.

Well, let's go on with more interviews. We mentioned earlier that many of the early leaders of the New Testament church received their first lessons in the gospel from John the Baptist. Two of these are identified as John the Beloved and Andrew, who later became members of the Quorum of the Twelve. Since they are so well known and can tell us so much from firsthand experience of both Jesus and John the Baptist, let's visit with them. Andrew and John, would you tell us of your experiences and your feelings about John the Baptist?

ANDREW AND JOHN. Yes, we will. We received our introduction to Jesus from John the Baptist. We heard him preach and became his disciples. We were taught the basic principles of the gospel by him, and one day he showed us Jesus in person. He called him the Lamb of God, emphasizing his mission to redeem the world with his blood. We thereafter became disciples of Jesus, although that did not mean we had to renounce John. There was complete compatibility between them. Since it was part of John's mission to prepare people to receive the Lord, it was natural that those who were to be future leaders in the Church should be attracted to John. Jesus didn't pick the Twelve off the street. We had first been tutored and spiritually awakened and baptized by John. Although it may seem in some instances that Jesus abruptly called men from the fishing nets into the Quorum of the Twelve, the record clearly shows that we were trained first by John, then were called by the Lord into his vineyard, and we later became apostles. Jesus loved John and often told us about his goodness. Our brother Matthew has written that when John was in prison, he was chained and tortured. [See Matt. 14:3; 17:12-13; Mark 6:17. Some modern translations read chained in preference to the King James Version bound.] Also, Jesus sent angels to minister to him there. [JST, Matt. 4:11.]

INQUIRER. Thank you, John and Andrew. Your insight is helpful in giving us an impression of John the Baptist.

Let's see if we can find Herod Antipas, who imprisoned John and finally ordered his execution. He's probably quite a long distance from here, but maybe we can find him. Ah, there he is now. Herod, some say that you were a friend of John. Is that true, and if so, why did you imprison and finally slay him?

HEROD ANTIPAS. Yes, it is almost true. I don't know that I could be called John's friend, but I was impressed with him. He had the kind of moral courage I admired but couldn't quite find within myself. I knew he was a holy man, but I didn't want to live by his standards. I did many things for him and obeyed his counsel for a time [JST, Mark 6:21], but when he told me I had committed a grave sin by leaving my wife and enticing Herodias, my brother's wife, that was too much! I felt that prophets should stay in their own realm and leave the business of the kingdom to the kings. My new wife, Herodias, who was also my niece, was more angry than I. She hated him. She would like to have killed him. Finally she tricked me with a birthday party, too much wine, and Salome, her dancing-girl daughter. My unrepented habits caught up with me, and I succumbed to the lust of the flesh. I let the girl get a promise from me of anything she wanted, up to half of my kingdom. Being instructed by her scheming mother, who was now almost delirious with the success of her plot, she asked for the head of John the Baptist to be delivered immediately to us on a platter. I was sorry, for I knew John was a prophet and popular with the people; but to save face in the presence of my friends and the nobles of the kingdom, I gave in to the pressure and ordered the death of John. Within a few minutes the executioner returned with the blood dripping from the plate.

Later, Jesus came through my area preaching the gospel and performing miracles. I heard of his great works, and fear struck deep in my breast. I really thought that John had come back from the dead to torment me. The description, the popularity, and the doctrine sounded like John, and I was fearful. My advisers told me it was not John, but my conscience would not allow me to believe them. [Matt. 14:1-12; Mark 6:14-29.]

INQUIRER. Thank you, Herod. We appreciate your views about your contact with John in life and in death. Thus ended the mortal life of John the Baptist, one of God's noble men. A short time later he rose in the resurrection, after Jesus, and he is still engaged in the ministry of his Lord. He is a man of three dispensations. He was the last prophet under the law of Moses and the first prophet of the New Testament, and he restored the Aaronic Priesthood to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the fullness of times. He was and is a burning light, a fire that cannot be quenched. He is the greatest Aaronic Priesthood hero that we have—an example for every teenage boy and girl as well as every adult man and woman.

We have the extreme good fortune now to meet with the Prophet Joseph Smith. Could you give our listeners your impressions of John the Baptist?

JOSEPH SMITH. Oliver Cowdery and I really did feel the hands of John on our heads when he ordained us to the Aaronic Priesthood. We knew him personally. We saw him, felt him, and heard his voice. He was true and faithful to the end of his life. He helped to bring to pass the restoration of all things spoken by all the holy prophets since the world began. He was a martyr for the gospel. He appeared to us as a resurrected being and said he was working under the direction of Peter, James, and John, who would soon bring us the Melchizedek Priesthood. [JS-H 1:68-74.] INQUIRER. President Smith, one time Jesus referred to John, saying there had risen no greater prophet born of woman than John the Baptist. He also said that he that was least in the kingdom of heaven was greater than John. Could you enlighten us on the meaning of that statement?

JOSEPH SMITH. John's greatness lay in his privileges and opportunities and his loyalty. He alone was chosen to prepare the way for Jesus and even to baptize Jesus. [^3] He saw the sign of the dove. He was faithful and diligent and successful in all that he was entrusted to do. These favored opportunities of baptizing Jesus and preparing a path for him constituted John's greatness. No other prophet had the honor of doing those things. He that is "least in the kingdom of heaven" was Jesus himself. It was an irony for the unbelieving Jews. At that time the Jews felt that Jesus had the least claim on heaven of any man. Jesus was saying that great as John is, he is actually less than "I myself." [^4]

INQUIRER. Thank you, President Smith. Through the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, the Joseph Smith Translation, and your other writings, our knowledge and appreciation of John the Baptist have greatly increased. We are grateful for the wisdom God has given to you.

We will now interview John himself. We are happy that he has agreed to respond to our questions. First, are the things written about you in the New Testament really true?

JOHN. Yes, all those things are true. However, some have misunderstood through the years and have thought that I got my teachings from the Essenes and other desert religious groups. But this is not so. I gained a testimony of the Messiah from reading the Old Testament and learned what I was to say and do from the revelations of the Holy Ghost to me. I was also visited by angels.

INQUIRER. Why did you wear such rough clothing and eat such bizarre food? A shirt of itchy camels' hair, a leather girdle, and locust and honey! [Matt. 3:4.]

JOHN. That was the food and dress of the poorer people of the desert. When I began my ministry, I kept the same appearance so as to be as unlike the Pharisee and Sadducee as I could. I was a plain-spoken man, with a straightforward mission and announcement. My food, my clothing, and my speech were all plain truth. [Luke 7:24-25.] I did not want anything about my manner to detract from the work I was sent to do.

INQUIRER. Your ministry has spanned twenty centuries. Tell us how you feel about your calling.

JOHN. My privileges have been great. Truly the Lord has used the so-called "weak and simple things" to break down the strongholds of worldly power, false pride, and wickedness. The Messiah, in referring to me, said there was no greater prophet. [Luke 7:28.] He had reference not to any personal greatness about me but to my privileges as the one to prepare the way and to announce the Messiah's presence in the flesh, to baptize him in Jordan, to see the Holy Ghost descend upon him and hear the voice of the Father say that this was the Son of God. [^5] My mission included pointing out to thousands the actual person of the Messiah and giving several of the future members of the Twelve their first lessons in the gospel. I held the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood and taught the preparatory gospel. [D&C 84:26-28.]

INQUIRER. Would you tell us about the Messiah?

JOHN. He was superb in every way. A master in debate against the perfidy and pride of so many of the religious and political leaders. He was patient and kind to all who were open and honest in their lives, but he was an enemy of hypocrisy and deception. He knew the hearts of people. There was no other like him. You remember I said that I was not even worthy to untie his shoelaces. [John 1:27.] That means I would be entirely unable to fill his shoes or take his place. [JST, John 1:28.] I knew that he must increase, but I must decrease. He was divine, I was but a mortal. [John 3:30-31.] Though I was imprisoned, tortured, and slain because of my testimony, I was resurrected and received this very body as you now see me. [D&C 133:55.] My resurrection and everlasting salvation I owe to the Messiah.

INQUIRER. You have been involved in three dispensations. Isn't that a bit unusual?

JOHN. Yes, in some ways unusual. I was the last prophet under the law of Moses and essentially the first prophet in the New Testament dispensation. Also, I helped in the restoration of all things in the fullness of times by bringing the Aaronic Priesthood to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. Others have also functioned in three dispensations; for example, Moses and Elijah, first in mortality, and then at the Transfiguration, and also in the Kirtland Temple in Ohio.

INQUIRER. Your ministry has placed you in association with some of the greatest men of all time—the Messiah, Elijah, Moses, and the Prophet Joseph Smith. It is unfortunate there is not more written about you and even something by you.

JOHN. There is a record made by me, but only part of it is available today in the world. [John 1:19.] Someday, when the Lord sees fit, the entire record will be available among the believers. [^6]

INQUIRER. Thank you, John. We wish we had more time to learn from you. We will await the coming of your record.

Our interviews have been designed not to give a theological pronouncement or a historical treatise but to create an appreciation for John the Baptist. [^7]

NOTES

Robert J. Matthews is professor of ancient scripture and dean of Religious Education at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "He showeth unto the children of men that, according to the flesh he humbleth himself before the Father." (2 Ne. 31:7.) Here was Jehovah, creator of worlds without number (see Moses 7:30); the very God who appeared amid fire and smoke on quaking Mount Sinai. (Ex. 19:18.) And yet, in the flesh as a mortal he set the pattern for all who would strive to become more like him: he humbled himself before his Father in heaven. With such an example, no earthly inhabitant, great or small, rich or poor, should dare to presume the stature of that pride and power which shuts out the quality of humility exemplified by Jesus the Christ. Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 71.
[^2] He "witnesseth unto the Father that he would be obedient unto him in keeping his commandments." (2 Ne. 31:7.) Obedience is a many-faceted diamond. Humility is included; so also are love, self-mastery, ability to put in proper priority one's life and devotions, ability to subdue earthly passions and desires, the freedom of correct service. All of these and many more are reflected. But important above all was the focus of these qualities: it was obedience, not to the powers and doctrines of men or nations, but to God in heaven. They were his commandments that beautified the setting of obedience that the Savior manifested. W. Bauer, W. F. Arndt, and F. W. Gingrich, A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1957), p. 321.
[^3] Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated: "Without the Melchizedek Priesthood salvation in the kingdom of God would not be available for men on earth, for the ordinances of salvation—the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, for instance—could not be authoritatively performed." (Mormon Doctrine, p. 479.) "John the Baptist 'was a descendant of Aaron' and held the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood. . . . Faith, repentance, and baptism—comprising as they do the preparatory gospel—fall within its province, though the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost is not a prerogative that attends it." (Ibid., pp. 10-11.) See also Robert J. Matthews, "A Voice in the Wilderness: An Interview with John the Baptist," chapter 9 in this volume.
[^4] For a beautiful description of circumstances that might have attended the baptism of Jesus, see Bruce R. McConkie, The Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1979-81), 1:399-401.
[^5] McConkie, The Mortal Messiah 1:401.
[^6] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 275-76, emphasis added.
[^7] The Mortal Messiah 1:402.
