Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

10

THE BAPTISM AND TEMPTATIONS OF JESUS (Matthew 3:1-17; 4:1-11)

S. BRENT FARLEY

The Baptism of Jesus

Jesus taught his disciples: "I am the way, the truth, and the life." "If any man serve me, let him follow me." "I am the good shepherd." "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me." (John 14:6; 12:26; 10:14, 27.) To Nicodemus, the investigator, Jesus taught, "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (John 3:5.)

In a profound example of obedience, Jesus, the shepherd of the faithful, led the way by walking into the waters of baptism and submitting to that heavenly ordinance performed upon earth. "Even the King of the kingdom could not return to his high state of pre-existent exaltation without complying with his own eternal law for admission to that kingdom." [^1]

The scriptural setting for the Lord's compliance with baptism shows John "preaching in the wilderness of Judea, and saying, Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Matt. 3:1-2.) Matthew testified that John was fulfilling a prophecy from the lips of the prophet Isaiah that there would be one to prepare the way for the Son of God, and that John was that individual: "This is he that was spoken of by the prophet Esaias, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord." (Matt. 3:3.)

To prepare such a way, the people were to "bring forth . . . fruits meet for [appropriate to, or worthy of] repentance" (Matt. 3:8), and to "make his paths straight" (Matt. 3:3). The Greek word euthus, represented by the English straight, also denoted upright and right. [^2] Jesus the Christ was soon to walk visibly among the crowds of Jews; they would listen to him, question him, and dine with him, but to receive him in the fullest sense went beyond public or private hospitality. It meant that they would straighten their lives by repentance and conformity to that which Jesus would personify: uprightness and correctness.

To those stirred by the Spirit of Truth, John promised: "I indeed baptize you with water, upon your repentance." (JST Matt. 3:38.) Those who received worthily of the Lord's commissioned prophet would later receive from the Lord, who, John said, "is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, (or whose place I am not able to fill)." (JST Matt. 3:38.) John's admission referred both to a humble contrast of himself with the Son of God and to a lack of ability to do what the Lord himself would do. Years later another John, on the Isle of Patmos, added light that helped in the understanding of John the Baptist's statement. John the Apostle saw in vision a book representing the events of our earth, and there were seals on the book. "And I saw a strong angel, and heard him proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof?" (JST Rev. 5:2.) The seals, among other things, must have represented the effects of mortality, for "no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to open the book, neither to look thereon. And I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open and to read the book, neither to look thereon." (Rev. 5:3-4.) Perhaps the anxious expectation of premortal spirits for mortal experience was also accompanied by the anxiety of how to return from a fallen world to an exalted sphere with God. No one was worthy to unseal the book.

But there was another who was worthy: he was to be the literal Son of God both in the spirit and in the flesh. He, the "Lion of the tribe of Juda, the Root of David," the "Lamb as it had been slain," upheld the plan of the Father and "came and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat upon the throne." (Rev. 5:5-7.) Then a song rang out in the heavens: "Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood." (Rev. 5:9.) These very events, hailed from the realms of premortality, were about to be fulfilled on the stage of mortal life, and John the Baptist was preaching of the very one, the only one, who could redeem mankind by his atoning sacrifice. He, the forerunner, left no misunderstanding of the exacting and noble role of Jesus, who was soon to follow.

"I indeed baptize you before he cometh, that when he cometh he may baptize you with the Holy Ghost and fire." (JST Matt. 3:38.) John's commission was of an Aaronic order, not holding the authority of the conferral of the Holy Ghost. (See D&C 107:20; 53:3.) [^3] Jesus, the great high priest (see Heb. 4:14), would make possible the conferral of the Holy Ghost, which would cleanse and purify those baptized worthily unto repentance (see D&C 55:1). He who was deserving of the witness of the Spirit of Truth would extend that right and gift himself, which was more than John was authorized to do.

The day that Jesus approached John for baptism is worthy of inclusion among historical events deserving of reverential awe. From the scriptural accounts we have, it appears that Jesus and John had been separated from the moment they left the premortal realm until now, some thirty years later. Jesus knew who John was and sought him out; John's recognition of Jesus probably did not come because of any physical characteristics. But just as when, some thirty years before, "the babe leaped in [Elisabeth's] womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost" (Luke 1:41) when Mary, the expectant mother of the Son of God, approached the mother-to-be of John, so John the Baptist, now a man, must have felt the electricity of the Spirit when that Holy Being of whom he was the forerunner approached. "Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him." (Matt. 3:13.) [^4]

The event was foreseen and prophesied by Lehi over six hundred years before its occurrence, and the river Jordan was named as the place where John "should baptize the Messiah with water." (1 Ne. 10:9.) It was over three thousand years ago that all the Israelites miraculously crossed the Jordan waters "until all the people were passed clean over." (Josh. 3:17.) Two great prophets, Elijah and Elisha, had both miraculously parted the waters of the Jordan and crossed over. (2 Kgs. 2:6-8, 14.) But the greatest parting of these waters would occur when John immersed the Son of God and brought him out again. And though the Son of God was pure and had no need of remission of sins, yet his act stood for obedience to God's commandments necessary for entrance into his kingdom. Every other person who has parted the waters of baptism in any other age in any other place in the world would need immersion for the remission of sins. And, as the leper Naaman was cleansed of his physical disease by washing in the Jordan's waters (2 Kgs. 5:10-14), so could all be cleansed of their spiritual maladies by worthily submitting to the ordinance now to be graced by the cleanser himself, Jesus, the Son of God. And Jesus, the sinless one, would teach by his baptism that perfection includes not only being free from sin, but also freely complying with the ordinances of God. (2 Ne. 31:5-7.)

John, again sensing the disparity between himself and a perfect being, stated: "I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?" (Matt. 3:14.) But his humble restraint was superseded by the Master when he said, "Suffer [permit] me to be baptized of thee, for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness." (JST Matt. 3:43.)

Given the revealed pattern for the manner of baptism today (see D&C 20:73-74), it would be a justifiable assumption that John raised his right hand to the square and pronounced an authoritative and inspired prayer, embellished with words appropriate for the special nature of that particular occasion. He then completely immersed the Savior in the waters of the Jordan, following which Jesus "went up straightway [immediately] out of the water." (Matt. 3:16.)

Lehi's 600 B.C. prophecy stated that after the Son of God was baptized by John, "he should behold and bear record that he had baptized the Lamb of God, who should take away the sins of the world." (1 Ne. 10:10.) The Matthew account confirms that prophecy by recording that following the baptism of Jesus by John, "the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon him." (Matt. 3:16.) Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "John sees the heavens open and the Holy Ghost descend in bodily form, in serenity and peace, like a dove." [^5]

Since the Holy Ghost is a personage of Spirit (see D&C 130:22), the only bodily form he could come in is that of his own self. But as a dove would descend in its heavenly flight, so the Holy Ghost descended to the earth from its heavenly sphere. And as the dove is a symbol of peace, so the Holy Ghost as a witness of God speaks that peaceful yet powerful witness to the souls of the faithful. Joseph Smith explained:

[John] had the privilege of beholding the Holy Ghost descend in the form of a dove, or rather in the sign of the dove, in witness of that administration[.] The sign of the dove was instituted before the creation of the world, a witness for the Holy Ghost, and the devil cannot come in the sign of a dove. The Holy Ghost is a personage, and is in the form of a personage. It does not confine itself to the form of the dove, but in sign of the dove. The Holy Ghost cannot be transformed into a dove; but the sign of a dove was given to John to signify the truth of the deed, as the dove is an emblem or token of truth and innocence. [^6]

We have little else to help in further understanding the sign of the dove, but we do know that there, at that place and that moment in mortal time, was a grand gathering of the Godhead, for as the Savior went up out of the water and the Holy Ghost appeared to give his witness for Christ, the voice of the Father issued from the heavens in supreme testimony: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." (Matt. 3:17.) Thus John beheld, and he bore witness. (See also D&C 93:15-17.)

Wherein did Jesus fulfill all righteousness in being baptized? An aspect that is often overlooked is the verification of the validity of prophecy. If inspired prophets recorded the future baptism of Jesus by John, then that word could not have been fulfilled had the events occurred other than foreseen. But the word of God is truth, and the representatives of God who prophesied of these very events had their heavenly edicts verified by their fulfillment.

With analytical insight, Nephi highlighted the following ways in which Jesus fulfilled all righteousness by being baptized:

Nephi then emphasized that after Jesus was baptized, "the Holy Ghost descended upon him." (2 Ne. 31:8.) This was the pattern with Adam, the first man (see Moses 6:64-65); it was the pattern restored through Joseph Smith, prophet of the latter-day restoration, who stated it in simplicity in the fourth Article of Faith.

It was not that Jesus needed to qualify for the gift of the Holy Ghost any more than he needed to seek repentance, for as Elder McConkie suggested, "This was a formality only in his case, for he being holy and without sin, the Spirit was his companion always. At baptism he simply went through the form that is required for all men, and that he should have done so is manifest by the fact that 'the Holy Ghost descended upon him in the form of a dove.' " [^7]

After describing the Savior's baptism, Nephi concluded that "it showeth unto the children of men the straitness of the path, and the narrowness of the gate, by which they should enter, he having set the example before them." (2 Ne. 31:9.) Thus, in the example of baptism of water and of the Spirit (as well as all other conditions for exaltation), Jesus fulfilled all righteousness in that he accomplished "all that was required of him according to the terms and conditions of his Father's plan." [^8] And, in so doing, he added a living letter of credence for the importance and authority of a legal administrator in God's kingdom when he sought out John for baptism.

The Temptations of Jesus

Paul wrote: "For we have not an high priest [Christ] which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin." (Heb. 4:15.) "Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted." (Heb. 2:17-18.)

The temptations following his baptism were not the first Jesus confronted, for the Lord said, "Power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable before me." (D&C 29:47.) Jesus was now a mature man and surely had been tempted before. Neither would these be the last temptations he would endure. But these were exemplified by the Gospel writers for a teaching purpose, probably that of example. And they most probably were unique.

"Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit, into the wilderness, to be with God." (JST Matt. 4:1.) What communion took place between Jesus and his Father is not now in written form for us to examine. But after he had undergone forty days and nights of fasting and communion, it is recorded that Jesus was hungry. At this seemingly opportune moment, Satan entered the stage with a proposition and a challenge: "If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread." (Matt. 4:3.) Had not Esau, in a moment of hunger, traded his birthright to satisfy his physical appetite? Perhaps the power of appetite would again prevail.

This confrontation between Jesus and Lucifer was no mythological or hypothetical setting. Elder McConkie wrote: "We must assert that this was a personal appearance, one in which the spirit Lucifer, who was cast out of heaven for rebellion, came in person and spoke to Jesus face to face. It was no mere placing of thoughts in his mind, but an open and spoken conversation." [^9]

Jesus would later work miracles that would provide food for the hungry (e.g., Matt. 14:16-21). Previously, manna had been provided miraculously to preserve the Children of Israel from starvation, being in fact a type of Jesus himself, who was the "bread from heaven." (See John 6:28-35, 47-51.) [^10] Jesus, now hungry, could indeed satisfy his physical appetite with bread. He had the power to perform such a miracle. But to do so would have been to obey a command of Satan (cf. Moses 5:18), who seeks the "misery of all mankind." (2 Ne. 2:18.) It would also be an abuse of his divine powers for convenience' sake.

Jesus answered, "It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." (Matt. 4:4.) He lived the lesson he would teach in John 6—in sustaining and nourishing spiritual life, to eat and drink of the divine nature is to live by God's words. (John 6:56-57, 63.) The "Bread of Life" himself had no intention of following the words of Satan: it was his Father's words that brought eternal life; his priorities were ordered correctly. The hunger of his body was overridden by the strength of his spirit. [^11] Spiritual sustenance took precedence over physical satisfaction, and the temptation was overcome.

When Jesus stated, "It is written . . ." (Matt. 4:4), he emphasized the recognition of scriptural authority and reaffirmed its importance. He also highlighted the need to apply the written word to daily life. (See 1 Ne. 19:23.) Note that Jesus emphasized living by every word of God. [^12] There would be no picking and choosing, but rather a total commitment. His example in overcoming this temptation provides some valuable insights and encouragement for all. Satan often makes his approach when the desire and need are both prominent. [^13] It will thus be difficult to resist unless there is a higher, spiritual morality dominating our lives. We must know as a point of fact and experiential logic that when temptation is resisted and we look back upon the victory, the sweetness of accomplishment will always far outweigh the depression of sin inherent in succumbing to the will of the evil one. Jesus did satisfy his physical hunger in an appropriate way and time, unrecorded as far as we know. But Satan's hunger for dominance left a gnawing pain, and he was soon to return.

"Then Jesus was taken up into the holy city, and the Spirit setteth him on the pinnacle of the temple." (JST Matt. 4:5.) The holy city was Jerusalem. The pinnacle of the temple, apostate though its officiators were, symbolized the house of God. Jesus would later cleanse it of the money changers and command, "Make not my Father's house an house of merchandise." (John 2:16.) He was appropriately placed on a high point of what should have been the holy house in the holy city. In addition to spiritual purposes that we can only wonder at, it was perhaps a symbolic act confirming the freely chosen and yet-to-be earned destiny of returning to his Father's celestial home at the conclusion of his mortal ministry.

Physically, the Savior was raised to the top of the temple. His mission in life could be lost now by a plunge from the pinnacle to the ground. Satan taunted: "If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down: for it is written, He shall give his angels charge concerning thee: and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone." (Matt. 4:6.) Perhaps the tempter thought that the mingling of scripture with his satanic philosophy would add convincing weight to his enticement, as it likely had among many mortal prospects at other times and in other places. Whether or not Jesus would have survived the fall physically is not the most critical point; but it is critical that his status of perfection would have died in the plunge, for it was not the Father who beckoned, but the rebellious brother of premortal war who sought again to exalt himself by debasing another.

There was no question of the validity of the prophecy to protect the Son of God. Later he would pass unharmed through an angry crowd whose motive was to cast him to his death from the brow of a hill. (Luke 4:28-30.) When Peter drew his sword to protect Jesus from those who would lead him to the trial of death, the Master testified, "Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?" (Matt. 26:53.) The protection of Jesus was a given; perhaps the barb was the word if: "If thou be the Son of God . . ." (Matt. 4:6.) If Satan could establish even a wedge of doubt, perhaps he could split in two the mission of the Son of God. But such was not to be allowed by Jesus. His power was not for show to a wicked and rebellious brother whose intent was neither the manifestation of the Savior's power nor the establishment of the validity of prophecy, for Jesus knew that Satan "was a liar from the beginning." (D&C 93:25.)

In addition, that prompted plunge to the earth was but a pattern in disguise of Lucifer's trend from the premortal realms, from which he had been cast, to his final demise at the end of time. By the inspiration of Jehovah (whom Lucifer now faced), Isaiah revealed: "How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! For thou has said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God. . . . I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High." (Isa. 14:12-14.) If Jesus would cast himself from his own Father's house, what a delight and a victory that would be for Satan! Isaiah continued concerning Satan: "Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit." (Isa. 14:15.) Lucifer's pattern was one of downward progression. That thought alone should serve as a solemn warning to those who would contemplate following him in any degree.

In contrast, the Savior's pattern was upward. He had condescended to be born on earth with the sacred purpose of leading the way back up to his Father in heaven. The downward pattern was foreign to his commitment and desires; he would not move in the direction of his obstinate spirit brother. Again, unruffled, he resisted and overcame temptation. Satan would sink to the depths, but the Savior would not follow. By his own free agency, he chose to look to the heights of his Father and of his own chosen mission. And he stayed atop the pinnacle of his Father's house, saying, "It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." (Matt. 4:7.) It is a common understanding among Latter-day Saints that Satan tempts men and women to do evil. But in what way would one tempt God? The Hebrew meaning of tempt is to try, test. The promise of protection for Jesus was scriptural fact. But it was not for the Savior to test the Father's promise just for the sake of a display of power. It was to be accomplished as willed by the Father. There are many promises extended to man from God. It is for men to seek to do the will of God, not to tempt or try to force or prove God's power by the will of men.

"And again, Jesus was in the Spirit, and it taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and showeth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them." (JST Matt. 4:8.) Again, we have no record of the purpose or the events that were spiritual in this experience. In the pattern of many prophets who went up to commune with God, up into the top of a mountain, Jesus too had a vantage point from a height that revealed in a spiritually understood panorama all the kingdoms of this world. Included was their glory, presumably the power and status recognized by the worldly. All the mortal greatness was there in a composite vista. It must have been impressive to Satan, for at the conclusion of Jesus' spiritual experience, Satan came again and said, "All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me." (Matt. 4:9.) This was the most blatant manifestation of the purpose in all of his temptations, the ultimate motive of his persistence: to gain worshipers, to counterfeit the throne of godhood that he had lost forever. "Fall down" indeed—another plunge toward his decayed realm. Men would bow the knee to their Maker, but it would be in properly placed reverential awe, motivated by love. Satan would rule the nations in anger for a season (see Isa. 14:6); the Lord would offer love to the point of divine sacrifice. The children of God would bow down in the thankful humility of free choice; the choice to fall down before Satan carried the force and deathly weight of sin.

Holy writ (to which Jesus turned in adding emphasis to his resistance of temptation) already had recorded: "The nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted." (Isa. 60:12.) John would record, "The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever." (Rev. 11:15.) To Satan it must have been an attractive offer; to Christ it was but a synthetic jewel, and a poor one at that. All Satan could possibly offer was the transitory, unfulfilling, worldly power that would be terminated when (perhaps in Satan's hope, "if") Christ reigned anyway. What Satan had sold his soul to possess was worth nothing to the God he openly confronted. Again the Master's voice resounded in triumph: "Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve." (Matt. 4:10.)

"Then the devil leaveth him." (Matt. 4:11.) Luke noted, appropriately: "And when the devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from him for a season." (Luke 4:13, emphasis added.) None of his weapons had even scratched the surface, let alone destroyed the mission of the Savior. Jesus had left a perfect pattern for resistance. In turn, Satan had left a pattern for his attack upon mankind, the perception of which could be very helpful in overcoming his enticements. President David O. McKay taught: "Now, nearly every temptation that comes to you and me comes in one of those forms. Classify them, and you will find that under one of those three nearly every given temptation that makes you and me spotted, ever so little maybe, comes to us as (1) a temptation of the appetite; (2) a yielding to the pride and fashion and vanity of those alienated from the things of God; or (3) a gratifying of the passions, or a desire for the riches of the world, or power among men." [^14]

Jesus, the Light that would be held up for all the world to see (3 Ne. 18:24), had conformed to the words of God while resisting the enticements of Satan. His example of humble obedience to the will and ordinances of his Father had clearly marked the path by which others could attain similar blessings. The detractor from the path, Satan, had thrown his poisonous darts without effect. The Savior's love for his fellow beings led him on to the infinite atonement whereby all who desired to follow him could gain power to do so.

NOTES

S. Brent Farley is an instructor at the LDS Institute of Religion at Utah State University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Arthur John Gossip, "The Gospel According to St. John: Exposition," in The Interpreter's Bible (New York: Abingdon Press, 1952), 12:495.
[^2] James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1979), p. 166. Here he quotes Clarke, Bible Commentary: " '[Thirty] was the age required by the law to which the priests must arrive before they could be installed in their office.' Jesus may possibly have had regard for what had become a custom of the time, in waiting until He had attained that age before entering publicly on the labors of a Teacher among the people. . . . To have taught in public at an earlier age would have been to arouse criticism, and objection, which might have resulted in serious handicap or hindrance at the outset."
[^3] Frederic W. Farrar, The Life of Christ (New York: John B. Alden), p. 102; emphasis added.
[^4] Spencer W. Kimball, "The False Gods We Worship," Ensign, June 1976, p. 6.
[^5] Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972), pp. 14-20.
[^6] Bruce R. McConkie, The Mortal Messiah: From Bethlehem to Calvary, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979-82), 1:470.
[^7] Gossip, p. 504.
[^8] Talmage, p. 170.
[^9] Bruce R. McConkie, "Jesus Christ and Him Crucified," in 1976 BYU Devotional Speeches of the Year (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1976), p. 399.
[^10] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 12; emphasis added.
[^11] Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), p. 101.
[^12] Talmage, p. 143.
[^13] Robert L. Millet, "Lessons in the Wilderness," Studies in Scripture, vol. 3: The Old Testament—Genesis to 2 Samuel (Sandy, Utah: Randall Book, 1985), pp. 197-98.
[^14] Gossip, p. 511.
