Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

11

THE EARLY JUDEAN MINISTRY (John 2 and 3)

KAY EDWARDS

The second and third chapters of John detail a series of events at the beginning of the Savior's public ministry from which some powerful lessons can be drawn. It seems safe to conclude, at the very least, that these events were viewed as significant moments in the Savior's life, since they were considered worthy of recording and preservation. The Savior's public ministry was brief and the surviving record circumscribed. It is logical to assume that each event in the limited record preserved down through the ages is a precious pearl from which wisdom and guidance can be derived.

From the beginning, Jesus's ministry to his people on the earth took the very steps we must take when we accept his gospel and begin our own ministry as his disciples. An understanding of and compliance with these steps ensures that our feet will be set firmly on the "strait and narrow path." (1 Ne. 8:20.) The following discussion will review each major event and seminal principle taught, as it is recorded in John 2 and 3.

The Miracle at Cana

The miracle at Cana was the first of the recorded miracles of Jesus. (See John 2:1-11.) While attending a wedding feast, in which his mother and his disciples also were present, Jesus turned water into wine, bringing honor to the bridegroom and to him who presided at the feast. (See John 2:9-10.) John did not tell us much about the event except to say that it "manifested forth his glory" and increased his disciples' faith in him. (John 2:11.) Worthy of note is Jesus' comment to his mother in verse 4, which he uttered after she told him that the wine had run out: "Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come." Various ideas have been proposed concerning the nature of the Lord's seemingly harsh rebuke of his mother. Perhaps it can be viewed as a public declaration of commitment. With these words, Jesus aligned himself specifically with his Father's work. Although he continued to be solicitous of his mother's welfare and concerned for her care, a transition seems to have been taking place between the "Jesus of Nazareth" and "Jesus the Christ," who was finally embarking on his long anticipated service in behalf of his Father's children. He had put his hand to the plow and could not now pause or turn back (see Luke 9:62), but had to move on with the inexorable series of events leading to his destiny in Gethsemane and upon Golgotha.

The Joseph Smith Translation makes a significant change in this verse that removes the issue of the Lord's seemingly sharp tone in addressing his mother: "Woman, what wilt thou have me to do for thee? that will I do; for mine hour is not yet come." (JST, John 2:4.)

Just as Jesus did, we too find ourselves required to make a public declaration of our commitment to a new life, with new responsibilities and new purposes. As each individual accepts the gospel covenant, he or she faces the challenge of communicating to family, friends, colleagues, and others that their former associate is no more, and that new allegiances exist and new concerns must be addressed.

A Visit to Capernaum

John 2:12 mentions briefly a short trip that Jesus took to Capernaum before leaving Galilee for the beginning of his ministry in Jerusalem. Although this episode may seem out of place or disruptive to the writer's narrative of these early days in the Savior's ministry, or at least unimportant, one author has characterized it as a watershed in Christ's life:

As long ago as Aristotle's day it was a recognized literary canon that a skilled dramatist does not allow episodes and characters with no significance for the unraveling of the plot to obtrude into his play. And this evangelist is much too expert a writer to crowd his meager space with pointless irrelevancies that mean nothing and lead nowhere. If he sets down this sojourn in Capernaum, it is because something momentous must have happened there. But what? Every life has its watersheds, where things begin to run in a new direction. A youth from some remote glen sets out for a new life in a city; and when the road reaches its highest point before it dips down on the farther side, instinctively he pauses to look back at the familiar scenes that he is leaving, soaking every item of it all into his memory, and then turns and faces out into the new and unknown bigger world into which he is venturing. These few days at Capernaum were such a watershed for Jesus Christ. There the old definitely was finished. There the new just as definitely was begun. [^1]

Apparently in this brief visit to Capernaum with family and disciples, the Savior bade farewell to the former and solidified his relationship to the latter. His public ministry in Judea was soon to commence, and his life would never be the same.

Cleansing the Temple

After leaving Capernaum, Jesus traveled to Jerusalem to celebrate the Passover, present himself to his Father, and pay homage in his holy temple. Upon his arrival in Jerusalem, he apparently hurried directly to the temple to present himself and observe the religious customs of his people. Elder James E. Talmage pointed out that Jesus probably had attended other Passovers during the interval between his recorded visit to the temple at the age of twelve (Luke 2:42-50) and this visit. However, "he, not being thirty years old, could not have assumed the right or privilege of a teacher without contravening established customs." Elder Talmage explained further that to teach in the synagogue, a man had to be thirty years old. [^2]

What Jesus found at the temple was noise and dirt and confusion, a cacophony of sounds from birds, animals, people of diverse languages, merchants of sacrificial emblems, and money-changers—all polluting the sanctity of this great edifice. That place, which should have been the scene of utmost reverence and spiritual uplift where he could refresh himself spiritually for the demanding days ahead, was instead a scene of chaos and confusion.

In righteous indignation, Jesus set about the task of driving out wickedness and restoring his Father's house to the religious purpose, order, and faith that should reign there. (See D&C 88:119.) What is most surprising, perhaps, about this event is that there appeared to be little, if any, protest made or resistance raised against his actions. Even when he had finished, there was no condemnation of what had transpired, only a query as to the authority he claimed that justified his having acted in such a way: "What sign shewest thou unto us, seeing that thou doest these things?" (John 2:18.) Why this seeming acquiescence, by those most directly affected, to violent action on the part of this young stranger from Galilee? Frederic Farrar has offered this explanation: "Because Vice cannot stand for one moment before Virtue's uplifted arm. Base and grovelling as they were, these money-mongering Jews felt, in all the remnant of their souls which was not yet eaten away by infidelity and avarice, that the Son of Man was right." [^3]

Christ responded to the Jewish leaders' request for a sign of his authority to carry out a task that was their responsibility and in which they knew they had failed to do their duty. He declared himself: "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up." (John 2:19.) From the way he phrased his response to their queries, it appears that they had become somewhat threatening in their questioning. However, it was at this moment, in this place, to these people, that he revealed his calling and earthly mission and foretold the events that would culminate in the freedom of all mankind from death and sin. The most momentous message in all time had been delivered, and it fell on deaf ears; blinded eyes looked upon its speaker—not a prophetic messenger this time, but even Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God.

For those of us who heed his words, the example is set: "No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God." (Luke 9:62.) The call had come, the commitment was made; he must be about his Father's business. So, too, must we get on with this new life we have chosen. "Our assignment is affirmative: . . . to carry the gospel to our enemies, that they might no longer be our enemies," President Spencer Kimball has said. [^4] Reluctance and hesitation in moving forward with our Father's work is unseemly. A clear declaration of allegiance and purpose is required.

The Conversation with Nicodemus

As Christ continued his ministry in Jerusalem, a ruler of the Jews, one Nicodemus, came to him, as the scripture says, "by night." (John 3:1-2.) A number of authors have written about this encounter between Jesus and Nicodemus. President Kimball used the incident to illustrate the difficulties some encounter in receiving the witness and accepting the fullness of the gospel of Jesus Christ. [^5] Elder Bruce R. McConkie interpreted Nicodemus's choice of time to visit the Savior as an attempt to protect his worldly position while investigating the gospel preached by this new Rabbi. [^6] Arthur John Gossip suggests that Nicodemus came at night because he was a cautious man, sensitive to his responsibility as "a religious leader to whom others looked for guidance, and whom they were likely to follow. It was not fair to the people, or to God, that he should plunge enthusiastically after every seeming prophet. He must find means to see for himself, to question, to meet Christ face to face, to base his decision not on carried stories, but on first-hand experience and evidence. And he did it." [^7] Elder Talmage felt that Nicodemus's belief failed to develop into a condition of true faith, but that he did more than most of his associates. [^8]

Whatever Nicodemus's motivation may have been, his questions elicited specific instruction as to the next step he must take: "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God" (John 3:3), followed by a powerful statement of the Savior's calling and mission.

Nicodemus appears to have been a very literal man in his thinking. He had great difficulty comprehending the words of the Savior and did not easily grasp the analogy being used. This concept of being "born again" continues to be a stumbling block in the understanding of the people of the world as they struggle to find the "strait and narrow path." Why does it matter so much that we understand? Because this new birth is the gateway to that path that leads to eternal life. God explained to Adam:

That by reason of transgression cometh the fall, which fall bringeth death, and inasmuch as ye were born into the world by water, and blood, and the spirit, which I have made, and so became of dust a living soul, even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory;

For by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified, and by the blood ye are sanctified;

Therefore it is given to abide in you; the record of heaven; the Comforter; the peaceable things of immortal glory; the truth of all things; that which quickeneth all things, which maketh alive all things; that which knoweth all things, and hath all power according to wisdom, mercy, truth, justice, and judgment. (Moses 6:59-61.)

It is a mistake to assume that baptism, even when performed by proper authority, is all that is involved in being "born again." It is only one step in a process of change whereby we "have put off the old man with his deeds; and have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him." (Col. 3:9-10.) The entire process is "a gradual thing," Elder McConkie explained. "We are born again by degrees, and we are born again to added light and added knowledge and added desires for righteousness as we keep the commandments." [^9]

Why is it so important that we be "born again"? The Prophet Joseph Smith taught:

Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. . . . A man may be saved, after the judgment, in the terrestrial kingdom, or in the telestial kingdom. But he can never see the celestial kingdom of God, without being born of water and the Spirit . . . he can never come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels; to the general assembly and Church of the Firstborn, . . . and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, unless he becomes as a little child, and is taught by the Spirit of God. [^10]

What does it mean to be "born of water and of the spirit"? It means to be born of God, so that we are changed from a "carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness" (Mosiah 27:25), thereby becoming new creatures of the Holy Ghost. Peter said that we must become newborn babes in Christ. (1 Pet. 2:2.) King Benjamin taught that conversion results in being "spiritually begotten" of God, being born of Christ, and thus becoming his sons and daughters. (Mosiah 5:7.)

Elder McConkie explained the process further:

The first birth takes place when spirits pass from their pre-existent first estate into mortality; the second birth or birth "into the kingdom of heaven" takes place when mortal men are born again and become alive to things of the Spirit and of righteousness. . . . The second birth begins when men are baptized in water by a legal administrator; it is completed when they actually receive the companionship of the Holy Ghost, becoming new creatures by the cleansing power of that member of the Godhead. Mere compliance with the formality of the ordinance of baptism does not mean that a person has been born again. No one can be born again without baptism, but the immersion in water and the laying on of hands to confer the Holy Ghost do not of themselves guarantee that a person has been or will be born again. The new birth takes place only for those who actually enjoy the gift or companionship of the Holy Ghost, only for those who are fully converted, who have given themselves without restraint to the Lord. [^11]

The importance of this full conversion was stressed by Alma in his address to his "brethren of the church." He pointedly asked them if they had "spiritually been born of God," received the Lord's image in their countenances, and had the "mighty change" in their hearts that always attends the birth of the Spirit. (Alma 5:14.) If they had not, he warned them, "Ye cannot suppose that such can have place in the kingdom of heaven; but they shall be cast out for they are the children of the kingdom of the devil." (Alma 5:25.)

Being born again puts us on the strait and narrow path, but it takes constant devotion to the Savior and diligence in keeping his commandments to remain there. We are cautioned that once the process is complete and the state of spiritual rebirth again is achieved, we can lose it. Alma asked his brethren, "If ye have experienced a change of heart, and if ye have felt to sing the song of redeeming love, . . . can ye feel so now?" (Alma 5:26.) He had referred to their fathers, saying that "a mighty change was also wrought in their [the fathers'] hearts, and they humbled themselves and put their trust in the true and living God. And behold, they were faithful until the end; therefore they were saved." (Alma 5:13, emphasis added.)

The Son of Man Which Is in Heaven

During the recorded interview between Jesus and Nicodemus, Jesus foretold his ascension into heaven, reaffirming his relationship to his Father. (John 3:13.) In his discussion of this verse, Elder Talmage proposed the following: "There is . . . a profound significance attaching to the Lord's use of the title 'The Son of Man', and this lies in the fact that He knew His Father to be the one and only supremely exalted Man, whose Son Jesus was both in spirit and in body—the Firstborn among all the spirit-children of the Father, the Only Begotten in the flesh—and therefore, in a sense applicable to Himself alone, He was and is the Son of the 'Man of Holiness,' Elohim, the Eternal Father." [^12]

It was revealed to Enoch that "in the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name, and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ." (Moses 6:57.) The Father later proclaimed himself to Enoch: "Behold, I am God; Man of Holiness is my name; Man of Counsel is my name; and Endless and Eternal is my name, also." (Moses 7:35.) In this short verse, Jesus revealed to Nicodemus, and to those of us who read his scriptures, the nature of God the Eternal Father.

A Type of Christ

When Jesus referred to his ascension into heaven, he likened his crucifixion to the serpent staff raised by Moses in the wilderness. (John 3:14; see Num. 21:8-9.) If a man had been bitten by a poison serpent and he looked upon the bronze serpent set upon a pole, he lived. Jesus promised that those who believe in him—his mission and its purpose—also will not perish, but shall be blessed with eternal life. One Latter-day Saint commentator has written the following concerning this event:

The brazen serpent, like so many incidents in Israel's wanderings and religious life, was a type, an actual historical reality which pointed beyond itself to a greater and more powerful reality. What is remarkable is that these things were known long before Calvary. Nephi the son of Helaman, approximately twenty years before the coming of Christ to earth, spoke of the testimony of Moses regarding the Redeemer. "Yea, did he [Moses] not bear record that the Son of God should come? And as he lifted up the brazen serpent in the wilderness, even so shall he be lifted up who should come." Nephi continued: "And as many as should look upon that serpent should live, even so as many as should look upon the Son of God with faith, having a contrite spirit, might live, even unto that life which is eternal." (Hel. 8:14-15.) [^13]

God Loved Us So He Sent His Son

Probably the most powerful testimony of the love of our Father in heaven for us, collectively and individually, was then borne by Jesus: "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:16.) In an effort to help us to understand the enormity of the gift of God and the depth of the love revealed in this verse of scripture, Gossip has written:

In the day of the world's desperation [referring to World War II] people gave their means, their time, their strength, even their boy on whom their homes were centered, making no effort to hold him back, prepared to run even that risk; feeling that for the emancipation of the multitudes enslaved or threatened, and for the upholding of our tottering human liberties, even that price was not too vast. All that they paid down, unflinchingly, and having paid it, sit now in an emptied home. That, says this scripture, is the nearest human analogy to what God did to save the world. Always the New Testament asserts that that is the background of the gospel and the origin from which it flows. He who out of the hugeness of his liberality has devised for us so many and such gracious benefits, has added this last crowning act of generosity, than which even God can do no more: has given us his only Son. [^14]

When all else is done—the gospel has been accepted, we have turned our back on the old life and on old companions who continue in that way, repentance and the cleansing of our bodily temples have occurred, we have been spiritually born again and have received his image in our countenance—we are left with this one last step, without which all else is vain. We must accept the gift of God's Only Begotten Son and believe in him. In essence, "this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light." (John 3:19.)

Humility and Self-abnegation

In the third chapter of John we find one final lesson of what it means to be spiritually reborn as a son or daughter of Jesus Christ. A few short verses highlight the relationship between Jesus and John the Baptist that had begun when they were yet in the womb.

Jesus and his disciples had left Jerusalem and journeyed into Judea, where they began baptizing not far from the area where John still labored in his ministry. Those who had been taught by John and who loved him were apparently confused as to the implications of Jesus' new activities as they pertained to the work John had been doing, including even the baptizing of Jesus himself. (See John 3:26.) John's response of self-abnegation and declaration is poetical in its imagery and the example par excellence of humility and submission to God: "Ye yourselves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent before him. He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's voice: this my joy therefore is fulfilled. He must increase, but I must decrease." (John 3:28-30.)

Concerning this Elder Talmage wrote: "In such a reply, under the existent condition, is to be found the spirit of true greatness, and of a humility that could rest only on a conviction of divine assurance to the Baptist as to himself and the Christ. In more than one sense was John great among all who are born of women. He had entered upon his work when sent of God so to do; he realized that his work had been in a measure superseded, and he patiently awaited his release, in the meantime continuing in the ministry, directing souls to his Master." [^15]

Humility is a precondition of progress in spiritual things. It is required, along with repentance, to qualify for baptism. (D&C 20:37.) Without it, one cannot see God and gain entrance to the kingdom of God hereafter. (D&C 67:10; 2 Ne. 9:41-42.) In the interval between these two events, humility is required of all those who embark in the service of God (D&C 4:6; 12:8) and is a prerequisite to gaining wisdom (D&C 136:32-33).

Without humility, self-abnegation is impossible. Pride, conceit, haughtiness, and vainglory are of the world. To keep the commandments of God requires a denial of the desires of our own heart and a renunciation of self in favor of God. John's example of both these virtues is striking. As he exemplified, so, too, should we be: humble before God, denying our own desires, patiently awaiting our release from this carnal existence, serving diligently where and how we are called, and declaring in word and deed that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God, the Savior of all mankind. Only in this way can we assure that our feet are still on the strait and narrow path, that our lives are worthy of acceptance, and that we will hear him say, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant" (Matt. 25:21) as he welcomes us into his kingdom.

NOTES

Kay Edwards is professor of family sciences at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The British evangelical biblical scholars I. Howard Marshall and F. F. Bruce see Isaiah 61 as a Servant prophecy. (See I. Howard Marshall, The Gospel of Luke [Exeter: The Paternoster Press, 1978], p. 183. See also headnote to Isaiah 61 of the 1981 LDS edition of the Bible, where these verses are understood as referring to the Messiah.) But as Marshall also points out, Jesus appears in this passage in Luke 4 "as the eschatological prophet—a figure who is to be identified with the Messiah and the Servant of Yahweh." (Ibid., p. 178.)
[^2] The sacrificial cult associated with the temple is treated in greatest detail in the canonical text of the Bible in Leviticus, while the three pilgrim festivals—passover, Weeks, and Tabernacles—are mentioned several times in the Pentateuch (e.g., Ex. 23:14-17; Lev. 23:4-8, 15-21, 33-44.)
[^3] The functional distinction between the worship of the synagogue (communal worship) and the rites of the temple (private devotion and ritual renewal) are paralleled by similar distinctions between the functions of temple and house in numerous other cultures. (See Harold W. Turner, From Temple to Meeting House: The Phenomenology and Theology of Places of Worship (The Hague: Mouton Publishers, 1979.) Certain of the differences between the two types—the temple admitting only those who belong to the community (and, in some instances, only those who are worthy to enter—cf. Moshe Weinfeld, "Instructions for Temple Visitors in the Bible and in Ancient Egypt," Scripta Hierosolymitana 28 [1984]), the synagogue admitting all who are desirous of participating, Jew and Gentile alike—are paralleled by the functional distinction between the chapel and temple among the Mormons; thus Turner (ibid., p. 46) notes that Mormon temples "became distinguished from Mormon chapels and tabernacles by being confined to those deemed ready to receive the mysteries of advanced religion. In no sense is it a Mormon congregational meeting place. It is reserved for special functions which all seem to have some cosmic reference. . . . Mormon temples . . . reveal some of the marks of the temple type and make the term entirely appropriate."
[^4] For a recent discussion (with some bibliography) on the antiquity and origins of the synagogue, see Joseph Gutmann, Ancient Synagogues: The State of the Research (Brown Judaic Studies Series 22) (Chico, Calif.: Scholars Press, 1981), pp. 1-6. Gutmann himself favors an origin in second century B.C. Palestine, but notes the wide variety of scholarly opinion, the current balance weighing in favor of sixth-century B.C. Babylonia. Synagogues are mentioned in the Book of Mormon (2 Ne. 26:26; Alma 21:4; 26:29; 31:12; Hel. 3:9; 3 Ne. 18:32; Moro. 7:1), but this need not be taken as prima facie evidence for the existence of synagogues in the preexilic period, that is, during the time before the departure of Lehi's family from Jerusalem, since the forces that led to the creation of the synagogue were probably already operative during that period of time, even if the synagogue itself was not realized as an institution until a later period.
[^5] Geza Vermes, F. Millar, and Matthew Black, eds., The History of the Jewish People in the Age of Jesus Christ (175 B.C.-A.D. 135), 2 vols. (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1983), 2:442, n. 67.
[^6] Paul Billerbeck, "Ein Synagogengottesdienst in Jesu Tagen," Zeitschrift fur die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 55 (1965): 143-44.
[^7] Philo, Quod Omnis Probus 12; cf. 1 QS 6:8-9.
[^8] The segregation of the sexes is not explicitly mentioned in the ancient literature. Philo's statement concerning the Therapeutae in De Vita Contemplativa 9 is not relevant, according to Vermes et al., eds. (History of the Jewish People 2:448, f. 98). There is no special mention of the separation of the sexes in the Talmud. Still, Vermes et al. assert that "the segregation of the sexes must be taken for granted." Galleries that may have been intended for women (as they are sometimes used in modern orthodox synagogues) have been found in several ancient synagogues in the Galilee. (See E. Goodenough, Jewish Symbols in the Graeco-Roman World, 13 vols. [New York: Pantheon Books, 1953], 1:182, 193.)
[^9] Marshall, The Gospel of Luke, p. 181; Vermes et al., History of the Jewish People 2:447-63. However, as Jacob Neusner has pointed out in numerous articles and books, great caution must be exercised to avoid retrojecting into an earlier period practices that were observed in later eras.
[^10] Matt. 6:5; Mark 11:25; Luke 18:11; Mishnah Berakhot 5:1; Mishnah Ta'anit 2:2.
[^11] Cf. 1 Kgs. 8:48; Ezek. 8:16; Mishnah Berakhot 4:5-6; Tosefta Berakhot 3:16; Jerome, Commentarius in Ezechielem 8:16. Franz Landsberger ("The Sacred Direction in Synagogue and Church," Hebrew Union College Annual 28 [1957]: 181 [=Joseph Gutmann, ed., The Synagogue: Studies in Origins, Archaeology and Architecture (New York: KTAV, 1975), 239]) wishes to avoid the word orientation in speaking of direction of prayer since it "signifies a turning toward the east, while we are concerned not only with the east but also with the west, the north, and the south," i.e., whatever direction it was necessary to turn in order to face toward the Holy of Holies of the temple in Jerusalem. See also Erik Peterson, "Die geschichtlich Bedeutung der judischen Gebetsrichtung," Theologische Zeitschrift 3:1 (1947): 1-15 (=Erik Peterson, Fruhkirche, Judentum un Gnosis [Rome: Herder, 1959], pp. 1-14; E. Peterson, "La croce et la preghiera verso oriente," Ephemerides Liturgicae 58 [1945]: 52-68 (="Das Kreuz und das Gebet nach Osten," in Peterson, Fruhkirche, pp. 15-35).
[^12] Vermes et al., History of the Jewish People 2:449-50.
[^13] Besides the evidence for liturgical readings from the prophets in Luke 4:17, there is a similar account in Acts 13:14-15: "When they departed from Perga, they came to Antioch in Pisidia, and went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and sat down. And after the reading of the law and the prophets the rulers of the synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on." Compare Mishnah Megillah 4:1-5.
[^14] Marshall, Luke, p. 181; L. C. Crockett, "Luke iv. 16-30 and the Jewish Lectionary Cycle: A Word of Caution," Journal of Jewish Studies 17 (1966): 13-46; J. Heinemann, "The Triennial Lectionary Cycle," Journal of Jewish Studies 19 (1968): 41-48; Charles Perrot, "Luc 4, 16-30 et la lecture biblique de l'ancienne synagogue," Revue des Sciences Religieuses 47 (1973): 324-40 (=Jacques-E. Menard, ed., Exegese biblique et judaisme [Strasbourg: Faculte de theologie catholique]), 170-83.
[^15] For a convenient summary of Samaritan history during the ancient and early medieval periods, from both the Jewish and Samaritan points of view, see J. Macdonald, "Samaritans," in Encyclopedia Judaica, 16 vols. (Jerusalem: Keter Publishing, 1975), 14:727-31; Theodor H. Gaster, "Samaritans," in G. A. Buttrick, ed., The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, 4 vols. (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1962), 4:191-92.
