Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

20

TRADITION, TESTIMONY, TRANSFIGURATION, AND KEYS (Matthew 15-17; Mark 7-9; Luke 9)

ROBERT J. MATTHEWS

The period of which we write is the autumn, about six months previous to the Crucifixion. The Twelve had been called and ordained for more than a year and had recently returned from their missions throughout the cities and villages of Galilee. John the Baptist, after a vigorous and highly successful ministry of nearly a year, had languished in the dreadful dungeon at Herod's palace for more than another year and then had recently suffered a martyr's death when he was beheaded by Herod's executioner.

Jesus was in northern Galilee and had just healed many people of their sicknesses. He was immensely popular with the multitudes, but there was rising opposition from the Jewish rulers. A delegation of scribes and Pharisees came from Jerusalem. Finding Jesus with his disciples, the delegation registered a complaint about the disciples' behavior—for they had eaten without first washing their hands.

The Tradition and the Law

Before investigating the Pharisees' complaint, it will be helpful to discuss some of the reasons why there was frequently a difference in the views of the Savior and the Jewish rulers.

The Jews' religion at the time of Jesus included many traditions that influenced their thinking and behavior. They judged illness and calamity to be the immediate result and also evidence of sin (John 9:2, 34; Luke 13:1-5), and they practiced extravagant ceremonial cleansings and washings. Eating habits and Sabbath day observances were very rigid. They called their performances the law of Moses, but they had gone far beyond the actual provisions of the law. Jesus did not subscribe to their extreme position (although he kept every valid commandment of the law) and spoke harshly against their traditions, which had led them away from the commandments of God.

The Lord had given Moses the Melchizedek Priesthood and the principles and ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Moses sought diligently to confer these on the children of Israel, but they were unable, or at least unwilling, to live by the standard of the high priesthood and the gospel, so the Lord gave them a lesser law, governed by a lesser priesthood. This lower law, which was known as the law of Moses, functioned under the Aaronic order of priesthood. It contained a law of carnal commandments, putting forth many "performances and ordinances" that the people were "to observe strictly from day to day, to keep them in remembrance of God and their duty towards him." However, because of the hardness of their hearts, "they did not all understand the law" (D&C 84:23-27; Mosiah 13:29-32) and did not realize it was intended to lead them to Christ.

The law of Moses was a good law and was adapted to the capacities of people who were not living as high a standard as required in the gospel. The gospel is the law of Christ.

Through the centuries after Moses, well-meaning but uninspired Jewish religious philosophers—reacting to the inroads made upon the law by foreign cultures and especially the Babylonian captivity—put "a hedge around the law" (as they called it). In so doing they invented many burdens and excessive legal requirements as safeguards to preserve the law. These inventions were the "traditions of the elders," or the "oral law."

By the time of Jesus, the spirit of the law had been smothered in interpretations and definitions. Intricate definitions were given concerning Sabbath day activities, ceremonial cleansing and purification, eating habits, washing of pots and pans, washing of hands, tying of knots, Sabbath-day travel, and so forth. The scribes felt obliged and pleased to give instructions on many things.

When Jesus and his disciples refused to heed the many traditions developed by the scribes and rabbis, they came under criticism of the rulers. Jesus obeyed every provision of the law of Moses; in fact, it was he who gave the law (3 Ne. 15:5), but he was not under any obligation to obey the traditions that the Jews themselves had added. His controversies with the Jews were often occasioned by the difference in the law as it was first given and the profuse interpretations of the law by the scribes and rabbis. He informed them that they were neglecting "the weightier matters of the law" while observing the lesser (Matt. 23:23), and that their traditions were preventing them from keeping the commandments of God.

In Joseph Smith's translation of Mark 7 we find the following (italics show variants from the King James Version):

When they [scribes and Pharisees from Jerusalem] saw some of his disciples eat bread with defiled (that is to say with unwashen) hands, they found fault.

For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash hands oft, eat not; holding the tradition of the elders.

And when they come from the market, except they wash their bodies, they eat not.

And many other things there be, which they have received to hold, as the washing of cups, and pots, brazen vessels, and of tables.

And the Pharisees and scribes asked him, Why walk not thy disciples according to the traditions of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands? (JST, Mark 7:2-6.)

Jesus called the complainers hypocrites, citing the words of Isaiah as evidence: "This people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. Howbeit, in vain do they worship me, teaching the doctrines and commandments of men." (JST, Mark 7:7; cf. Isa. 29:13.)

He then applied Isaiah's words to those who were finding fault:

For laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the tradition of men; the washing of pots and of cups: and many other such like things ye do.

And he said unto them, yea, altogether ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your own tradition.

Full well is it written of you, by the prophets whom ye have rejected.

They testified these things of a truth, and their blood shall be upon you. (JST, Mark 7:8-11.)

However, these people had developed another tradition more spiritually destructive than the washing of pots and the excessive washing of hands. This was the willful neglect of parents under the guise of religious duty and holy consecration. Jesus continued:

Ye have kept not the ordinances of God; for Moses said, Honor thy father and thy mother; and whoso curseth father or mother, let him die the death of the transgressor, as it is written in your law; but ye keep not the law.

Ye say, if a man shall say to his father or mother, Corban, that is to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me, he is of age. And ye suffer him no more to do aught for his father or his mother; making the word of God of none effect through your tradition, which ye have delivered; and many such like things do ye. (JST, Mark 7:12-13.)

The practice referred to as "corban" is that a son, if he were of independent age, could pledge his property to God, and thus it would not be available to be used to support needy parents, although the son could continue to use it for himself as long as he lived. Such a vow (which was permitted by the religious leaders) became more binding than the command of God, and hence the law of God was made "of none effect" by the tradition.

Having thus shown the delegation that they themselves were guilty of gross negligence and corruption far greater than eating with unwashed hands, Jesus then proceeded to explain that defilement that comes from within the heart is worse than defilement from the soil on one's outer body:

And when he had called all the people, he said unto them, Hearken unto me every one, and understand;

There is nothing from without, that entering into a man, can defile him, which is food; but the things which come out of him; those are they that defile the man, that proceedeth forth out of the heart.

If any man have ears to hear, let him hear.

And when he was entered into the house from among the people, his disciples [Matt. 15:15 says it was Peter] asked him concerning the parable.

And he said unto them, Are ye without understanding also? Do ye not perceive, that whatsoever thing from without entereth into the man, cannot defile him; because it entereth not into his heart, but into the belly, and goeth out into the draught, purging all meats?

And he said, That which cometh out of a man, defileth the man.

For from within, out of the hearts of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness;

All these evil things come from within, and defile the man. (JST, Mark 7:14-21.)

Matthew 15 gives a close parallel to Mark's account but adds an interesting exchange between Jesus and his disciples about the plain talk of Jesus to the delegation:

Then came his disciples, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the Pharisees were offended, after they heard this saying?

But he answered and said, Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up.

Let them alone: they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. (Matt. 15:12-14.)

Seeking Signs Instead of Faith

A short time later, Jesus again emphasized to his disciples his dislike and disapproval of the doctrine of the Pharisees and the Sadducees and their desire to seek a sign from heaven:

The Pharisees also with the Sadducees came, and tempting desired him that he would shew them a sign from heaven.

He answered and said unto them, . . .

A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas. And he left them, and departed. (Matt. 16:1-2, 4.)

Mark added the informative comment that when Jesus was approached by these critics, "He sighed deeply in his spirit, and saith, Why doth this generation seek after a sign?" (Mark 8:12.)

Jesus then entered a ship with the disciples and crossed the Sea of Galilee. He told them to "beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees." (Matt. 16:6. Mark 8:15 adds "beware . . . of the leaven of Herod.") The Savior's reference to leaven puzzled them:

And they reasoned among themselves, saying, it is because we have taken no bread.

Which when Jesus perceived, he said unto them, O ye of little faith, why reason ye among yourselves, because ye have brought no bread? . . .

How is it that ye do not understand that I spake it not to you concerning bread, that ye should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees?

Then understood they how that he bade them not beware of the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees. (Matt. 16:7-8, 11-12.)

Jesus was wearied with even the disciples' lack of understanding and said, "Perceive ye not yet, neither understand? have ye your heart yet hardened? . . . How is it that ye do not understand?" (Mark 8:17, 21.)

The particularly unholy character of the Pharisees is exposed in another passage, which contains a scathing denunciation of the Pharisees because of their marital infidelity, showing that they were in fact an adulterous generation. The Joseph Smith Translation alone offers these words:

[Then said Jesus unto the Pharisees,] Why teach ye the law, and deny that which is written; and condemn him whom the Father hath sent to fulfil the law, that ye might all be redeemed?

O fools! for you have said in your hearts, There is no God. And you pervert the right way; and the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence of you; and you persecute the meek; and in your violence you seek to destroy the kingdom; and ye take the children of the kingdom by force. Woe unto you, ye adulterers!

And they reviled him again, being angry for the saying, that they were adulterers. (JST, Luke 16:20-22.)

It is not difficult to see that the Savior had very strong feelings against the false doctrine and the life-style of the Pharisees and other Jewish leaders and that he was also concerned when even the believers were sometimes slow to sense the important difference between true doctrine and false doctrine. The differences between the Savior's doctrine and the Jewish leaders' traditions and practices were deep-rooted and fundamental. Only by repentance and reformation could those leaders come into harmony with their Lord.

Mark tells of Jesus entering "into an house, and would have no man know it: but he could not be hid." (Mark 7:24.) However, a woman with an ailing daughter found him. The Joseph Smith Translation adds an important dimension totally missing in other Bibles, which shows that Jesus, in spite of his apparent physical weariness, allowed himself to be approached, listening and responding favorably to the woman's plea. As rendered in the Joseph Smith Translation account of Mark 7:22-23, we can see the true situation: Jesus "entered into a house, and would that no man should come unto him. But he could not deny them; for he had compassion upon all men." (See also Mark 6:34.)

We see in this passage an instance of the dual nature of the Savior: a weary body, craving rest, as contrasted to the compassionate love of one who came to save and help mankind. And compassion prevailed. The Joseph Smith Translation thus presents an important aspect of his divine nature that is lost in this passage in other translations.

The Testimony of Christ

Shortly thereafter, Jesus with the Twelve came into the region of Caesarea Philippi, north of the Sea of Galilee near the source of the Jordan River. He questioned them as to who others said he was. They replied that some thought he was John the Baptist (risen from the dead), some that he was Elijah, or Jeremiah, or one of the prophets of olden times.

Jesus then asked the Twelve, "But whom say ye that I am?" He was teaching by contrast. He wanted no mistake or blurred vision in the thinking of the chosen Twelve as to who he really was. To be thought of and even mistaken for a prophet would ordinarily be an honor, and Jesus was a prophet, but he was much more than that. Ye is a plural designation, and he was asking the question of all the Twelve (their calling is to be special witnesses of him): But whom say ye? Peter, as the chief and senior member of the quorum, spoke for his fellows, with great assurance, in the plainest of terms: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." (Matt. 16:15-16.)

Peter's utterance was borne of knowledge, not of opinion or guesswork. Jesus said that Peter's testimony was not revealed by flesh and blood (mortality) but that it was revealed from the Father himself. This revealed knowledge—which is called testimony—is the basis of all saving knowledge and is the rock foundation upon which the gospel of Jesus Christ is promulgated among mortals.

Revelation is the only true source of testimony about Jesus Christ, and it comes through the Holy Ghost. As recorded in the King James Version, Paul wrote to the Corinthians that "no man can say Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost." (1 Cor. 12:3.) The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that the true meaning of this concept is that "no man can know that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost." [^1] A testimony of Jesus Christ, borne of the Holy Spirit, is the greatest knowledge a mortal can obtain and is the beginning of true wisdom. No one can be saved in ignorance of that testimony. No man was ever a true prophet who did not possess that knowledge (Rev. 19:10; Jacob 7:11; Hel. 8:13-20), and no revelation of the saving principles was ever given nor will be given that does not make known the role of Jesus Christ (JST, John 1:19; JST 1 Jn. 4:12). No one can ever be saved by any other name, as is repeatedly affirmed in scripture. (2 Ne. 25:20; Mosiah 3:17; Hel. 5:9; Acts 4:12; D&C 18:23; Moses 6:52.)

It is possible for the natural senses to be deceived, but a testimony of Christ through the Holy Ghost is pure knowledge without deception. It exceeds in value and clarity anything that could be gained by the eyes or the ears or by physical touch, because it is God's Spirit speaking to man's spirit. Since the knowledge of Christ, as revealed through the Holy Ghost, is the greatest of all truths, the sin against that knowledge is the greatest of all sins. Revelation through the Holy Ghost has always been the way of salvation and always will be.

There is a difference between the power and the gift of the Holy Ghost. [^2] The testimony of Peter was given to him by the power of the Holy Ghost. This power must always be operative whenever the gospel is taught. Both the teacher and the hearer must be influenced by it. (See 2 Ne. 33:1.) This power bears convincing witness to the hearts of honest men and women. If they hearken to that testimony, they will then be baptized and receive the greater gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands of those who have authority to confer it. The power brings divine knowledge. The gift makes it possible for one to become sanctified and to be baptized with fire—totally cleansed. Some have thought that the Holy Ghost in any form was not operative in the days of Jesus' mortal ministry, or before the day of Pentecost, but this is a mistaken notion based on a lack of understanding of John 7:39, which specifies that "the Holy Ghost was not yet given," and John 16:7, which states that unless Jesus goes away, the Holy Ghost (Comforter) cannot come. However, the Holy Ghost was active both during Jesus' time and before, as is seen in various passages. (See Luke 1:41, 67; 4:1; 2 Pet. 1:21; 1 Ne. 10:17; D&C 20:26-27.) The truth of the matter is that no one could be converted by the preaching of John, or of Jesus, or of the Twelve, if the power of the Holy Ghost had not borne witness to the hearers. It was the gift of the Holy Ghost that was not operative until the day of Pentecost in Acts 2, and to which John 7:39 also refers.

At this time, Peter was promised the keys of the kingdom, with which he could bind or loose on earth and it would be valid in heaven. (Matt. 16:19.) More will be said later of the function of these keys. Jesus then charged the Twelve that they should tell no man that he was the Christ.

The directive to refrain from identifying Jesus as the Christ was a temporary restraining order, probably given for at least two reasons. One, a straightforward proclamation at that time would probably have angered the Jews and brought increased persecution upon Jesus and the Twelve. The time was near but not yet for his death. Second, the Twelve apparently were not yet prepared for the opposition that would arise, so it was expedient that they be restrained for a few more months from proclaiming who Jesus really was. This was a local restraint, for their time and place and for those persons only. By contrast, our responsibility is to declare openly, with meekness but with clarity, that Jesus Christ is the Son of the living God, that he alone is the Savior of the world, and that he has established his church—a church that bears his name—on this earth and in our generation through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Transfiguration and Keys

According to the biblical account, about one week after Peter's great declaration and the Savior's promise that the keys of the kingdom would be given, Jesus took Peter, James, and John on a high mountain and there he was transfigured before them. Matthew's account says that Jesus' clothing became "white as the light" and "his face did shine as the sun." (Matt. 17:2.) Mark wrote that the clothing "became shining, exceeding white as snow." (Mark 9:3.) Luke said the clothing "was white and glistering." (Luke 9:29.) Glistering is not only bright but also means shiny and even sparkling. Moses and Elijah (KJV, "Elias") appeared and spoke to Jesus about his forthcoming death and atonement, which he would accomplish in Jerusalem. The Father spoke out of a cloud, testifying to the three apostles that Jesus is the Son of God. All these things are recorded in Matthew 17, Mark 9, and Luke 9, and Peter made reference to the event in 2 Peter 1:16-18. Even with these details, it is evident that the biblical record is not complete regarding what really took place on the mount.

The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that priesthood keys were given on the mount: "The Savior, Moses, and Elias, gave the keys of the priesthood to Peter, James and John, on the mount, when they were transfigured before him." [^3] The bestowal of these keys is possibly the most important thing that transpired on the mount. The promise of the keys, given a week earlier, was now fulfilled. The three apostles, with Peter at the head, now held the keys of the holy priesthood, the same keys that Moses and Elijah held, keys that had the power to bind and to loose both on earth and in heaven.

The Twelve had been given the Melchizedek Priesthood a year earlier, when they were ordained apostles and sent on missions (Matt. 10), but the keys were not at that time transferred to them for the fullness of the blessings and the organization of the church upon the earth. The keys are the directing power in the priesthood. Without them, a person might hold the priesthood, but he could not use it in performing ordinances or directing the affairs of the church. So far as the establishment of the kingdom is concerned, the bestowal of keys upon the Twelve appears to be the single most important event in the ministry of the Savior between his baptism and the Garden of Gethsemane.

There are numerous similarities between the establishment of the church with the accompanying restoration of the priesthood keys and powers in our own time and that which is recorded in the New Testament. Since we have more precise information about the present dispensation, it can serve as a guide toward understanding the development and sequence of events in the meridian of time. Please note the following parallels:

Meridian of Time Fullness of Times

Jesus himself held the Melchizedek Melchizedek Priesthood restored

Priesthood (Heb. 6:20) [May or June 1829]

Twelve Apostles called, ordained, Twelve Apostles and the Seventy

and sent on missions. The Seventy called and ordained (D&C 107)

also called (Luke 6:13-16 and [1835]

10:1-20; Matt. 10) [A.D. 31]

Keys of the priesthood given to Keys of priesthood given to Joseph

Peter, James, and John (Mount of Smith and Oliver Cowdery by Moses,

Transfiguration) by Moses and Elijah Elijah, and others in the Kirtland

(Matt. 17:1-9; Mark 9:2-9; Temple (D&C 110) [1836]

Luke 9:28-36) [A.D. 32]

The similarity of the events on the Mount of Transfiguration with those of the Kirtland Temple seems to certify that the main accomplishment of the visitation of the holy beings on the mount was the bestowal of priesthood keys, in order to establish the dispensation of the meridian of time on a solid and complete foundation, with power to preach the gospel, to seal up the faithful to eternal life, and to communicate all of the gifts, powers, and graces of the gospel of Jesus Christ. This important and significant event is all but lost in the biblical account. Without latter-day revelation, we would know nothing about the significance of this event and why the occurrences on the Mount of Transfiguration were so necessary.

The Prophet Joseph Smith explained the postmortal mission of Elijah in these words: "Elijah was the last Prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood, and who will, before the last dispensation, restore the authority and deliver the keys of the Priesthood, in order that all the ordinances may be attended to in righteousness. . . . Why send Elijah? Because he holds the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood; and without the authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness." [^4]

Elijah, as a mortal, had lived approximately 800 B.C. in and around the country of Samaria and was a prophet to the northern kingdom of Israel in the days of King Ahab and Jezebel. The account of his translation is given in 2 Kings 2:9-12.

Although it is recorded in Deuteronomy that Moses died and supposedly was buried by the hand of the Lord (Deut. 34:1-8), it is certain that he did not die but was translated. If this were not so, he could not have appeared on the Mount of Transfiguration to lay on hands and bestow keys of the holy priesthood. Since this event took place before the resurrection of Jesus (or of anyone else), and since Moses had lived as a mortal thirteen or fourteen centuries earlier, it follows that Moses was a translated being, even as Elijah. Perhaps this is why "no man knoweth of his sepulchre" and why it was assumed that he was "buried by the hand of the Lord" in Moab. (Alma 45:19.)

There is no doubt that Jesus could have given the keys of the priesthood himself to Peter, James, and John. However, there is an added message with Moses and Elijah being present. The lesson would be unmistakable that Jesus is the Savior of men in every age of the world when the three mortal brethren saw the earlier prophets ministering to him and sharing with him in the activities. Furthermore, for Peter, James, and John to see these prophets in their glorified condition, hear their voices, and feel their hands on their heads would convey clear and lasting impressions.

In addition to the foregoing events, it is learned from latter-day revelation that Peter, James, and John, while on the Mount, saw a vision of the earth as it will appear in its glorified state: "He that endureth in faith and doeth my will, the same shall overcome, and shall receive an inheritance upon the earth when the day of transfiguration shall come; when the earth shall be transfigured, even according to the pattern which was shown unto mine apostles upon the mount; of which account the fulness ye have not yet received." (D&C 63:20-21.) The same subject is also referred to by the Prophet Joseph: "They saw the glory of the Lord when he showed the transfiguration of the earth on the mount." [^5] We are persuaded, therefore, that the happenings on the Mount of Transfiguration are among the most important in the New Testament.

The precise mount of the Transfiguration is not specified in the scriptures, but it is evident that it was in Galilee, probably not far from Caesarea Philipi. (Matt. 16:13; 17:1.) The probable location is either Mount Hermon or Mount Tabor.

The Joseph Smith Translation of Mark 9:1-4 suggests that John the Baptist was also present on the Mount of Transfiguration. John would be a spirit only, since he had been slain some months before and the resurrection had not yet taken place. Just what his mission would be at this event is not clear, but perhaps there were many holy and angelic beings present for a number of reasons. Elder Bruce R. McConkie expressed his understanding of the event as follows: "For some reason that remains unknown because of the partial record of the proceedings—John played some other part in the glorious manifestation—perhaps he was there, as the last legal administrator under the Old Covenant, to symbolize that the law was fulfilled." [^6]

The Role of Two Eliases

As Jesus and the three disciples descended the mountain, they asked him why the scribes had taught "that Elias must first come." (Matt. 17:10.) The emphasis in the question has to be on the word first—that is, they were asking "Why is it that you, the Messiah, have been with us for thirty-two years, and now Elias has finally appeared on this mount, whereas the teaching of the scribes has been that Elias would come first or before the Messiah?"

The King James account of Jesus' reply seems to contain only fragments of the conversation, and as a result identifies John the Baptist as the one to restore all things. This account misses the point that there are two Eliases, each having different missions. The matter is clarified in the Joseph Smith Translation, which clearly speaks of one Elias to prepare the way and another to restore all things: "I say unto you, Who is Elias? Behold, this is Elias, whom I send to prepare the way before me. Then the disciples understood that he spoke unto them of John the Baptist, and also of another who should come and restore all things, as it is written by the prophets." (JST, Matt. 17:13-14.)

This clarification of the two Eliases and their separate missions harmonizes perfectly with the Joseph Smith Translation rendition of Matthew 11:15, which identifies John as an Elias to "prepare all things," and also with John 1:21-28 in the Joseph Smith Translation, wherein John distinctly affirms that he (John) had a preliminary work and came before the Messiah, but that Jesus himself is the Elias to restore all things.

In the dispensation of the meridian of time, John prepared the way with the Aaronic Priesthood, and Jesus subsequently restored all things through the Melchizedek Priesthood. As a type of parallel, in the fullness of times, John again prepared the way with the Aaronic Priesthood, and the Prophet Joseph Smith is the prophet to whom the Lord granted the privilege of restoring all things through the Melchizedek Priesthood. Joseph Smith is thus the Elias to restore all things in the last days.

It is evident that the scribes had access to a prophecy or prophecies by which they knew more about Elias than our present Bibles contain, except the Joseph Smith Translation.

A Priesthood Endowment

The Lord placed the three disciples under a strict requirement to tell no one about the events on the mount until after the resurrection of the Savior from the dead. Since the keys of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the holy endowment of the temple, it could well be that Peter, James, and John received their endowments on the mount. This could account for the imposed silence.

On this matter, Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "It appears that Peter, James and John received their own endowments while on the mountain. . . . Peter says that while there, they 'received from God the Father honour and glory,' seemingly bearing out this conclusion. It also appears that it was while on the mount that they received the more sure word of prophecy, it then being revealed to them that they were sealed up unto eternal life (2 Peter 1:16-19; D&C 131:5)." [^7] President Joseph Fielding Smith explained: "These keys were given to Peter, James, and John on the mount when they received this power from Elias and Moses. . . . Christ told these three men, who I believe received their endowments on the mount, that they were not to mention this vision and what had taken place until after he was resurrected." [^8]

Summary

The Lord has often appeared to his servants on a high mountain, away from the multitude and ways of the world. In the absence of a dedicated, unpolluted temple building, a mountaintop seems to be an acceptable place for divine communication. This appears to be the case with the Mount of Transfiguration.

The topics covered in this chapter identify three major areas of Jesus' mortal life: (1) The terrible opposition he encountered from institutionalized, organized priestcraft, supported by spiritual wickedness and cultural tradition, the opposition that eventually led men to crucify him; (2) the absolute necessity of obtaining a testimony of Jesus Christ through the Holy Spirit if one wishes to obtain salvation; (3) the remarkable spiritual manifestations and priesthood endowment necessary for the development of the kingdom of God on earth. These three subjects, found in Matthew 15-17, Mark 7-9, and Luke 9, absolutely basic to an understanding of the mission of Jesus Christ on this earth.

NOTES

Robert J. Matthews is professor of ancient scripture and dean of Religious Education at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975), p. 183.
[^2] Joseph F. Smith, Conference Report, October 1904, p. 3.
[^3] This constant principle was revealed to Joseph Smith as part of the Oath and Covenant of the Priesthood. (See D&C 84:33-39.)
[^4] A cockatrice was a very poisonous serpent.
[^5] James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1961), pp. 427-28.
[^6] Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966-71), 1:465.
[^7] Robert Young, Young's Analytical Concordance to the Bible (Grand Rapids, Mich.: William B. Eerdmans, 1970), p. 66.
[^8] This meaning is listed in the same category as the passages stating, "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God" (Matt. 4:7; Luke 4:12), and "Neither let us tempt Christ" (1 Cor. 10:9); Young, Concordance, p. 966.
