Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

21

THE CALLING OF THE SEVENTY AND THE PARABLE OF THE GOOD SAMARITAN (Luke 10:1-37)

S. BRENT FARLEY

The Sending of the Seventy

It is the duty of the Seventy "to preach the gospel to every creature, to every tongue and people under the heavens, to whom they may be sent." [^1] "It is expected of this body of men that they will have burning in their souls the testimony of Jesus Christ, which is the spirit of prophecy; that they will be full of light and of the knowledge of the truth; that they will be enthusiastic in their calling, and in the cause of Zion, and that they will be ready at any moment, when required, to go out into the world, or anywhere throughout the Church and bear testimony of the truth, preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and set examples before the world of purity, love, honesty, uprightness and integrity to the truth." [^2]

It was of men of such qualities that the scriptures record, "The Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place, whither he himself would come." (Luke 10:1.) They were sent without purse, scrip, or shoes; that is, rather than relying upon their own financial store and personal provisions, they would walk in common sandals and modest clothing and would rely upon the hospitality of those among whom they were sent (as was the custom of the day). They would eat the same as did those to whom they preached—nothing greater, nothing less. Their power would not be symbolized by their dress or their food; it would come by their testimony of the Lord and his kingdom. To those inclined toward peace, the heavenly provisions of the gospel were offered as hospitably as the mortal provisions of those families with whom the Seventy stayed. For those who were sick and deserving of a blessing, the Seventy would lay their hands upon them and heal them. (See Luke 10:4-9.)

What was the message of the Seventy? They were to declare in words of soberness, attended by the Spirit of Truth, "The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you." (Luke 10:9.) Jesus the Christ, Son of the Almighty Father, is near. His kingdom is being set up upon the earth, that those with receptive hearts might enter and receive the blessings of the gospel both in this world and in eternity.

Their message was of such significance that those who rejected them would also be rejected by God; that as dust is shaken from the feet, so would those who rejected them be shaken from the kingdom of God if they did not repent. (See Luke 10:10-16.) Those who rejected the Seventy rejected Jesus, for he stated: "He that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you despiseth me." (Luke 10:16.) [^3]

With their divine commission, the Seventy went forth in faith and power, as witnessed by their joyful return and report that "even the devils are subject unto us through thy name." (Luke 10:17.) They surely would have witnessed the power of the word among the faithful, but the implication in the text is that they were surprised that the disobedient spirits who followed Satan were subject to the power of the priesthood exercised in the name of the Lord. With an insight that stretched back beyond the normal veil of forgetfulness that we experience at birth, the Savior recalled: "As lightning falleth from heaven, I beheld Satan also falling." (JST, Luke 10:19.) This same message had been given to Moses, perhaps to enable the "soldiers of righteousness" to conceive of the beginnings of that commander of evil, Lucifer:

I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying—Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor. But, behold, my Beloved Son, which was my Beloved and Chosen from the beginning, said unto me—Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever. Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down; and he became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice. (Moses 4:1-4.)

The possible symbolism of lightning falling from heaven as a parallel to Satan's course is interesting to contemplate. Lightning is a powerful force that strikes with a downward motion toward the earth. Joseph Smith learned that Lucifer was "an angel of God who was in authority in the presence of God and the Son." (D&C 76:25.)

Jesus knew that the war waged in heaven by Satan continued upon the earth, for because Lucifer "had fallen from heaven, and had become miserable forever, he sought also the misery of all mankind." (2 Ne. 2:18.) Adding comfort and strength to his wondering servants, Jesus said, "I will give unto you power over serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you." (JST, Luke 10:20.) Were it to be the Lord's will, even the poisonous strike of serpents and scorpions would not harm the disciples. However, there is a deeper, symbolic meaning to these words. Isaiah symbolized the works of wicked and deceitful men as follows: "They hatch cockatrice' eggs, and weave the spider's web: he that eateth of their eggs dieth, and that which is crushed breaketh out into a viper." [^4] (Isa. 59:5.) The terrible poison of serpents that brings pain and physical death was used to connote the seriousness of the poison of wickedness, which itself would cause the pains of hell and the spiritual death suffered by the wicked. Thus, as Elder James E. Talmage wrote, "The promise that they should tread on serpents and scorpions included immunity from injury by venomous creatures if encountered in the path of duty and power to prevail over the wicked spirits that serve the devil, who is elsewhere expressly called the serpent." [^5] They were not to rejoice, however, in their power, "but rather rejoice, because [their] names are written in heaven." (Luke 10:20.) This may have been a revelation, or a confirmation of prior revelations, that their callings and elections were made sure, or it may have been a goal for which they should seek, or it may have been either, depending upon the individual servant. Regarding this passage, Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "The faithful saints who have gained the promise of eternal life have their names recorded in the Lamb's Book of Life." [^6] Such was the goal of the gospel, whereas the spirits of the evil one would seek to counter the works of the Lord's ministers so that others might fall from the grace of God, as did their leader in the premortal existence.

Having reflected upon the self-assumed power of Satan and his evil horde, Jesus "rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from them who think they are wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes." (JST, Luke 10:22.) Perhaps he was thinking of the scribes and Pharisees of the day, counterparts of those individuals in the last days who Paul prophesied would be "ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." (2 Tim. 3:7.) Jesus loved teachable followers, for they could be made into saints. Like babes anxious to learn, they would absorb the knowledge of the Spirit. The Greek word translated babe, as used in this context, denotes one who was without speech. [^7] It was the speech of the Spirit that the disciples were willing to learn (see 1 Cor. 2:9-16), whereas those schooled only in worldly traditions and who were unwilling to change blocked out the language of the Spirit of Truth. To them it was a foreign tongue. They were not pliable, not ready to be fashioned into something better by God. Isaiah proclaimed, "O Lord, thou art our father; we are the clay, and thou our potter; and we all are the work of thy hand." (Isa. 64:8.) Such was the nature of the Seventy whom Jesus had commissioned.

The Parable of the Good Samaritan

In the narrative of Luke 10, it is recorded that a lawyer stood up and asked the Master a question. The lawyer may have personified the rigidity of knowledge that stemmed more from men than from God, a man who thought he was wise and prudent. In the New Testament, a lawyer was equivalent to a scribe, a person who was a professional teacher of the law, including the written law of the Pentateuch and the oral traditions of the Jews. His motivation was to "tempt," meaning "to try, or test." [^8] The lawyer's question, according to Elder Talmage, was likely a conscious attempt "to annoy and if possible disconcert Jesus on questions of law and doctrine, and to provoke Him to some overt utterance or deed." [^9] The lawyer lacked the childlike qualities of babes (to which Jesus had just referred in verse 21), such as humility, trust, faith, and willingness to learn. Rather, as has been suggested by Elder McConkie, the lawyer was "one of those intellectual religionists who thrive on contention and delight in dissension." [^10]

"What shall I do to inherit eternal life?" the man asked. (Luke 10:25.) The question was simple to ask, but it could have opened an endless debate in the courts of worldly wisdom. However, the Savior in divine perception turned the question back to the man schooled in the law and asked simply, "What is written in the law? how readest thou?" (Luke 10:26.) With precision, the lawyer quickly drew from holy writ the great commandments: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbour as thyself." (Luke 10:27; see also Lev. 19:18 and Deut. 6:5.) He had exhibited his knowledge with quick perfection. Jesus said, "Thou hast answered right." (Luke 10:28.)

Perhaps the lawyer's desire to be exalted in the eyes of the public had prompted him to such a quick response when his own question was returned. The commendation by Jesus, an individual who drew much public attention, probably added more light to the lamp of his own conceit. If it did, it was short-lived, for the completion of the sentence carried the challenge that "to know" and "to do" must be harmonized to be effective: "This do, and thou shalt live." (Luke 10:28.) He had expected a debate but had received a powerful sermon: live your life in harmony with these teachings. His conscience may have twinged a little at this time; in addition, he probably sensed that he was not doing well in a debate that he himself had begun, which debate now seemed to be aborted. Hoping to salvage such reputation as he could in a confrontation that had gone against him; desiring to justify his own hatred rather than love for many of his fellowmen, and knowing, by instinct or from some previous statement of Jesus, that the Lord and the other rabbis differed widely as to who fell in the category of a neighbor, the lawyer asked: "And who is my neighbour?" (Luke 10:29.) [^11] This time the Savior answered with a parable, one so typical of the times that it may have been history as well as parable:

A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead. And by chance there came down a certain priest that way: and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side. And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other side. But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he had compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him. And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him, take care of him: and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee. (Luke 10:30-35.)

The answer to the lawyer's first question, regarding eternal life, was merely a matter of quoting the law. The answer to the second, regarding one's neighbor, involved something far more difficult: the application of the law in one's own life. "Which now of these three, thinkest thou, was a neighbour unto him that fell among the thieves?" (Luke 10:36.) As the parable had been structured, only one answer could be given, and it would have been perceived by the less-learned observers. The lawyer could only respond, "He that shewed mercy on him." Then followed the challenge to put life in his learning: "Go, and do thou likewise." (Luke 10:37.) Twice the lawyer had been told that his actions must follow correct teachings. One would hope that his encounter would have opened the door to a higher understanding of the truth; it is not recorded, however, what became of him thereafter.

A look at the characters in the parable adds interest to its interpretation and applications. The first to pass by the wounded man was a priest. It was his religious duty to act as a mediator between his people and God; he was, by virtue of his office, supposed to draw the people closer to God. One would think that a priest would be a logical individual to lead out in demonstrating the principle of neighborly love that would help lead to eternal life. But such was not the case; he went out of his way to avoid contact with the sufferer. Next came a Levite, an authority who was to assist the priests, one who was traditionally viewed as fulfilling a role of sanctuary service. [^12] Should he not understand the significance of his commission in the Lord's kingdom? Should he not exemplify the love of neighbor that God would desire? Yet the Levite also passed by on the other side, as did the priest, "for they desired in their hearts that it might not be known that they had seen him." (JST, Luke 10:33.) It was a Samaritan, one hated of the Jews, one not considered as being worthy to be termed a neighbor; a Samaritan, one viewed by the Jews as not being of the chosen lineage, one in whose veins flowed blood tainted by Gentile mixture. He was viewed as least likely to act appropriately, even to be considered for eternal life. [^13] Yet of the three, it was he who put the others to shame; he alone loved his neighbor enough to sacrifice in his behalf.

Was not this parable a declaration of the apostasy of the Jewish religious leaders from the pure religion lived by the Old Testament prophets? Was not Jesus illustrating to them the need for his own restoration of the true religion taught to Adam and the other patriarchs?

Many pages could be written to interpret and apply principles in this parable to the lives of others. But out of it all ought to come one lesson more grand than all others: it was a declaration of the Messiahship of Jesus, a truth veiled in parabolic form to be discovered by those who were willing to learn the language of the Spirit. The afflicted man was wounded by evil thieves; are not all of God's children also wounded, to one degree or another, by submission to sin? And is it not Satan who is the thief seeking to rob us of eternal life? And who loved his neighbor more than Jesus, who would fulfill in the sacrificial Garden of Gethsemane and upon the cross his own declaration that "greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends"? (John 15:13.) As I have written elsewhere:

I wonder if the disciples, sometime after the atoning sacrifice and resurrection of the Savior, reflected upon the parable of the good Samaritan and saw some distinct parallels portrayed in the life of Jesus. Just as the Samaritans were not regarded by the Jews as a chosen race, so have the Jews themselves been looked down upon by others who felt themselves superior. It was to the often unpopular race of Jews that Jesus was born. As in the parable, the Savior (as a "good Samaritan" to all men) stopped and stooped to help the wounded. If the wounded were likened to sinners, then the Savior did what contemporary authorities (the priest and the Levite) not only did not do in the parable but could not do in life: he atoned for their sins. As the parabolic Samaritan offered unconditionally to pay the cost for his friend's recovery, so the Savior paid a price unlimited by time or amount when he atoned for his fellow beings in the Garden of Gethsemane. [^14]

What the lawyer could have learned was that to love God with all his heart required his acceptance of the Son of God, Jesus the Christ, who would offer himself for the salvation of all. And to accept the Christ would in turn require his sacrifice for his neighbors, regardless of their learning, ancestry, or social status, for all were spirit children of God.

The Seventy, as babes, were progressing toward eternal life; the lawyer, as one wise in his own sight, was not.

NOTES

S. Brent Farley is an instructor at the LDS Institute of Religion at Utah State University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The city of Jerusalem and especially the temple typified the Jewish nation. When Jesus pronounced a judgment against Jerusalem (JST, Luke 13:34-36) and the temple (Mark 13:1-2), it was a pronouncement against both the people and their nation, for "with the passing of the temple the Jews, as a distinct nation, also ceased." See Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966-73), 1:636-37.
[^2] It was at this time that "Jesus, as though to place the capstone on all the testimony of Messiahship which he had previously borne, arranged to fulfil in detail one of the great Messianic prophecies." (McConkie, 1:577.)
[^3] Christ warned that those who would follow him and preach the same message would be persecuted and killed also. (Matt. 10:16-40.) Peter preached that Jesus was the Christ (Acts 2:22-36) as did Paul (Acts 26:1-24). Both men were persecuted and eventually killed for that testimony. The Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants bear testimony that Jesus is the Christ, and Joseph and Hyrum Smith were martyred as a result of that testimony. (D&C 136:36-39.) Modern-day elders are commanded to bear testimony of Christ (D&C 68:6) so that they will not be held accountable for the sins of their generation (D&C 88:81-88) and also so that the wicked—who do not accept that testimony—will be left without excuse when God visits them with his judgments (D&C 124:2-3, 7-10).
[^4] McConkie, 1:439.
[^5] Up until the days of John the Baptist, there had been no prophets among the Jews for approximately five hundred years. The last prophet, Malachi, had condemned the Jewish nation for tendencies toward apostasy. Uninspired scribes and Pharisees interpreted the scriptures to fit their own desires and needs, and from these false interpretations there arose false traditions that later Jewish leaders accepted as more binding than the scriptures. See James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1949), pp. 63-68.
[^6] See Talmage, pp. 35-36. The premortal Christ was anointed the Lord God and the Savior over the human family. See Ps. 45:6-7.
[^7] Abinadi referred to the coming of the Messiah: "God himself shall come down among the children of men, and redeem his people." (Mosiah 15:1.) Lehi spoke of the Messiah as the Holy One who had given the law "unto the inflicting of the punishment which is affixed." (2 Ne. 2:10.) He also referred to the Messiah in this same role, saying that "if the day shall come that they will reject the Holy One of Israel, the true Messiah, their Redeemer and their God, behold, the judgments of him that is just shall rest upon them." (2 Ne. 1:10.)
[^8] Nephi spoke of the coming of the Messiah in terms of "the redemption of the world." (1 Ne. 1:19.) Lehi referred to him in one verse as a prophet who would be raised up among the Jews, "even a Messiah, or, in other words, a Savior of the world" and in the following verse as "this Messiah . . . or this Redeemer of the world." (1 Ne. 10:4-5.) Lehi also explained that "redemption cometh in and through the Holy Messiah. . . . He offereth himself a sacrifice for sin, to answer the ends of the law, unto all those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit." He elaborated: "No flesh . . . can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace, of the Holy Messiah, who layeth down his life according to the flesh." (2 Ne. 2:6-8.)
[^9] The last reference to the Messiah is in Helaman 8:13, which was written between 23 and 20 B.C.
[^10] 1 Nephi 1:19, 2 Nephi 25:19, Jarom 1:11, Mosiah 13:33, and Helaman 8:13 indicate how the title was used in an anticipatory sense.
[^11] The Book of Mormon also teaches that the Messiah will save Israel in the latter days from temporal or worldly enemies. (2 Ne. 6:13-14.)
[^12] Talmage, pp. 71-72.
[^13] See also Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 48, 353. This premortal state is discussed in greater detail in the following articles: LaMar E. Garrard, "What Is Man?" in Hearken, O Ye People (Sandy, Utah: Randall Book Co., 1984), pp. 133-52, and LaMar E. Garrard, "The Origin and Destiny of Man" in Studies in Scriptures, Vol. 1: The Doctrine and Covenants (Sandy, Utah: Randall Book Co., 1984), pp. 365-78.
[^14] Evidently, the voice or word of God comes to our spirits in the form of light and truth and through the power of the Spirit of God. (D&C 84:43-47.) This is sometimes referred to as testimony or promptings of the Spirit of God. (See Alma 32:28-35.)
