Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

23

THE WORTH OF A SOUL (Luke 11-15)

KEITH H. MESERVY

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "Happiness is the object and design of our existence." [^1] Lehi taught his sons, "Men are, that they might have joy." (2 Ne. 2:25.) Since Jesus came that we "might have life, and that [we] might have it more abundantly" (John 10:10), it seems apparent that happiness as implied by the abundant life is the goal of existence. Thus we would expect to find that every generation would determine how best to be happy and would eagerly pass that information on to the next generation. Each succeeding generation in turn would discover more of the means to a happy life and would be happier than the preceding one. Ours, then, being the latest in the series, should be happiest of all.

Ironically, this does not follow. Each generation regards itself as unique and its challenges as so novel that all past solutions are out-moded and old-fashioned. Thus, each generation, regarding anything from the past as unreliable, sets out anew to discover the secrets of the happy life.

In this material world, values tend to be material. Obtaining material possessions, gaining power and wealth, and earning the plaudits of the world all appear to provide the key to success and happiness. In the physical world, values tend to be physical. Each human body arrives on earth with highly developed sensory equipment that hates to be hurt and loves to feel good. Fully satisfying the pleasurable feelings of the body by eating, drinking, and making merry, while at the same time avoiding pain at any cost, would seem to epitomize happiness. Happiness, then, seems to depend upon satisfying the here-and-now needs of a physical, material person.

But this easy, rational conclusion is contradicted by Christ. He teaches us to trade the tangible but unreal world for the intangible but real one—the eternal world of the soul. If souls are meant to be happy, he says, caring for souls is of major importance. (D&C 18:10; Moses 1:39.) It takes good soul care, including a liberal investment of time and talent, to save souls. Without this, souls can be lost or exchanged for something of far less value.

At one point Jesus asked his disciples what a person in this material world might give in exchange for his soul. (Matt. 16:26.) Any self-respecting person might quake at the thought that anything could be more highly valued than his soul; no one would knowingly trade it. Unless one knowingly sacrifices or mistakes the shadow for the essence, nothing can be more important than what is most important—one's essence, one's being, one's soul. So any question about the rate of exchange for souls must be a contradiction. But a soul may get lost in the process of living. In living a life, choices are made that determine whether one's soul is won or lost. The value, then, of the things chosen establishes the exchange rate for a lost soul.

Obtaining the Goal Through Sacrifice

Luke 11 through 15 records several things that Jesus did and said that show how to care for souls so they are not exchanged. He was constantly valuing the nature of life and its experiences. He emphasized the need for us to receive guidance throughout life, to seek God's interests above all else, and to commit ourselves so intensely to the building up of God's kingdom that we would pay whatever costs were necessary, including making any sacrifice that had to be made, in order to inherit it. Those who value life will study and follow his teachings carefully.

Wisdom to make good choices is to be coveted, and Jesus at times contrasted the wise and the foolish souls who may or may not have planned ahead and counted the cost of saving their souls. "Which of you," said he, "intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first, and counteth the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it? Lest haply, after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him, saying, this man began to build, and was not able to finish." (Luke 14:28-30.)

Since choices are based upon one's desires, then, by way of contrast, anything that stands between us and our soul's desire must be hated. On one occasion Jesus rebuked his friend Peter when Peter tried to convince him that his suffering need not be undertaken. (Matt. 16:22-23.) Said Jesus, "If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple. And whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple." (Luke 14:26-27.) Nothing that life has to offer must deter a person from following Jesus, who declared: "Whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple." (Luke 14:33.) All of this talk of sacrifice came in the context of counting the cost of building the tower.

One value of the scriptures is that they show the price others (for example, Abraham, Joseph, Saul, David, Solomon, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Jesus, Paul, Peter, Joseph Smith) were asked to pay for their souls and how their lives turned out, depending upon whether or not they were willing to pay it. As we read their stories, we are perhaps prone to ask, Am I willing to pay a similar cost? And since none of us knows the specific costs for building our own soul, each of us must walk humbly with God and keep training continually for the call to perform, hoping that our strength to execute our task will be adequate when the time for performance comes. Yea, "blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing. Of a truth I say unto you, that he will make him ruler over all that he hath." (Luke 12:43-44.) But not so the person who is slothful.

Those who clearly see their desired goal will sacrifice whatever they must to reach it. How exciting it is during athletic events to look at the jubilant faces and see the tears of joy and relief on the faces of champions. How often young boys and girls who look at them hope someday to be the same, and listen intently to individual stories as they are told what is required to attain victory with its related honor. It means the sacrifice of a normal life, often including painful injury, long and grueling hours of practice when others are at play, frustration, heartache, and sometimes failure. These are some of the prices that winners are willing to pay because their hearts are set single-heartedly on reaching their goal.

Taking Jesus as our example, it is clear that from the earliest day, the vision he had of the meaning of his life and the intensity with which he kept that vision alive determined what he did. He remembered who he was and why he was here, and he constantly made his choices based on these considerations.

At Caesarea Philippi, Jesus began to "shew unto his disciples, how that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things,...and be killed, and be raised again the third day." He then used this example to teach his disciples: "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it." (Matt. 16:21, 24-25.) He emphasized how clear the vision must be of those who seek God. "The light of the body is the eye: therefore when thine eye is single [to God], thy whole body also is full of light; but when thine eye is evil, the body also is full of darkness. Take heed therefore that the light which is in thee be not darkness. If thy whole body therefore be full of light, having no part dark, the whole shall be full of light, as when the bright shining of a candle doth give thee light." (Luke 11:34-36; compare D&C 88:67-68.)

Those souls who love light inevitably turn toward the light and receive from God what they are and what they aspire to be, "for intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence; wisdom receiveth wisdom; truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light; mercy hath compassion on mercy and claimeth her own; justice continueth its course and claimeth its own." (D&C 88:40.)

The Holy Ghost Comes Through Prayer

Those who want to know who they are and why they are on the earth must turn to God. But God does not force his way into the sovereign soul. He enters by invitation, and the invitation is sent by personal prayer and sometimes by fasting. (D&C 63:64; 42:14.)

The disciples had heard Jesus pray and had pled: "Lord, teach us to pray." (Luke 11:1.) He not only provided a model prayer for them but also emphasized in the parable following the prayer that those who desire God must seek him persistently and must not be put off in their quest any more than was the eager householder, whose guests dropped in on him at midnight when he had no means to satisfy their hunger. He asked his neighbor for help, but his neighbor was in bed and refused to answer the door even for friendship's sake. Persistent knocking, however, finally produced the necessary results. (Luke 11:5-8.)

All parables are analogies, and analogies have limitations. [^2] In this light, God is not a sleepy neighbor who cannot go back to sleep until he answers the door. Neither does he respond, if the request is all wrong, simply because of persistent pressure. The point here as well as in the parable of the unjust judge (Luke 18:2-8) was "that men ought always to pray, and not to faint" (Luke 18:1). Without persistence the prayer would fail. The petitioner might be unready, his faith might be inadequate on a given day, it might not be the right time in God's economy.

All righteous prayers are answered, but in the due time of the Lord. There may be some delay until his time is due, as a man well-stricken in years learned when Gabriel appeared to him and said: "Fear not, Zacharias: for thy prayer is heard." (Luke 1:13.) Though the answer was much-delayed, the prayer was answered in God's time. This experience says much about God's need and his timing. To become as God, a person needs the power of the Holy Ghost. Through it, all other blessings are possible; whether the person needs intelligence, personal power, priesthood power, or testimony power, the Holy Ghost tailors the divine grace to each personal request and need.

Jesus completed this parable by showing how God, as a father, responds to his needy children. These children hunger for righteousness more fully than does a loving parent, who, despite imperfections, knows how to give good gifts to his or her children. "How much more," then, "shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" (Luke 11:13.) "And ye receive the Spirit through prayer." (D&C 63:64.)

God blesses lives when his children hear his message. How earnestly this simple but profound point comes out. When someone exclaimed: "Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked," Jesus responded, "Yea rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it." (Luke 11:27-28.)

Seeking After Real Treasure

In discussing the value of life and things of worth, we must distinguish between apparent and real worth. No one who could have pearls wants baubles. And eyes and ears that see only the good things of this world can deceive a person into thinking that such things are the only good. It is precisely in these areas that Jesus provided heavenly counsel to earthbound fellow residents. He identified things that God esteems to be of great worth and that mankind tends to esteem lightly, as well as those things that God esteems lightly that mankind tends to esteem highly. By questioning the popular perceptions of reality, he questioned the nature of the world as it really is and as it will be. Those who are honest with themselves want to know the truth about themselves and the world in which they live.

Having made this world and all that is in it,Jesus was well qualified to give advice about its nature and what is of greatest importance. He knows who we are, why we are here, and where we are going, what is temporal and eternal, what is true and false. He knows what we can be. He is the truth, the way, and the life. Because those things most desirable in this world are often least desirable to God, we are required to sacrifice that which, in his eyes, is of little value in favor of that which is of true worth.

What are life's baubles and what are its pearls? What is real? When people die, they leave behind all of the material that they have striven so hard to acquire in this world. At that point, there must be not only a great sense of shock, but perhaps even bitterness, anger, and resentment, that things work this way. How can things that have dominated a lifetime be abandoned so casually? Why, in the divine accounting, is the inventory of life wiped out without any apparent qualms?

But, we might ask, how can anyone blame God when our own hearts are set on the wrong goal? Hasn't God always counseled through his prophets and his Son Jesus that mortality is ephemeral? Doesn't common observation show us that we can't take it with us? Shouldn't that fact arouse us to ask for deeper meanings of life? Those who set out to acquire wealth as their supreme value set out to build their lives without finding out what the one who created them said about why life was given to them. Are they careless or merely arrogant? Why do they assume that they know better than God what will bring them joy? Ignorance of divine intent and of the nature of eternity is no excuse. Why don't they ask so they could receive? How important it is to see things as they are and not as we wish they were! How important it is to be honest with ourselves as well as with God! The penalty for ignorance applies forever. Now is the time to draw near to God and talk about it.

To help us keep our perspective, Luke relates an incident that occurred while the Savior was teaching the multitude. Two brothers contested with each other over who would inherit their fair share of their inheritance. When they asked Jesus to arbitrate their differences, he gently reminded them how costly it is to souls to set their hearts on the things of this world. He counseled them: "Take heed, and beware of covetousness: for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth." (Luke 12:13-15.) He implied in this example that a person could lose his soul by being obsessed with possessing life's abundance.

Then he related the parable about the rich man who died and had to leave behind all of his hard-earned wealth. In conclusion, he said, God told the unwise man: "Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be, which thou hast provided? So is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God." (Luke 12:20-21.)

Treasures in heaven—the wealth of eternity—consist of such things as a strong testimony of the truth of the gospel, love for God and his children, a loving family, good relationships with neighbors, a life of service, and good character. These are things of the heart. We can carry them over into the next world because they are stored in our hearts. How foolish for individuals such as the foolish rich man to spend the only mortal life they will ever have chasing after the things of this world without any concern for what lies ahead! Why don't they know, as they climb the ladder of success, that it is leaning against the wrong wall? If they were to stop to pray about their goals, to seek counsel day by day in the living of their lives, and humble themselves to respond to the divine Spirit, they might succeed. But they seem never to find out what God's world is really like. They are living out a fantasy, creating an illusion, building on sand. They are never in the real world.

Things As They Really Are

Jesus' lessons seem hard but only because of our limited perspective. Any sacrifices God imposes are apparent and not real—a process merely of trading baubles for pearls, a nonsacrifice. On the other hand, when the soul is saved, then any material or earthly thing that interferes is not only of no value but is actually detrimental to growth of the soul. And in the process of acquiring it, if the soul has suffered irreparable damage, gaining it would be the real sacrifice. In this perspective, any impediments to acquiring one's soul becomes hateful and repulsive rather than highly desired.

To his disciples, Jesus emphasized: Life has too great a value to spend it for full barns, gourmet foods, or clothes with designer labels. God helps take care of the necessities. Have faith; God looks after ravens, lilies, and even the grass of the field. If God can "clothe the grass...how much more will he clothe you, O ye of little of faith?" Therefore, "seek not ye what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind. For all these things do the nations of the world seek after: and your Father knoweth that ye have need of these things. But rather seek ye the kingdom of God; and all these things shall be added unto you." (Luke 12:28-31; see also Isa. 55:1-2.)

"Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom. Sell that ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also." (Luke 12:32-34.) This challenge was warmly extended to the rich young man whom Jesus loved: "If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and follow me." (Matt. 19:21.) He went away sorrowing because he had great riches. It is hard for the rich to enter heaven—as hard even as for a camel to go literally through the eye of a needle. "It is impossible," said the Savior, "for them who trust in riches, to enter into the kingdom of God; but he who forsaketh the things which are of this world, it is possible with God, that he should enter in." (JST, Luke 18:27.)

In the world people may feel that true indication of their worth is reflected in how much others value their life or their influence. Jesus castigated those who sought for human recognition, the upper seats in the synagogue, and greetings in public. And the Pharisees, who set such a negative example, must not be allowed to spread their leavening hypocrisy into the lives of the disciples. (Luke 12:1.) There is no hope for hypocrites, rationalizers who lie to God, their neighbors, and themselves. They are the real losers. All hidden motives and agendas will ultimately be made known. Schemes made in darkness will all be brought to light, spoken from the housetops and proclaimed in all ears. (Luke 12:2-3.)

Jesus' compassion can be seen in his commitment to truth. Compassion might be defined as the right response to the real needs of others, whether it be for mercy, healing, chastisement, invitation, enlightenment, encouragement, rebuke, or a call to repentance. Each response is based on real needs, and needs are based on things the way they really are or the way they really will be. Jesus had the ability to look at all things, including eternity, as they are, not as one wants them to be or hopes they will be. Reality is always governed by law and order. To teach about reality is to teach the truth.

We might suggest that real blessedness, for Jesus, was to cope with or live in harmony with reality. Real misery, on the other hand, was trying to reject or fight it. He taught people how to see truth clearly, to overcome dishonesty, and to stop rationalizing. Wherever he could get people to be honest enough to acknowledge a problem and brokenhearted enough to accept a solution, he could teach them. He showed them that sin is contrary to divine nature; that being hateful, giving offense, being angry, being unjust, or lacking mercy goes against the nature of souls and breaks down the order of things. Those who engage in such acts to find happiness are inevitably frustrated in their attempt. Disharmony with reality brings pain rather than joy, restlessness rather than peace, and disharmony rather than unity.

The Value of Souls and of Repentance

Whoever fights reality ends up in a state of despair. Moroni said, "Despair cometh because of iniquity." (Moro. 10:22.) It is a predictable result. Seeking the right goal by the wrong means always is frustrating, and when frustration accumulates to a high degree, despair sets in. Despair comes from believing in the lies of him who is an enemy of the soul. Satan wants us to be as frustrated, despairing, and miserable as he is, so he teaches us to seek for happiness by the wrong means. He persuades us of the apparent advantage in living a lie. On the other hand, God teaches us the consequences of living in harmony with the truth and the disadvantages of living a lie. Jesus did not come to judge the world but to save it. Punishment inevitably comes from breaking the laws that govern the world the way it is—from fighting reality. The final punishing judgments come when the person who might have been meets the one who really is and discovers that he or she could have known the truth and faced up to reality but chose instead to hide in the dark and live by wishful thinking.

The Prodigal Son

The ultimate justification for Jesus' ministry and his willingness to give his life relates to his concern for those who fail to face reality. If he makes the sacrifice and such individuals offer no recognition, no confession of wrongdoing, and do not return to the Father, for them his sacrifice was in vain. Part of God's great joy comes whenever anyone who leaves him to walk in deviant paths decides to return and walk again with him. He does not give up on those who reject truth or refuse to face reality. He empathizes with their pain and despair and sets out to find them.

In reflecting on the importance of being faithful to God, we have not emphasized the needs of the unfaithful (which, to a certain extent, includes us all), and perhaps have raised the idea that if a person has gone very far away from God, he has gone too far and there may be no hope for him. But if Christ worked with the publicans and harlots precisely because they could be reclaimed, it is clear that a new life is possible. The alcoholic can regain his resistance and live soberly. The harlot can purify herself through repentance and faith in Christ and live a virtuous life. God challenges all of his children to live beyond themselves in Christ—to overcome sinful tendencies, to live in harmony with truth and reality, and to recognize the deeply ingrained needs each person has for integrity, truth, and genuine bonds of love. Thus, the greatest joy in heaven comes when a soul turns to God and faces life the way it really is—by accepting truth and living in harmony with it.

That this is possible is illustrated in the parable of the prodigal son. (Luke 15:11-32.) This is the account of a young man who took his inheritance and "wasted his substance with riotous living." When his degraded circumstances later brought him to an awareness of his sins, he determined to return to his father and accept whatever grace might be given him. The father greeted the son with open arms, demonstrating the love of our Father in heaven for the soul that repents and returns. The young man came back home, meaning that he turned away from his way of life and repented, and returned to his father. Perhaps there is no more powerful picture in all the scriptures than that of the father who runs to met his errant son and who, upon meeting him, embraces and kisses him. What a sign of the depth of the love our Father in heaven has for each of us and of his desire that we return to him!

The practice of the Church of Jesus Christ shows how we should interpret the scriptures concerning God's forgiveness. The Church welcomes back errant sons and daughters. And those who return to the folds of the Church—who repent of past sins, submit to any required Church discipline, dedicate their lives to the Lord, give of themselves in full service to the Lord, qualify themselves to go to the temple, and live up to their covenants—have hope for exaltation in the kingdom of our Father if they endure in faithfulness to the end and overcome all things.

The principle still applies that "whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come." (D&C 130:18-19.) The older, more faithful son will rise with all of the intelligence he gained by his diligence and obedience; his younger brother, all things being equal, will not have his advantage. On the other hand, if the older brother becomes careless and decides that he has lived faithfully enough that he can deviate somewhat, then his younger brother, by greater diligence, might pass by him.

Conclusion

We are basically spiritual, and if our spiritual needs are not met, then regardless of how many other physical and material satisfactions we may have, we are not happy. There are several things that Jesus did and said, as recorded in Luke 11 through 15, that illustrate his concern for the soul and how to make it happy. He takes all of our needs into consideration when he tells us about those things that are of most value. If we accept him, we will repudiate those material things that appear to us to be of value and will accept the intangibles that he tells us are really of greatest worth. Commitment to him is commitment to deny ourselves those things that the world views as important—physical pleasures and material acquisitions.

Sacrifice, by definition, is to deny oneself. And sacrificing for God brings forth the blessings of heaven, though it may lead to the ridicule of the world. Jesus sacrificed and was ridiculed, though he insisted that he was the one who was in touch with reality. His eye was single to the glory of the Father and he followed the Father implicitly, making the necessary sacrifices along the way.

Those who make God the center of their lives, who seek to know his will and follow it, and who are willing to sacrifice and accept any subsequent persecution (a type of sacrifice) are sustained with the conviction that they are doing the right thing. There is a whispering in their souls that tells them they are of God and that God is with them. They know that as long as they stay close to God, their souls are not for sale or trade under any circumstances.

NOTES

Keith H. Meservy is associate professor of ancient scripture at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Life does not cease at the death of the mortal body. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 357.
[^2] All persons are accountable to God for what they choose to do with their earthly lives. Ibid., p. 310.
