Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

24

FIT FOR THE KINGDOM (Luke 16; Matthew 18-20)

LARRY E. DAHL

The Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus

Luke is the only Gospel writer who records the parable of the rich man and the beggar named Lazarus. (Luke 16:19-31;JST, Luke 16:20-36.) Among the important messages of the parable are the following:

The Prophet Joseph Smith helped us understand what prompted the parable and also the unrighteousness of the Pharisees to whom it was given. Luke 16:20-23 in the Joseph Smith Translation adds the following information to the account in the King James Version:

Why teach ye the law, and deny that which is written; and condemn him whom the Father hath sent to fulfil the law, that ye might all be redeemed? O fools! for you have said in your hearts, There is no God. And you pervert the right way; and the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence of you; and you persecute the meek; and in your violence you seek to destroy the kingdom; and ye take the children of the kingdom by force. Woe unto you, ye adulterers!

And they reviled him again, being angry for the saying, that they were adulterers. But he continued, saying, Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery; and whosoever marrieth her who is put away from her husband, committeth adultery. Verily I say unto you, I will liken you unto the rich man.

It is clear from these verses that the Savior was scolding the Pharisees for more than being selfish with material wealth. They were also being selfish and hypocritical, even abusing spiritual opportunities to the detriment of both those who looked to them for spiritual sustenance and those who were concerned about the kingdom of God. By their own admission, they had "the law, and the prophets" (JST, Luke 16:16) and even taught it to others, but in their hearts they said, "There is no God." It is also significant that in the parable, Lazarus, who represents those in need of and desiring nourishment, had to beg for whatever he got from those who "fared sumptuously." At death, both types reap the rewards of their earthly behavior, being judged by a very different standard than is honored in the world. The one reward is hell; the other is "Abraham's bosom."

Of these two rewards, Alma said:

Now, concerning the state of the soul between death and the resurrection—Behold, it has been made known unto me by an angel, that the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, yea, the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life.

And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow.

And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of the wicked, yea, who are evil—for behold, they have no part nor portion of the Spirit of the Lord; for behold, they chose evil works rather than good; therefore the spirit of the devil did enter into them, and take possession of their house—and these shall be cast out into outer darkness; there shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, and this because of their own inquity, being led captive by the will of the devil.

Now this is the state of the souls of the wicked, yea, in darkness, and a state of awful, fearful looking for the fiery indignation of the wrath of God upon them; thus they remain in this state, as well as the righteous in paradise, until the time of their resurrection. (Alma 40:11-14.)

In describing hell, or the status of one who does not repent but dies an enemy to God, the prophet-king Benjamin taught: "The demands of divine justice do awaken his immortal soul to a lively sense of his own guilt, which doth cause him to shrink from the presence of the Lord, and doth fill his breast with guilt, and pain, and anguish, which is like an unquenchable fire, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever." (Mosiah 2:38.) Joseph Smith added: "A man is his own tormenter and his own condemner. Hence the saying, They shall go into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. The torment of disappointment in the mind of man is as exquisite as a lake burning with fire and brimstone. I say, so is the torment of man." [^1]

Such was the state of the spirit of the rich man of the parable after he died and was buried. In contrast, Lazarus was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom, or into a "state of rest, a state of peace, where [he could] rest from all [his] troubles, and from all care, and sorrow." (Alma 40:12.)

What was the gulf that separated Lazarus and the rich man and prevented Lazarus from helping? That they could see and converse with one another seems obvious. The Prophet Joseph taught that "the righteous and the wicked all go to the same world of spirits until the resurrection." [^2] He also said, however, that within that spirit world there are "bounds, limits, and laws by which [wicked spirits] are governed or controlled." [^3] In the same world of spirits, the state of righteous spirits is very different from the state of wicked.

President Joseph F. Smith was privileged to see the world of spirits in vision. (D&C 138.) He saw the Savior visit the spirit world between his crucifixion and resurrection, and organize the righteous spirits to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ there. He saw that the gospel was to be preached to "all the spirits of men" (v. 30), "all who would repent of their sins and receive the gospel" (v. 31), "those who had died in their sins without a knowledge of the truth, or in transgression, having rejected the prophets" (v. 32), "the unrighteous as well as the faithful" (v. 35), even to "all the dead, unto whom he could not go personally, because of their rebellion and transgression" (v. 37). "Where these [the wicked spirits] were, darkness reigned, but among the righteous there was peace." (V. 22.) That he met with the righteous but did not (the record even says "could not") go personally among the wicked, and the statement "where these were," both indicate that there is some physical separation of the righteous and the wicked in the world of spirits. However, it is not clear whether that separation is because of bounds, limits, and laws, or by choice. (See D&C 88:38.)

It seems certain that one aspect of the gulf was that the rich man did not at that time have the opportunity to sooth his torments with the fullness of the gospel of Jesus Christ. However, Christ's mission to the spirit world bridged that gulf, giving all the opportunity to hear the gospel and relieve their sufferings by conforming their minds, hearts, and actions to it—all this made possible by the power of the atonement. That the rich man and others like him can overcome their torments by hearing and accepting the gospel in the spirit world seems clear. Their ultimate destiny will depend upon what level of law they did and can abide. (See D&C 88:21-24.) Perhaps the gulf in the parable referred to the fact that at that time Lazarus was not permitted to help the rich man by taking him the gospel. It might also mean that the rich man was suffering the natural, inevitable, irrevokable consequences of wickedness—a gulf that neither Abraham nor Lazarus, even if they desperately wanted to, could bridge for the rich man. He had to work it out himself. (See 1 Ne. 15:28-29; 2 Ne. 1:13; Alma 26:20; Hel. 5:12.)

There is another intriguing principle in the parable of the rich man and Lazarus. Not wanting his brothers yet on earth to suffer as he was suffering, the rich man implored Abraham to send Lazarus to warn them. Abraham replied that the rich man's brethren had Moses and the prophets, to which the rich man responded, "Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent." (Luke 16:30.) The parable then has Abraham speaking an eternal truth, which is difficult for many to accept: "If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead." (Luke 16:31.) Contrary to popular notion, seeing is not necessarily believing. Knowledge, even testimony born of the Spirit, does not guarantee faith. James wrote that even the devils believe and tremble, but have not faith to keep the commandments of God. (James 2:19.) Laman and Lemuel experienced repeated demonstrations of the power of God, yet they did not believe or have faith sufficient to submit to his will. (See 1 Ne. 3:29-31; 7:16-20; 16:37-39; 17:45-55; 18:8-21; 2 Ne. 5:1-7.)

Faith comes as a gift from God to those who hear Moses and the prophets and who have enough real intent to honestly experiment with the principles of the gospel. (See Alma 32:26-43.) Learning without humility, or simply being shown all things—even someone returning from the dead will not bring faith.

The last few verses of the parable may have been intended to direct the Pharisees (and perhaps later readers of the parable) to a careful study of Moses and the prophets, an invitation to be among those who are blessed because they believe without seeing. (See John 20:24-29.)

Becoming Heirs of Eternal Life

The contents of Matthew 18:20 fit nicely under the theme: "Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?" (Matt. 18:1), and "What good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?" (Matt. 19:16).

Anyone who is truly concerned about what is required to qualify for eternal life in the kingdom of heaven must confront the challenges of Jesus' teachings.

Become As a Little Child

References: Matthew 18:1-6; 19:13-15. See also Mark 9:33-37; Luke 9:46-48;JST Matthew 18:1-5; JST, Mark 9:30-35;JST Luke 9:46-48.

The apostles had been reasoning together about who would be greatest in the kingdom of heaven. ( Luke 9:46.) Jesus, perceiving their thoughts, "called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven." (Matt. 18:2-3.)

What does it mean to be converted? And what does it mean to become as little children? To be converted means to be changed. Alma testified: "Marvel not that all mankind, yea, men and women, all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, must be born again; yea, born of God, changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters; and thus they become new creatures; and unless they do this, they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God." (Mosiah 27:25-26.) In being thus changed, or converted, we become "children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters; for behold, this day he hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith on his name; therefore, ye are born of him and have become his sons and his daughters." (Mosiah 5:7.)

There is another sense in which those who gain eternal life must become as little children. "Little children are whole" (Moro. 8:8) and "innocent before God" because of the atonement (D&C 93:38). All who enter the kingdom of heaven must apply the atoning blood of Jesus Christ through repentance and obedience to become whole and innocent as are little children, "for no unclean thing can dwell there." (Moses 6:57.)

The Savior's statement that we must become as little children, then, was a call to become his children, whole and innocent before God, "submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father." (Mosiah 3:19.)

Seek First the Kingdom of God

References: Matt. 18:7-14; Mark 9:43-50;JST Matthew 18:6-14; JST, Mark 9:40-50.

"If thine eye offended thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee." (Matt. 18:9.) "If thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast them from thee." (Matt. 18:8.) Matthew 18:9 in Joseph Smith Translation explains that "a man's hand is his friend, and his foot, also; and a man's eye, are they of his own household." (JST, Matt. 18:9.)

What is the message? It seems clear the Lord is teaching that seeking the kingdom of God is the first priority, even if it must be that we choose it above friends, mentors, or family members. This is reminiscent of the Savior's earlier teaching that "he that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me." (Matt. 10:37; see vv. 32-39.) The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that to ensure exaltation, we must be "thoroughly proved" and demonstrate that we are "determined to serve [God] at all hazards." [^4] He also taught the apostles in Nauvoo that to be thoroughly proved may require the wrenching of the heartstrings. President John Taylor recalled: "I speak of these things to show how men are to be tried. I heard Joseph Smith say—and I presume Brother Snow heard him also—in preaching to the Twelve in Nauvoo, that the Lord would get hold of their heart strings and wrench them, and that they would have to be tried as Abraham was tried. Well, some of the Twelve could not stand it. They faltered and fell by the way. It was not everybody that could stand what Abraham stood. And Joseph said that if God had known any other way whereby he could have touched Abraham's feelings more acutely and more keenly he would have done so." [^5]

What would wrench heartstrings more than to be torn between the kingdom of heaven and a dearly loved family member, friend, or leader? Yet the possibility exists, and if we are faced with such a difficult situation, the right choice is clearly given for us.

But the instruction does not end here. As if anticipating that some may use (or abuse) this principle as an excuse to ignore, reject, or give up on one who has "become a transgressor" (JST, Mark 9:46), or who has "gone astray," the Savior taught the parable of the lost sheep. (Matt. 18:12-14.) If we honor agency, it may be ultimately necessary for us to choose between the kingdom and a loved one. However, for now, until the ultimate choice must be made, we are to do all we possibly can to bring them to understand and live the saving principles of the gospel. As we contemplate priorities, it is important to remember the Savior's promise that if we seek the kingdom of God first, all other considerations will fall into place (see Matt. 6:33)—a comforting thought in connection with a rather difficult doctrine.

Forgive Others

References: Matthew 18:15-17, 21-35.

The necessity of forgiving others in order to be forgiven is a recurring theme in scripture. The Lord instructed that we pray, "forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors" (Matt. 6:12), and emphasized the point by adding, "For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses" (Matt. 6:14-15).

In our own dispensation it has again been made clear that we are to forgive others: "Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin. I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men." (D&C 64:9-10.) It is also clear that we are to forgive again and again, even seventy times seven. Though numbers are used in the Lord's response to Peter's question of "how oft?" (Matt. 18:21), the underlying principle is the same as that taught in Doctrine and Covenants 98:39-48, Mosiah 26:29-30, and Moroni 6:8—we should forgive as often as people repent and seek forgiveness with real intent. Some special instructions are given in Doctrine and Covenants 98:41-48 concerning those who repeatedly sin against us and do not repent.

There is a point of special significance in the parable of Matthew 18:23-35, which a twentieth century reader who is not familiar with the value of a talent and a pence may miss. That point is that the debts we owe to each other are a mere pittance compared to the debt we all owe to the Savior and our Heavenly Father. The servant of the king owed the king ten thousand talents, while the fellowservant owed the king's servant one hundred pence. One pence equaled a denarius, which was the value of one day's pay. It took six thousand pence to equal one talent. Therefore, the debt of the king's servant to the king was sixty million pence, while the fellowservant's debt to the king's servant was a mere one hundred pence—a six hundred thousand to one comparison. After being freely forgiven for such an overwhelming debt, how utterly silly was the servant's refusal to forgive another such a comparatively tiny obligation.

As we are tempted to hold grudges toward or withhold forgiveness from each other, and at the same time appeal to the heavens for forgiveness of our sins, perhaps we should remember this powerful lesson about pence and talents.

"Cleave unto [Your Spouse] and None Else" (D&C 42:22)

References: Matthew 5:31-32; 19:1-12; Mark 10:1-12;JST Matthew 5:35-36; JST, Mark 10:1-10.

"Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?" (Matt. 19:3.) Also, is it lawful for a woman to put away her husband for every cause? The Lord's response was disturbing to those who listened then, and is also disturbing to many who read it now.

The Pharisees who asked the question were not honestly seeking to know gospel standard in reference to divorce. They were tempting the Savior—pitting his anticipated teachings (he had earlier spoken of divorce in the Sermon on the Mount—see Matt. 5:31-32) against the teachings of Moses, an acknowledged prophet. (Mark 10:2-4.) In essence, they were asking Jesus, "Why are you teaching a different standard than the prophet Moses taught?" A similar question might be asked today: "Why are church members now permitted to divorce, seemingly for every cause, and marry others in the holy temples without charges of adultery?"

Perhaps the answer to both questions lies in the words "hardness of your hearts" both in Moses' day and our own. Jesus explained, "Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered [allowed] you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it was not so." (Matt. 19:8.) The Savior then stated God's intention ("from the beginning") that marriages were not to be dissolved, "except it be for fornication" (the Greek word translated into English as fornication clearly means sexual immorality), indicating that those who divorce for lesser reasons and then marry another are guilty of adultery. That is hard doctrine in a world where divorce "for every cause" is becoming more and more common. The question still presses: Why are such things allowed in the Church of Jesus Christ? Are we not supposed to be in but not of the world? Elder Bruce R. McConkie taught:

Divorce is not part of the gospel plan no matter what kind of marriage is involved. But because men in practice do not always live in harmony with gospel standards, the Lord permits divorce for one reason or another, depending upon the spiritual stability of the people involved. In ancient Israel men had power to divorce their wives for relatively insignificant reasons. (Deut. 24:1-4.) Under the most perfect conditions there would be no divorce permitted except where sex sin was involved. In this day divorces are permitted in accordance with civil statutes, and the divorced persons are permitted by the Church to marry again without the stain of immorality which under a higher system would attend such a course. [^6]

It appears that when the people are unprepared or unwilling to live the higher law (the celestial law, the intended standard "from the beginning") the Lord allows them to have a lesser standard, a "schoolmaster law." (Gal. 3:24.) But even strict obedience to the schoolmaster law is not the goal, nor is it sufficient to exalt us. (See Mosiah 3:13-17; 12:31-37; 13:28-35.) The schoolmaster is to "bring us unto Christ." It is a temporary measure, a minimum standard, to keep us tethered to the kingdom of God and help prepare us to live willingly the fullness of the law of Christ. All who will be exalted must, through a process of repentance and obedience, become the kind of people who desire and obey "the law of the celestial kingdom." (D&C 88:22.) In President Ezra Taft Benson's words, "a better day . . . surely must come." [^7]

But are there not divorces in which one of the partners is an innocent victim? If such an innocent victim remarries, is it considered adultery in the eyes of the Lord under the highest law (that is, "whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery"—Matt. 19:9)? One of the foundation principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ is that all persons "will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression." (Article of Faith 2.) Some of the instruction given by the Savior about divorce and adultery was not given in an open forum, but "in the house" (Mark 10:10) after the public exchange. Do we have record of all that was discussed in this more private setting? What might he have said to those honestly seeking the truth about the question of innocent victims?

Mark's account is somewhat helpful. Notice that in Mark 10:11-12, the charge of adultery is assigned only to the marriage partner who put away his or her spouse. No charge of adultery is mentioned in reference to the one who was being put away: "Whosoever shall put away his wife, and marry another, committeth adultery against her. And if a woman shall put away her husband, and be married to another, she committeth adultery."

Is sexual immorality the only justifiable reason for divorce in the eyes of the Lord? Again, if this question had been put to the Savior "in the house" by those truly wanting to do what is right, how would he respond? Thankfully, God has provided means whereby we can seek and know the will of heaven. We have a living prophet and apostles who hold the keys of the kingdom. We have additional Church leaders, and we have personal prayer. Joseph Smith taught: "This is the principle on which the government of heaven is conducted—by revelation adapted to the circumstances in which the children of the kingdom are placed." [^8] Through his appointed leaders, God will continually reveal his will and direct his people on how to apply gospel principles "to the circumstances in which the children of the kingdom are placed," generally and individually. And through personal revelation, the Lord will confirm the rightness of following those leaders. That is the appointed way to resolve searching questions about divorce, and other things not explicitly clarified in the scriptures. Of all of us it requires listening ears, honesty, humility, and obedience.

What Lack I Yet?

References: Matthew 19:16-30; Mark 10:17-31; Luke 18:18-30;JST Matthew 19:26; JST, Mark 10:26;JST Luke 18:27.

Although these verses deal with a rich young man and his particular spiritual nemesis, there is a broader principle inherent in this encounter. It is interesting to compare this incident with another recorded in Luke 10:25-37. Both incidents begin with the same basic question posed to the Savior: "What good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?" (Matt. 19:16) and "What shall I do to inherit eternal life?" (Luke 10:25). The answers, however, were customized. The rich young man needed instruction about not trusting so much in wealth; the lawyer evidently needed to be taught the importance of loving his neighbor. How sad that the young man, who had kept so many of the commandments from his youth up, would allow his love of riches to stand between him and eternal life. Elder McConkie taught:

We might well ask, "Isn't it enough to keep the commandments? What more is expected of us than to be true and faithful to every trust? Is there more than the law of obedience?"

In the case of our rich young friend there was more. He was expected to live the law of consecration, to sacrifice his earthly possessions, for the answer of Jesus was: "If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and follow me."

As you know, the young man went away sorrowful, "for he had great possessions." (Matt. 19:16-22.) And we are left to wonder what intimacies he might have shared with the Son of God, what fellowship he might have enjoyed with the apostles, what revelations and visions he might have received, if he had been able to live the law of a celestial kingdom. As it is he remains nameless; as it might have been, his name could have been had in honorable remembrance among the saints forever. [^9]

Jesus taught: "It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God." (Matt. 19:24.) Our perceptions and our experience tell us that camels cannot go through the eye of a needle. What hope is there then for rich men to enter the kingdom of God? In the Joseph Smith Translation, Matthew (19:26), Mark (10:26), and Luke (18:27) all clarify that the impossibility refers not to those who have riches, but to those who trust in riches. Mark's account reads: "With men that trust in riches, it is impossible; but not impossible with men who trust in God and leave all for my sake, for with such all these things are possible."

With the question of whether the rich can gain eternal life settled, Peter asked what blessings he and others who had "forsaken all" and followed Christ could expect. (Matt. 19:27.) The Savior's response was a reassurance that all righteousness and sacrifice will be amply rewarded both now and in the hereafter, but it was also a caution, even a warning, to Peter against focusing unduly on comparative rewards and status:

"There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake and the gospel's, but he shall receive a hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come, eternal life. But there are many who make themselves first, that shall be last, and the last first. This he said, rebuking Peter." (JST, Mark 10:28-31.)

The issues and principles illuminated here are as alive and necessary today as they were in Jesus' day. Perhaps they have special meaning today, inasmuch as we have been repeatedly taught that affluence, luxury, and ease are a subtle and very difficult tests of faithfulness that currently face many saints. President Harold B. Lee explained: "We're tested and we're tried. Perhaps we don't realize the severity of the tests we're going through. In the early days of the Church, there were murders committed, there were mobbings. The Saints were driven out into the desert. They were starving, they were unclad, and they were cold. We're the inheritors of what they gave to us. But what are we doing with it? Today we're basking in the lap of luxury, the like of which we've never seen before in the history of the world. It would seem that probably this is the most severe test of any we've ever had in the history of this Church." [^10]

President Ezra Taft Benson has added: "Ours then seems to be the toughest test of all for the evils are more subtle, more clever. It all seems less menacing and it is harder to detect. While every test of righteousness represents a struggle, this particular test seems like no test at all, no struggle and so could be the most deceiving of all tests. Do you know what peace and prosperity can do to a people—it can put them to sleep." [^11]

If affluence is not the problem for an individual, perhaps he or she could ask, "What lack I yet?"

Not Where We Serve, but How

References: Matthew 20:1-34;JST Matthew 20:1-34.

What lessons did the Savior want his disciples (then and now) to learn from the parable of the laborers in the vineyard, and from his response to the mother of James and John that they be granted special place in the kingdom of heaven? Considering the introduction to and the summary statement of the parable is helpful. Jesus introduced the parable with this statement: "But many that are first [or as it is expressed in JST, Mark 10:30: "many who make themselves first"] shall be last; and the last shall be first." (Matt. 19:30.) He concluded, "So the last shall be first, and the first last: for many are called, but few chosen." (Matt. 20:16.) It seems that the words first and last have double meanings as used here: (1) sequence—some were sent to labor first, and others last, and (2) position or greatness—some who have high position or opportunity or reputation in this life may not be looked upon with the same favor in the next life, and some who are considered lowly here may receive high station there.

To sit at Christ's right or left in the kingdom of heaven is not given as a favor to an influential mother, nor because of high earthly calling (James and John were apostles), nor on the basis of how long one serves (even though a person has "borne the burden and the heat of the day"—Matt. 20:12). That high place is given to those "for whom it is prepared of my Father." (Matt. 20:23.)

And for whom is it prepared? The parable teaches that it is prepared for those who willingly contract to labor in the vineyard, having faith that the Lord will reward them "whatsoever is right." (Matt. 20:4, 7.) It is interesting to note that except for the laborers hired first, the laborers went to work without negotiating wages. It is also interesting to consider the reason those hired in the eleventh hour were not laboring before: "Because no man has hired us." (Matt. 20:7.) They were willing, even anxious to work. They only lacked opportunity. The Lord of the vineyard is mindful of all the laborers and can see that each is sent appropriately to labor when and where and for how much. If he has a spot that he wants us to tend, he will see that we get there, either with the help of or, if need be, in spite of other laborers involved. "Therefore, let every man stand in his own office, and labor in his own calling; and let not the head say unto the feet it hath no need of the feet; for without the feet how shall the body be able to stand? Also the body hath need of every member, that all may be edified together, that the system may be kept perfect." (D&C 84:109-110, emphasis added.) "Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence." (D&C 107:99; emphasis added.)

In addition to the parable, Jesus explained to the disciples that it is not position but disposition—the disposition to serve—that qualifies one to sit at his right or left in the kingdom of heaven: "Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant: even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many." (Matt. 20:26-28.)

The spirit of this important principle was captured by President J. Reuben Clark: "In the service of the Lord, it is not where you serve but how. In the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, one takes the place to which one is duly called, which place one neither seeks nor declines." [^12]

Conclusion

"What good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?"

There are many requirements to qualify for eternal life. Luke 16 and Matthew 18 through 20 address some important ones. As we begin to recognize those things we yet lack, we are compelled to cry with the two blind men, "Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David." (Matt. 20:30.) For we are all as dependent upon the Savior for eternal life as they were for their sight. In our strivings to serve and to better ourselves we would do well to remember King Benjamin's counsel: "See that all these things are done in wisdom and order; for it is not requisite that a man should run faster than he has strength. And again, it is expedient that he should be diligent, that thereby he might win the prize; therefore, all things must be done in order." (Mosiah 4:27.)

NOTES

Larry E. Dahl is associate professor of Church history and doctrine and director of Doctrine and Covenants research in the Religious Studies Center at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] All four Gospel writers give an account of this event. (Matt. 21:1-11; Mark 11:1-11; Luke 19:29-40; John 12:12-19.) Matthew's account has the disciples bringing Christ both a colt and its mother. This is not in harmony with the other accounts and is corrected in the Joseph Smith Translation, Matthew 21:5.
[^2] Adam Clarke, Clarke's Commentary, 3 vols. (Nashville: Abingdon, 1977), 1:268. "The mule was the proper riding beast for the king and his sons (2 Samuel 13:29; 18:9)." George Arthur Buttrick, ed., The Interpreter's Bible, 12 vols. (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1954), 3:26. See also Judges 5:10; 10:4.
[^3] Even this did not constitute the complete fulfillment of Zechariah's prophecy. His prophecy was one of a kingdom of peace, a day when Ephraim and Judah would again be one, a day when that peace (that is, the gospel message) would cover the earth "from sea even to sea, and from the river even to the ends of the earth." (Zech. 9:10.) We look to a future day when that part of the prophecy not fulfilled in Christ's first coming finds completion in the era of millennial rest.
[^4] Literal fulfillment of this prophecy would come in A.D. 70, when Titus and his Roman legion would lay siege to the city, destroy the temple so that not one stone would be left standing upon another, and take into slavery that remnant of his people who did not suffer death in its siege and destruction. Those of his captives who did not die in bondage would eventually be scattered to the ends of the earth.
[^5] Joseph Fielding McConkie, Gospel Symbolism (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985), pp. 10-11.
[^6] Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73), 1:585. See also JST Matt. 21:13.
[^7] Bruce R. McConkie, The Mortal Messiah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1979-81), 3:356.
[^8] These words were part of the Hallel, which all Jewry chanted in their ceremonies. As such, they were well known to those whom the Savior addressed. A tradition among the Jews held that in the building of the temple, one stone was originally rejected by the builders, who did not know for what purpose it had been quarried. Later it was discovered that it was indeed the chief cornerstone. See J. R. Dummelow, A Commentary on the Holy Bible (New York: Macmillan, 1973), p. 372.
[^9] Joseph Fielding McConkie, Gospel Symbolism, p. 132.
[^10] Clarke's Commentary 3:210.
[^11] Gospel Symbolism, pp. 132-33.
[^12] The Mortal Messiah 3:369-70.
