Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

28

TREADING THE WINEPRESS ALONE (Matthew 26:36-46; Mark 14:32-42; Luke 22:39-46)

ROBERT L. MILLET

Having finished the Last Supper, the Passover meal having now been subsumed into an even greater occasion, the little band of apostles, with Jesus at their head, left the Upper Room. The disciples, no doubt, had been deeply touched by our Lord's moving and much-needed Intercessory Prayer. (John 17.) Mark records: "When they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives." (Mark 14:26.) East of the temple mount, outside the walls of the holy city, on the slopes of the Mount of Olives was a garden spot, a place where "Jesus oftimes resorted . . . with his disciples." (John 18:2.) Gethsemane, the "garden of the oil press" (or winepress), was indeed one of the three "gardens of God." With the Garden of Eden and the Garden of the Empty Tomb, the Garden of Gethsemane would be forever enshrined in the hearts and minds of Christians as one of those profoundly sacred spots on earth where the works of God—Creation, Fall, and Atonement—took place. [^1]

A lifetime of purity and preparation and performance was now a part of the past; the private battles of the soul, the unwritten struggles over Satan and his minions, had been waged and won. Now, for the Lord of Life, the time of preparation was over: the hour of ordeal, the major reason for which the great Jehovah had come to earth, was now at hand. This fateful occasion, transcendent in scope and incomprehensible to mortal minds, was the hinge upon which the door into all eternity turned. Surely the heavens were hushed and the spirits of men and women from ages past and for ages to come paused and prayed during this precious segment of time. In a way perhaps much more profound than on that joyous Christmas eve some thirty-three years earlier, "The hopes and fears of all the years are met in thee tonight." (Hymns, 1985, no. 208.)

The Awful Ordeal

"They came to a place which was named Gethsemane, which was a garden; and the disciples began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy, and to complain in their hearts, wondering if this be the Messiah. And Jesus, knowing their hearts, said to his disciples, Sit ye here, while I shall pray." (JST, Mark 14:36-37.) As Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "Though they all knew, as Jesus himself attested in the private sermons and prayer just delivered [the Intercessory Prayer], that he was the Son of God, yet he did not fit the popular pattern for the Jewish Messiah, and the disciples, of course, had not yet received the gift of the Holy Ghost." [^2] The hours of anguish and alienation had begun. That for which the Lamb of God had been foreordained and that of which the prophets had spoken for millennia was under way. "When the unimaginable burden began to weigh upon Christ," Elder Neal A. Maxwell has observed, "it confirmed His long-held and intellectually clear understanding as to what He must now do." [^3]

There is no weight heavier than the burden of sin, and the Sinless One (and those closet to him) began to sense and feel the bitterness of this singular occasion, a time when the weight of the world was about to be placed upon the shoulders of Him who had made the world. To approximate an understanding of Gethsemane, it seems appropriate to consider things in perspective. Jesus was morally perfect. He had never taken a backward step or a moral detour. He was "in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin." (Heb. 4:15; compare 1 Pet. 2:22.) According to the Prophet Joseph Smith, Jesus was "the Son of God, and had the fullness of the Spirit, and greater power than any man." [^4] He had never known the feelings of guilt and remorse, the pain of alienation from God that characterizes the whole of mankind. Note the following statements from Jesus, utterances that evidence the closeness and intimacy between God the Father and God the Son:

"My Father worketh hitherto, and I work." (John 5:17.)

"The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do: for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise." (John 5:19.)

"I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me." (John 5:30.)

"I am come in my Father's name." (John 5:43.)

"My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me." (John 7:16.)

"I and my Father are one." (John 10:30.)

"The Father hath not left me alone; for I do always those things that please him." (John 8:29.)

There was a tragic aura surrounding this night of nights, then, when he who had always pleased the Father and had thus never been alone (so far as being separated from his Father) was subjected to the forces and effects of sin that he had never known, forces that must have been poignantly and excruciatingly intense to that pure and clean soul of the Son of Man. The God of the Fathers, the Holy One of Israel, the Lord God Omnipotent, as he was known among the ancients, knew all things. In the language of Jacob, son of Lehi, "O how great the holiness of our God! For he knoweth all things, and there is not anything save he knows it." (2 Ne. 9:20.) And yet there was something he had never known personally: sin or its effects. Christ knew all things as a Spirit Being; "nevertheless," Alma taught, "the Son of God suffereth according to the flesh that he might take upon him the sins of his people, that he might blot out their transgressions according to the power of his deliverance." (Alma 7:13, emphasis added.) In the words of Elder Maxwell, a modern apostle, "The suffering Jesus began to be 'sore amazed' (Mark 14:33), or, in the Greek, 'awestruck' and 'astonished.' Imagine, Jehovah, the Creator of this and other worlds, 'astonished'! Jesus knew cognitively what he must do, but not experientially. He had never personally known the exquisite and exacting process of an atonement before. Thus, when the agony came in its fulness, it was so much, much worse than even he with his unique intellect had ever imagined!" [^5]

"He went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed that, if it were possible, the hour might pass from him. And he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible unto thee; take away this cup from me: nevertheless not what I will, but what thou wilt." (Mark 14:35-36.) Being withdrawn from his apostolic associates "about a stone's cast" (Luke 22:41), the Master pleaded in prayer with God. The Son of God called out in tender tones, "Abba," an intimate and familiar form of father, perhaps something like what we know as "Daddy." Was there not another way, he asked? It did not appear so. Could the plan of salvation have been operative without Jesus' selfless submission to the torturous experiences of the hour? It would seem not. We have no scriptural or prophetic indication that some substitute Savior waited in the wings, some person who could fill in should Jesus of Nazareth not complete the task at hand. We sing with conviction: "There was no other good enough to pay the price of sin. He only could unlock the gate of heaven and let us in." (Hymns, 1985, no. 194.) Indeed, no one else qualified for such an assignment. Earlier the Savior had spoken in soliloquy. "Now is my soul troubled," he had said, "and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify the name." The Father then spoke: "I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again." (John 12:27-28.)

Isaiah had prophesied of this event some seven hundred years earlier: "Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows. . . . He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities. . . . He was oppressed, and he was afflicted. . . . Yet it pleased the Lord [the Father] to bruise him; he hath put him to grief." (Isa. 53:4-5, 7, 10.) The bitter cup of justice (see Mosiah 3:26) had been passed by the Father to the Son, all as part of the foreordained plan of the Father, and the Son had begun to imbibe the dreadful draught.

Luke added two important details to the story. He wrote: "There appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him. And being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly; and he sweat as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground." (JST, Luke 22:43-44.) An angel, sent from the courts of glory, came to strengthen the God of Creation in his hour of greatest need. What an assignment! What an honor! "If we might indulge in speculation," Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote, "we would suggest that the angel who came into this second Eden was the same person who dwelt in the first Eden. At least Adam, who is Michael, the archangel—the head of the whole heavenly hierarchy of angelic ministrants—seems the logical one to give aid and comfort to his Lord on such a solemn occasion. Adam fell, and Christ redeemed men from the fall; theirs was a joint enterprise, both parts of which were essential for the salvation of the Father's children." [^6]

Luke added the additional detail concerning the intensity of our Lord's suffering—so great that drops of blood came to the surface of his body and fell to the ground. This was in fulfillment of the prophecy delivered by the angel to King Benjamin: "He shall suffer temptations, and pain of body, hunger, thirst, and fatigue, even more than man can suffer, except it be unto death; for behold, blood cometh from every pore, so great shall be his anguish for the wickedness and the abominations of his people." (Mosiah 3:7.)

In a modern revelation, the Savior pleaded with his people to repent, recalling the painful episode in Gethsemane: "I command you to repent—repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth, and by my wrath, and by my anger, and your sufferings be sore—how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not. For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent; but if they would not repent they must suffer even as I; which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men." (D&C 19:15-18.)

The immediate consequence of sin is withdrawal of the Spirit of the Father. (See Alma 34:35.) It may be that such a withdrawal from an individual is what leads to feelings of guilt and pain and emptiness. Jesus Christ, in taking upon him the effects of the sins of all mankind, was thus exposed to the awful (and to Jesus, unusual) withdrawal of that Spirit which had been his constant companion from birth. In speaking of the atoning mission of Jesus Christ (and the ordeals related thereto), President Brigham Young explained:

The Father withdrew His Spirit from His Son, at the time he was to be crucified. Jesus had been with his Father, talked with Him, dwelt in His bosom, and knew all about heaven, about making the earth, about the transgression of man, and what would redeem the people, and that he was the character to redeem the sons of earth, and the earth itself from all sin that had come upon it. The light, knowledge, power, and glory with which he was clothed were far above, or exceeded that of all others who had been upon the earth after the fall, consequently at the very moment, at the hour when the crisis came for him to offer up his life, the Father withdrew Himself, withdrew His Spirit. . . . That is what made him sweat blood. If he had had the power of God upon him, he would not have sweat blood. [^7]

Concerning the suffering of Christ in Gethsemane, Elder James E. Talmage wrote:

Christ's agony in the garden is unfathomable by the finite mind, both as to intensity and cause. The thought that He suffered through fear of death is untenable. Death to Him was preliminary to resurrection and triumphal return to the Father from whom He had come, and to a state of glory even beyond what He had before possessed; and, moreover, it was within His power to lay down His life voluntarily. He struggled and groaned under a burden such as no other being who has lived on earth might even conceive as possible. It was not physical pain, nor mental anguish alone, that caused Him to suffer such torture as to produce an extrusion of blood from every pore; but a spiritual agony of soul such as only God was capable of experiencing. No other man, however great his powers of physical or mental endurance, could have suffered so. . . . In some manner, actual and terribly real though to man incomprehensible, the Savior took upon Himself the burden of the sins of mankind from Adam to the end of the world. [^8]

Just as ancient Israel had sent the scapegoat into the wilderness (Lev. 16:5-10), even so the Lamb of God, suffering outside Jerusalem's walls and outside the pale of God's healing and redemptive Spirit, met and faced the obstacles and assaults of Lucifer and his hosts. Delivered over to "the buffetings of Satan," Christ "met and overcame all the horrors that Satan, 'the prince of this world,' could inflict. The frightful struggle incident to the temptations immediately following the Lord's baptism was surpassed and overshadowed by this supreme contest with the powers of evil." [^9]

The night of atonement was a night of irony. He who was sinless became, as it were, the great Sinner. In Paul's words, God the Father had "made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin." (2 Cor. 5:21.) To the Galatian Saints, Paul also taught that "Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us." (Gal. 3:13.) He who deserved least of all to suffer now suffered most—more than mortal mind can fathom. He who had brought life—the more abundant life (John 10:10)—was subjected to the powers of death and darkness. As the Prophet Joseph Smith taught the brethren of the School of the Prophets, Jesus Christ is called the Son of God because he "descended in suffering below that which man can suffer; or, in other words, suffered greater sufferings, and was exposed to more powerful contradictions than any man can be." [^10]

Through most of our Lord's infinite ordeal—which may have lasted for three or four hours [^11]—the chief apostles slept. It is almost impossible to imagine that these good and noble and obedient servants of the Lord, called to be special witnesses of his name in all the world, could not control the demands of the body for a brief moment—indeed, a moment that mattered. Elder McConkie suggested the following explanation for this most unusual scene: "Finite minds can no more comprehend how and in what manner Jesus performed his redeeming labors than they can comprehend how matter came into being, or how Gods began to be. Perhaps the very reason Peter, James, and John slept was to enable a divine providence to withhold from their ears, and seal up from their eyes, those things which only Gods can comprehend." [^12]

Below All Things

Alma spoke with poetic and prophetic power when he described the coming of the Messiah and the suffering necessary to accomplish the Atonement: "He shall be born of Mary, at Jerusalem which is the land of our forefathers, she being a virgin, a precious and chosen vessel, who shall be overshadowed and conceive by the power of the Holy Ghost, and bring forth a son, yea, even the Son of God. And he shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people. And he will take upon him death, that he may loose the bands of death which bind his people; and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities." (Alma 7:10-12.) In commenting upon these verses, Elder Neal A. Maxwell observed:

Can we, even in the depths of disease, tell Him anything at all about suffering? In ways we cannot comprehend, our sicknesses and infirmities were borne by Him even before they were borne by us. The very weight of our combined sins caused Him to descend below all. We have never been, nor will we be, in depths such as He has known. Thus His atonement made perfect His empathy and His mercy and His capacity to succor us, for which we can be everlastingly grateful as He tutors us in our trials. There was no ram in the thicket at Calvary to spare Him, this Friend of Abraham and Isaac. . . .

And when we feel so alone, can we presume to teach Him who trod "the wine-press alone" anything at all about feeling forsaken?. . .

Should we seek to counsel Him in courage? Should we rush forth eagerly to show Him our press clippings and mortal medals—our scratches and bruises—as He bears His five special wounds?. . .

Indeed, we cannot teach Him anything! But we can listen to Him. We can love Him; we can honor Him; we can worship Him. We can keep His commandments, and we can feast upon His scriptures. [^13]

And so it was that our Savior descended below all things. (See Eph. 4:8-10; D&C 88:6.) The Redeemer has indeed "trodden the wine-press alone, even the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God." (D&C 76:107; 88:106; Isa. 63:3.) And the voice of him who shall come again to reward the righteous and heap vengeance upon the ungodly shall yet be heard: "I have trodden the wine-press alone, and have brought judgment upon all people; and none were with me; and I have trampled them in fury, and I did tread upon them in mine anger, and their blood have I sprinkled upon my garments, and stained all my raiment." (D&C 133:50-51.) In the meantime, the miracle, the miracle and blessings of the Atonement—timeless in their scope—continue to be extended to all who come to the Lord with righteous intent.

"I am Christ," the Lord declared in a modern revelation, "and in mine own name, by the virtue of the blood which I have spilt, have I pleaded before the Father for them." (D&C 38:4.) The nature of that pleading, that intercession, was elucidated some two months later in another revelation: "Listen to him who is the advocate with the Father, who is pleading your cause before him—saying: Father, behold the sufferings and death of him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed, the blood of him whom thou gavest that thyself might be glorified; wherefore, Father, spare these my brethren that believe on my name, that they may come unto me and have everlasting life." (D&C 45:3-5.)

NOTES

Robert L. Millet is assistant professor of ancient scripture and New Testament area coordinator at Brigham Young University

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1961), p. 617.
[^2] Spencer W. Kimball, "Peter, My Brother," Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year (Provo: Brigham Young University Publications, 1971), pp. 1-2.
[^3] See, for example, S. G. F. Brandon, The Trial of Jesus of Nazareth (New York: Stein and Day, 1968) or Kaim Cohn, The Trial and Death of Jesus (New York: Harper and Row, 1971).
[^4] Mishna Sanhedrin 11.2.
[^5] Talmage, Jesus the Christ, p. 623.
[^6] See ibid., pp. 645-48, where twelve violations of the law are discussed.
[^7] Mishna Sanhedrin 4.1.
[^8] Mishna Sanhedrin 7.5.
[^9] Talmage, Jesus the Christ, p. 642. See the Joseph Smith Translation of Matthew 27:6 for the manner in which Judas met his death.
[^10] Ibid., p. 636.
[^11] Ibid.
[^12] The name of the insurrectionist, Barabbas, literally "son of the father," is but another element of irony in the Savior's days of passion.
[^13] Josephus, Antiquities xviii. 3, 1; War ii. 9, 2-3.
