Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

29

THE ARREST, TRIAL, AND CRUCIFIXION—A LESSON IN LOYALTY (Luke 22:47-23:56)

ANDREW C. SKINNER

Though the Lord endured incomprehensible suffering in Gethsemane, his pain and humiliation were far from finished as he completed his prayer, arose, and walked a stone's throw distance to awaken the fatigued apostles from the sleep to which they finally had succumbed. (Luke 22:41, 45-46.) The Gospels record with varying degrees of completeness the scene of the Master's arrest while he was speaking to his disciples. (Matt. 26:45-57; Mark 14:41-53; Luke 22:45-54; John 18:1-12.) However, concerning one detail there is exact and poignant agreement: Judas, one of the Twelve, was leading an incited and armed crowd! So began the series of exhausting events of an already long evening, events that culminated in the Crucifixion, events that provide us with a profound lesson in loyalty.

Betrayal and Arrest

That the wording is exactly the same in the Synoptic Gospels regarding Judas's position as a member of the Twelve while at the same time he was the Lord's betrayer perhaps reflects the shock and intensity with which that moment was felt by those disciples present. Surely it must have added to the Savior's grief as Judas singled him out. Do we not learn that in all dispensations of time loyalty to one's brethren always was and always will be essential? (See, for example, Prov. 6:16, 19; John 17:11; D&C 38:27.)

Both Matthew and Mark, whose Gospels contain fuller accounts of the betrayal than Luke's, indicate that Jesus was hailed with a kiss. Luke, however, explains that as Judas drew near to kiss the Savior, the latter chided him, asking if such a symbolic act was in harmony with such treachery. We come to appreciate the significance of this question when we recall that Paul exhorted the Thessalonian saints to greet all the brethren with a holy kiss or salutation. (1 Thes. 5:26.) In latter-day revelation we are told that the Lord's people and Enoch's city will be reunited in a holy place "and [they] will kiss each other." (Moses 7:63.) It is not unlikely that as Judas employed this singular method of greeting, the Savior remembered the prophetic words of Proverbs 27:6: "Faithful are the wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful."

After the betrayal and the seizure of Jesus by the mob, all four Gospels report the scuffle involving the servant of the high priest. Only John declared specifically that it was Simon Peter who drew his sword and cut off the servant's ear. Likewise only John reported that his name was Malchus. (John 18:10.) The Lord immediately rebuked Peter, and, as Luke, the physician, said, the servant was made whole by this, the Lord's last miracle of healing. Even in the time of his greatest extremity or danger, the Savior's compassion and concern for mankind were evident. This is seen not only in the incident concerning the healing of Malchus but also in the Savior's reply to Peter, as reported by Matthew: "Put up again thy sword.... Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels? But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?" (Matt. 26:52-54.) In Roman Palestine, a legion was the chief subdivision of the army, containing about six thousand soldiers. Certainly Jesus had great power at his disposal (seventy-two thousand angels against mere mortals). But his purpose was not to destroy those around him. Rather, he wanted to carry out the supreme saving mission of the Father (John 18:11) and thus fulfill the scriptures. He was loyal to the Father at all costs.

Peter's Denial

As Jesus was being led away to Caiaphas, the high priest, "all the disciples forsook him, and fled." (Matt. 26:56; Mark 14:50.) Though we might be tempted to view this circumstance in a harsh light, perhaps even regard it as another example of supreme disloyalty and thus become highly critical of the Savior's followers, other discussions may help to temper our attitudes.

Elder James E. Talmage observed that any resistance to the arrest of Jesus was useless. He also noted that the apostles were actually in jeopardy themselves. [^1] Furthermore, we have the testimony of John, who indicated that Jesus was very protective of his apostles, perhaps even encouraging their flight or dispersal from the garden, and not wanting any harm to come to them: "Then asked he them again, Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus answered, I have told you that I am he: if therefore ye seek me, let these go their way: that the saying might be fulfilled, which he spake, Of them which thou gavest me have I lost none." (John 18:7-9.)

Finally we turn to President Spencer W. Kimball's remarks concerning the apostle Peter, who, as all four Gospels tell us, followed Jesus at a distance while he was being taken first to Annas and then to Caiaphas. (See John 18:13.) There can be no doubt that Peter denied knowing the Savior, for, again, all four texts report this, though the events are arranged in slightly different order. (Matt. 26:69-75; Mark 14:66-72; Luke 22:54-62; John 18:15-18, 25-27.) As to Peter's motives for the denial, President Kimball stated: "Much of the criticism of Simon Peter is centered in his denial of his acquaintance with the Master. This has been labeled 'cowardice.' Are we sure of his motive in that recorded denial? He had already given up his occupation and placed all worldly goods on the altar for the cause." [^2] Certainly this assessment coincides with the general New Testament picture of a chief apostle who was far from cowardly, as demonstrated by his readiness to draw the sword against a mob armed with swords and clubs.

Jesus and the Sanhedrin

At daylight, when the chief priests and scribes came together to hear Jesus in their council meeting (Luke 22:66), the Savior had already been awake for an entire day and night, having experienced the bloody agony in Gethsemane; having been forced to cross the Kidron Valley and march up the steep western slope to the residences of Annas (father-in-law to Caiaphas) and then Caiaphas the High Priest; and having been forced to endure blows to the face and being blindfolded, mocked, and spit upon. Such an ordeal would have caused exhaustive collapse in most mortals.

At this point Jesus was examined by a group of Jewish leaders, with the high priest taking the lead as interrogator. (John 18:19-22.) Whether this body of leaders constituted the Great Sanhedrin of 72, the lesser Sanhedrin of 23, or some smaller informal group is a question for debate among scholars. [^3] It was expressly forbidden for the Sanhedrin to meet in the house of the high priest, for that body had as its place of convocation the "Hall of Hewn Stones" from which the "law went out to all Israel." [^4] As Elder Talmage observed, the size of the body is uncertain and of small importance. [^5] One thing is certain, however: based upon Mishnaic writings and legal procedures—codified after the time of Jesus—the proceedings were illegal on several points of Jewish law. The ultimate irony seems to be that though every element of Mishnaic or rabbinic legal tradition was theoretically designed to ensure that the innocent not be made scapegoats or railroaded into conviction (that is, no one-day trials resulting in capital punishment, no self-incrimination or confession without two corroborating witnesses, no conviction unless self-knowledge of wrongdoing was positively proven [^6]), all the safeguards were ignored in the case of Jesus of Nazareth. Perhaps the most sinister aspect of the whole business is recorded by Matthew: "Now the chief priests, and elders, and all the council, sought false witness against Jesus, to put him to death." (Matt. 26:59.)

Throughout this pretense of a proper trial, Jesus stood before his accusers calm, not reviling though he was reviled against. Finally, the leaders of the Jews, having convinced themselves that he was guilty, delivered him to Pilate. This little note is most significant, for rabbinic law explicitly stated that a unanimous verdict of guilt rendered on the same day of a trial was the same as an acquittal and gave freedom to the defendant. [^7] Furthermore, the charge for which Jesus was to be put to death was blasphemy. According to the Mishna, a "blasphemer is not liable to the death penalty, unless he has pronounced the Ineffable Name [YAHWEH]." [^8] Blaspheming or cursing God without pronouncing the "Ineffable Name" was punishable by flogging only.

Arraignment Before Pilate and Herod

Bound and condemned, Jesus was taken from the residence of Caiaphas to the hall of judgment to stand before the Roman governor, Pontius Pilate. This move, on top of all that Jesus had already endured, can only but have compounded the exhaustion—physically, emotionally, and spiritually—that he was feeling at that point. We do not know for certain the location of the Praetorium or judgment hall, but tradition holds it to be the Antonia Fortress. Rebuilt and strengthened by Herod, who named it in honor of his friend Mark Antony, the Antonia was situated at the northwest corner of the temple precinct for purposes of temple defense and surveillance. John 19:13 notes that the place of the judgment seat was called the "pavement," in Hebrew (Aramaic) Gabbatha. A portion of an ancient pavement found below the present-day surface of the ground may represent the site in question.

In bringing Jesus to Pilate, the leaders responsible for the previous trial at the palace of Caiaphas would not enter the judgment hall lest they be made ritually unclean owing to Passover requirements as well as Jewish regulations. (John 18:28; compare Acts 10:28.) Consequently, Pilate went out to meet them. It is ironic that Jesus, who had the power to make these Jewish leaders clean every whit (not just ritually clean), was the object of their vile persecutions and buffetings.

At this point the Jews began to accuse Jesus not just of blasphemy but also of sedition against Rome. This then prompted Pilate to ask Jesus if he was indeed the King of the Jews. (Luke 23:2-3.) Sometime during the course of this arraignment, a very interesting exchange occurred, as recorded by John. (See John 18:33-38.) In answer to Pilate's query, Jesus told the governor that he was a king, but that his kingdom was not of this world. However, he said, "Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice." Then Pilate asked his very famous question, "What is truth?" As Latter-day Saints, we possess the divinely inspired answer to that question, given to us from the very God who once stood before Pilate: "Truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." (D&C 93:24.) No plainer declaration could be made.

Interposed between the account of Jesus' early morning trial and this first arraignment before Pilate is Matthew's unique (among the Gospels) report on the suicide of Judas, the Lord's betrayer. (Matt. 27:3-10.) Owing to the brief mention of Judas's demise in Acts, it is a little surprising that nothing is mentioned in Luke about this episode. Judas Iscariot is one of eight men with that given name mentioned in the New Testament. His surname, Iscariot, probably means "man (Hebrew 'ish) of Kerioth." John (14:22) is careful to distinguish between Iscariot and another apostle named Judas, owing perhaps to the odium attached to the reputation of the former. Elder Talmage eloquently summarized the events leading to the death of Judas; how he became remorseful, consumed by the enormity of his crime; how he tried to undo the damage by returning the thirty pieces of silver (the price of a slave); and finally how "under the goading impulse of his master, the devil" he himself had become the slave, and he went and committed suicide. [^9]

Pilate's interrogation of Jesus was interrupted when he learned that the prisoner was a Galilean and belonged in Herod's jurisdiction. He therefore sent the accused man to Herod Antipas, who was in Jerusalem at the time, evidently for the feast of Passover. Luke 23:6-12 reports that meeting and indicates that Herod was glad to see the Savior because he had hopes of witnessing a miracle performed by him.

Herod Antipas, son of Herod the Great, was at this time tetrarch of Galilee. We know he had been referred to by the Savior as "that fox" (Luke 13:31-32), and we know that he was the one who ordered the murder of John the Baptist. In fact, at some point he apparently had thought that Jesus was John the Baptist reincarnated. [^10]

The meeting between Herod and Jesus was evidently short, since Jesus did not speak. No doubt upset by such silence, Herod had the Savior mocked, arrayed in a gorgeous robe that some modern authorities believe was white, the usual color of dress among Jewish nobility, [^11] and sent back to Pilate. Luke concludes his report of the meeting with a very interesting note that tells us something of the political climate in Jesus' day: "The same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together: for before they were at enmity between themselves." (Luke 23:12.)

Since Herod refused to exercise jurisdiction, Pilate was now forced to act. Recognizing the Savior's innocence, he attempted to release him by giving the assembled crowd the choice to set free either Jesus or Barabbas. Matthew and Mark contain the fullest accounts of this episode (Matt. 27:16-26; Mark 15:7-15), though all of the Gospels recount the crowd's decision. It is noteworthy that each of the Gospel authors offers us a different perspective regarding the life of the prisoner who was released in place of the Savior. Matthew calls him a "notable prisoner." (Matt. 27:16.) From Mark and Luke we learn that he was an insurrectionist as well as a murderer, and John calls him a robber. (Mark 15:7; Luke 23:19, 25; John 18:40.) At any rate, Pilate, no doubt afraid to go against the insistent Jewish rulers who had by now stirred up and poisoned the crowd against Jesus (Mark 15:11), finally gave in after having appealed to the crowd several times that he found no fault in Jesus. All four Gospels record the cry of the mob, which demanded (at the instigation of the Jewish leaders) that Jesus should be crucified. Therefore Pilate scourged Jesus and delivered him up to be crucified. [^12] (Matt. 27:24-26; Mark 15:12-15; Luke 23:23-25; John 18:40—19:1.)

Pilate was not a very appealing figure, though he did attempt to have Jesus released and later allowed the release of Jesus' body for burial. He ruled for ten years (A.D. 26-36) as procurator in Judea. He was first mentioned to Gospel readers in Luke 3:1; of the four Gospel writers, Luke probably was more interested in the man than the others. We begin to get a glimpse of his personality and the disdain he felt for the Jews when we are told that he mingled the blood of Galileans with their sacrifices. (Luke 13:1.) We understand more fully Pilate's character when we study the story of our Lord's Passion. Above all, he appears to have been a man who ultimately acted to preserve his own interests. Though he had acquitted the Savior of wrongdoing and wanted to release him as justice demanded, he gave in to the Jewish rulers and the rabble, fearing that any other decision would further increase his unpopularity.

Josephus and Philo indicate that Pilate was not the wisest of rulers, having offended various segments of the populace long before the mock trial of Jesus took place. Probably near the beginning of his rule Pilate had sent a detachment of troops into Jerusalem at night carrying ensigns of the Roman empire, consisting of images of the emperor and small eagles, which had always been left outside the city. This set off mass demonstrations, and Pilate ordered the offending symbols removed only after attempting to first intimidate his subjects. [^13] Later in his administration the procurator built an aqueduct to bring water from Bethlehem to Jerusalem, and paid for the project with funds from the temple treasury. Though he must have had some cooperation from certain Jewish authorities in Jerusalem, this incident nevertheless caused another demonstration which resulted in bloodshed as Pilate suppressed the rioters. [^14]

All of this tells us that Pilate reigned over an uneasy internal situation in Palestine at the time of the Savior's arraignment. We do not know with certainty the fate of Pilate. One story, propagated by the Church historian Eusebius, claims that Pilate fell into such misfortune that he committed suicide. Because Pilate's wife attested to Jesus' innocence as the result of an unusual dream (Matt. 27:19), she was later honored as a saint by the Greek Orthodox Church. [^15]

The Crucifixion and Burial

The four accounts of the Crucifixion taken together give us a fairly detailed account of what happened. (Matt. 27:26-66; Mark 15:15-47; Luke 23:26-56; John 19:16-42.) All four Gospel writers tell us that Jesus was led away to be crucified, though Luke contains the fullest account of the events immediately after the Savior left the presence of Pilate. Since victims carried either the traverse portion (crossbar) of their crosses or the whole thing, we do not know for certain what Jesus was required to do, although we suppose the latter. John 19:17 states simply that the Savior went forth "bearing his cross." At this point it appears that the cumulative effects of the past twenty-four hours took their toll; and Jesus, in his weakened condition, needed to be given assistance in carrying the cross. The Synoptic Gospels record that the man (a passerby, Mark says) who was pressed into service was Simon of Cyrene (a town of Libya).

Here Luke gives us valuable information not presented elsewhere. A great multitude of people (no doubt including both disciples and curiosity seekers) followed behind the Savior, with women bewailing and lamenting his fate. Jesus, ever the master teacher, turned and uttered a warning prophecy that was fulfilled some thirty-five years later when Jerusalem and the temple were devastated by the Romans. (Luke 23:27-31.) The Joseph Smith Translation of Luke 23:32 tells us this warning was meant to include the desolation of the gentiles as well as the scattering of Israel.

When the party reached the place called "the Skull" (Golgotha in Aramaic, Calvaria in Latin), the actual crucifixion took place. All the Gospels report that the Savior hung between two criminals. From John we learn that four soldiers comprised the crucifixion detail (John 19:23), and that they divided the garments of Jesus between themselves. In this action the Gospel writers saw the fulfillment of the psalmist's prophetic statement: "They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture." (Ps. 22:18.)

All of the Gospels tell of the superscription placed on the cross above Jesus' head. However, only Luke and John explain that it was written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and only John informs us that it was authored by Pilate himself. This gives us an important clue as to the languages current among the inhabitants of Palestine in the time of Jesus. There are significant questions as to whether Hebrew in the Gospels really means Hebrew or Aramaic. By the first century, both used the same script and shared some words, but they were two distinct languages. For our purposes, it is significant to note that this trilingual inscription implies that Jerusalem was a real crossroads and that the place of crucifixion was located in a spot where people of varying linguistic backgrounds would have passed by.

As to which languages Jesus used, one can only speculate. However, he was certainly exposed to both classical (biblical) and Mishnaic (Talmudic) Hebrew (see Luke 2:46, 4:16); Aramaic, the lingua franca of the entire ancient Near East; Greek, the language of the Septuagint; and Latin, the official language of the Empire. It is possible that he used Aramaic for everyday speech and Hebrew for religious performances and biblical quotations.

The act of fixing a victim to a cross for the purposes of capital punishment was well known among many peoples of the ancient world. Alexander the Great employed it. According to Josephus, Cyrus the Great threatened with crucifixion anyone who interfered with the Jews returning to Israel from Babylon. [^16] Apparently Darius the Persian also threatened to crucify those who did not obey his decrees. (Ezra 6:11.) Among the Romans, it was a punishment inflicted on those who were guilty of the most heinous crimes, though the ordinary Roman citizen was usually exempted from it.

Crucifixion was carried out either by tying the victim's hands and feet to the cross or by using nails while the victim was laid on the ground and then raising the cross upright. Frederic Farrar provides a detailed description of the effects of crucifixion on the human body:

Death by crucifixion seems to include all that pain and death can have of [the] horrible and ghastly—dizziness, cramp, thirst, starvation, sleeplessness, traumatic fever, tetanus, publicity of shame, long continuance of torment, horror of anticipation, mortification of untended wounds—all intensified just up to the point at which they can be endured at all, but all stopping just short of the point which would give to the sufferer the relief of unconsciousness. The unnatural position made every movement painful; the lacerated veins and crushed tendons throbbed with incessant anguish; the wounds, inflamed by exposure, gradually gangrened; the arteries—especially of the head and stomach—became swollen and oppressed with surcharged blood; and while each variety of misery went on gradually increasing, there was added to them the intolerable pang of a burning and raging thirst; and all these physical complications caused an internal excitement and anxiety, which made the prospect of death itself . . . bear the aspect of a delicious and exquisite release. [^17]

Such was the lot of our Lord as he hung and suffered on the cross.

It has been said that nothing reveals a person's true self as much as when he faces personal catastrophe. As incidents on the cross indicate, Jesus truly is the supreme exemplar. His actions indicate that even at this moment of tremendous suffering, his concern was for the welfare of others. Luke 23:34 recounts how he asked our Father in heaven to forgive those who crucified him. The Joseph Smith Translation of Luke 23:35 makes it clear that Jesus had reference to the soldiers who were carrying out orders. John's account tells us something about the compassion of the Master: As Jesus' mother stood by the cross, he directed his beloved disciple to care for and protect her—"and from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home." (John 19:27.)

Mark 15:25 tells us the Crucifixion began at the third hour (9 A.M.). All of the writers report that from the sixth hour (noon) to the ninth hour (3 P.M.), great darkness covered the land. Luke 23:45 adds that at that time "the veil of the temple was rent in the midst." This was followed by one of the most dramatic moments recorded in all of religious history. In a cry more anguish-laden than any mortal will ever be able to understand, the Savior of mankind called out, "Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being interpreted, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Mark 15:34.)

I have sometimes marveled at how certain theologians could detachedly discuss this one passage—whether it was Hebrew or Aramaic, whether it represented the actual words of Jesus, who first recorded it, and so forth—and miss its profound implications. How close the Father and the Son must have been throughout the Son's earthly ministry! How sustaining the influence of the Father must have been to the Son! How utterly devastating the withdrawal of that influence must have been to one so accustomed to it! Now the Savior was alone. The agonies of Gethsemane had returned. [^18]

As to why the Father withdrew himself, the words of Elder Talmage are instructive: "In that bitterest hour the dying Christ was alone, alone in most terrible reality. That the supreme sacrifice of the Son might be consummated in all its fulness, the Father seems to have withdrawn the support of His immediate Presence, leaving to the Savior of men the glory of complete victory over the forces of sin and death." [^19]

The rest of the narrative following the death of the Savior is fairly well known. It is important to note that while all the Gospels discuss the role of Joseph of Arimathaea, only John mentions that Nicodemus brought spices to the burial. (John 19:38-42.) Both men were leaders of the Jews who recognized the special nature of the Savior's life and teachings. In the end they remained loyal to him and performed a special act of love and service.

Conclusion

The image of Jesus, bloody, bruised and humiliated, stumbling along while attempting to bear the weight of the cross, in many ways seems to symbolize and capsulize the profound lessons we need to learn from the Savior's life. Under the most adverse circumstances he moved along that course which would take him to the completion of his mission. He was loyal to the Father.

Perhaps that is why one of the greatest, if not the greatest, discourses ever given on the Atonement uses the symbolic imagery of enduring "the crosses of the world." (2 Ne. 9:18.) Faithfully bearing up under such loads prepares us for the kingdom of God. We cannot enjoy the association of the Savior without offering sacrifice in the similitude of the Savior, suffering tribulation in his name. (D&C 138:12-13.) We must be loyal to him as he was loyal to the Father. However, we can be sure that our Lord will be with us in our trials, lifting the burden of our crosses. After all, who understands better those kinds of needs than one whose cross was carried by someone else for a while?

NOTES

Andrew C. Skinner is an instructor in the department of History at Metro State College in Denver, Colorado.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1977), pp. 463-64.
[^2] Many theories have been advanced as to why Mary was told not to touch Jesus. These must remain as theories, because we have no substantial answer. Although the present Joseph Smith Translation of John 20:17 changes the word touch to hold, it is not certain whether Joseph Smith intended the word hold to mean embrace or detain.
[^3] John records that the doors were shut, an indication that Jesus did not come into the room in the usual manner. As an immortal resurrected being, he was not bound by the normal physical laws but could enter closed rooms without there being an opening. This is substantiated by Moroni's appearance to Joseph Smith. (JS-H 1:43.)
[^4] Mishna Sanhedrin 11.2.
[^5] Talmage, Jesus the Christ, p. 623.
[^6] See ibid., pp. 645-48, where twelve violations of the law are discussed.
[^7] Mishna Sanhedrin 4.1.
[^8] Mishna Sanhedrin 7.5.
[^9] Talmage, Jesus the Christ, p. 642. See the Joseph Smith Translation of Matthew 27:6 for the manner in which Judas met his death.
[^10] Ibid., p. 636.
[^11] Ibid.
[^12] The name of the insurrectionist, Barabbas, literally "son of the father," is but another element of irony in the Savior's days of passion.
[^13] Josephus, Antiquities xviii. 3, 1; War ii. 9, 2-3.
[^14] Josephus, Antiquities xviii. 3, 2; War ii. 9, 4.
[^15] Madeleine Miller and J. Lane Miller, eds. Harper's Bible Dictionary (New York: Harper and Row, 1973), p. 753.
[^16] Josephus, Antiquities xi. 1, 3; 4, 6.
[^17] Frederic W. Farrar, The Life of Christ (Portland: Fountain Publishers, 1964), p. 641.
[^18] See Bruce R. McConkie, Conference Report, April 1985, p. 10.
[^19] Talmage, Jesus the Christ, p. 661.
