Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

30

THE WITNESSES OF THE RESURRECTION (Matthew 28, Mark 16, Luke 24, John 20)

MONTE S. NYMAN

The testaments of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John give many witnesses of the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Despite these witnesses, however, the world still doubts or rejects, in one way or another, this vital message of the New Testament. A review of these witnesses can bolster our faith today and help bring a personal witness to us in compliance with Moroni's declaration, "Ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith." (Ether 12:6.)

The Witnesses in Jerusalem

A most unusual witness of the resurrection comes from the enemies of the Savior and of the truth. The chief priests and Pharisees came to Pilate and asked him to command that "the sepulchre be made sure until the third day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say unto the people, He is risen from the dead: so the last error shall be worse than the first." Pilate complied with their wish; the sepulchre was sealed with a large stone, and a watch, or guard, was set upon it. (Matt. 27:62-66.) As analyzed by President Joseph F. Smith, such actions only verified the reality of the resurrection, for thereafter the leaders of the Jews could not claim that the Savior's disciples had stolen the body. [^1] Nonetheless they attempted such a claim. When some of that watch reported to the chief priests what had happened, the soldiers were given a large sum of money to say that indeed the disciples had stolen the Savior's body while the guards had slept, which negligence was a capital offense. They were told that the chief priests would intercede with the governor for them if the incident were brought before him. (Matt. 28:11-15.) Despite the chief priests' and others' attempts at deception, the guards stand as a witness to the world that it was a supernatural power that brought Jesus from the grave.

Jesus had taught his disciples that he had the power to take up his body again after he had laid it down. (John 10:17-18.) Although we have no account of his actual resurrection, we do have accounts of other supernatural powers that attended his resurrection. First there was a great earthquake, a means whereby God often speaks to man (see D&C 43:25), and then an angel appeared and rolled back the stone. These actions brought fear upon the guards, and they "became as dead men" (Matt. 28:2-4), which suggests they fainted or were subdued to total silence.

A companion witness to the removal of the stone is that of the women who visited the tomb. Although the account in Matthew 28:1-5 suggests that the two Marys who visited the sepulchre at dawn of the first day of the week were witnesses to the angel's rolling back the stone, Mark 16:1-5 records that as the women approached the sepulchre, they discussed how they might get the stone rolled away, and upon their arrival they saw that the stone had already been rolled away. They also saw the young man—an angel—sitting inside the entrance. Both Luke and John support Mark's account.

Upon seeing the angel, the women were told that Jesus had risen, and they were invited to "see the place where the Lord lay." They were then told to go quickly and tell the disciples that Christ had risen and was going to Galilee, where they would see him. They hurried to obey these instructions. (Matt. 28:5-8.) The account in Luke records that the women entered the sepulchre and were perplexed because they did not find the body. Then two men in shining garments appeared and informed them of Christ's prophesied resurrection. (Luke 24:1-7.) The Joseph Smith Translation of Luke states that these men were angels and were outside the sepulchre upon the arrival of the women. The Joseph Smith Translation of John 20:1 adds that the two angels were sitting on the stone. Apparently, both Matthew and Mark were concerned only with the angelic message and overlooked recording that there were two angels present. Regardless of the number, the angels were a spiritual witness to support the physical evidence of the stone having been removed. The Lord's law of witnesses was met (Deut. 19:15), and the women had two witnesses—including both physical and spiritual affirmation that Jesus had risen.

Upon hearing the report of the women, Peter and John the Beloved ran to the sepulchre and saw the linen clothes but no body of Jesus. Not fully comprehending Jesus' prophecy that he would rise again, they returned to their own homes. (John 20:2-10.)

After the disciples left, Mary Magdalene remained outside the sepulchre weeping. She looked into the sepulchre, and again she saw the two angels, who asked why she wept. After responding that her Lord had been taken away, she turned and saw Jesus but did not recognize him. There was another exchange of questions concerning why she wept and where the body was laid, and then Jesus called her by name. Recognizing him, she called him Rabboni or "Master" and apparently stepped toward him; she was cautioned against holding or touching him, because he had "not yet ascended to [his] Father." He then instructed her to go to the disciples and tell them that he was ascending to his Father. Mary reported to the disciples, telling them that she had seen the Lord, and relaying his message to them. (John 20:11-18.) [^2] Mark records that the disciples "believed not." (Mark 16:9-11.)

Mary Magdalene was thus given the privilege of being the first mortal to see the resurrected Lord. Why such a privilege was granted to her is not known.

The next appearance of Jesus is not recorded but merely referred to by Luke. In describing a report of two disciples to the eleven apostles, Luke wrote that the Lord had appeared to Simon. (Luke 24:33-34.) Although none of the other Gospels mention this appearance to Peter, Paul did tell the Corinthian saints that following the resurrection on the third day, as foretold in the scriptures, the Savior "was seen of Cephas, then of the Twelve." (1 Cor. 15:3-5.) This appearance to Peter was undoubtedly because of Peter's position as president of the Church. (Matt. 16:19.)

Matthew records that there was also an appearance to the other women who had gone to the sepulchre early that morning. As they were rushing to tell the disciples that Jesus' body was not in the tomb, Jesus met them and addressed them. Matthew names only the other Mary, while Mark identifies the women as Salome and Mary the mother of James. (Mark 16:1.) Luke names Joanna as being with Mary the mother of James and other women. (Luke 24:10.) While the exact number is not known, there were apparently several women. That this is a separate appearance from Mary Magdalene's is evident from the fact that they "held [Jesus] by the feet, and worshipped him." Mary had been told not to touch him, but these women were allowed to do so. He then instructed them to tell the brethren to go to Galilee, where they would see him. (Matt. 28:9-10.) Since some time had lapsed, Jesus having in the meantime ascended to his Father, it is assumed that this appearance to the women also occurred after Jesus appeared to Simon Peter. However, no account tells us the exact sequence of events.

The next recorded appearance of Jesus in Jerusalem was to two disciples on the road to Emmaus. While there is uncertainty about the exact geographical location of the village of Emmaus, it was in the Jerusalem area. (Luke 24:13.) Why Jesus chose to appear to these two brethren (one of whom is identified as Cleopas) is again not stated. Perhaps it was a reward for their faith, or perhaps it was to give a witness to the common people in addition to the leadership of the Church. Regardless, Jesus appeared and asked concerning the seriousness of their conversation. He then opened the scriptures and expounded, "beginning at Moses and all the prophets" (Luke 24:27), on how all of the events associated with the resurrection had been foretold. When they arrived at their destination, Jesus accepted their invitation to tarry with them, and as he partook of food with them, "he took bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gave to them." (Luke 24:30.) At this point their eyes were opened, and they recognized Jesus, who promptly vanished from their sight. The witness was now complete; they praised the Lord, saying: "Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?" (Luke 24:32.) These two disciples also had two witnesses: the testimony of the Holy Ghost—a spiritual confirmation—and the recognition of Jesus as a physical being who indeed had once been dead. Legend suggests that Luke, the author of the account, was one of the two men.

That evening Jesus appeared in Jerusalem to ten of the apostles and others who were assembled. Luke records that eleven apostles were present (Luke 24:34), but from the account in John 20:24, it is apparent that Thomas was not present. The two Emmaus disciples had hastened to Jerusalem to inform the apostles of their great spiritual experience, and found the apostles discussing the appearance of Jesus to Peter.

As the two disciples made their report, "Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you." The apostles, despite the previous reports, "were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit." But Jesus calmed them and showed them his hands and feet, which apparently had the marks of the crucifying nails upon them: "Handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." He then requested food—a further witness of his physical resurrected body—and ate the fish and honey-comb they brought him. After he ate, he opened the scriptures, this time including the Psalms, and helped them to understand how these scriptures had testified of him. He also charged them to be witnesses of the things they had seen, to labor as special witnesses of his resurrection and divinity. He admonished them, however, to remain in Jerusalem until the promised endowment of power from on high came from the Father. Jesus then led them to Bethany, where they witnessed his ascension into heaven. Now special witnesses of the Son of God, they "returned to Jerusalem with great joy" and proclaimed their witness in the temple. (Luke 24:33-53.)

John's account of the Savior's appearance records that the apostles were given the Holy Ghost and the power to remit or forgive sins. (John 20:22-23.) The phrase used, that he "breathed on them" to give the Holy Ghost, can be understood through the teachings of the Book of Mormon, where we learn that the Holy Ghost was given to the apostles through the laying on of hands. (See 3 Ne. 18:36-37; Moro. 2:1-2.)

The final recorded appearance of Jesus in his resurrected body in Jerusalem occurred eight days later. Thomas, a member of the Twelve who had not been present at the previous appearance, was with the other apostles on this occasion. [^3] Jesus appeared and said to him, "Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be not faithless, but believing." To Thomas's response, "My Lord and my God," Jesus commented that Thomas was blessed because he had seen and believed; however, "blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed." (John 20:26-29.)

The Witness in Galilee

In Jesus' appearances in Jerusalem, he repeatedly instructed his apostles to assemble in Galilee, where he would appear to them. This promise he kept both collectively and individually.

The first appearance in Galilee was to seven of the apostles at the Sea of Tiberias (Galilee). This was actually the third recorded appearance to a majority of the Twelve. Seven of the apostles, led by Peter, had gone fishing. They fished all night but caught nothing. Unrecognized by the apostles, Jesus stood on the shore and inquired as to their success. When they reported that they had caught no fish, he instructed them to throw their net on the right side of the boat. They did so, and the result was a catch of a "multitude of fishes." Suddenly John the Beloved recognized Jesus and told Peter, "It is the Lord." Jesus invited them to eat with him. Then he taught them more concerning their mission. (John 21.)

The appearance on the coast of Tiberias was not the promised appearance in Galilee to the apostles, possibly because they were not all present or perhaps because of the impatience shown by Peter and the others. According to Matthew, the place of the apostles' meeting had been designated by Jesus, "a mountain ... appointed them." (Matt. 28:16.) Little is known of the appearance on the mount other than that the apostles were instructed to go forth and preach the gospel to all nations. (Matt. 28:17-20; Mark 16:14-18.) This is further evidence that the appearance was after the Pentecost, where the Spirit was collectively poured out on the Saints.

Other Witnesses

For other appearances, we are indebted to Paul's epistles to the saints in Corinth. In addition to reporting the appearance to Peter (Luke 24:33-34), Paul referred to an appearance of Jesus to "above five hundred brethren at once." (1 Cor. 15:6.) We have no record of where this event took place. This appearance to such a large group might be compared with the Savior's appearance to twenty-five hundred Nephites in America, a group that included men, women, and children. (3 Ne. 17:25.) Both of these experiences were undoubtedly a reward to the faithful followers who had endured the trial of their faith.

Paul also told the saints at Corinth that Jesus had appeared to James. He did not identify which James, although it is reasonable to assume that it was the one who was a member of the presidency of the church. (D&C 7:7; Matt. 17:1-2.) However, the James who was prominent in Paul's day, who would have been more familiar to the saints of Corinth, was James the brother of Jesus. What the Savior told James is not known. And, finally, Paul told the Corinthians that the Lord had appeared to him (this was, of course, many years later).

In addition to these appearances, there have been many appearances to apostles and prophets in the latter days. (D&C 76:23; 110:1-10.)

The New Testament answers the Old Testament question of Job, "If a man die, shall he live again?" (Job 14:14.) Not only were there multiple witnesses of the resurrection of Jesus, but Matthew also recorded that "the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many." (Matt. 27:52-53.) To those who will accept it, a second witness is found in the Book of Mormon, which reports that many others were brought forth from the grave in another hemisphere following Christ's resurrection. (3 Ne. 23:9-11.)

The Lord has provided the witnesses, the world is on trial, and the judgment will be rendered after a trial of our faith. Those who accept the witnesses will know "that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing [they] might have life through his name." (John 20:31.) This is the purpose of John's testimony, and it should be the objective for every seeker after truth.

NOTES

Monte S. Nyman is professor of ancient scripture, associate dean of Religious Education, and director of Book of Mormon research in the Religious Studies Center at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] David O. McKay, "Christ, the Light of Humanity," Improvement Era 71 (June 1968): 5.
[^2] Eusebius HE II.xxv. 5.
[^3] John records that the doors were shut, an indication that Jesus did not come into the room in the usual manner. As an immortal resurrected being, he was not bound by the normal physical laws but could enter closed rooms without there being an opening. This is substantiated by Moroni's appearance to Joseph Smith. (JS-H 1:43.)
