Robert L. Millet, Kent P. Jackson, Studies in Scripture, Vol. 5: The Gospels ( 1986)

31

THE RESURRECTED LORD AND HIS APOSTLES (John 21)

THOMAS W. MACKAY

The Setting

Of the postresurrection appearances of the Savior recorded in the New Testament, John 21 is striking in a quiet but penetrating way. After having recounted, in the preceding chapter, the resurrection and some of the experiences of Mary and the apostles with the Lord, John relates a simple experience on the Sea of Galilee (called the Sea of Tiberias in John 21:1, as well as in John 6:1). Because the directive "feed my sheep" is often quoted, we should examine it in context.

Despite having seen the resurrected Savior and despite having received personal assurance of his divinity, the disciples are portrayed as still foundering, still lacking direction and motivation. From our perspective, on the basis of both Luke's account in Acts and John's statement (John 7:39; see also John 14:16, 26; 15:26; 16:13) that the Holy Ghost had not yet been given, we may conclude that the disciples had been touched by the Holy Ghost but had not yet received that cleansing, revitalizing force we term the birth of the Spirit. Although they had been promised they would receive the Holy Ghost, the gift itself was not made manifest until Pentecost (Acts 2), more than a month and a half after the resurrection. It was during the forty-day ministry that the events of John 21 took place.

Seven disciples were in Galilee: Simon Peter, Thomas (or Didymos), Nathanael, the two sons of Zebedee (John the Beloved and his brother James), and two other disciples. (John 21:2.) Manifesting his natural leadership, Peter stated that he was going fishing; the others concurred. Implicit in Peter's words was a growing impatience about waiting to learn what they should do. His response to the situation was to return to his former work by going fishing. In the structure of John's Gospel, this setting is reminiscent of Peter's call recorded in John 1:35-42. Peter's brother, Andrew, had been one of the adherents of John the Baptist, from whom he learned the identity of the Redeemer, the Messiah or anointed Savior (Greek Christos means "the anointed one"). It is in Matthew 4:18-20 that we learn more about Peter and Andrew as fishermen by trade; and so, echoing Jeremiah 16:16, Jesus invited them to join him, saying, "I will make you fishers of men."

Then, with characteristic irony, John notes that though they fished throughout the night, they caught nothing. As dawn came, Jesus stood at the shore, unrecognized by the disciples even when he spoke. At his instructions, the disciples cast their nets to the right side; the net was so full of fish—John states that there were 153 (John 21:11)—that they could not pull it into the boat, and the net nearly broke. Immediately John realized who it was on the shore. Peter's impetuous response, after clothing himself, was to hurl himself into the sea to hasten to the Lord. The event may have been so recorded by John to counterbalance Matthew's account of Peter walking on the water, which Matthew alone appends to the story of Jesus approaching the disciples by walking across the water. (John 6:15-21; Matthew 14:22-23; Mark 6:45-52.) Certainly the very setting of this postresurrection appearance of the Lord brings vividly to mind other instances in John where Jesus was around the boats, the sea, and fishermen. And the disciples knew well his identity without inquiring.

Bread, Fish, and Wine

But even more important, as the disciples came ashore, they saw a fire as well as fish and bread. When Jesus had them eat of the bread and fish, it was a symbolic reminder of the great multitude that he fed during his mortal ministry. In John's account of the setting for the "Bread of Life" sermon in John 6, the multitude wanted to make Jesus king, but his subsequent discourse turned many away. (John 6:66.) For he was the true manna that had come down from heaven, the bread of life, and his doctrine was hard. Since many deserted, he asked the disciples whether they, too, would leave. In John's way of writing, the miracle of the feeding of the multitude recorded in John 6 was a situation in which the Lord was being tested in a true-life circumstance parallel to Satan's testing his fortitude and self-discipline during Jesus' solitary fasting in the desert. (Matthew 4:1-11.) As the divinely appointed Messiah, Jesus had the power to create life (John 1:3-4, a passage that echoes Genesis), to sustain it (as with wine, fish, bread), and to renew it (John 11—the resurrection of Lazarus). The symbols of sustaining life were the bread and the fish (or, elsewhere, the wine), and the Jews knew that the Messiah would be able to produce them. Satan's efforts in the temptations were directed at getting Jesus to doubt or question his Messianic powers and to use them either for personal satisfaction or to gain the adulation of the crowds. Whether confronting Satan directly or whether confronting the pressure of a large multitude ready to worship and to adore, Jesus chose the course his Father directed him to choose: I do only that which the Father has shown me. (John 5:19; 8:28.)

Bread, fish, and wine are the characteristic symbols found throughout John that unify the stories and the teachings. The presence of bread and fish beside the Lord when he bid the disciples come ashore ties this scene back to earlier events in John, and they all point to the great Messianic banquet when he will come in his glory and eat with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, holy prophets, and all who are worthy. (See Matt. 8:11, where "sit down" properly means to recline at a meal with someone; see also D&C 27:5-14.) Just as he had broken bread with the two disciples in Emmaus, here, on the shore of the Sea of Galilee, the resurrected Lord shared a sacramental meal with his disciples. The very word sacrament comes from the Latin sacramentum, meaning an oath of allegiance such as was made by a Roman soldier to his general. In a sense, in the sacrament we partake of the emblems of our oath of allegiance to the Lord. It is thus natural and appropriate that loyalty and fidelity to the cause of the Messiah should be bound up with eating the sustaining forces of life he produced; it is entirely in harmony with the rest of John's Gospel that he should imply such here.

"Lovest Thou Me?"

Only a short while before, Peter had categorically denied his affiliation with the Lord on three occasions. (John 18:17, 25-27.) President David O. McKay suggested that the threefold questioning of Peter in John 21:15-19 was the Lord's way of letting Peter make good his error, of having him purge his soul with a reaffirmation of loyalty and of energetic, devoted action. [^1] Just as Peter had denied the Lord three times, three times the Lord invited Peter to assert his love and commitment.

Some writers have confused readers about the nature of John's words for love in chapter 21 of his Gospel. Let us, therefore, rather patiently and carefully examine the passage in question. After they had eaten (that is, after the sacramental meal reestablishing the open expression of the disciples' devotion to the Savior), the Lord said to Simon Peter, "Simon, son of Jonah, do you love me more than these?" Peter replied, "Oh, yes, my Lord; you know that I love you." (John 21:15; translation by the author.) In Jesus' words "than these," we understand "than you love these [fish]," a gentle chastisement of Peter. For he (and we) ought to love the Lord's work more than the things of this world. Without directly raising the question, the Lord caused Peter to reflect: Why should I be more concerned about material goods than about preaching the gospel? Even lacking specific instructions, Peter should try to help others. His responsibility as one of the apostles gave new direction to life, or at least it should have done so. After Pentecost it did.

But Peter was afflicted with one of the most common diseases of mankind: discouragement. Even while anticipating the success of the Lord's kingdom, he had experienced the death of his Master, whom he had denied knowing three times. Perhaps the anguish of his actions and of his dashed expectations weighed upon him. In such circumstances people often revert to old habitual pursuits. That is what Peter did. He went fishing, taking with him other apostles. So when the Lord inquired whether Peter loved him more than worldly pursuits or tangible goods, the question acted as a purging influence, bringing Peter to acknowledge the strength and depth of his testimony, which had been temporarily obscured. The resurrected Lord masterfully taught Peter by having him recognize and state the true priorities of his life. He then exhorted Peter to put these priorities into practice.

While it is true that there are several words for love in Greek, John 21:15-17 is probably not the best passage to differentiate the meanings. But because many have treated this exchange as though it were intended to urge Peter to a higher form of love, we should examine more closely John's account of Jesus' words here. Since the Greek language is extremely rich in vocabulary and grammar, it exhibits many synonyms. In the New Testament, at least four different word groups (verbs, nouns, or adjectives based on the same stem) may be translated by a meaning in the range of the English love: phileo, agapao, stergo, aspazomai. Furthermore, another word group based on eros, commonly used in classical literature to describe a purely sensuous or passionate love, does not appear in the New Testament (though it appears twice in the Septuagint or Greek Old Testament used by the early Christian Church).

In Greek, the noun eros is used both for love and for the boy Cupid (from the Latin noun cupido or "desire"), who, according to the myths of classical antiquity, stirs up longing and desire in the hearts of people by shooting them with his arrows. We would expect that the notion of eros would receive a strong condemnation in the scriptures, particularly in cataloguing evils and vices that are prevalent in the world and that members of the church should avoid. But the entire word group is lacking from the New Testament, and only occasionally does it appear in later Christian writings. John does not use it; to suggest the word in the context of John 21 is offensive, contrary to the entire episode.

The word aspazomai (often translated "greet" or "salute") includes warm and affectionate greetings, often with a kiss. The welcome may include a friend, relative, or peer, or it may extend to acclaiming a king; in Matthew 5:47 it clearly means to cherish, love, and be fond of someone. While the verb and its related noun are common enough in the synoptic Gospels, and while John uses the verb in his epistles, he does not include it in his Gospel. If he had intended to convey a development of love, he likely would have used this word to mean general, natural human love, warmth, and respect for one another.

Another word with a more specific sense was stergo. It was originally used by poets for the word love, with the nuance of love between parents and children; but by the time of the New Testament, prose writers also used it. Most commonly, the meaning was the love a parent felt for a child; Euripides pathetically used it thus in his play Medea. While love as a verb does not occur in the New Testament, other early Christian writers in the late first and second centuries used it. But one form of the stem does appear in the writings of Paul in a very pejorative or negative sense. In Romans 1:31 (in a list of vices) and in 2 Timothy 3:3 (talking of the last days), Paul uses an adjective with a negative prefix (like unloving): astorgos. This is not surprising, for Paul had an extensive familiarity with Greek literature and quoted from some Greek poets. John knew Greek very well, though he probably did not enjoy Paul's familiarity with classical literature. Nevertheless, inasmuch as John wrote the Gospel in Greek (and that, too, quite probably for the church at the Greek city of Ephesus after he wrote Revelation, according to early Christian sources), he could well have drawn upon Paul and other Christian or non-Christian Greek works for this sense of the word. He did not. Never, even speaking of God's love for his own Son, does he use the positive sense of the verb. Instead, he writes phileo or agapao, without making a distinction between the two words.

Generally, phileo has a broad meaning of love and affection, from kindness to a passionate kiss, from respect to deep love. John used the verb phileo to describe God's love for his Son (John 5:20) and the disciples (John 16:27), and Christ's love for Lazarus (John 11:3, 36). Jesus uses the noun friends (philoi) in an elevated manner (John 15:15); the disciples are his friends (philoi) if they keep his commandments (John 15:14). Negatively, phileo is used to describe a person loving his own life (John 12:25), just as John in 1 John 2:15 uses agapao to describe loving or lusting after the things of this world. (At James 4:4 "friendship of the world" is philia.)

In Greek, agapao and its related words (for example, agapazo in Homer) carry a range of meaning: to treat with affection, to caress, to be fond of, to love, to be contented with or pleased at, to show affection, to value or esteem. In John we find agapao to describe God loving the world (John 3:16; 1 Jn. 4:9-10), God loving his Son, and his Son loving the disciples (John 15:9), the love of his disciples for one another (John 13:34-35; 15:12, 17), and the obedience stemming from love (John 14:23-24; 15:10). But in Christian usage the noun came to mean a love-feast or meal shared in connection with church services (much as we might say sacrament meeting). The adjective beloved (agapetos) is used of Christ in the synoptics (Matt. 3:17; 17:5) and of members of the church in the writings of Paul and the general epistles, including John.

In John 21 Jesus twice asks, "Do you love me?" (agapas me) and Peter responds, "I love you" (philo se). Jesus asks the same question the third time, now using the other verb, phileis me, to which Peter responds with philo se, the same as the first two times. His protestation of love would be ludicrous if he had replied with a word that had a distinctly lesser meaning than the word used by the Lord. Likewise, if the words were not synonymous, why would John have Jesus alter his words?

Thus we conclude that agapao and phileo occur interchangeably in this context of John's Gospel. Although some popular Christian ministers and Latter-day Saint speakers have endeavored to see in John 21 levels of love and some sort of qualitative personal growth, there is nothing in John's words to warrant such a conclusion. Literary, stylistic, and vocabulary considerations require interpreting the phrases as deliberate repetition of the same point by using synonyms.

Peter's Death Foretold

As we read in Eusebius's account of early Christian history, Peter did indeed die in Rome, crucified upside down. [^2] That he had developed the determination of character to emulate the Savior and remain true to the testimony he had uttered three times on the shore to his resurrected Lord illustrates that at least for John, the sealing of the Atonement by the Resurrection was the focal point of the life of Christ. To gain and to bear testimony of that event was far more significant than the utterance by Peter near Caesarea. (Matt. 16:16.) Hence, John's account minimizes the very things that some people at Rome were extolling: Peter and his confession of faith.

This same attitude toward Peter may be seen in John's references to "the beloved disciple" and to the walking on the sea (John 6:16-21) without mentioning Peter walking on the water, an event recorded only in Matthew 14:28-33. In John 21 the postresurrection appearance of the Lord furnishes an analogous situation, but John notes only that Peter attempted to approach Jesus—by swimming. Similarly, at the beginning of John 20, both Peter and John hastened to the tomb, though John, perhaps with an inward smile, notes that "the other disciple" ran ahead faster than Peter. Yet, after looking inside, he did not have the audacity to enter the tomb. Peter, on the other hand, rushed right in. (John 20:4-7.)

Whereas Matthew gives us the magnificent testimony of Peter at Caesarea shortly after Jesus fed the multitude, John's report of the event is somewhat more subdued: "Lord, to whom will we go? Thou hast the words of eternal life. And we have come to trust [or, in Greek, have faith, believe] and know that thou art God's holy one." (John 6:68-69; translation by the author.) Like most of us, Peter's actions warranted occasional reproach and encouragement, but he was at base a good, dedicated, and energetic person. He willingly surrendered his life to and for his Lord.

John's Mortal Life Extended But Transformed

Of all the events recounted in John 21, the translation or transformed physical condition of John is most enigmatic for the world. That it stands in stark contrast to Peter's future is only one aspect, for John was the beloved disciple. Curiously, although this scripture states that John would not die until the Savior returned (John 21:23), Eusebius records that John met death. [^3] The compression of John's narrative has deliberately obscured the circumstances of the Lord's promise to John presupposed by John 21:21-23. Early commentators are perplexed by the passage; Latter-day Saints fare better because we have other sources on the subject, section 7 of the Doctrine and Covenants and chapter 28 of 3 Nephi.

In the Doctrine and Covenants we have a brief transcript of a writing of John from a leather scroll that Joseph Smith saw in a vision. Since the language of that text is close to the Gospel of John but more expansive and in a more personal tone, we may have in section 7, as well as in section 93, some of John's earlier or more complete Gospel that we are told will be brought forth in our dispensation (D&C 93:18), depending on our faith. Certainly the first-person narrative of section 7 contrasts sharply with the third-person account in John ("the disciple whom Jesus loved" [phileo at John 20:2 and agapao at John 21:20]). But section 7 requires that the reader know John 21 or at least the point made in John 21:20-23. Yet section 7 clarifies why John would remain untouched by death, while the other disciples would come to the Lord: John was to preach the gospel and to prophesy among the nations in order to prepare the way for the return of the Lord. From John 21:22-23 we learn that John was to remain until Jesus should come, but, as noted above, John does not elaborate the point in his Gospel that has been transmitted to us.

In 3 Nephi 28 we find a reference to John's condition, for three of the Nephite Twelve sought the same promise and privilege that Jesus had granted to John. From Mormon's statements we conclude that John and the three Nephite disciples entered a condition analogous to that experienced by Enoch and his city: they are no longer subjected to mortal conditions and restrictions known to us; they can disguise themselves; they have supernatural mobility; they can exercise tremendous priesthood powers; Satan no longer has power over them to tempt them; and they will undergo another change to their eternal condition when the Lord comes. Mormon himself, curious as to how they could be above death, asked and learned that when they were changed, pain, sorrow, and death could not affect them. (3 Nephi 28:37-38.) Therefore, 3 Nephi 28 is really our best description of what happened also to John.

Given the long interval between that occasion and the present, we may well wonder whether any of the Nephite disciples or John might have regretted that choice. Still, the world has been blessed through their ministry even without knowing its source or nature. Their actions have been a manifestation of a deep and abiding love for their fellowmen and for the gospel. Like Peter, we will go to our Master; others will remain until his coming.

In John 21 we have a precious record of the Lord's postresurrection appearance to some disciples on the Sea of Galilee. The sacramental meal of fish and bread provided by the Lord only reinforced his lesson: his kingdom requires full dedication. If John reported that Jesus, in helping Peter to understand this message, used two different words for love, he did so only for stylistic variation and not to differentiate meanings or qualities of love. John's own devotion to the cause led him to request the privilege of continuing to manifest this love to others by remaining in a mortal, though transformed, condition. Whether our lives are of long or short duration, we too should be motivated to minister to the Lord's sheep.

NOTES

Thomas W. Mackay is professor of Greek and Latin at Brigham Young University.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] David O. McKay, "Christ, the Light of Humanity," Improvement Era 71 (June 1968): 5.
[^2] Eusebius HE II.xxv. 5.
[^3] John records that the doors were shut, an indication that Jesus did not come into the room in the usual manner. As an immortal resurrected being, he was not bound by the normal physical laws but could enter closed rooms without there being an opening. This is substantiated by Moroni's appearance to Joseph Smith. (JS-H 1:43.)
