Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter One

The Progenitors

The philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson once said, "It is impossible to make a silk purse out of a sow's ear." The nature of a product, therefore, depends largely on the quality of the materials available to produce it. Workmanship, of course, enters in to affect its appearance and its durability. But if good materials are lacking, no amount of skill or ingenuity can convert the product into something contrary to its basic nature. While the complex variables of human personality and potential create risk in making an unqualified application of the philosopher's analogy to people, still there are sufficient similarities to allow this generalization: For one to rise to eminence in any field during earth life requires inherent qualities of intelligence and character and an environment which will allow for a full flowering of one's native abilities. And what is said here generally applies specially to one who, in life, rises to prophetic status.

Such a one is the subject of this biography, Harold Bingham Lee. At his birth on March 28, 1899, he received as an earthly inheritance superior qualities of intelligence, devotion; and spirituality through ancestors of worth and good character, although none of his direct forebears achieved high reputation outside the small circles of family and village. There was a great uncle, Joseph W. McMurrin, his grandmother's brother, who had risen to become one of the General Authorities of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, serving for thirty-five years as a member of the First Council of the Seventy. But, with this exception, the ancestry of Harold B. Lee is devoid of anyone who gained prominence of a kind which remotely resembled that which he attained. This lack, however, bears no relationship to the innate qualities they possessed and which were transmitted to him as a legacy by lineal descent.

It is interesting to study the characteristics of people and to trace them into the personality and conduct of their descendants. The solid integrity and reliability of Harold B. Lee, which inspired such confidence among his family and associates, is, in large part, a legacy from his British ancestors. The first Lee on his direct line to migrate to America was William Lee, who was born in Carrickfergus, Ireland, on August 15, 1745. At age 25, William, led by the lure of land and economic opportunity, migrated to America where, soon after arriving in Philadelphia in 1770, he married Susannah Chaffings. The fourth child born to this couple, Samuel Chaffings Lee, was Harold's great-great-grandfather. Not long after Samuel's birth, his mother, Susannah, passed away, leaving her husband, William, a widower with four young children.

At this time, the American colonies were caught up in their revolution against Mother England. Loyal to his adopted country, William Lee enlisted in the American Revolutionary Army, leaving his four children with friends. He almost paid the ultimate price for this loyalty, being critically wounded at the battle of Guilford County Courthouse, fought in the Carolinas in 1781. Afterward, William married the compassionate woman who nursed him back to health, Sarah McMullen, by whom he sired seven more children.

Taught by his stepmother in an active family of eleven children, Samuel ultimately left home to marry. Moving westward where economic opportunities were more plentiful, Samuel Chaffings Lee settled in Wilmington, Ohio. It was here that Harold's great-grandfather, Francis Lee, was born on June 26, 1811. And it was through this ancestor that the destiny of Harold B. Lee's family first became intertwined with the destiny of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Attracted by the clarity of the doctrines of the Church, and electrified by the existence of a living prophet who had seen and conversed with the Father and the Son, Francis joined the Church in 1832. Soon after, heeding the counsel of the Prophet Joseph Smith, twenty-one-year-old Francis Lee moved to Missouri to help strengthen the Church in what the Saints called "the land of Zion." This was the first of many moves the young convert would make at the direction of his leaders, or because of his commitment to the Church, moves which were never convenient, which entailed major turmoil in his living arrangements, and which were usually made with little or no advance notice. So far as is known, Francis Lee never complained about the inconvenience of these moves, about the upset they created in his personal and family life, or about the deterring effect they had on his ability to plan for the future. There can be little doubt that the dedication of Francis Lee to the cause of the Church was a strong incentive to the great-grandson, Harold B. Lee, to rise above mediocrity.

In Missouri, Francis met and married Jane Vail Johnson, a poised young lady, who had previously joined the Church and who shared his convictions about its divine origins. The nuptials took place on October 24, 1835, in Liberty, Clay County, Missouri, the site of the dreary jail where the Prophet Joseph Smith would later be imprisoned. The Lees, optimistic about the future, yet unaware of the impending tragedy that would overtake the Missouri Saints, established the foundations of their family in Liberty. Later, however, knowing that a temple site had been designated there and attracted by the character of the community, they moved to Far West where most of the principal leaders of the Church then resided. It was there in Far West, in 1838, that the world of Francis and Jane Lee and their two children seemed to crumble. Fueled by Governor Lilburn Boggs's order to exterminate the Mormons and by the spirit of mobocracy that ruled the day, the Lees and thousands of other Latter-day Saints were uprooted from their homes and were driven across the Mississippi River into Illinois.

At first, Francis and his family sought refuge in Payson, Adams County, Illinois. It was here, on January 8, 1840, that Harold's grandfather, Samuel Marion Lee, Sr., was born. Three years later, attracted by its prosperity and by the beautiful temple being constructed there, the Lees moved to Nauvoo, then the mecca of Mormondom. They had barely settled into their new home when the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother, Hyrum, shattered any dreams of peace and stability the Lees may have had.

Victims of the wave of anti-Mormon sentiment that washed over Illinois after the martyrdom, Francis and his family prepared to join the exodus of the Latter-day Saints. With a company of 225 other refugees, they crossed the Mississippi on February 14, 1845, and during the next four months, toiled their way across the plains of Iowa, arriving at Council Bluffs, Iowa, on June 14. The Lees remained at the temporary Mormon camps on the Missouri River for five years as they planned the second leg of their migration to the Rocky Mountains.

While there, by a quirk of fate, Francis was reunited with his father, from whom he had been separated for many years. His father, attracted by the reports of the gold strike, was on his way to California on foot. However, Francis persuaded him to join the Saints in their exodus, and upon arriving in Utah, persuaded him to remain there. He joined the Church in 1851 in Tooele.

Tragedy struck the Lees in the summer of 1850 as their immigrant company prepared to leave for the Rockies. They were at the staging area on the Platte River west of Winter Quarters when cholera broke out. Several victims died. One of them was Francis and Jane's little boy, Jacob Edward. He was buried there in a lonely grave whose makeshift marker was later destroyed.

By this time, the trail westward was well marked and frequently used. The Lees' company made the tiring trip without incident, arriving in the Salt Lake Valley on September 17, 1850.

A spirit of enterprise and high expectation infused this new Mormon mecca when the Lees arrived in Salt Lake City. The Church leaders were directing an ambitious plan of colonization whose object was to settle Mormon families in all the valleys throughout the mountainous area. The Lees willingly followed the suggestion of the Brethren that they settle in the Tooele Valley, thirty miles west of Salt Lake City at the southern end of the Great Salt Lake. Here, during a period of twelve years, the Lee family put down deep roots, building a comfortable home while cultivating their fields, tending their animals, and enjoying the religious and cultural life of the close-knit Mormon community. It was the first time since their marriage that Francis and Jane had been allowed to remain long enough in one place to enjoy the fruits of their labors. They were ill prepared, therefore, for the bombshell that exploded at the general conference in April 1862. Without prior consultation, it was announced from the stand that Francis Lee and his family were called to move south to settle and to help build up an area popularly called "Dixie." No subsidy was offered to help them in the move, nor were they given assistance or advice in liquidating their holdings in Tooele. They were expected to use their intelligence and ingenuity to fulfill the "call," which had come from one whom they sustained as a prophet, so they went without complaint or remonstrance.

Arriving at St. George, which was the focal point of the Dixie colonization, Francis was asked to settle in Meadow Valley to the west. The Mormon community that grew up there came to be known as Panaca, located in the territory, later the state, of Nevada.

The Lees' first home in this remote Mormon outpost was a dugout, gouged out of a hill. The front part of their dwelling was covered by timbers punched into the hill and covered with clay. Here fifty-one-year-old Francis Lee began to till the land, starting over at an age when most men of that day looked forward to retirement or to a reduced work load.

Samuel Marion Lee, Sr., the twenty-two-year-old son of Francis and Jane, had been left in Tooele to help wind up family affairs when his parents went south to Panaca. The following year, he married seventeen-year-old Margaret McMurrin, a perky and pretty lass, whose Scottish blood would add another vital ancestral strain to their future grandson, Harold Bingham Lee.

Margaret's father, Joseph McMurrin, was born in Crossmaloof, Scotland, while her mother, Margaret Leaing, was born in Glasgow. Joseph and Margaret were married in Glasgow in 1842, and their daughter Margaret was born there on May 13, 1846.

A few years after Margaret's birth, the McMurrin family migrated to the United States, presumably in search of greater economic opportunity. They found that, and much more. In their adopted country, they came in contact with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, were converted to its doctrines, and, in 1854, were baptized. The following year the McMurrin clan, including nine-year-old Margaret, following the counsel of the Church leaders, migrated to Utah. They settled first in Tooele where Joseph plied his trade as a cooper. The McMurrins later moved to Salt Lake City, where they settled permanently, but not before daughter Margaret had married Samuel Marion Lee, Sr. About the same time, Margaret's sister, Mary, married Francis Lee, Jr., Samuel's brother.

Once the family holdings in Tooele had been closed out, Samuel and Francis Jr. and their wives moved to Panaca to assist the Lee parents in their pioneering effort.

The mission they had undertaken was fraught with difficulties. Starting from scratch, they had to break up and cultivate the virgin soil, prepare their own irrigation system, and go through a period of experimentation to determine which crops thrived best in that climate and the length of the growing season. Meanwhile, they were occupied in their "off" hours building permanent homes and Church buildings, performing their ecclesiastical duties, and mediating disputes with the surrounding Indian tribes. At one point the relations with the Indians, who were understandably irked by the intrusions of the settlers upon their ancestral lands, had become so volatile that the Mormon leaders authorized the Saints to abandon Meadow Valley and to move elsewhere. While at times that may have seemed to be an attractive alternative, and one which some of the other settlers opted for, the Lees did not take it. They toughed it out. The headstones of several generations of Lees found in Panaca's cemetery attest to the spunky durability and determination of the clan.

Francis and Jane Lee had ten children, seven sons and three daughters. During the early years of the Panaca settlement, most of the children who survived to maturity quite regularly added to the growing progeny of their parents, giving them grandchildren to dote upon and to spoil. The notable exception was Samuel and Margaret. From the time of their marriage in 1863 until 1875, they were childless. It was not that they did not want children or had not tried to have them. Indeed, during that period, Margaret had conceived eleven times, but her babies were either stillborn or lived for only a few hours. After ten failures, Margaret, who during most of her married life was very frail, almost despaired of having a child who would survive. But while on a trip to Salt Lake to visit her family, she received a remarkable blessing from Patriarch Abel Lamb who promised her, "you shall have a son and he shall be a mighty man in Israel and his name shall be the name of his father." One can imagine Margaret's joy at receiving the blessing and yet her anguish when the first child conceived after she had received it was stillborn. But, the twelfth and last one, a son, survived, although the circumstances made it doubtful he would do so. The child, who was born prematurely on November 22, 1875, weighed only three-and-a-half pounds. Margaret, exhausted by the ordeal, lived only eight days afterward, then passed away. She was twenty-nine. Her miracle child was named Samuel Marion Lee, Jr., as the patriarch had decreed. He would become the father of the prophet, Harold B. Lee. Elements of Margaret's travail and Patriarch Lamb's blessing are reminiscent of Hannah's fervent prayers for a son, whom she received through the blessing of the priest Eli and who was also named Samuel. (See 1 Samuel, chapter 1.)

At the outset, there was serious doubt whether Margaret's son would grow to manhood. he was so weak and tiny, and after only eight days of life, he was also motherless. It was providential that at Margaret's death her sister, Mary, was nursing her own baby. She took Samuel into her home and, for six months, nursed him in tandem with her own child. However, by the spring of 1876, Mary was exhausted from the physical demands of nursing and caring for two babies. Out of family consultations came the decision to take Samuel to Salt Lake City to be cared for by Grandmother Margaret Leaing McMurrin. By then the baby was strong enough to endure the two-week trip to Salt Lake by horse and buggy.

What was originally intended as a place of temporary refuge for Samuel became his permanent home, at least until he was eighteen years old, when Grandmother McMurrin died. By the time his father had remarried and was able to provide a suitable family environment for him, Samuel had been fully integrated into the McMurrin household. All agreed at that time that the boy's best interests would be served by leaving him in the McMurrin home. Afterward the father visited his son as often as the long distance and the demands of pioneer living in Panaca allowed. And when Samuel grew into boyhood, he occasionally went to Panaca during the summer, where he was exposed to life on the farm and to his numerous Lee relatives who lived there.

It is inferred that an important reason why Samuel remained in Salt Lake was the educational and cultural advantages life in the city offered, advantages that would never exist in Panaca. The McMurrins lived on Sixth South and Main Street, only a mile south of Temple Square. For several years during his adolescence, Samuel's grandfather was in charge of the temple grounds. There the grandson witnessed the tedious process by which the majestic building was erected, stone by stone. Often he visited the unique, domed tabernacle on Temple Square, which by the time of his birth had been fully completed and in use for several years. Here he occasionally saw some of the high leaders of the Church, apostles and prophets, never imagining that one day his own son would stand as the chief living apostle and the prophet of the Church.

The McMurrin home was located within walking distance of both school and church. The family belonged to the Eighth Ward, where the grandfather served in the bishopric for many years. On February 1, 1876, a few months before Samuel came into the home of his grandparents to live, his uncle, Joseph W. McMurrin, who later became a member of the First Council of Seventy, left the family home to fill a colonizing mission in Arizona. The uncle was only seventeen years old at the time. He returned two years later and for a while lived with his parents before he married and established his own household. As he was only a baby at the time, Samuel undoubtedly had little awareness of these and of other events around his grandparents' home until later. As he grew older, however, he learned that his grandfather had taken a plural wife, Jeanette Irvine, whom he married in 1869 and by whom he sired nine children. These children were Samuel's aunts and uncles, as were the children of his Grandmother Margaret Leaing McMurrin, even though some of them were younger than he. So from his earliest days of remembrance, Harold B. Lee's father learned about the practical and the personal aspects of polygamy. He also learned about the trauma endured by some polygamous families when, during the 1880s, his Grandfather McMurrin was convicted of unlawful cohabitation and was imprisoned in the Utah penitentiary for six months. Samuel's sense of trauma was undoubtedly heightened during this period when his uncle, Joseph W. McMurrin, was shot twice in the abdomen by a trigger-happy officer who was trying to gather evidence of unlawful cohabitation. It was feared that these wounds would prove to be fatal. However, following an apostolic blessing given by Elder John Henry Smith of the Twelve, the uncle recovered and, as already mentioned, lived to become a General Authority of the Church.

These stressful times ended with the announcement of the Manifesto in 1890; and three years later the whole Church rejoiced when the Salt Lake Temple was dedicated by President Wilford Woodruff.

Margaret Leaing McMurrin lived only five months after this historic event. She died on September 4, 1893. Her passing marked another milestone in the life of Samuel Marion Lee, Jr. He was seventeen years old at the time, turning eighteen two months later. He might have returned to Panaca then had not his father died three years before. In mulling his options, Samuel decided to accept the invitation of his aunt, Jeanette McMurrin Davis, and her husband, Riley, to live with them and to help operate their farm at Clifton, Idaho. It was this decision that led Samuel into an acquaintance with the Bingham family, who lived in the upper Cache Valley, and more particularly with Louisa Emeline Bingham, who would become his wife. It was this unusual woman, whose roots also extended deep into Great Britain, who would provide the final ancestral mix for the son who became the President of the Mormon church.

For generations the Binghams had tilled the soil. Levi Perry Bingham, Harold B. Lee's great-grandfather, was known as one of the most careful and exacting farmers in the Cache Valley. He was born in Canada, joined the Mormon church as a teenager, and, after the expulsion of the Saints from Illinois, was swept up in the exodus. At age twenty he married Elizabeth Lusk at Council Bluffs, Iowa, while preparing for the trek to Utah. He farmed at Pleasant Grove and Payson, Utah, before settling in Clifton. While he lived in Pleasant Grove in 1857, his son Perry Calvin was born, the grandfather of President Lee. Perry Calvin, who learned farming from his father, moved with the family to Clifton, where he became established with his wife, Elvira Henderson of Kaysville, Utah, whom he married in 1875 at age eighteen. He later branched out into freighting and livestock brokering, was elected sheriff and assessor of Oneida County, and finally was appointed deputy warden of the Idaho State Prison at Boise. The second child of Perry Calvin and Rachel Elvira Bingham was Louisa Emeline Bingham, Harold B. Lee's mother. She was born at Clifton on January 1, 1879.

Louisa's older sister, Sarah, died when she was three years old. Because her mother was ill most of the time, almost to the point of being an invalid, Louisa had much of the responsibility to nurse her mother, to care for the household, and to supervise the younger children. Occasionally, when her father was away, she also had responsibility for some of the outside chores. Under this regimen, Louisa matured very fast. Indeed, it might be said that she never had the luxury of being a child.

Samuel worked on the Davis farm for several years, quickly learning the skills that were neglected during his growing-up years in Salt Lake City. In Clifton he met, courted, and married Louisa Bingham, who was four years younger than he. The couple travelled by horse and buggy to Logan, Utah, where, on May 13, 1896, they were endowed and sealed in the temple. The sealing ceremony was performed by Marriner W. Merrill, president of the temple and later a member of the Council of the Twelve.
