Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Two

Childhood

Clifton, where Samuel and Louisa Lee made their home, lies on the west flank of the upper Cache Valley. Its name was derived from a high rocky cliff that towers over the community to the west. It is one of several string towns settled by Mormon colonists in the 1860s, including Oxford to the north and Dayton and Weston to the south, all of which are overshadowed by the mountains to the west. Several miles southeast of Clifton, in the center of the valley, is Franklin, Idaho, founded in 1855 by the Latter-day Saints. To the north of Franklin, on the east side of the valley, lies Whitney, the birthplace of Ezra Taft Benson, and Preston, the site of the Oneida Stake Academy. It was here that Harold Lee and "T" Benson, born only five months and several miles apart, would first become acquainted. In the north end of the valley is Red Rock Pass where, the geologists theorize, the walls of ancient Lake Bonneville were breached, allowing its waters to drain into the Snake River. The Great Salt Lake, it is also theorized, is the remnant of this vast inland freshwater lake.

Because these communities had been founded of such recent date, they were very rudimentary at the time Samuel and Louisa set up housekeeping on a small farm in Clifton. They had no modern conveniences. There was no indoor plumbing, no electricity, and no central heating. At first, water was carried from a well or stream. Later when it was piped in, the water needed for laundering or personal hygiene was heated on the kitchen stove. Baths were taken in a washtub. Lighting was by kerosene or gas lamps. As electrification was introduced into the valley and as other modern conveniences were added, life became more comfortable. But it was never easy.

The high elevation of the Cache Valley greatly shortened the growing season, and late spring or early summer storms or freezes would sometimes blight the crops. There was ample fertile land available, but water was scarce. The farms were irrigated from the Twin Lake reservoir, which was fed by Mink Creek or from flowing wells that had been successfully dug. But there was seldom a surplus. Farming here was labor intensive, and before the Lee boys were old enough to do farm work, Louisa often pitched in to help with the lighter outside chores. She was an expert rider and had a pony named Maude that she rode often, either in helping Samuel or as a means of transportation. In addition to the crops needed to feed their cattle, the Lees had a truck garden and an orchard that provided vegetables and fruits for the table. Surpluses were bottled for use during the off-season. Chickens and a cow provided milk and eggs for their diet, and what meat they needed came from their own cattle and hogs. What little cash they had was derived chiefly from the sale of their cattle or surplus crops. A downturn in market prices could be as devastating as an unseasonable freeze.

While the Lees never went hungry, indeed they always had an ample diet, they, like other farmers in the area, lived frugally because of the lack of money to buy the things that could not be produced on the farm. This fostered a sense of ingenuity and resourcefulness to make do with what they had. So, notwithstanding a slender cash income, the Lee household presented an image of material abundance. This was in large part the result of Louisa's industry and skill as a homemaker. She was an expert seamstress, so most of the clothing of the children was the product of her needle and her treadle sewing machine. She had an innate artistic sense, which manifested itself in a flair for flower arrangements and in the careful selection of colors and fabrics to decorate the home. The years of her adolescence when she practically ran the Bingham household single-handedly had given Louisa a marvelous sense of competence and independence that was reflected in the orderliness of the Lee home and in the obedience of the children, which her positive and forthright character engendered.

Meanwhile, Samuel, the father, not only provided the brain and brawn necessary to make the farm produce a livelihood for his family, he also provided the kind of spiritual and intellectual leadership that imbued its members with a sense of purpose. Judging from the frequency with which he mentioned it, he was very conscious of the miraculous aspects of his birth. And judging from the intense interest he had in his ancestry, the father also seemed to sense that his line was destined to play an important role in the unfolding drama of the Church. Samuel's preoccupation with his family lineage was dramatized when he compiled 1,500 sheets of genealogical records. He then laboriously made copies of them by hand for members of the family, often with the approval of his employer, toiling over them while he supervised a night maintenance crew at Salt Lake's ZCMI department store. All this, added to his calm personality and his dignified bearing, created a patriarchal quality in Samuel Marion Lee, Jr., a quality that surfaced often. For instance, when sending Harold into the mission field, he told the son that he expected big things from him. And it surfaced again when, after Elder Lee had been called to the Twelve, the father gave him a special blessing as the apostle prepared to leave on an important assignment in the Pacific.

Samuel Lee, therefore, was a true patriarch in his family, a status that was enhanced by the many Church positions he held during his lifetime. His official Church career began shortly after marriage when he was made an assistant to the superintendent of the Sunday School in the Clifton Ward. Later, he became the superintendent, serving for five years. In that capacity, he had the responsibility to supervise gospel instruction for both children and adults in the ward, and thereby had the incentive to increase his knowledge of Church doctrine. Later he became a member of the ward bishopric, following which he was sustained as the bishop, a position he held for nine years, being released after Harold had completed his mission. So, from the moment of Elder Lee's birth until the time he left the family home, his father was heavily and continuously engaged in Church work. That influence carried into the home, where the principles and practices of Mormonism were a dominant factor. Family prayers and scripture study were a regular part of the daily routine, and the children saw in their parents' conduct a demonstration of how religious principles are applied to daily living.

In the Lee home there was a genuine concern for the welfare of others. Bishop Lee was a devoted shepherd of his flock, attending to the temporal and spiritual needs of the widows and others in his ward who required special attention. Louisa, who was skilled in nursing and midwifery, was often called on to comfort the sick or to preside at the delivery of a baby. And, of course, she used her healing arts in aid of her own family, applying the wellknown home remedies of the day, chief among which were the clammy mustard plaster for chest colds, a hot onion or camphor for the earache, and cloves for the toothache. Because of the prevalence of pulmonary ailments and children's diseases in these rural communities, and because of the scarcity of professionally trained doctors, there was a greater reliance at the time than at present on priesthood administrations to heal the sick. Accordingly, Harold and the other children in the Lee home became witnesses at an early age of their father exercising his priesthood authority to bless the sick or to bring comfort to those who were troubled or who mourned.

They also became aware, when very young, of special spiritual qualities that their mother possessed. Louisa was prayerful by nature and frequently offered special, secret prayers for the welfare of her family. A notable example of this characteristic, handed down in family lore, was her earnest prayer for Harold's success in a school debate. With this habit of prayerfulness was an innate spiritual sense that prompted her to act instinctively in cases where members of her family were in peril. One such instance occurred in Harold's childhood when his mother, during an electrical storm at Clifton, suddenly, without warning or apparent reason, pushed him sprawling out of the doorway of the family home. Soon after a bolt of lightning flashed down the chimney and out through the door where Harold had been standing, scorching a huge gash in a tree that stood in the yard. Had not the mother acted with such promptness, it is likely the future prophet would have been killed. On another occasion, Louisa, moved by an impulse she could not explain, insisted that Samuel go in search of their son. The father found Harold in a pool of half-frozen mud where he had been thrown when his horse stumbled while crossing a stream. Louisa never attempted to define the source or the scope of this instinct, nor to elaborate on the sensations that accompanied its manifestations. It was sufficient that she felt impelled to take the action that the moment dictated, without preplan and without any consideration about the consequences of it.

This quality of spiritual sensitivity, so evident in Louisa Bingham Lee, was even more pronounced in her prophet-son. Of all the unusual qualities revealed in Harold B. Lee at the height of his powers, none was more pronounced nor more intriguing to witness than the sudden infusion of spiritual insights that he sporadically received. So confident was he of their source and of their validity that he acted upon them without hesitation in a manner not unlike his mother's impulsive action that sent him sprawling during the electrical storm in Clifton. It seems to have been this quality that caused many of President Lee's associates to refer to him as a "seer." And it was this quality that gave his leadership a special sense of immediacy and excitement. In the presence of Harold B. Lee, no one ever quite knew when the lightning would strike, when, because of a whispering or a spiritual impulse, an unforeseen chain of events would suddenly be set in motion. His actions on these occasions were reminiscent of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who, for instance, initiated the vast network of international proselyting by the Church merely by whispering to Heber C. Kimball in the Kirtland Temple about a spiritual impression he had just received, directing Elder Kimball to open the door to the preaching of the gospel in Great Britain. This same quality was manifested often during Harold B. Lee's apostolic ministry.

Other qualities in the character of Louisa Lee that, in varying degrees, were reflected in the personality of her famous son were a delightful sense of humor, extraordinary willpower, and a refreshing frankness. It was never necessary to wonder about Louisa Lee's meaning or about how one stood in her estimation. She spoke openly in words not to be misunderstood. So it was with her son. President Lee was forthright in all his conversations and dealings. He left no room for speculation about what he meant or how he felt. This induced an extraordinary sense of obedience and diligence among his associates and subordinates. To many of them, he was like the disciplined coach whom they wanted to please and to emulate. And, like his mother, he had extraordinary willpower. Louisa showed this quality when she summarily rejected the opinion of the doctors that her husband's death was imminent, checked him out of the hospital, and with the help of her sons, took him home. There she nursed him for a year before he died. Hints of a similar determination in the son will be seen in the way in which Elder Lee, in the face of doubts, carping criticism, and opposition, shepherded the welfare program through its infancy to the place of eminence it ultimately occupied.

While Samuel and Louisa Lee lacked opportunities for higher education, they were studious, enjoyed books, and cultivated a sense of scholarship in their home. This attitude was enhanced when, during the early years of their marriage, Samuel taught school during the off-season to supplement the income generated from the family farm. In such an environment, children were inclined toward intellectual and scholarly pursuits. Given this bent, the son Harold quite naturally gravitated toward a career in teaching during his earlier adult years.

Against this background, the home into which Harold Bingham Lee was born on March 28, 1899, was one characterized by religious conviction, intellectual interests, orderliness, and an overriding sense of urgency and uncertainty, which farm life induces. It was in this environment that he would begin to develop the skills, the capacities, and the qualities of character that would fit him for the prophetic office.

Harold was the second of six children born into the family of Samuel and Louisa Lee. The first child, Samuel Perry, was three years older than he. The other four, Clyde, Waldo, Stella, and Verda, would be born during the following ten years. Harold was a picture perfect baby—healthy, active, and appealing. As he grew into childhood, the most striking things about his appearance were his large, searching brown eyes and an abundant growth of dark, wavy hair. Perhaps betraying a secret hope that her second child would be a girl, Louisa insisted on letting the baby's hair grow; and when it was sufficiently long, she began to fashion it into long ringlets in the style of Little Lord Fauntleroy. In keeping with that image, Louisa spent long hours making clothes for Harold worthy of his hair: white shirts with ruffles in front, starched cuffs, and a white middy that was draped over the shoulder of a handsome coat, all set off with a large, flamboyant black tie. It is difficult to image such an outfit for a boy living in the rustic village of Clifton around the turn of the century. And Harold seems to have shared that view. When he went to school dressed like that and with his hair in ringlets, he naturally attracted wide attention. It was embarrassing and annoying when he became the butt of his classmates' jokes. He was angered when they pulled on his ringlets and taunted him for looking like a girl. Unwilling to submit meekly to these insults, Harold retaliated in kind, precipitating fist fights and wrestling matches. He apparently decided quite soon that this was no way to get an education and borrowing his mother's scissors cut off the front ringlets. This ruined the whole effect. Grandfather Bingham, apparently sympathetic to Harold's plight, finished the job, cutting off all the ringlets and shaping the boy's hair into a style that made him less conspicuous and more acceptable to his classmates. We get the idea that Louisa mourned over this, for she saved the ringlets. Years later when her father was the assistant warden at the penitentiary in Boise, she arranged with him to have one the prisoners, known for his skill in handicrafts, braid the curls into two attractive watch chains. One of these later became the prized possession of President Lee's first wife, Fern.

This incident occurred when Harold was only five years old, the age at which he started school. He was allowed to start early because he was very bright and because his mother had taught him some of the basics at home. This seemed to set a pattern that was repeated often throughout his life, a pattern that saw Harold B. Lee reach milestones at a younger age than his peers. He was ordained a deacon at age ten, was a school principal in his teens, became both a stake president and a Salt Lake City commissioner in his early thirties, was the managing director of the Church Welfare Department in his mid-thirties, and was ordained a member of the Twelve in his early forties. His precocity and maturity always belied his chronological age. His confident demeanor and bearing made Harold B. Lee seem older than he actually was. There was a certain dignity there, a certain sense about him, which conveyed the impression that he had always been an adult. It was an inherent quality whose roots seemed to extend back beyond the moment of his earthly birth. It was a spiritual quality that implied a pre-earth life where his character and personality had been molded and honed.

The rural school Harold and his brothers and sisters attended was located two miles from the Lee farm. In good weather, they could walk there along Clifton's one and only north-south road, which formed the spine of the town's street system. When the weather was bad, they used whatever mode of transportation ingenuity could devise: horseback, wagon, buggy pooling with neighbors, or sleigh when there was deep snow. If the weather was extremely bad, they stayed home. Like all rural schools of the day, scheduling was ordered around the demands of planting and harvesting so as to accommodate the labor needs on the farms. Fortunate, indeed, was the farmer who had sons who could help carry the heavy and continuing burden of work. And, notwithstanding Louisa's inordinate yearning for a girl, she and Samuel must have considered themselves fortunate that their first four children were boys. Each of the sons, in turn, as he became old enough and strong enough, took his place in the Lee's labor force to help carry on their family enterprise.

As already mentioned, in addition to the farm acreage, which consisted of a hundred acres of bottomlands, where their wheat and the feed for their animals were grown, the Lees had a garden, an orchard, cows, horses, pigs, and chickens. All these required special attention. Each member of the family had specified duties that spread the work load and, in the process, created in each one a sense of responsibility and self-worth. As indicated, money was scarce and came either from school teaching salaries, the sale of any surpluses, or from "hiring out" to neighboring farmers who lacked homegrown manpower.

But farm life was not all work. There were times, especially during the winter months, when the work slacked off, leaving time for leisure and the pursuit of personal hobbies or interests. At an early age, Harold developed a liking for music, especially the piano, although he also learned to play several wind instruments. His piano teacher was Sarah Gerard, a doughty Scottish lady, who would playfully rap Harold's knuckles at the sound of a sour note. The skill he acquired at the piano and organ was one which yielded rich rewards throughout his life, either in personal satisfaction or in the enjoyment he provided others. As a youth in Clifton, he often served as the accompanist at Primary and Sunday School. This skill followed him into the mission field where he was frequently called on to provide the music for various gatherings. It even followed him into the Quorum of the Twelve, where, for many years, he served as the organist at the weekly meetings of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve held in the upper room of the Salt Lake Temple. Indeed, he was still performing that function in the spring of 1970, but soon thereafter relinquished it to Elder Spencer W. Kimball, who continued as the official organist of the Brethren until after he became the president of the Church. Harold's skill with the horn earned him a spot in Mr. Cox's Clifton Silver Concert Band. This was his first experience with a musical group. As we shall see, it would not be his last.

Amidst work on the farm, school, and his music, Harold found ample time for the usual boyhood pleasures. He was an agile and well-coordinated athlete, enjoying the competitive sports of the day. Basketball was a favorite. There was fishing in the mountain streams. One of these fed what was called "Bybee Pond" located on property owned by Lester Bybee. It was in this pool that Harold was baptized by Lester Bybee on June 9, 1907. He was confirmed the same day, a Sunday, by his bishop, E. G. Farmer. It is inferred the baptism was postponed beyond Harold's eighth birthday because the water in the Bybee Pond was too cold. Indeed, in late March there could still have been ice on it, and at that elevation, the water was probably bracingly cold even on June 9. For whatever reason, the event made a lasting impression on him. Several decades later as Elder Harold B. Lee sat beside Glen L. Rudd at a Church meeting, Lester Bybee offered the invocation. Afterward, Elder Lee whispered to his companion: "That man baptized me."

"He what?" asked Glen Rudd in disbelief.

"He baptized me," Elder Lee answered.

Glen let that information seep into his brain during the meeting, and then afterward, to make sure he had it right, he asked Elder Lee again, "Did you say that that man baptized you?"

"Yes," came the answer, "is there anything wrong with that?" Some time later when Glen Rudd, who was a longtime associate of his in welfare work, was with Elder Lee in Cache Valley, he persuaded him to drive to Clifton so he could see exactly where that extraordinary event took place. And it was an extraordinary event, marking the official entrance into the Church of one who was destined to become its presiding officer. (As related to the author by Glen L. Rudd.)

President Lee did not grow to maturity in Clifton without his share of trial, trauma, and testing. One of the most significant events that occurred there during this period introduced him to the realm of the spirit and demonstrated his obedience to spiritual promptings. It occurred when Harold had accompanied his father to Dayton, south of Clifton, where Samuel Lee owned a small forty-acre farm. While the father was busy with his chores, the son began exploring. Seeing the remnants of some old outbuildings, which had collapsed, Harold parted the strands of the wire fence to go inspect them. An audible voice warned, "Harold, don't go near that lumber over there." He heeded the warning and, frightened, turned back. He never knew whether danger lurked there or whether the warning was given merely to test his response to a spiritual prompting. The Prophet Joseph Smith occasionally tested the obedience of his followers by instructing them to do unusual things. And the breeders of thoroughbreds have been known to command a thirsty horse to "stay" before a stream of water to test the limits of its discipline. We shall never know whether such a purpose accounted for this spiritual warning to the boy, Harold Lee. One thing is clear, however. It demonstrated the obedient reaction, in a stressful situation, of one destined to fill a high place. The incident would have had little meaning for an omniscient God who knew beforehand how he would react. But it was doubtless an experience fraught with meaning for the young boy who thereby learned about the reality of the spiritual world and that there were beings there who were interested in protecting him.

Judging from some of the experiences he had in Clifton, Harold needed protection. Without the protecting care of his mother and others in time of dire need, he would have been disfigured, or maimed, or would not have survived to adulthood. We have already seen how his mother's swift reaction saved him from instantaneous death by lightning. Later she saved him from a lingering death through the creative application of her nursing skills. Harold once lay gravely ill with pneumonia. Louisa first sought to reduce the congestion and to lower Harold's fever by applying a series of mustard plasters. They did nothing but turn his chest a fiery red. She then resorted to the ultimate remedy of the practical nurse in such cases. Slicing an apron full of onions into a pan of boiling water, she strained out the water and put the hot onion mass in a cloth sack which she then placed on Harold's chest. Then she prayed. By morning the patient was breathing more easily. That marked the turning point. He was soon healed. Typically, Louisa turned away compliments about her nursing skill, attributing her son's recovery to the blessings of God.

Another time, Louisa, in the process of making soap, had prepared a lye concoction that she had placed in a pan on a high shelf out of the reach of the little children. When she was ready to use the concoction, the mother asked Harold to help get it down. Standing together on a chair, they carefully lifted the pan off the shelf and were starting to lower it when it slipped. The pan flipped over, dumping the contents over Harold's head, face, and arms. Reacting immediately, Louisa held her son to prevent him from running away, kicked the lid off of a large container of beet pickles she had put up, and cupping her right hand, dipped out the pickle vinegar, which she splashed over the affected areas of Harold's body. The vinegar neutralized the lye, which prevented any scarring.

Years before when Louisa and her mother were bottling fruit, Harold drank from a cup he thought contained fruit juice. Instead, it contained a lye solution used to remove fruit particles caked in the pans. Immediately they grabbed him to pour olive oil down his throat, thereby averting injury or death.

Again, Harold accidentally caught his right hand in the milk separator, stripping the flesh from one of the fingers. At first, Louisa was so sickened by the sight that she was immobilized. Fortunately, Bishop Farmer stopped by at that moment and pulled the skin over the exposed bone. Regaining her composure, Louisa then bandaged the wound, which healed readily but left a jagged scar. However, it never prevented Harold from playing the piano.

Except for two memorable trips, the future prophet spent his entire childhood within a few miles of the house in Clifton where he was born. In company with his mother, Perry, and Clyde, he travelled to Boise, the state capital, to visit Louisa's parents. Harold and his brothers had never seen such a big place, although Boise at that time could not have had a population of more than ten thousand. Of the many new things they saw there, nothing seems to have impressed them as much as the penitentiary, where, as already noted, Grandfather Bingham was the deputy warden. In his maturity, Harold reflected on some of the things he saw during this visit. One Sunday his grandfather took him to a church service at the prison. He reported nothing about the program, but vividly described the impressions made upon him by the sight of hundreds of prisoners dressed in their striped uniforms. Even more memorable was the angry inmate cook who ran Harold and Perry out of the guard's kitchen with a butcher knife. Any argument of the cook that he only wanted to frighten the boys who had no right to be in his kitchen was unavailing. He got three days in solitary on bread and water.

The boys also witnessed the drama of an attempted escape. When a prisoner broke away from a work detail, Grandfather Bingham led a search and capture team that included bloodhounds. The baying of the dogs and the hurried excitement of their grandfather and his men as they armed themselves made a deep impression on the boys. However, their grandmother prohibited them from watching the climax of the drama. Concerned that the sight of the shackled prisoner, in his striped uniform, surrounded by the barking dogs and the armed guards, would leave a lasting and harmful impression on the minds of her grandchildren, Louisa's mother pulled down the shades of their house, which was adjacent to the prison, so Harold and his brothers couldn't see the end.

The second memorable trip took Harold to Salt Lake City with his father and Perry. Samuel wanted his sons to see where he was raised. More important, he wanted them to experience the excitement of a general conference of the Church. Louisa prepared a large basket of food for the travelers, which featured mounds of fried chicken, and saw them off to nearby Franklin where they caught the train to Salt Lake City. One who can remember his first ride on a steam engine train can imagine the excitement of Harold and Perry as the monstrous engine, spewing steam and smoke and sounding its shrill whistle, ground to a halt at the Franklin station. It was a busy time of the year for the railroad as many Latter-day Saints living in the upper Cache Valley and points north travelled to Salt Lake City to attend general conference. Boarding the train with other passengers who had waited at the Franklin station, Samuel and his two wide-eyed sons settled down for the three-hour trip. Passing through Logan they could see, on the crest of a hill to the east, the massive temple where Samuel and Louisa were married. Winding its way out of the Cache Valley, the train headed south, passing through the string of small communities, which, during the preceding sixty years, had been settled by the Latter-day Saints along the west flank of the Wasatch Mountains. At some of them, the train stopped to take on more passengers or to drop some off who were not destined for Salt Lake City.

Given the Mormon custom at that day of "doubling up" during conference, it is inferred that Samuel and his sons were guests in the home of one of their numerous McMurrin relatives. The family had gained wide prominence through the call of Samuel's uncle, Joseph W. McMurrin, to the First Council of Seventy in 1897, two years before Harold was born.

Samuel's sons had been told much about Salt Lake City. That their great-grandfather, Joseph McMurrin, had once supervised the maintenance of the grounds on Temple Square was a matter of family lore. To see these grounds in person brought to reality what they had been told about them or had seen in pictures. Here stood the imposing granite-walled temple, dedicated only a few years before, and the domed Tabernacle from whose pulpit all the presidents of the Church, except the Prophet Joseph Smith, had addressed the Saints. When Samuel and the boys went to Temple Square to attend a session of general conference, they found long lines queued up waiting to enter the Tabernacle. They had not arrived in time to find seating on the main floor and so were directed to the south balcony. From that vantage point, they had a close-up view of the holes in the ceiling of the building, used in the early days as apertures for ropes by which platforms were raised to the ceiling to clean or paint it. They also had a clear view of the huge organ in the west end of the building, which overshadowed the choir seats and the stands on which the General Authorities were seated. Here, for the first time, Harold B. Lee saw a prophet of God in person, President Joseph F. Smith. Tall, bearded, and austere looking, President Smith likely presented to the boy from Clifton an image similar to that of the biblical prophets. Seated on either side of President Smith were his counselors, John R. Winder and Anthon H. Lund, also bearded and also quite austere in appearance and demeanor. Harold never met and shook hands with President Joseph F. Smith. But on the stand that day were four future presidents of the Church, members of the Twelve, with whom he would later have an intimate acquaintance: Heber J. Grant, George Albert Smith, David O. McKay, and Joseph Fielding Smith. It was President Grant, of course, who, thirty-four years later, would call Harold B. Lee to the Twelve. Following President Grant's death, Elder Lee would serve in that same capacity with George Albert Smith and David O. McKay, and when Joseph Fielding Smith became the prophet, Harold B. Lee would be called as his first counselor.

While Harold's attention would have been riveted on these men seated on the stand, it is undoubtedly true that none of them was aware of his presence, or even of his existence. Only the maturing of events in the years ahead would bring them into a personal relationship as special witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ.

How often, as in this case, are adults oblivious of the potential and the coming eminence of the children in their midst? All of us, even the greatest of all, began as babies. Mark well, then, how you treat that rowdy, ruddy boy, or that little slip of a girl, so vulnerable and so dependent. Tomorrow may find them in positions of prominence, power, or prestige that you never thought possible, a status far beyond anything you could have conceived. We seldom know the true identity of those with whom we deal, especially among the young. In the same way, seldom do the young apprehend exactly who they are or what they may become. Such recognition usually comes only with maturity. So it is safe to infer that as the young Harold B. Lee gazed down upon President Joseph F. Smith from the south balcony of the Tabernacle that day, he had no inkling that one day in the future, he would occupy that place and would be invested with the vast authority and influence that inheres in the presiding high priest of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. If the full truth were known, it is likely that at that stage of his development, Harold's modest goals and expectations did not extend beyond completing the requirements of the rustic school at Clifton or, perhaps, the Oneida Stake Academy, or beyond acquiring some competence with the piano or the horn.
