Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Three

The Student

Harold Lee completed the eight grades of study at the Clifton school at age twelve. He had been a good student, admired by his classmates and a favorite of his teachers. That favoritism seems to have derived from an innate manliness he possessed, from a cooperativeness he always showed toward adults, and from the variety of his interests, which included music and athletics as well as his scholastic studies. Moreover, there was a certain presence about him that was enhanced by his abundant hair, wavy and dark, and by the steady gaze of his hazel brown eyes. So, Harold B. Lee was a standout, even though he was one year, and in some cases, two years younger than his classmates.

The next scholastic step for the graduates of Clifton's grammar school was the Oneida Stake Academy at Preston, Idaho, across the valley and south of Clifton. The academy was organized in 1888 under the direction of the Oneida Stake Presidency. Its first home was in Franklin, Idaho. It remained there until 1898 when it moved to Preston where a new two-story, cut-stone building had been erected for its use. Nine years later, a second building was added. In Harold's junior year, a well-equipped gymnasium was constructed. These buildings, with the nearby playing fields, comprised the campus of the academy. Here the new student from Clifton would spend four years, except during the summer months when he would return home to help on the farm. Here he would begin to reveal the qualities of leadership that would characterize all his adult years.

In his beginnings at the Oneida Academy, it is doubtful that young Harold Lee, soon to be called Hal by his friends, felt like much of a leader. He was the youngest student in his class and, therefore, the youngest in the entire school. Moreover, except for one other poor, benighted freshman, he was the only boy in the academy who still wore knee pants. While Louisa had yielded on the issue of Little Lord Fauntleroy outfits for her son, she had remained adamant that he wear knee pants. Had it not been for the protective guidance of Perry, who had preceded him at the academy, Harold's first days there could have been very rough, indeed. It is inferred that with urgent counsel from Perry, knee pants quite soon disappeared from the freshman's wardrobe.

The Lee brothers set up housekeeping at a large home across the street from the academy owned by Robert Daines. Eleven other male students were housed there, as was the principal, J. Robert Robinson, who had rooms on the main floor. On several occasions, the exuberance of the students prompted the principal to go upstairs to deliver pointed sermonettes to them about order and discipline. One can imagine Mr. Robinson's annoyance when, after supervising two hundred active students during the day, he had to endure the nighttime ruckus of the thirteen who lived above him. It may be more than happenstance that Mr. Robinson served as the principal of the academy for only the first two years of Harold's tenure there. He was replaced by Joseph A. Geddes, who apparently did not board at the Daines home. He lasted six years.

But while they were noisy, as young men of that age are inclined to be, especially when they are thrown together in such numbers, they were fine young men, clean and intelligent and highly motivated. For the most part, they were the sons of farmers, reared in orthodox Latter-day Saint homes, where they had imbibed from infancy the basic doctrines of Mormonism: that they were the children of God, that through obedience and discipline they could become like Him, that the glory of God is intelligence, and that any knowledge or abilities acquired during earth life would arise with them in the resurrection. These seminal ideas go far toward explaining the extraordinary spirit of scholarship, activity, and achievement that infused this remote rural school.

The curriculum at the academy included all of the basic courses taught in high school: science, mathematics, biology, business, history, and physical education, as well as special courses in domestic science, carpentry, music, and missionary work. In addition to taking all of the standard courses, Harold gave special attention to his music during the first two years. He played both the alto and the French horns and was a member of the academy band. Later, he took up the baritone horn and was good enough to be invited to join the Preston Military Band, directed by professor Charles J. Engar. This group performed for a fee at special civic and patriotic events held in communities throughout the area.

As he matured physically, Harold took a more active interest in sports. His favorite was basketball, which was the major sport at the school. In addition to playing, he was the athletic reporter for the school paper, The Oneida, during his junior year; and during his senior year, he was the student manager of all athletics. In this position, he accompanied all the school's athletic teams on their trips at school expense, handling the business affairs and travel arrangements. Like the executive who sweeps out the office, he also did some scouting of the school's opponents. Oneida competed with teams from Rexburg, Idaho, on the north to Ogden, Utah, on the south, including the college teams at Logan, Utah, with whom Oneida competed on par.

During his senior year, Hal Lee's school activities shifted into high gear. In addition to attending his regular classes, playing in the band, reporting for The Oneida, playing basketball, and managing the school's athletic affairs, he became heavily involved in debate. Each year, all the schools in the area engaged in round robin debate competition, addressing an assigned issue. This year the issue focused on was whether the Monroe Doctrine should be abolished. The two teams that made it to the final bracket were the Oneida Academy and the Fielding Academy at Paris, Idaho. Oneida had never before defeated Fielding in debate until this year when Oneida's team of Harold B. Lee, Sparrel Huff, Louis Ballif, and Irel Lowe defeated the Fielding team. Such was the novelty of this victory that when Harold and his teammates returned from Paris, an impromptu school assembly was held where the victors were lauded and lionized.

During his sophomore year, Harold had become acquainted with Ethel Cole of Fairview, Idaho, whom he dated intermittently, escorting her to school dances and other social events. This relationship continued throughout the remainder of his schooling at Oneida and, through correspondence and occasional visits, was perpetuated afterward until he entered the mission field. This appears to have been the nearest Harold Lee approached to having a steady girl friend until he married Fern Tanner following his mission. There were, of course, other girls with whom he socialized or was well acquainted, but his relationship with them was only sporadic and usually in group situations.

There was little resemblance between the young boy in knee pants who enrolled in the Oneida Academy in the fall of 1912 and the handsome, accomplished, and self-assured young man who graduated in the spring of 1916. Hal Lee had left his mark on the academy. There may have been other students who excelled him in one activity or the other, but it is doubtful there was anyone whose overall performance outshone his. He was not a one-dimensional student, pouring all his energies into one aspect of the school's curriculum. He sampled them all, and he was remarkably adept in everything he sampled. Yet, with all his prominence in athletics, music, debate, and the school's social and administrative affairs, Harold was still one of the boys, enjoying the high jinks so often associated with teenagers. He was very much part of the "ceiling cracking" episodes at the Daines boardinghouse that evoked Mr. Robinson's little sermonettes. And he was very much involved in the brawl that erupted between the senior and junior classmen during the founders' day celebration in 1916. Moved, perhaps, by feelings of nostalgia as their careers at Oneida wound down, the seniors fixed their class flag to the academy's flagpole. Then, in turn, each of them climbed the pole to kiss the flag as a symbol of class unity and loyalty. After singing together and giving the class yell, they retired, presumably in an expansive, mellow mood. That turned quickly to anger when they awakened the next morning to find that the juniors had removed their flag. These underclassmen discovered too late that what to them was a harmless prank was to the seniors a major affront to their honor. The brawl that ensued ended only with the intervention of the Preston police force. Since "T" Benson was a year behind Hal Lee at Oneida, we are left to wonder whether the two future prophets were arrayed against each other in the sound and fury of this meaningless brawl. If so, we can be assured that in later years, it afforded them many a good chuckle when the incident was put in proper perspective.

When Harold graduated from the Oneida Stake Academy in the spring of 1916, the Lee family was faced with major challenges. All agreed that Harold should seek further education. The issue was how to finance it. By then, Clyde was approaching the age when he could go to the Oneida Academy; and Waldo, the youngest son, was only eleven and therefore unable to perform heavy labor on the farm. The father had his hands full, especially because he had been called as the bishop of the Clifton Ward while Harold was in Preston. The decision was finally made that Harold would enroll at the Albion State Normal School at Albion, Idaho, for the 1916 summer session. Several factors appear to have driven this decision. First, the curriculum there was such that by attending through the summer, he could receive a second-class teaching certificate, which would qualify him to teach in the Idaho public schools during the 1916-17 school year. The second reason, it is inferred, was that the expenses at Albion were less than those at the college in Logan, Utah, where the students from Idaho would have been charged the higher out-of-state tuition fees. And third, it is assumed that a teaching certificate from a Utah school may not have satisfied Idaho's certification requirements. For whatever reason, the decision was made that Harold would go to Albion, some two hundred miles west of Clifton, rather than to Logan, which was in the south end of Cache Valley, across the border in Utah.

But, it was not a foregone conclusion that Harold would be admitted to Albion, despite his having graduated from the Oneida Stake Academy. Idaho law required that admittance there would be granted only to those applicants who could pass a rigid examination in fifteen different subjects. Because so much rode on the outcome, Harold buckled down to a period of intense study immediately after graduating from the academy, during which he lost twenty pounds. The effort paid off when he passed the examinations with high grades.

The reason why Idaho has an Albion, which, of course, is the ancient name for Great Britain, is no more clear than the reason why it has a Paris and a Moscow. Certainly, Albion, Idaho, bears no physical resemblance to its namesake. It is a tiny town, nestled in a remote valley, off the main thoroughfare. That the State Normal School was established there in 1894 is a testimonial to the political adroitness of a group of influential citizens in south central Idaho, led by J. E. Miller of Burley, Idaho, some thirty miles northwest of Albion. The assumption is that those who persuaded the Idaho legislature to establish the Normal School there reasoned that it would be a powerful magnet, which, in the wake of the students, would draw a host of business interests needed to sustain the school, its faculty, and student body. When Harold arrived at Albion in 1916, this formula seemed to be working. Everything in the small town gravitated around the school with its student body of three to four hundred students who came from different parts of the state. But Albion's remoteness doomed the school to a temporary existence. Several decades later, schools at Twin Falls and Pocatello siphoned off students who otherwise would have gone to Albion, which resulted in its abandonment. It exists today only in the empty, solid brick buildings on the old campus, in the minds of its former students, and in the reflected distinction of some of its alumni like Harold B. Lee and David B. Haight.

The remoteness and the setting of Albion were conducive to scholarship. There were no diversions in the town itself to distract the students. Downtown consisted solely of a few businesses scattered along a two-block area with wooden sidewalks in front of them to protect pedestrians from the mud during periods of bad weather. And there were no towns nearby where the students could find entertainment. Any yen for entertainment, therefore, had to be satisfied on campus. This consisted of a cluster of five redbrick buildings located on a grassy knoll, dotted with shade trees, on the north end of town. The buildings included a men's dormitory, Miller Hall, presumably named in honor of the patron, J. E. Miller, who spearheaded the effort to establish the Normal School at Albion. It is also assumed that the women's dormitory, Hansen Hall, was named after another of these skillful boosters. There was a large brick building that housed the school's administrative offices, an auditorium, a library, and lecture rooms. Also there was a gymnasium that included a hardwood basketball court, a cork-covered running track, and game and locker rooms. The fifth structure was a model elementary school building for children in the area where the Normal School students could receive teacher training in a practical setting. And nearby, of course, were the outdoor playing fields.

It was here that the new student from Clifton settled down for what was perhaps the most intensive period of study of his entire lifetime. Here he encountered an atmosphere and an attitude unlike anything he had experienced at Clifton's rural school or at the Oneida Academy. Albion had been settled in the 1870s by a group of non-Mormons. The Latter-day Saints came later, attracted by the fertile land of the Marsh Valley, which extends six miles south from the townsite toward the towering Goose Creek Mountains, which are part of the Sawtooth National Forest. The primacy of the non-Mormon influence put a stamp on Albion unlike anything Harold had experienced in the Mormon communities of the Cache Valley. Moreover, both the student body and the faculty included many who were not members of the Church. The curriculum, which was devoid of religion classes, included subjects that were entirely new to Harold, subjects like educational psychology and political science. In a sense, it was his first real exposure to the outside world, and he seemed to enjoy it and to be motivated by it.

For reasons never fully explained, Harold elected not to live at Miller Hall. Instead, during both summers at Albion, he lived with a Latter-day Saint family, the Burgesses. On first arriving at Albion, he was only seventeen years old. Since it was his first foray into the world, so to speak, it is likely that his parents urged him to live off campus with members of the Church so as to minimize the affect of any adverse influences there. A ward had been organized in Albion in 1887, which, until 1916 when Harold first arrived, was housed in a rustic log cabin. During 1916, however, a modern building was constructed for the Albion Ward Saints who lived in town and out in the valley. It included a chapel, amusement hall, and seven classrooms. We may be assured that the bishop, Thomas Loveland, enthusiastically welcomed the new student from Clifton and promptly utilized his many musical talents.

During his first summer at Albion, Harold, apparently preoccupied with the challenges of his new environment and the expanded curriculum of the school, completely immersed himself in his studies to the exclusion of any extracurricular activities. This changed during his second summer when he played in the Albion town band under the direction of Lee M. Lockhard; and on campus, he played on the school's baseball team.
