Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Four

The Teacher

After completing the requirements for his second level teaching certificate in the summer of 1916, seventeen-year-old Harold B. Lee was prepared for his first professional teaching assignment. Negotiating with the local school board, he contracted to teach at the Silver Star School during the 1916-17 academic year. Located five miles south of Weston, this one-room country school included about twenty-five students in grades one through eight. In negotiating the contract, the new teacher wanted sixty-five dollars a month and the school board wanted to pay him sixty. They flipped a coin for the difference and Harold lost. However, he was given an additional fifteen dollars a month to cover his room and board with the family of Lars Rasmussen. The fifteen dollars also paid for feed for his horse. Each Friday afternoon at the end of the week, Silver Star's teacher would ride his horse to Clifton where he would spend the weekend with his family. He would then return to Weston in time for his classes the following Monday morning.

The wide age spread of his pupils placed a heavy burden of preparation on the new teacher. When the school-bell rang in the morning, he had to be ready to take charge so as to prevent chaos in the classroom. Then he had to have enough ammunition to keep things going on an even keel throughout the day, satisfying the special needs of all the students ranging from his lone first grader, an adventuresome little boy named Vassal, to those in the advanced classes. So anxious was Harold to succeed, and so concerned was he that each child receive proper training, that he spent long hours outside the classroom in preparation. This included not only a mastery of the subject matter for each level and a plan on how to roll it out effectively, but also frequent prayers for divine guidance. Never before had Harold been faced with such a challenge of self-discipline. And never before had he faced a task better calculated to show the need for help beyond his own powers. In reflecting on this experience in later years, the mature Harold B. Lee concluded that in that little one-room school, he had learned some of the most important lessons of self-mastery of his entire life.

Ordinarily, classes at the Silver Star school commenced at 9:00 A.M. But if in counting the heads of those playing on the school grounds the teacher found that everyone was present, he would ring the starting bell early. We infer he did this because he felt the need for extra time to get the heavy teaching job done and because he was concerned about possible injury on the playground. The school board had cautioned him to keep the children off the picket fence that enclosed the school yard. We gather this caution was given because the fence had been the source of previous injuries. Imagine, then, Harold's horror one day when he looked up to see Vassal standing on his head atop the fence. He couldn't resist snapping a picture of the spectacle with his Kodak so as to be able, tongue-in-cheek, to show the school board how he had been enforcing their policy. Judging from the frequency with which his name was mentioned, we gather that Vassal was Harold's most unforgettable student.

The one-room Silver Star school also served as a community center for Weston and the surrounding area. It was a favorite place for town dances. When one was held there, the student desks were arranged around the walls, leaving space in the center for the dancers and providing seats for the watchers. The music was by a three-piece combo of violin, banjo, and portable organ. These were usually all-night affairs. Near midnight, there would be an intermission when refreshments were served. The menu implies that the dancers either were not active Latter-day Saints or that the restraints of the Word of Wisdom had not yet taken hold in the area. The women served coffee with their cakes and sandwiches inside, and outside some of the men drank beer and whiskey brought from Utida on the state line. After the intermission, the dance would usually continue until daylight.

Harold turned over to his father most of the salary he earned during the year he taught at the Silver Star school. He also did that when he transferred to the school at Oxford, continuing to do so during the three years he taught there. This was a godsend to Bishop Lee, who constantly struggled to obtain the means to maintain his family and to educate Harold's younger brothers and sisters.

This new employment marked a major increase in Harold's responsibility and prestige. At Oxford he was the principal of a school whose faculty included two other teachers: Velma Sperry and Tressie Lincoln. Because of the added administrative responsibilities, the principal's salary was set at ninety dollars a month, a 50 percent increase over what he had received at Weston.

The Oxford district school was housed in a two-story stone structure, the most impressive-looking building in town. Here Harold's teaching responsibilities were less complicated as his assistants took over the younger students. This was offset by a challenge he did not face at Weston. At Oxford, a few of the students were older than he, and some of the boys were bigger than he. These boasted that the new eighteen-year-old principal wouldn't last long. Harold's athletic ability, self-confidence, and inherent dignity came to his rescue. He immediately began to teach the older boys to play basketball. During the noon hour, he would put on basketball togs to train them and to play with or against them. This soon dissolved any antagonisms toward the new principal or any effort to try to drive him out of school. Indeed, Harold B. Lee became a vast favorite of the students at Oxford and the relationships and loyalties formed there would endure throughout life. Moreover, he quite soon became a vital force in the community. His involvement in school athletics led to the organization of the Oxford Athletic Club, whose membership was open to anyone in the community regardless of age. Harold played forward on the club's basketball team, which competed regularly with teams in neighboring communities. The fiction that basketball is a noncontact sport existed even then, and Oxford's principal later bore permanent scars of the rugged games his teams played.

But Harold's intense activity in sports, both at the school and in the community, did not inhibit his keen interest in music. He provided piano or organ accompaniment at both school and church events. And during the Oxford period, his musical skills led him into two new artistic outlets. He organized and trained a women's chorus, and he became heavily involved in a dance orchestra. The chorus was comprised of ten young ladies who sang at various school, church, and civic functions. Since there were few entertainments in Oxford and the surrounding rural communities, a chorus such as this was doubtless very much in demand. So grateful were the members of this group for Harold's efforts in bringing them together and training them, that when he left for the mission field they gave him a gold ring as a remembrance of their association.

The orchestra Harold joined was organized by Dick and Chap Frew, whose parents purchased a ranch at Oxford while he was the school principal. The brothers had earlier been members of an orchestra that performed at the Lagoon Resort near Farmington, Utah, Dick playing the violin and Chap the drums. In organizing what they called the Frew Orchestra, the brothers conducted auditions for musicians who could play the cornet, piano, and trombone. They found their cornet and piano player in Marion Howell and Reese Davis. The only trombonist who auditioned lacked the necessary skill. Learning of Harold's musical background, the Frews invited him to to try out. Although he had never before played the trombone, his experience with other wind instruments, which he played in the bands at Clifton, Preston, and Albion, enabled Harold to play the trombone readily in what became Frew's Orchestra. After practicing together for a time to become acquainted with each other's styles and skills and to synchronize their instruments into a whole, and after developing a wide repertoire of catchy dance tunes, the Frew Orchestra went public. It did not take long for the group to catch on.

This period, immediately before and after World War I, saw the emergence of a whole new concept of ballroom dancing. It was a time that also saw the emergence of the so-called liberated woman, the flapper, with her bobbed hair, her short skirts, and her saucy attitudes. This spawned a set of new dance steps, among which were the Charleston and the Black Bottom, which gave energetic expression to the mood of the times. It was during this period that various temperance societies, with widespread public support, were able to shepherd through Congress the wartime Prohibition Act, passed in November 1918, and to obtain ratification of the Prohibition Amendment to the United States Constitution in January 1919. This in turn gave rise to the prevalent use of "the flask" by non-abstainers in which to carry their forbidden liquor about with them.

This, then, was the character of the era during which the Frew Orchestra and its members, including the trombonist Harold B. Lee, acquired a wide reputation in an area that extended from Logan, Utah, on the south to Pocatello, Idaho, on the north. Once its reputation had been established, it was not uncommon for the orchestra to play for dances two and three nights a week. This became a rich source of extra income for Harold and the other members of the orchestra, and made it possible for him to turn over to his father the entire amount of his school salary. But this also became a source of concern for Harold's parents. They disliked the idea that their son was repeatedly thrown into an environment that fostered attitudes and practices contrary to the standards of the Church. Their concerns were intensified by the knowledge that some members of the Frew Orchestra were known to drink and to engage in other conduct unbecoming a Latter-day Saint. While they had confidence in the integrity of their son, still they knew he was not immune to temptation. Harold later expressed the feeling that during this period, his parents "held their breath" out of fear that he might succumb to the enticements that surrounded him. And, they were concerned about his health. When the orchestra had a mid-week engagement, Harold would have little sleep during a period of thirty-six hours. If, for instance, the musicians were scheduled to play on a Wednesday night, after working at school all day Harold would leave Oxford as soon as he could break away in the late afternoon. There would then be a long ride over a rough, unsurfaced road to the town where the dance was to be held. Usually these lasted well into the early-morning hours. After packing instruments and riding home, it would be nearing the time when Thursday's workday would begin. With the duties facing him at school that day, he could not hope to get any sleep until Thursday night, except for a short nap he might steal during the day. If this were a week, as often happened, when the orchestra also had commitments on Friday and Saturday nights, the musicians could look forward to little rest over the weekend, except on Sunday. And, as we shall see, Harold's Sunday commitments left little room for leisure on that day. With such a heavy schedule, it is small wonder that Harold contracted a serious case of pneumonia during this period. His mother, ever solicitous over his well-being, carefully nursed him back to health. We can be assured that when the son recovered, Louisa admonished him to reduce his work load and to be more conscious of the need to guard his health. There is no evidence that he did this, and judging from the tendency toward overwork that Louisa's son exhibited throughout his adult life, it is unlikely that he slowed down.

During this period, Harold was also called as the president of his elders quorum, whose members were drawn from the Clifton, Oxford, and Dayton wards. His counselors were Walter Hatch and William Hardwick. This was the first significant priesthood calling of Harold B. Lee's career in church service. He no doubt devoted to it the same disciplined attention he gave to the many callings he later received, so that there would have been little time on Sundays for other than church work.
