Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Five

The Missionary

Harold's career as the principal of the Oxford School ended in the summer of 1920. He had just turned twenty-one. By that time, he had been a professional educator for four years, with a proven track record both as a teacher and as an administrator. His extensive involvement in athletics and music, and his position as the elders quorum president, had enhanced his reputation and prestige among the residents of the upper Cache Valley. All this, with his solid educational background, his innate dignity, his drive, and his handsome good looks marked him as a young man of great promise.

At that stage of his development, a crucial decision was made. In consultation with his father, who was then the bishop of the Clifton Ward, it was decided that Harold would be recommended to serve as a missionary for the Church. It was not an easy decision to make, either for the son or for his parents. At the time Harold was an adult in every way. He was mature physically, well educated, emotionally stable, and possessed of a rare spiritual instinct. He was of marriageable age and had the training and the skills that would have enabled him to comfortably support a wife and children. If he had settled down at the time into domestic life, one could have predicted a rewarding future for him as a pillar of strength in his local community and church, while enjoying all the blessings of married love and family life. It was not an easy thing, therefore, for Harold Lee to turn away from that prospect toward two years of austere and demanding missionary service during which he not only would be unable to earn an income, but would be a financial burden on his already overburdened father. As for the parents, they knew that with the loss of their son's income, with the need to regularly send money to him in the mission field, and with the obligation to finance the education of the younger children, they would be financially strapped as never before. Yet, there was never a serious question that their second son would willingly accept a call to serve, and that they would support him fully.

The call came in September 1920 in the form of a letter from Heber J. Grant, the president of the Church. It directed Harold to come to Salt Lake City in early November to be set apart and from thence to go to his field of labor, the Western States Mission, with headquarters in Denver, Colorado. If Elder Lee was disappointed in being sent next door, as it were, rather than to some exotic mission overseas, he never let on about it. He accepted the call with enthusiasm and made preparations to leave. Later events suggest that there was a divine purpose in Harold B. Lee being called to that mission at that time.

Elder Lee's preparations included fitting out his wardrobe; speaking at his farewell in the Clifton Ward chapel; saying good-bye to his family, friends, and associates; and arranging to receive his temple endowment. This last event took place at the Logan Temple on November 6, 1920. His father accompanied him there. The mother, whose presence was urgently needed in Clifton to perform midwifery duties, was unable to go. Louisa's deeply spiritual nature gives assurance that she offered fervent prayers for his safety and success as he left.

At the Logan Temple, the missionary was introduced to aspects of his religion that until then had been withheld from him. What he saw and learned comprised what Harold B. Lee later referred to frequently as the training provided by the "University of the Lord." There he gained further insight into his relationship to Deity, learned about the marvels and purposes of the Creation, was taught the plan of salvation, was shown the exaltation he might obtain through obedience and diligence, and was put under solemn covenant to observe basic laws of morality and godliness. With all this, he became obligated to wear a new garment, night and day, bearing symbolic markings that were to remind him of his identity and of the covenants he had made. Judging from the intense interest he later showed in temples, and from the frequency with which he taught the significance of temple ordinances, especially to young people, it is reasonable to assume that the experience young Elder Harold B. Lee had in the Logan Temple that day had a profound influence on his mission and on his later life.

From Logan, Elder Lee travelled by train to Salt Lake City. It was his first visit since his father took Perry and him there when they were little boys. While Utah's capital was then looked on as little more than a western hick town by the metropolitan centers in the East, compared to Clifton and the other string towns on the west side of the upper Cache Valley, Salt Lake City was big. It then boasted the ornate Hotel Utah across the street east of the temple and the large and modern Newhouse Hotel, which anchored the south end of Main Street's business district. In between were several large office buildings that had been constructed since Harold was last in the city, and along with these were a variety of shops, stores, and restaurants. The streets were lighted by electricity and an efficient streetcar system linked the city together. Aside from the massive granite-walled temple and the adjacent Tabernacle and Assembly Hall, which he had seen before, the building in Salt Lake that most interested the young elder likely was the comparatively new Church Administration Building at 47 East South Temple. It was here on November 9, 1920, that Elder Lee first saw a group of General Authorities assembled in a setting other than a general conference. On that day, he attended a meeting in the auditorium on an upper floor of the Administration Building where members of the Quorum of the Twelve and the First Council of the Seventy were present. Also present were other missionaries who had been called to serve in various missions of the Church. During an hour meeting, the missionaries were given instruction by some of the General Authorities present about their work and about their conduct in the mission field. This was the extent of the pre-mission training given to missionaries at that day.

At the end of the meeting, the missionaries were assigned by name to go to the offices of designated General Authorities where they were to be set apart. Harold was assigned to the office of Brigham H. Roberts, a member of the First Council of the Seventy. In the blessing setting him apart, Elder Lee was promised that he would go to his field of labor and would return in safety. Before leaving Salt Lake City, he also received a second patriarchal blessing, this one under the hands of the Presiding Patriarch of the Church, Hyrum G. Smith. That blessing contained this significant promise: "And, if thou wilt honor the Holy Priesthood which has been given thee, thou shalt be advanced therein in due time, and be called into positions of trust and responsibility and leadership, and shall have an influence for good among thine associates."

Having been instructed and authorized and blessed by the General Authorities of the Church, and with this admonition of Bishop Lee ringing in his ears, "Your father and mother are looking for big things from you," Elder Harold B. Lee boarded a train at 5:30 P.M. on November 10, 1920, destined for Denver, Colorado.

There was an unusually heavy crush of people at the Union Pacific Depot on this occasion. In addition to the normal traffic expected at any departure, there were many relatives and friends there to say good-bye to other missionaries on that same train who were going to different missions in the East. Their animated voices, added to the general hubbub that reverberated through the cavernous depot, punctuated at intervals by the rumble of baggage carts, the loud voices of the red caps, and, from the outside, the hissing, squeaking, and chugging of the trains as they entered and left the depot, created an atmosphere of great excitement. It was quite unlike anything the elder from Clifton had experienced before. Nothing he had seen at the depots at Franklin and Logan could compare with it. In a sense, it was Elder Lee's initiation into a new and alien world that bore little resemblance to the sheltered farming community where he was born and raised. It was the first of innumerable trips he would take as an authorized representative of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Elder Lee's companion on the train was Elder Owen H. Martin of Salt Lake City who was also going to the Western States Mission. The trip, which today takes an hour by jet, took the elders eighteen hours. Seated uncomfortably in a chair car, which lurched and rocked its way to their destination, it probably seemed longer than that to the elders.

They arrived in Denver at noon, November 11, Armistice Day. Rumpled and much in need of a shave, a shower, and a change of clothing, they were met at the Denver depot by their mission president, John M. Knight, and members of the mission office staff. This man would play an important role in the development of Harold B. Lee, not only during his mission, but afterward. He was a seasoned leader, forty-nine years old, who was not only the mission president, but was also a counselor in the Ensign Stake Presidency in Salt Lake City. When the Ensign Stake was organized on April 1, 1904, as part of the breakup of the original Salt Lake Stake (a breakup that also saw the creation of the Pioneer and Liberty Stakes), John M. Knight was called as the second counselor to Stake President Richard W. Young, who was a son of Brigham Young. Under a practice that was followed often in years past, when John Knight was called to preside over the Western States Mission, he retained his position in the Ensign Stake Presidency, which he actively resumed when he was released as mission president.

The new elders were taken immediately to the mission home, which was adjacent to the LDS chapel located on the corner of Seventh Avenue and Pearl Street in Denver. They first witnessed a baptismal service that was in progress at the chapel font when they arrived. Later, they were able to freshen up and to have a bite to eat before being assigned to their fields of labor.

At the time, the Western States Mission extended from North Dakota on the north to New Mexico on the south and from western Colorado to eastern Nebraska. There were then no organized stakes within this vast area. As a result, President Knight not only directed the proselyting work of the elders and sisters assigned to the mission, but he also presided over and directed the activities of the members who lived in the districts and branches within the mission. The missionaries who served under President Knight occasionally were given responsibilities in these units. This provided the few who were given this opportunity with excellent training in Church administration, which was quite apart from their role as proselytizers. As we shall see, Harold B. Lee was one of these.

The new missionary from Clifton, Idaho, was assigned to work temporarily with Elder Daniel Peterson who had responsibilities in the Denver Branch. Their first task was to visit members of the local Relief Society to teach them and to encourage their active participation in the affairs of the branch. Very soon, however, Elder Lee was permanently assigned to labor in the Denver area with Elder Willis J. Woodbury of Salt Lake City. Their main proselyting tools were tracting, street meetings, and cottage meetings. Harold's introduction to tracting was discouraging. At the first house, the woman who answered the door abruptly closed it before the elders were able to explain their purpose. The entire tracting harvest for the day consisted of conversations with eight people at the door, six of whom accepted literature and one of whom agreed to attend church at the Pearl Street chapel. Not once were they invited in so they could begin to engage in meaningful teaching. In time, however, the two elders devised a novel means of getting beyond the threshold of a door. Elder Woodbury, who was a cellist, had brought his instrument with him into the mission field. When he learned that Harold played the piano, he insisted that they practice regularly at the chapel. After the companions had acquired some skill in playing together, Elder Woodbury began to take his cello along when they went tracting. The instrument, of course, became an unusual conversation piece. When householders learned that these nice-looking young men weren't selling cellos but wanted to serenade them, they were invited in with increasing frequency. If a home had a piano, the elders would make it a duet. If not, they would sing to the accompaniment of the cello. Elder Lee reported with a sense of triumph that this approach, on an average, gained them admittance to three homes a day, breaking down barriers, creating friendships, and laying the groundwork for solid gospel teaching at cottage meetings.

There was hardly any way the elders could be creative in holding street meetings. It was simply a matter of finding a street corner where there was a good flow of pedestrian traffic, singing a song, offering a prayer, then speaking at the top of your voice on a gospel subject of your own choice. While one of the missionaries was speaking, his companion would circulate around, engaging bystanders in conversation, distributing tracts, and endeavoring to set up teaching appointments.

A favorite location for street meetings of the Denver conference was at the corner of Nineteenth and Welton Streets. Of his first street meeting there, Elder Lee wrote, "I thought I would surely faint until I got started, then somehow I forgot myself, and everyone else, I'm afraid." Then with becoming self-deprecation, he added, "I think if I keep on finding out how little I know, by the time my mission is over, I will be convinced I don't know anything."

High among the things the elder from Clifton knew was how to work. Once he had overcome the normal feelings of apprehension and inadequacy, which most new missionaries feel, Harold began to focus on his duties with the same concentrated effort he had previously bestowed on his schooling, his teaching, his athletics, and his music. "If ever I felt like working, it is now," he wrote after seven months in the field, "when I am just beginning to appreciate the responsibility that rests upon me." By this time, he had been instrumental in the conversion and baptism of several and had tasted the sweet fruit of missionary service. "I am praying," he added, "that I will always be kept just a 'high private in the rear ranks' so that I can continue to do the work I am beginning to love."

Harold B. Lee's chief orientation and skill was that of a teacher. Those who knew him well observed that he seldom, if ever, missed an opportunity to teach a lesson to his associates. He was always on duty, as it were, and therefore took advantage of the moment to drive home a lesson regardless of the time or place. Read in this light, the last quoted statement takes on special meaning. It seems to tell us that he did not want to be burdened with administrative responsibilities but would prefer to be left alone to do what he most loved to do—to teach. This dominant interest surfaced intermittently throughout his life. During the early 1930s, for instance, while he was a Salt Lake City commissioner and the president of the Pioneer Stake, heavily involved in caring for the temporal needs of his people, he took time to teach early-morning seminary classes at Salt Lake's South High School. And as a member of the First Presidency, nothing seemed to please him more than to go to the Salt Lake Temple to teach groups of young missionaries about the importance of the temple endowment. These were special moment when ideas or ideals were planted in the fertile minds of his listeners, setting in motion events whose consequences might extend forever. Only in this way could one hope to exert an influence upon people and events beyond his own life. Brother Lee hinted at this idea in the sermon he delivered after he had been sustained as the president of the Church. Said he, "The only true record that will ever be made of my service in my new calling will be the record that I may have written in the hearts and lives of those with whom I have served and labored, within and without the church." (Conference Report, Oct. 1972, p. 19.) It was in such a way, through his teachings and example, that Harold B. Lee's ideal, the Savior, exerted strong influence upon others after his death.

After nine months, Elder Lee was called to preside over the Denver conference, the strongest, most productive conference in the mission. Ordinarily such calls were given to missionaries who had served a year or longer. That the appointment came to him after only nine months shows again a familiar pattern in Elder Lee's life, which saw him reach important milestones before his peers.

As the conference president, he supervised the proselyting of thirty-five missionaries who served in an area extending from Littleton, Colorado, south of Denver, to the Wyoming border on the north and thence east to the Nebraska border. The western boundary of the conference generally followed the eastern flank of the Rockies. He also presided over the Church units and the members within that area, which included branches in Littleton, Denver, Boulder, Greeley, and Fort Collins. Because Elder Lee's headquarters were in Denver, close to the mission office, he had frequent contact with President Knight. As this relationship developed, President Knight began to give Elder Lee assignments beyond his duties as conference president, which, in effect, made him an assistant to the president.

It is easy to see why John Knight called Elder Lee to this important position after only nine months. Harold was then twenty-two years old, a little older than the average missionary. His years as a professional teacher and school administrator had given him a reputation that would lend authority to his role as conference president. He had proven himself to be a dedicated worker who was wholly reliable. And, perhaps more important, he was a producer. That is, he had the ability to both teach the gospel and lead his investigators to baptism. It is a truism that 20 percent of the missionaries account for 80 percent of the baptisms. A few missionaries have a special knack or skill, rooted perhaps as much in will and determination as in technical ability, which enables them to convert investigators into members. Harold B. Lee was one of the few. Serving at a time and in a mission where conversions were not prolific, he baptized forty-five converts. Their prior religious affiliations covered the spectrum. They included former members of the Salvation Army, Methodists, Baptists, Lutherans, Christian Scientists, and Catholics. Eight of them had no prior religious affiliation. Some of them retained a close relationship with Elder Lee during the remainder of his life. These qualities, and others less tangible and definable, equipped Harold to provide effective leadership during the remaining sixteen months of his mission.

President John M. Knight was a shrewd leader. Upon extending the call to Elder Lee, he goaded him by saying, "I am just giving you a chance to show what is in you." The implication was that the elder from Clifton, while showing some promise, had not yet arrived. Few things would have been better calculated than this to have motivated a person of Harold B. Lee's native ability and record of achievement. Later in his career, Elder Lee was known to use the same device. When, for instance, thirty-eight-year-old Dallin H. Oaks was interviewed as a possible choice to become the new president of the Brigham Young University, President Lee told him that if he were called it would not be because of what he had accomplished but because of what he might become. (Author's diary 1971, pp. 88-89.)

The new president of the Denver conference accepted the call with an admirable spirit. There was no sense of pride or vainglory in his attitude. "Only nine short months since I arrived in Denver," he wrote, "and when I think back on all the wonderful experiences that have been mine in that time, I feel as though it had been but a dream, but I thank the Lord continually." He then added a statement that would typify all the remaining days of his Church service, in whatever capacity. "The crying necessities of today," wrote he, "wake me up to the fact that I must be working always if God is to accomplish anything through me." In this same entry, Elder Lee noted, "I know now I have gained what I'm sure Father would call 'big things'—the confidence of President Knight."

Harold's first companion after he became conference president was Elder Vernal Bergeson of Cornish, Utah. They settled into quarters at 740 Grant Street and went to work. Elder Bergeson's assignment to labor with the new conference president produced a revolution in his personal habits. A principal change was in his living costs. Accustomed to spending eighty to ninety dollars a month, "Berg" had to cut these in half to conform to Elder Lee's austere budget. This reduction in spending was offset by an increase in work output. Street meetings were accelerated to two a week. Tracting was intensified, and with that came an increase in cottage meetings. The end result was a significant increase in baptisms. Elder Lee reported seventy-two baptisms through the first nine months of 1922, one more than during the entire previous year.

Although Harold knew that missionary success could not be measured exclusively in terms of baptisms, yet this was a vital aspect of the work. "I almost feel as a little kid today," he wrote several months after becoming conference president, "and I cannot help but be happy. If all those who have promised to be baptized appear, there will be twelve or fourteen new members of the church after our baptismal service today. Of course, many have experienced the satisfaction that comes when you are able to measure the effectiveness of your work by converts. Although success can't possibly be measured in that way, yet therein is the fascination of missionary work." The essence of that fascination was to see the changes made in the lives of people through the teaching of the missionaries.

The significant increase in convert baptisms in the Denver conference can be laid in large part to Elder Harold B. Lee's leadership style. In the first place, he led by example. He did not expect the missionaries to do anything he had not done himself or was not prepared to do. He also took time to give specific training to the missionaries. "I had a fine day tracting," he recorded of an outing with Elders Kelsey and Allred. "I sent them alone and when I got around the block I found them sitting under a tree utterly disgusted because they couldn't talk at the homes. After I preached 'Mormonism' to them for fifteen minutes to give them an idea what to say, they started out and had a very successful time, some of the conversations lasting half an hour." In addition to leading by example and properly training the missionaries, Elder Lee deliberately introduced a spirit of competition among them as a means of stimulating the work. "There is a healthy spirit of competition among the Elders here now," he wrote in a letter home, "the very condition I have wanted to see; and as a result the pace is fast and furious and all will be well if someone doesn't weaken." Yet, he was acutely aware of the danger inherent in this strategy should it result in a sense of individual pride rather than in a selfless feeling of joy in the overall success of the work. Confiding this concern to his journal, he wrote, "I'm happy, despite the vying of the elders for credit for baptisms, as though it were I who had brought the proper pressure to bear to bring about their conversions, and I rejoice that I am able to erase my own selfish desires and to push loyally for the success of the entire conference—that anyone's success is a big boon to my individual appreciation." He then added this sentence, almost as a postscript, which casts some light on the inner drives that impelled him: "I'm going to live up to the expectation made of me to the end that patience and strength will prevail." It is inferred that a chief influence, which goaded the elder from Clifton to a supreme effort of achievement, was the high expectations of his parents. His later reference to it shows that he never forgot his father's parting words that he and his mother expected "big things" from him. And the challenge of his mission president to demonstrate what he had in him could not have failed to motivate one such as he whose competitive fires burned with such obvious intensity. We see this quality reflected in entries such as this: "When the president selected me as conference president, he told me he was giving me a chance to show what was in me. He certainly has played fair with me, and if I fail it will be because I wasn't a big enough man for Denver."

Whatever the motivation, its effects were as evident in Elder Lee's work with the members and the local unit leaders as in his relationship with the proselyting missionaries. He was intimately involved in the selection, the training, and the supervision of branch and district officers. He also assumed the overall responsibility for the periodic teaching and counselling visits to the homes of the members. Because of an apparent lack of local priesthood strength, he involved the missionaries in this work, although he looked forward to the time when this responsibility could be shifted entirely to the local brethren. "We are gradually working in a few of the local members of the priesthood," wrote he, "and some day I hope to be able to step out and leave the visiting entirely to the branch officers." Elder Lee was also heavily involved in counselling the local members about their personal affairs, in blessing them, in performing their marriages and priesthood ordinations, and in conducting and speaking at their funerals. His maiden effort in speaking at a funeral was a scary experience. "Although I felt pretty shaky in the knees," he wrote, "everything went all right and without a hitch."

By this means, Elder Lee became acquainted with every aspect of the work at the grass-roots level. His knowledge of Church administration and procedure was not theoretical, but was precise, practical, and personal. The lessons he learned in Denver would be invaluable as, in the years ahead, the scope of his responsibilities widened to an extent he could not then have conceived.

Along with the basic leadership skills of organization, delegation, motivation, and discipline that developed during the Denver experience, there emerged a quality in Elder Lee's character that overshadowed all these and would be a dominant feature of his future leadership. This was a feeling of genuine love and concern for his co-workers, a feeling reflected in many entries made in his private journal. "Many times have I prayed that God would make me worthy to be a leader among such fine people," he noted on one occasion. And in recording the events of a conference held in November 1921 after he had been in the field a year, Harold wrote: "When conference finally arrived I was as happy as a little child, so much so, in fact, that when my turn came to talk it was nearly impossible. Through sheer joy I could hardly speak. Never before have I been able to appreciate real people who are doing their best to help in God's great work, and words fail me in expressing my love toward them."

A manifestation of that love was an insistence by Elder Lee that the missionaries strictly adhere to the rules of the mission. When missionaries in the Denver conference violated mission rules and Elder Lee learned about it, he was prompt and direct in speaking out. A notable incident illustrating this quality involved a sister missionary, Harriet Jensen (later Woolsey). The incident occurred in September 1922, three months before Harold's release. Sister Jensen and her companion went to a fashion show in downtown Denver one evening instead of to a choir practice. The next morning Elder Lee asked, "Where were you two last night?" When they told him he merely said, "Don't let it happen again." There were no preachments or chastisements, only this five-word instruction, that's all. At least, that is all that was said. Actually there was much more than this involved. Sister Jensen explained: "As I looked at him, I wished the floor would swallow me up. His look said more than words and made me feel like I had committed a huge crime." At the moment, the offending sisters did not feel too kindly toward their leader. In time, however, these feelings changed. "Later," she added, "we came to appreciate and respect the high standards that he held for all of us." (He Changed My Life, p. 193.)

In the years that followed, many others would receive instructions or reproof from Harold B. Lee. Judging from the known instances when it occurred, it is safe to say that his looks and demeanor always conveyed as much or more meaning than his words. There was some indefinable something in the man, which spoke out by means other than words. It lay in the spiritual realm beyond normal, human understanding. Perhaps another experience Sister Jensen had with Elder Lee will shed some light on this enigma. It occurred one night while, by invitation, he was explaining Mormon doctrine from the pulpit of another church. "It was while Elder Lee was speaking that night," wrote Sister Jensen, "that I saw a hallowed light encircle his head. The light was much brighter around his head than was the surrounding light, and it was mingled with several beautiful colors. His head was framed in a half circle from the top of one shoulder to the other." Such was the impact of this extraordinary experience on her that after the meeting Sister Jensen went to the speaker and said: "Elder Lee, you are going to someday be the president of the church." His modest reply was, "Sister, I won't be worthy enough to be the president." Sister Jensen added, "But from that day on, I was convinced that he would become our Prophet." (Ibid., p. 194.)

This was not the last time such an aura would be seen surrounding or hovering over Elder Lee. "Stewart Mason and his wife drove me in their car over to Boise," he recorded in his diary on March 23, 1942, "where I was to board the train for Salt Lake. Sister Mason told me she had witnessed an 'aura' as she called it, surrounding me as I spoke." In the same entry, Elder Lee noted, "Fern had previously seen the same thing in the First Ward."

Sister Fern Tanner, Elder Lee's first wife, like Sister Harriet Jensen, was also a missionary in the Western States Mission when Elder Lee was there. She arrived in Denver two weeks before Elder Lee. They met for the first time on November 14, 1920, three days after his arrival. At the time, Fern was the junior companion of F. Elinor Johnson, an older sister who was a graduate of the Brigham Young University and who, at the time, served as the "matron" in charge of the work of the sister missionaries in Denver. These sisters lived in an apartment across the street from the chapel and mission home and offices, and because Elder Lee and his companion, Elder Woolley, were often there in the line of duty, they became well acquainted. Although there was no romantic involvement between Elder Lee and Sister Tanner at the time, there seemed to have been a strong affinity between them from the beginning, which, months after Elder Lee's release, blossomed into love and finally marriage. Of his acquaintance with Sisters Johnson and Tanner during the first months of his mission, Elder Lee reported: "Among the three of us there was formed a 'trinity' that 'sat in judgment' on most of the affairs of the mission." This trinity was broken up when Fern was transferred to Pueblo, Colorado, where she spent most of her mission. During that interval, she and Elder Lee retained their platonic relationship through occasional correspondence. She was transferred back to Denver near the end of his mission, where she served for a short while under the direction of her conference president, Harold B. Lee.

When Sister Tanner was transferred back to Denver, Elder Lee's success as conference president was just beginning to crest. By that time the initiatives of organization, delegation, training, and discipline he had put in place were beginning to bear significant fruit. There was an optimistic attitude among the missionaries, which, in no small part, could be traced to the inspired, energetic leadership of their conference president. It was about this time that Elder Lee received one of the special bonuses of his mission. It came in the form of a visit by Elder James E. Talmage of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. It was the first time the elder from Clifton had ever associated with a member of the Twelve on a personal basis. He, of course, had been in a special meeting with some of them while he was in Salt Lake prior to leaving for the mission field. But then, he had only seen them from a distance. Now, over a period of two days, February 18-19, 1922, he was directly involved with the great man.

Elder Talmage arrived at the Pearl and Seventh Avenue chapel on Saturday, February 18, during a baptismal service that was under the direction of Elder Lee. With him was President Knight. Not being too familiar with Church protocol at the time, Elder Lee went forward with the service without consulting Elder Talmage. During the baptism, Elder Talmage stepped forward to the edge of the font and carefully watched what went on. When the confirmations started, the apostle again stepped forward, uninvited, and said, "Here, I will confirm this one." In performing the confirmation, he deliberately reversed the order and first said, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost," and then he confirmed the candidate a member of the Church. After the ceremony, when they were alone, Elder Talmage said, "Elder Lee, you did a splendid job, but . . ." and then proceeded to point out his error in not recognizing the presiding authority and in not checking with him before he proceeded. He also emphasized that there was no special way to confirm someone a member of the Church. (Author's diary 1973, pp. 334-35.)

There is little doubt that those present at the meetings on Saturday and Sunday, especially the missionaries, were practically awestruck by the depth of knowledge and the eloquence of this extraordinary man, Elder Talmage. His extemporaneous remarks, so precise and closely reasoned, sounded like a carefully crafted sermon he might have toiled over for hours, or days. Such was the reputation of the man for gospel scholarship, gained chiefly through his major works, The Articles of Faith and Jesus the Christ, that some members of the Church slavishly sought to emulate his style, to speak and to write like James E. Talmage. It is likely there were some of those among the Denver missionaries on this occasion who faithfully recorded his words and sought to incorporate them into their own vocabulary. While Elder Lee never sought to emulate the speaking or writing style of James E. Talmage, the experience at the baptismal service made a profound impression upon him. Later when he became the president of the Pioneer Stake, Elder Lee occasionally consulted with Elder Talmage about matters of policy and procedure in addition to matters of doctrine. He considered that one of Elder Talmage's greatest strengths was in the realm of Church administration.

It is obvious that Elder Lee did not take offense at the counsel given to him by Elder Talmage. On the contrary, he seemed to appreciate it and to profit from it. This quality of being teachable seems to have been one of the main things that attracted President Knight's interest in the elder from Clifton. His early success as a teacher and school administrator had not given Harold an exaggerated idea about his ability or his importance. Therefore, notwithstanding his father's prediction of "big things" for him, he had entered the mission field with a cooperative, submissive attitude, anxious to do the work in whatever capacity, even as a "high private in the rear rank." This attitude doubtless inspired a sense of confidence in President Knight and was a chief factor in Elder Lee's appointment as the president of the most prestigious conference in the mission after only nine months in the field. As that attitude persisted after his appointment, and Elder Lee's leadership abilities were more clearly revealed, the mission president continued to show preference to him and to give him special assignments, which, in effect, made him a counselor or an assistant to the president. For instance, he was invited to accompany President Knight to Pueblo, Colorado, to inspect the damage caused by a devastating flood and to direct reclamation efforts among the Saints there.

The Mormons had had a presence in Pueblo since the mid-1840s when infirm elements of the Mormon Battalion and Latter-day Saint immigrants from Mississippi had wintered there in 1846-47. On arriving in Pueblo, President Knight and his young companion faced a scene of terrible devastation. An unusually heavy snowpack on the upper reaches of the Arkansas River and a late, rapid thaw had sent torrents of water cascading through the Royal Gorge and other deep, narrow, rocky canyons to the plain below, inundating Pueblo and its surrounding farms. This overwhelming volume of water had been augmented by an unusually heavy runoff on Fountain Creek, which converges with the Arkansas River at Pueblo. So sudden and unexpectedly heavy was the flooding that the townspeople were caught unaware and an estimated fifteen hundred of them were drowned. Property damage was estimated at thirty thousand dollars, a large sum for that day. As he was the presiding priesthood authority in the area, President Knight took the lead in efforts to comfort and to care for those who had lost loved ones or whose homes had been destroyed and to reclaim, as far as possible, their damaged properties. The Denver conference president witnessed at firsthand how, in an emergency, the priesthood, the Relief Society, and the other resources of the Church could be marshalled to alleviate suffering and to provide a glimmer of hope to those caught up in adversity. It is likely that some of the lessons Elder Lee learned at Pueblo were useful years later when he struggled to find solutions to a different kind of emergency that faced the members of the Pioneer Stake.

Later President Knight took Elder Lee with him on a tour of conferences in the eastern part of the mission. Everywhere they went, meetings were held where Harold was called upon to share the pulpit with his mission president as they taught and motivated the missionaries and members. More important, perhaps, for the training of a future prophet than these experiences was the opportunity the trip afforded Elder Lee to spend hours alone with his mission president as they travelled from place to place, or as they shared accommodations along the way. To kneel in prayer and to converse in an informal, relaxed way with a man of such broad experience in the Church undoubtedly provided the young elder from Clifton with insights and perceptions that would be of great value in the years ahead.

There was still another aspect of this trip that was of special significance to Elder Lee. As the tour drew to a close, President Knight, either on an impulse or on authorization from his supervisors, travelled into an adjoining mission to visit some of the Church's most important historic sites. At Nauvoo, Illinois, he and Elder Lee walked the streets of the once beautiful city on the east bank of the Mississippi River, which the Latter-day Saints, led by the Prophet Joseph Smith, had built upon what was once a swamp. While at the time of this visit Nauvoo was a mere shadow of its once thriving condition, with its buildings largely unoccupied, its gardens untended, and its tree-lined streets showing signs of careless disuse, still there was sufficient evidence there to enable the visitor to reconstruct in his mind's eye the original grandeur of the place. Here was the Mansion House, the Prophet Joseph Smith's stately, federal style, two-story home where his body lay in state after the martyrdom. Across the street and to the south was the rustic cabin in which the Prophet and his family had first lived in what was originally called Commerce, later renamed Nauvoo. And on the grounds of this cabin were found the grave sites of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum. Across the street to the east was the foundation of what was originally projected as a luxury hotel of that day; and not far away were the substantial brick homes of Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Heber C. Kimball, Bishop Vinson Knight—the bishop of the Prophet's ward—and others. On an eminence above the main residential area the visitors inspected the barren site of the once beautiful temple, which had commanded a panoramic view of the orderly neighborhoods below and the majestic river that snaked its way around the once swampy promontory on which the city had risen. As Elder Lee walked these streets with his mission president, reflecting on the events that had transpired there long ago, he could not have failed to remember that his great-grandfather, Francis Lee, and his family had lived in Nauvoo during its heyday and had been forcibly driven from it across the river to Montrose, Iowa, on the Mississippi's west bank and from thence had struggled forward to the valleys of the mountains. Here were some of Harold B. Lee's earliest Mormon roots, which extended in an unbroken line to Winter Quarters, to Tooele, to Panaca, to Salt Lake City, and finally to Clifton.

If Elder Lee was exhilarated by his visit to Nauvoo, he was probably depressed by his visit to nearby Carthage. Here he and President Knight inspected the dreary, forbidding jail where Joseph and Hyrum were slaughtered by a mob with painted faces. As the pair stood in the upper room where the murders had occurred, what earthly wisdom could have foretold that the dark-haired, earnest young man who stood there with his mission president would one day stand as number eleven in a line of modern-day prophets that began with the enigmatic Joseph Smith who was martyred there. That Harold B. Lee's visit to Nauvoo and Carthage had a profound effect on him is evidenced by the frequency with which he referred to it and by the detailed description he made of it.

President John M. Knight had still another special experience in store for his young protege. In November 1922, a few weeks before Elder Lee's release, President Knight assigned him to conduct a conference in Sheridan, Wyoming, which the president could not attend during the first two days of it. In making the assignment, the president gave the ultimate accolade of confidence when he told Harold "there was no one else he would rather trust." Since he had no time to prepare in advance, Elder Lee spent the time on the train arranging his thoughts as to what he would do. Judging from his established habit, we can assume he prayed fervently for help.

Located in northern Wyoming near the Montana border, Sheridan, named for General Philip Henry Sheridan of Civil War fame, is the trading and cultural center of a wide area of farms and cattle ranches in the vicinity of the Bighorn Mountains. It was seventy miles north of here when, in 1876, General George A. Custer made his last stand at the battle of Little Bighorn. Sheridan was founded a few years later and soon attracted Latter-day Saint settlers who plied their farming and ranching skills to help build the community. In many ways, therefore, Sheridan was not unlike Clifton, Idaho, where Harold was born and raised, which gave him much in common with the members of the branch there.

Despite this, we can safely assume that the members there were not thrilled to see him get off the train. They were expecting the mission president, not this unknown elder. Their attitudes soon changed, however, when they found he was a triple threat man. He preached the gospel with eloquence and played the piano and conducted the music with equal competence. And between meetings on Sunday, he mediated disputes between members with wisdom beyond his years. We can gauge the impression he made on the members at Sheridan by this comment made by Elder Lee on Monday, after President Knight arrived: "When President Knight arrived on Monday, Elder Scadlock insisted that I talk again, but I graciously declined and played the part of wisdom." That Harold's mission president shared this high opinion of him is suggested by this entry in Elder Lee's diary: "While there, the President took me into his confidence more than he has ever done before and took me with him wherever he went." Reflecting on the impact this experience had upon him, Elder Lee wrote that it made "[me] more appreciative and humble in the responsibility that is mine—to determine whether or not I can make good among strangers."

Despite his achievements, it should not be assumed that Elder Lee's missionary service was crowned only with success. He had his off days, his times of failure, and his times of despondency. During his early service in Denver, Elder Lee seriously bungled the anointing of a little girl, entirely forgetting the wording and fumbling around in confusion. Afterward his companion, Elder Woodbury, after being assured Harold wouldn't "get sore" about it, said, "For Pete's sake, don't ever do it like that." Later, when he returned to a house where he had first received a warm reception, the woman wouldn't even answer the door. "I sure thought I had a convert there," wrote a wiser elder. And at another home, a woman slammed the door in his face while he was quoting a scripture, ordering him to "go on down the street."

These and other similar experiences were the normal fare for missionaries of that day and were usually passed off with a certain lightheartedness. But, there were other times when negative events piled up to create real despondency. "Felt pretty blue all day," he wrote some time after being called as conference president, "because of many griefs and complaints brought by the missionaries and from different Saints. Felt as incapable as a babe and sure acted like one too." However, bouts of despondency such as this, arising from his work, were not of frequent occurrence and were soon brushed off and forgotten. There was another cause of concern, however, which was external to the work and which was so persistent that it could never be entirely submerged. This was Elder Lee's constant struggle because of having so little money. We have already seen how his first companion, after he became conference president, had to halve his spending to accommodate Elder Lee's slender budget. The money pressures grew worse near the end of his mission. Indeed, doubt existed he would be able to finish. But, he was buoyed up by a letter of August 27, 1922. "I received a most encouraging letter from father," he wrote, "who told me they would never ask for my release and would only pray God to increase their crops so I can stay until released." He was further encouraged to receive a forty-dollar check from his sixteen-year-old brother, Waldo, who "wanted some credit too." The missionary did not take these gestures of generosity for granted. "I am so appreciative of my people at home," wrote he. "I could cry when I think of it all, and my prayer is that God will make me humble so that I shall not disappoint them when I go home."

President Knight hoped Elder Lee would be able to serve until the spring of 1923. When he learned about Harold's pinched finances, however, he decided to release him at the conference in early December 1922. As it drew near, the elder from Clifton seemed determined to make it the best conference ever. He "declared a housecleaning day and cleaned the church from top to bottom." All the woodwork was scrubbed and oiled as were the chairs. Nor were the floors neglected. "I crawled up and down the floor on my knees," he explained, "until my knees were calloused and my back ached." His other preparations were equally demanding. Not only was he to conduct and to speak at the meetings, he was also to sing in a mixed quartet and a male quartet and to play accompaniment for the congregational singing. With all planning and rehearsals completed, everything was in readiness for the opening session of the conference on Saturday, December 9, 1922. This was a missionary report and testimony meeting, which went on for eight hours. Each of the twenty-eight missionaries present was allowed to speak without a time limit. "When my turn came to speak," wrote Elder Lee, "after all the others had talked, I found I was up against a hard proposition. I was finally able to control myself after a time, and then say what I wanted." President Knight, who was the concluding speaker, "experienced the same difficulty when he attempted to speak." We gather this show of emotion by the mission president reflected both a sense of personal and institutional loss at the departure of one so able and dedicated. "When the president announced that I was released," wrote Elder Lee, "he said that it would bankrupt the English language to tell how much he thought of me and said that I had been on the firing line from the time I had arrived in Denver." At this meeting, sixty-two-year-old Andrew Hood was appointed to succeed Elder Lee as the president of the Denver conference. And the missionaries in the conference joined to give their outgoing president a beautiful watch chain as a token of their love and appreciation.

Thus ended Harold B. Lee's first major Church calling. While it is easy to record the significant events of that assignment as we have done here, it is difficult to assess their impact upon his emerging personality and character. There can be little doubt that the unusual skills in Church organization and administration that would be reflected in President Lee's later career traced their origin in large part to his experiences in Denver. It was there that his ability to organize and to motivate followers to work toward a common goal first surfaced in a significant way. The depth of his gospel knowledge and his spirituality were enriched while there, and his teaching skills were honed and broadened. But more important, perhaps, than any of these was the acquaintance he made there with Fern Tanner, an acquaintance that would later ripen into love and marriage and, in turn, would bring about the genesis of his eternal family.

In appraising the impact of Elder Lee's missionary experience upon his future career, we must not ignore the influence of his association with John M. Knight. He characterized his mission president as "a fearless fighter" in missionary work and as a leader who was "always on the go, visiting the various divisions of the mission." He owed much to this man who gave him the chance to demonstrate his inherent abilities and who provided special opportunities for travel and varied experiences outside his conference.

But President Knight's influence on him did not end with Elder Lee's release from the mission. Commitments at home made it necessary that John Knight return to Salt Lake City in December 1922. He and Elder Lee travelled to Salt Lake together in company with Sister Harriet Jensen, who was going there for special surgery. This trio received a rousing send-off when missionaries, members, and friends gathered at the Denver train depot to say goodbye. Among those present was Elder Lee's first convert, Mabel Hickman, who would retain a friendly relationship with him and his family through the years ahead. Indeed, Mabel Hickman and her maiden sister were almost like members of the Lee family. They, with other guests, were staying at the Lee home during the April general conference in 1941 when Elder Lee was sustained as a member of the Twelve. Mabel, who was seated beside Sister Lee when her husband's name was read as the new member of the Twelve, noted how the knuckles of Fern's hands turned white as she gripped the seat in front of her.

The long train ride back to Salt Lake City offered ample time for thoughtful reflection, interspersed with quiet conversation. Elder Lee's private reflections most likely centered largely around a concern he had expressed shortly before his release. "To think that I have caused my parents worry and hardship makes my heart ache," he had written. "Never again, if I know it, will my folks be in the position they are in today. What I shall do in the future is dark and uncertain; my prayer to God is that things will happen for the best." Herein we see a Nephi-like quality in his character, which surfaced often during Elder Lee's life. It was clearly evident during the dark days of the depression as he struggled to care for the needs of the members of the Pioneer Stake and later as he wrestled with the complicated problems faced in establishing the Church welfare plan. And it was seen dramatically at a press conference held shortly after he was ordained as the eleventh president of the Church. There a reporter asked about the prophet's plans for the future of the Church. He answered, in substance, that he had no specific plans but that he would go forward like Nephi of old, taking one step at a time, confident in the knowledge that when he had taken that step, the next step would be made clear to him. Inherent in this attitude, of course, was the assumption that the Lord would guide him along, day by day, through the mists of darkness that occasionally obscured his view.

While Harold's view of his future may have been dim at the time, the same was not true of President John Knight. He foresaw a distinguished future in Church leadership for his young protege, although his view of the exact nature of that leadership role was somewhat skewed. "While talking to President Knight about my next mission," Elder Lee recorded in his diary under date of December 15, 1922, "he said that someday I would be sent to preside over one of the missions." What John Knight saw in this young man was something many people saw in him over the years. That was a vast, indefinable capacity for leadership. A vague sense of the impression he made on others is seen in an appraisal made of Elder Lee by a Brother Smart who had served under him as the president of the Denver branch. "When he left me," wrote Elder Lee, "he told me he respected me and was glad for the opportunity of working with me, saying I was a hard one to say that about, because of the peculiar qualities that were distinctly mine that kept people long in the dark as to superior abilities that I might possess." That Elder Lee himself was not quite sure exactly what President Smart meant is suggested by this concluding entry: "That one fact of my makeup has caused me more misgivings as to my ability to succeed than any other. I wish someone would give me a recipe of instruction so I might overcome."

While the road ahead seemed dark to Elder Lee, and while President Knight saw a distinguished but vague leadership career ahead for him, their travelling companion, Sister Jensen, had seen Harold B. Lee's destiny clearly from the beginning, a destiny that would lead him to the prophetic office.

One of the things that had drawn President Knight to Salt Lake City at this time was a quarterly conference of the Ensign Stake scheduled on Saturday and Sunday, December 21-22, 1922. He invited his protege to accompany him to the Sunday sessions, which were held in the Assembly Hall on Temple Square. The Ensign Stake, in whose presidency John M. Knight had served for almost twenty years, included the neighborhood on the north bench of Salt Lake City in which many General Authorities lived, including President Heber J. Grant. Indeed, so many of them lived there that it seldom happened that several of them were not in attendance at each stake conference. Sunday, December 22, 1922, was no exception, especially because Christmas was only three days away. It was quite extraordinary, therefore, that even with so many distinguished leaders present yet still an unknown missionary from a rural ward in remote Clifton, Idaho, was called on to speak for ten minutes. The reason, of course, was that his mission president, as a member of the stake presidency, had given Elder Lee still another opportunity to show what he could do. It was the first time Harold B. Lee had spoken from this pulpit, or from any pulpit on Temple Square. It would not be the last.

Earlier in the week, Elder Lee had officially reported his mission to Harold G. Reynolds, the mission secretary of the Church, who for many years had worked in the missionary department helping to prepare outgoing missionaries and to receive returning missionaries, arranging for their transportation, visas, steamship passage, and railroad transportation, etc. Later, President Knight took his protege on a tour of the Church Administration Building, introducing him personally to some of the leaders, including President Charles W. Penrose-first counselor in the First Presidency-and Elders Joseph Fielding Smith and Richard R. Lyman of the Twelve. From President Penrose, Elder Lee obtained a recommend to enter the Salt Lake Temple, where he later went through an endowment session. At one of the offices they visited during their tour, President Knight introduced Elder Lee to one of the secretaries as the next president of the Western States Mission. That Harold was only twenty-three years old at the time suggests the mature image he projected, notwithstanding his youth.

During the week Elder Lee spent in Salt Lake City, he also paid courtesy calls on several former missionaries and their families. Two of these warrant special mention. He visited Freda Jensen, the girl friend of his missionary companion Elder Murdock. The expected marriage between this pair never materialized. Indeed, Freda Jensen never married until she became the second wife of Harold B. Lee following the death of his first wife, Fern Tanner. The other special contact he made was, of course, with Sister Tanner, who would become his first wife and the mother of his children. From the time they first met shortly after Elder Lee arrived in Denver in November 1920, there was a marked affinity between him and Fern. In the beginning, the relationship was nothing more than a friendly association between two people who shared common convictions and aspirations. Their acquaintance in Denver was notably brief, but was kept alive by periodic correspondence after Fern was transferred to Pueblo. Then following her release in July 1922, the frequency of their correspondence increased. So, despite the brevity of their personal contacts before then, by the time Harold arrived in Salt Lake City in December 1922, he and Fern were well acquainted with each other at the intellectual and spiritual level. Elder Lee was anxious to expand that acquaintance. He therefore called Fern by telephone; she was living with her parents on Salt Lake's west side. Observing the proprieties expected of those whose acquaintance was first formed in the mission field, she contacted her brother, Bud, and his wife, Ethel, who drove her to meet Elder Lee at the Kenyon Hotel downtown. The four of them then went to the Tanner home at 1310 Indiana Avenue, a home the Lees would purchase from Fern's parents, Stuart T. and Janet Tanner, several years after their marriage. Here the well-chaperoned couple spent several hours together, reminiscing about their days in the mission field, discussing their mutual acquaintances, and sharing the moments of triumph or disappointment they had experienced. From the events that followed a few months later, it is clear that this brief encounter was sufficient to convince both of them that they wanted to extend their relationship beyond mere friendship.
