Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Six

Courtship and Marriage

Harold caught the train for Franklin, Idaho, on Monday, December 23, 1922, the day after the Ensign stake conference. Members of his family were waiting there to drive him across the valley to Clifton. It was a joyous reunion. The patriarch's promises that Harold would be "called into positions of trust and responsibility" and would "have an influence for good" among his associates had been literally fulfilled. And the fact that he had presided over the largest conference in the mission for sixteen months, had served as the unofficial assistant to the mission president, and in the process had become his close confidant, seemingly fulfilled the expectations of his parents that their son would accomplish big things in the mission field.

Aside from the joy of again being in the heart of his family where he was loved and admired, there were the last-minute preparations for Christmas, which absorbed Harold's attention. And the renewal of acquaintances with friends and neighbors and the prospect of reporting his mission to the members of the ward undoubtedly aroused feelings of happy anticipation. Underlying all this, however, was a vague sense of anxiety. Harold found that the financial condition of his father was much worse than he had imagined. In order to maintain his son in the mission field, Bishop Lee had incurred heavy indebtedness, which, in view of the depressed farm conditions of the day, he had no prospect of repaying. "I thank the Lord that my parents didn't tell me all their difficulties," he wrote on learning of the financial peril they faced. Had he known earlier, it is likely he would not have remained in the mission field. Yet, the discouraging financial prospects facing the family were temporarily submerged in the festivities of the season. "I believe there has never been a time when there was more of the real Christmas spirit," he wrote.

Once the excitement of Christmas and homecoming had worn off, Harold was faced with difficult decisions. He was torn between the responsibilities owed to his family and his personal career plans. It seemed apparent that his future did not lie in Clifton. Even if he had an interest in farming as a career, which he did not, there could not have been a worse time to become involved in it. Like his father, most farmers in the area were mired in debt, and depressed market conditions had spread a cloak of gloom over the valley. Harold's interests and his training lay in the field of education, but it was midseason and a teaching contract for the balance of the year was not available. Moreover, if he hoped to teach at the high school level, increasing accreditation standards would require that he obtain more education. So, for the moment, the returned missionary was locked into a catch-22 situation from which there was no immediate escape. Matters were worsened when he was caught up in a post mission letdown, which afflicts most missionaries. For two years he had been strung taut with the responsibilities of his calling, which had kept him fully occupied during most of his waking hours. During most of his mission, his calling as the conference president had stretched his capacities to the limit and had given him a status and prestige he had never known before. Now at home he had reverted to the obscure role as one of the six children of Bishop Samuel Lee and his wife Louisa, without employment and without any immediate prospects of obtaining any. It was a most stressful time for one as able and creative as he. In these circumstances, Elder Lee put the best possible face on a bad situation. He busied himself about the farm, helping to tend the animals, to chop wood, and to perform other chores. He enjoyed visiting with his family and friends, sharing his missionary experiences and his convictions about the Church. While this was enjoyable and aroused fond memories, it had its down side. The fact is Harold was disappointed at the lowered level of spirituality and commitment he found among the members at home compared to those in the mission field. He had noticed this the first Sunday after returning from Denver when he attended services in a Salt Lake City ward, and he had noticed the same thing in Clifton. So, while recalling incidents in the mission field evoked pleasant memories of the past, it caused feelings of regret that those days were gone. He therefore welcomed an assignment to teach a class in theology in his home ward. It was absorbing to prepare his lesson, delving into the scriptures, which he loved. He enjoyed the challenging interplay between teacher and students in the classroom. Here Harold was in his proper element. He was a natural teacher, born to the task, as it were. His intelligence, his spirituality, his eloquence, and his genuine love for people combined in a classroom setting to provide ideal conditions for sharing knowledge and for kindling testimony and resolves to improve. Yet, in a sense, Harold B. Lee never left the classroom. He was always teaching wherever he went and in whatever circumstance he found himself. O. Leslie Stone, for instance, deceased member of the Seventy, recalled a casual conversation he had with Elder Lee as the two of them rode together toward the chapel where Elder Stone was to be presented as the new stake president. "Les," said Elder Lee, "you want to begin thinking now about what you will do when you are released." (As related to the author.) It would be impossible to calculate the impact on Elder Stone of that lesson on foresight taught by his friend, or the impact upon others with whom Elder Stone shared the incident. Nor could one tabulate the number of times that same sage advice has been given to others as they faced a Church calling, advice whose origin traces back to a master teacher, Harold B. Lee.

In addition to this teaching assignment, Harold was called again to preside over the elders residing in the Clifton, Oxford, and Dayton wards. He travelled across the valley in January 1923 to attend the quarterly conference of the Oneida Stake at Preston where he was set apart. This was a demanding assignment, which called into full play his genius for organization and motivation. It was a calling that, in some ways, was more challenging than his call as the Denver conference president. The main difference lay in the higher level of commitment and discipline among the full-time missionaries who devoted all their waking hours to the Church. At home, however, the members of Harold's elders quorum spent most of their days at work or in school, leaving little time for family life or Church assignments. Their quorum duties, therefore, were a relatively low priority item, which imposed heavier burdens on their leader. Despite this, Elder Lee appreciated the assignment as providing a much needed outlet for his energies and a vehicle to help recapture the sense of purpose and the spirituality that had typified his service in the mission field. But, it was not the same, and his role as the elders quorum president, while being much appreciated, suffered by comparison.

Beyond the love for his family, his teaching and quorum assignments, and his menial duties around the farm, there was nothing at Clifton to attract and to hold the interest of one whose views of life's potential had been so vastly broadened as had those of Harold B. Lee. It seems apparent, therefore, that he knew his future lay elsewhere, especially because of the bonds between him and Fern Tanner, which grew ever stronger through their frequent correspondence, and which seemed to attract him magnetically toward Salt Lake City.

Meanwhile, Elder Lee marked time as best he could. He became involved with Perry in producing a minstrel show, and he took a special interest in the young members of his family: Clyde, who was then twenty, Waldo, seventeen, Stella, fifteen, and Verda, twelve, all of whom admired and sought to emulate him. Clyde, who by this time had developed into a basketball player of some note, pleaded with his missionary brother to join him and others in a pickup game. Harold, whose athletic toughness had been weakened during his mission, unwisely agreed. The results were disastrous. During the game, which was marked by rough physical contact, he was knocked to the floor where he lay, writhing, until he was carried off with a severely wrenched back. This injury further aggravated a hernia that had developed in the mission field. When his condition worsened a few weeks later, surgery became necessary. He travelled to Utah for this purpose, where in February 1923 the operation was performed in a Salt Lake City hospital. Afterward, he gladly accepted the invitation of Fern's parents to stay at their house while he convalesced.

It was during this period that Harold and Fern decided on marriage. The affinity they seemed to have had from the moment of their first acquaintance had ripened into a fast friendship, and that, in time, had developed into an enduring love. Neither of them, apparently, could identify a moment in time when it had become clear to them that they wanted to be man and wife. Indeed, it seemed in retrospect that their union had been foreordained. Whatever the process by which it had occurred, they both were confident, indeed were eager about their desire for marriage. They were less confident, however, about the economic realities that would make marriage possible. Those realities became ever more pressing when Harold received a sobering letter from his mother, which advised that his father had been released as bishop and which hinted that they were overwhelmed with financial chaos. This put all plans for marriage on hold, and Harold left immediately for Clifton to lend support to his family. "Father and Mother have gone through a veritable hell," he wrote after arriving home, "and appear to have aged years since I last saw them." For the first time, Harold learned of the full extent of his parents' financial difficulties and of the way they had masked them so as not to upset him while he was in the mission field. "I could cry," he wrote, "when I think that in the midst of all their trouble and grief, they have placed uppermost the spiritual values, and in their great stress, have found peace and rest through the gospel."

Out of a Lee family council came the decision that Harold return to Salt Lake City "to work to get ahead financially." That decision removed any lingering doubts about whether Harold B. Lee's future lay in Clifton, Idaho. He would never return except for occasional nostalgic visits.

On returning to Salt Lake City, Harold decided his future lay in education, but to teach school in Utah required more certification than he had obtained at Albion. More schooling required money for tuition, books, and his personal needs, money that he lacked. The financial crisis of his parents meant he would have to bootstrap it, looking only to his own resources.

He obtained part-time employment at the Paris Department Store on Broadway (Third South), between Main and State Streets. This generated enough money to enable him to enroll for the summer quarter at the University of Utah. By continuing to work through the summer, he survived, but not in luxury. And a full academic load greatly limited his social life. He did spend some time on Sundays with Fern as they planned their nuptials in the fall. This was the extent of his leisure activities. Such a crowded schedule did not seem to create a sense of deprivation in them. Their youth, their love, and their self-confident attitude that together they could surmount any obstacle produced a happy buoyancy, which marked all their relationships.

After he received certification to teach in Utah, Harold negotiated a contract to teach and to serve as the principal at the Whittier School in the Granite School District at $135 a month. With an assured income, he and Fern made definite plans to marry. The wedding took place on November 14, 1923, in the Salt Lake Temple where Elder George F. Richards of the Twelve performed the ceremony.

The newlyweds were fortunate to rent a modest home at 1538 West Eighth South owned by Fern's parents, and by borrowing eleven hundred dollars, they purchased furniture and a used Ford automobile. Considering that Harold's contract was for nine months, it is apparent the indebtedness they incurred about equalled his total income for the school year. But by paying on installments and with a modest rate of interest, they lived comfortably and happily, now fully launched on their exciting voyage of matrimony.

The Lees' first home was located in the Poplar Grove Ward of the Pioneer Stake. It was here they planted their marital roots, deep and firm, roots that grew into an extraordinary life career in the coming years. One wonders what life would have been like for the Lees had they lived in some other part of Salt Lake City or in some other city. So many critical things occurred to them along the path that led to the presidency of the Church, which had their roots in the Pioneer Stake, as to suggest that establishing their home there was based on some divine purpose. That Elder Lee was the president of the Pioneer Stake, leading out in welfare work, and a city commissioner representing the west side of Salt Lake, were key factors that led him into significant involvement at Church headquarters. And that, of course, put him on the path that led him into the Council of the Twelve and ultimately into the prophetic office.

Incidents that occurred shortly before Harold and Fern set up housekeeping at 1538 West Eighth South support this speculation. On January 1, 1922, Paul C. Child was called as the new bishop of the Poplar Grove Ward. Some time after Bishop Child was installed, he and his counselors began to pray fervently that the Lord would bring into their ward persons who would provide good leadership for its members. In not too long a time after this, both Harold B. Lee and S. Perry Lee and their wives moved there. (As related to the author by Glen L. Rudd.) As we shall see, Paul C. Child later became Brother Harold Lee's counselor in the Pioneer Stake presidency and played a key role in the development of the stake's welfare plan.

Bishop Child lost little time in harnessing the talents of the newcomers from Clifton. Very soon after the Lees moved into the Poplar Grove Ward, the bishop called Harold as the M-Men instructor. At the time, there was an able but dispirited group of young men in the ward whose activities had no sense of direction due to a lack of leadership. In only one year, this same group, who had previously enjoyed the reputation of being the doormats in stake competition, led out in basketball, debating, male quartet, and public speaking. We see here the skills in which Elder Lee had excelled while he was a student at the Oneida Stake Academy and at Albion, skills that he had honed while teaching at Weston and Oxford. While the technical skills Elder Lee taught were vital to their success, it is undoubtedly true that new attitudes of self-confidence he instilled in his M-Men were equally if not more important. This quality was evident in every position of leadership Harold B. Lee occupied. It was certainly true during his second year in Poplar Grove Ward when he served as the superintendent of the Sunday School. His previous experience as a teacher and principal in Idaho and his everyday employment as a teacher and principal at Whittier enabled him to instill a sense of professionalism and commitment in the Sunday School faculty.

By this time, the leaders of the Pioneer Stake had become aware that there was an extraordinary young man at work in the Poplar Grove Ward who would bear watching. When they saw the revolution, which had been effected almost overnight in the M-Men and the Sunday School organizations of the ward, they called him the next year as the superintendent of all religion classes in the entire stake. Here again, a "complete rejuvenation and reorganization" took place. Such was Elder Lee's success in this position that the next year, 1927, his stake responsibilities were enlarged when he was called as a member of the Pioneer Stake high council at age twenty-eight. He was set apart to this position by Elder Richard R. Lyman of the Twelve.

In the meantime, during this five-year period while he was gaining prominence as a leader in the Pioneer Stake, Elder Lee was making steady progress toward his professional goals and in establishing the foundations of his family. His summers during this period while school was in recess were actually periods of accelerated activity. The minimal salary he received at the school, and the heavy indebtedness incurred at the time of his marriage, made it mandatory that Harold find supplemental employment in the off-season. So, he was alternately employed selling meats and produce for Swift and Company, pumping gas at a service station, and checking out equipment at the Salt Lake City Streets Department. Later he sold Nash automobiles and worked as a clerk in the grocery department of ZCMI. While handling these summer jobs, Harold juggled his schedule to enable him to take summer school classes at the university or by correspondence in order to maintain his teaching certification. Also, during this period he switched from the Whittier to the Woodrow Wilson School in the Granite School District. Here he also served as the principal and taught as well.

Brother Lee's family grew apace with his stature as a Church leader and a professional teacher. The first few months of their marriage were idyllic for Harold and Fern Lee. Indeed, the husband referred to them as a "glorious honeymoon." Harold had good employment, their house was nicely furnished, and they had a car, which gave them mobility. Since Samuel and Louisa had moved to Salt Lake City from Clifton, both sets of parents were nearby, as were brothers and sisters from both families. Moreover, in a short time the Lees had developed a circle of close friends from among their neighbors and the members of the ward and stake. In this environment their love flourished as they found that the spiritual and intellectual affinities that had first attracted them to each other were matched by the physical attraction of romantic love. They seemed to lack nothing to make their joy complete, except children. That culminating joy came soon when, several months after they were married, Fern conceived. Their first child, Maurine, was born on September 11, 1924, in the Latter-day Saint Hospital in Salt Lake City. Her arrival brought about a major change in the routines of the Lee household. In the first place, the baby and all her gear soon made it mandatory that larger quarters be found. Fortunately, there was a larger, better appointed place available next door at 1534 West West Eighth South, to which they moved with little upset.

Sister Lee conceived a second time within a few months after Maurine's birth. This news was received with some concern because of the serious problems connected with Fern's first pregnancy and childbirth. Then she almost lost her life because of serious bleeding. Their concerns were affirmed when the mother spent sixty hours in intense labor before the second daughter, Helen, was born on November 25, 1925. Helen, too, was born in the Latter-day Saint Hospital, a facility her future husband, L. Brent Goates, would later direct as its administrator. The Lees would not be blessed with other children, a lack that was compensated for in part by the handsome grandchildren these two daughters would later bear.
