Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Seven

Call as Stake President

The year 1928 was a banner year in the life of the Lee family. It saw major changes in Elder Lee's occupation and Church responsibilities. And for the first time, the Lees became home owners. In the fall of 1928, Harold resigned his position with the Granite School District and accepted employment as a salesman with the Foundation Press, Inc. This company, which was headquartered in Denver, Colorado, published and marketed a set of classic books called the "Master Library." Brother Lee's supervisor in Salt Lake City was Mr. L. A. Ray, who had recruited and hired him at a fixed salary of fifty dollars a week, plus a percentage bonus on all sales made by those whom Harold might employ and train. His territory included not only parts of Utah, but also Idaho, Wyoming, Colorado, Washington, and Oregon. It was a unique opportunity for Elder Lee since the guaranteed salary exceeded the amount he received from teaching school, and the bonus arrangement held out the prospect of significant additional income. Moreover, the product he sold was one he could endorse without reservation. During the several years Elder Lee worked with the Foundation Press, he travelled extensively throughout his territory, often taking Fern and the girls with him. This employment significantly increased his income and elevated him to an economic level he could never have attained as a school teacher and principal.

There is little doubt that Fern's subtle influence was a vital factor in her husband's career change. "Fern was never content that I should remain in the school teaching profession," wrote Harold. That discontent was not expressed in a nagging, critical way. Nor, presumably, was it generated by any desire for increased wealth or social status. It rather would seem to have been caused by a sense that teaching was a blind alley insofar as the full flowering of her husband's vast potential was concerned. It was apparent, therefore, that once this idea had taken root in Fern's mind, she pursued it quietly, adroitly, and persistently. Elder Lee once characterized his wife as being quiet, unassuming, sensitive, and impressionable, yet "vigorous in her denunciation of unfairness and calumny." This vigorous quality was also evident in all matters pertaining to her husband and their family for whom she felt a responsibility in helping to chart their career paths.

But, aside from this important aspect of Fern's contribution to the growth and development of her husband and her daughters, the most significant role she played was that of homemaker. Wherever the Lees lived, Fern maintained a home of culture and refinement whose appointments reflected the level of Harold's income and whose routines were well ordered and free, insofar as she could control it, from unnecessary pressures and from distracting outside influences. It was to this sheltered place that her family could come for comfort, for refreshment, and for renewal. And as her husband's outside activities became more demanding and, in some instances, hectic, this haven of rest and relaxation became ever more important to him and to the family. As already noted, it was during 1928 that Harold provided his wife with a home she could call her own. It was a home that had special significance for Fern as she had been raised there. When during this year the Tanners moved to Granger, Utah, to live with their daughter Emily where they could get better care in their old age, the Lees bought the family home at 1310 Indiana Avenue.

This purchase firmly anchored the Lees on Salt Lake City's west side and more particularly in the Pioneer Stake. During 1928, Elder Lee's rapid rise to leadership in the stake took a quantum leap. Prior to the October quarterly stake conference that year, Elder Lee had been released as the stake superintendent of religion classes and had been called as the stake superintendent of the Sunday Schools, replacing T. T. Burton. He had selected Edwin Bronson and E. Albert Rosenvall as his counselors and had expected that their names would be presented for sustaining vote at one of the general sessions of the conference. As Harold entered the Assembly Hall on Temple Square on Sunday, where the general sessions of the conference were held, he had no inkling of the surprise that awaited him there. Instead of hearing his name presented as the new stake superintendent of the Sunday Schools, he was presented to the conference as the new second counselor to President D. E. Hammond in the stake presidency. The other counselor sustained was Charles S. Hyde, who replaced J. A. Hancock as the first counselor. The unexpected action taken this day elevated twenty-nine-year-old Harold B. Lee to a place of visible prominence among the seven stakes in the Salt Lake Valley, a place comparable to that which his mission president John M. Knight had occupied six years before when Harold was released from the Western States Mission.

The men with whom Elder Lee was thus brought into close association in the stake presidency were men of ability and wide experience. Datus E. Hammond, who was fortyone years old at the time, was a professional scouter who had served as a missionary in England, who was educated at the University of Utah, and who was a veteran of World War I where he had risen to the rank of first lieutenant. President Hammond was called as the president of Pioneer Stake in 1925, and after his release in 1930, he was called as a member of the general board of the YMMIA. His long experience in Scouting reflected an intense interest in the youth of the Church. President Charles S. Hyde, the first counselor, who was forty years old at the time, had served as the president of the Netherlands Mission. In addition, he had served there as a missionary when he was a young man. He was called into the presidency of the Pioneer Stake in 1925. President Hyde, whose father, Charles H. Hyde, had also served in the presidency of the Pioneer Stake, was a member of the staff of the Presiding Bishop's office.

The stake over which these men presided took its name from Pioneer Square, which was within the stake boundaries, the place where the Mormon pioneers first camped upon entering the Salt Lake Valley. It included ten wards, a Mexican branch, and a population of over ten thousand members. The eastern portion of the stake included much of the industrial section of Salt Lake City and on the western boundary of the stake were many homes of humble character. In between were neighborhoods of typically middle-class quality. Also included in the stake were homes of a more substantial nature, some of which had been built by pioneer families bordering or near the Jordan River, which flows through the stake. Among these was the Cannon family, which included Sylvester Q. Cannon, a son of President George Q. Cannon, who was released as the president of the Pioneer Stake in 1925 when he became the Presiding Bishop of the Church.

President Lee's tenure as a counselor in the Pioneer Stake presidency was short-lived. In October 1930 the stake presidency was reorganized under the direction of Rudger Clawson, president of the Twelve, assisted by Elder George Albert Smith of the Twelve. On the Friday before the conference, Brother Lee was invited to the office of President Clawson where he was told he had been approved by the First Presidency and the Twelve to serve as the new president of the stake. He was shocked. As he groped for words to respond, Elder Lee said he would rather serve as a counselor to Charles S. Hyde who was much more experienced than he. Harold was promptly disabused of that idea when Elder Smith pointedly told him he had not been invited there to give counsel about a new stake president but to determine whether he was willing and worthy to accept the call. When put in those terms, he accepted with alacrity.

This was the second time the young Harold B. Lee had been given direct counsel by a member of the Twelve, the first being when Elder James E. Talmage had corrected him in Denver about the way he had conducted the baptismal service. He did not take offense at being corrected by these brethren. Indeed, he seemed to appreciate having the miscues called to his attention and to profit from the direction he received, but unsolicited or questionable directions from others were not received with the same deferential attitude. Elder Lee was very much his own man. If he felt he was right on a given issue, and if it had moral implications, he would adhere to it regardless of who stood in opposition. But in instances like the two cited here, he yielded immediately when it was apparent he was in the wrong.

Once he had accepted the call to serve, Elders Clawson and Smith raised the question about Harold's counselors. He asked if they had suggestions about whom he should select. Their answer, presumably, was as shocking as was the call itself. He was told they had two men in mind, but did not intend to identify them. That decision, he was told, was his responsibility and that if he was guided by the Spirit, he would select the ones whom they had in mind. With such a pointed challenge to the depth of his spirituality, it hardly needs mentioning that he spent a fitful night. It was a night alternately divided into periods of wakefulness and troubled slumber. While it wore on, he reflected on different combinations of ten or twelve men whom he visualized serving as his counselors. As he did so, drifting in and out of sleep, he could foresee obstacles and misunderstandings that might impede the work, clearly indicating that certain men should not be given consideration. When dawn came, he had, by this process of elimination, reduced the number under consideration to two: Charles S. Hyde, the incumbent first counselor in the stake presidency, and Paul C. Child, the bishop of the Poplar Grove Ward. When he informed the apostles of his decision, "they smiled their approval," indicating he had selected the ones they had in mind.

That night after the priesthood meeting, Elder Lee went for a long ride with Charles Hyde. He told him of the call he had received and of his desire that his friend continue to serve as the first counselor in the stake presidency. Brother Hyde was "thunderstruck" at the idea. He refrained from answering until he had thought about it and had counselled with President Clawson. It is a mark of Charles Hyde's maturity and dedication that he accepted the call to serve the one who had been his subordinate, who was much younger than he and whose credentials in Church leadership were far less impressive than his own. As for Bishop Child, he received the same treatment Harold had received when he was called as the second counselor and was unaware of it until his name was read from the pulpit. It is safe to say that the bishop was thunderstruck, but in a different way.

What took place in the Assembly Hall that day undoubtedly created a stir among many members of the Pioneer Stake. They had just sustained the youngest stake president in the Church, one who had been jumped over the first counselor, the scion of one of the oldest and most distinguished families in the stake. While President Lee had lived there for seven years and was well known and highly respected, still he was a comparative newcomer to many whose ancestral roots in that area reached back more than three-quarters of a century to the very beginnings of the Latter-day Saints in the Salt Lake Valley. Although such as these would have raised their hands in support of the new leaders, some of them undoubtedly did so with a "wait and see" attitude. This attitude was evident during the first months of Elder Lee's ministry as stake president, even among some in the inner circle of leadership. In time, however, when they saw this extraordinary man at work, it is doubtful that anyone in the Pioneer Stake harbored negative feelings toward Harold B. Lee, except those who may have been motivated by jealousy instead of skepticism. It is safe to assume that upon taking the helm of the Pioneer Stake, Elder Lee had feelings akin to those he had when President Knight called him as the president of the Denver conference. Was he "big enough" for the job? The two apostles had given him still another chance to show what he could do, to show his generalship under difficult circumstances.

At the threshold of his administration, President Lee was faced with numerous problems of organization. It became necessary to reorganize the bishopric of the Poplar Grove Ward because of the call of Bishop Child to the stake presidency. Since the bishops of the Cannon and the Thirty-Second wards had been called to the high council, the reorganization of the bishoprics of these two wards was also required. In addition, changes were necessary in the leadership of the high priests quorum and the Genealogical Society. All these required extensive interviews and prayerful consultations, and, in the case of the three new bishops, it was also necessary to obtain the approval of the council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve. Over a period of several weeks, all these changes were effected, which seemed to position the stake leaders to begin to grapple with the many substantive problems with which they were faced. It was then that a bombshell was dropped on President Lee which would divert his attention from these problems, would create rancorous feelings of long-lasting effect, and would present a serious challenge to his leadership.

In the audits that were conducted as part of the change in the leadership of the three wards, serious shortages were uncovered in the tithing and building fund accounts of one of the bishops. As there was no convincing explanation that justified these discrepancies and because of incriminating evidence that the former bishop had deliberately misappropriated the funds, it became necessary for the new stake president to convene a high council court. Added to the normal circumstances that make disciplinary councils unpleasant and disruptive were the stressful facts that the former bishop was then a member of the high council and there were intertwining personal relationships between him and his family and various members of the stake, which had been forged over a period of many years. These circumstances created an atmosphere of extreme tension when the court was convened and the former bishop stood accused before his brethren of the high council. What made it especially difficult for the thirty-one-year-old stake president was that he had never before presided over a high council court. He was, therefore, apprehensive about following the court procedures while subjected to the personal anguish of having to sit in judgment on a dear friend and co-worker. The trial was long and wearing, lasting from evening until four o'clock the next morning. After the detailed evidence developed by the audit was introduced showing a pattern of dishonesty and misappropriation, the accused was allowed to respond with evidence by way of mitigation or in justification for what he had done. Then followed the customary procedure when half of the high council spoke in favor of the accused and the other half spoke for the court. President Lee then retired with his counselors to prayerfully mull over the evidence and to discuss the complex ramifications of the trial and the consequences of any decision to be reached. At length, President Lee decided that the circumstances required that the accused be disfellowshipped from the Church, and being supported in that decision by his counselors, returned to announce it to the high council. To his surprise, the high council refused to sustain it. We can only imagine the consternation of the young stake president to be rebuffed in that way by his high council in the first real test of his leadership. In this stressful situation, President Lee merely announced for the record that the decision of the stake president, concurred in by his counselors, was not the decision of the high council. He then adjourned the hearing. However, when it was reconvened the following Sunday morning, the high council reversed itself and unanimously sustained President Lee's decision. It is apparent that upon reflection, the members of the high council concluded that the evidence fully justified the decision of the stake president, and that perhaps they had been swayed by their emotional attachment to the accused who was one of their own.

It is not difficult to appraise the impact and the significance of this decision upon the members of the Pioneer Stake. It assuredly conveyed the message that high position in the Church would not insulate one from the consequences of misconduct. And the way in which the young and inexperienced stake president had adroitly brought about unanimity in the court undoubtedly enhanced his leadership role in the stake. Here was a man of strong mind and purpose who showed qualities of leadership and judgment far beyond his years. These qualities, and the confidence they engendered in his followers, would be of vital importance in the years ahead as Harold B. Lee and his associates forged an instrument for the relief of their people and infused it with an extraordinary enthusiasm and sense of purpose.

The judicial machinery of the Pioneer Stake seems to have fallen into disuse prior to Brother Lee's call as stake president. The common judges apparently had closed their eyes to all transgressions, allowing disobedient members to go their way without restraint or warning. This condition had created widespread indifference in the stake, blurring the meaning of what it meant to be a Latter-day Saint. This in turn weakened the incentive to live up to the high standards of the Church. This situation was radically altered with the call of President Harold B. Lee. Following the high council court that disfellowshipped the erring bishop, a series of other Church courts followed, which disciplined members for a variety of transgressions including adultery, fornication, polygamy, apostasy, and dishonesty. It is inferred that this had a bracing effect on the members of the stake, awakening them to the duties of membership and reminding them of the aim of the Church to lead its members toward perfection. It is also assumed that this revival of the judicial system caused some disobedient members to change their ways voluntarily, thereby eliminating the need for formal Church discipline.
