Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Eight

Salt Lake City Commissioner

At the time of Elder Lee's call as stake president, his mission president, John M. Knight, was a member of the Salt Lake City Commission, responsible for Public Safety. A controversy had arisen out of Commissioner Knight's administration, which had drawn much public criticism. One of the critics was Elder Richard R. Lyman of the Twelve, who aired his views at a public meeting held in the Pioneer Stake. In doing so, Elder Lyman made accusations that impugned the commissioner's integrity. Oblivious of the source of these charges and of the consequences of speaking out, President Lee defended his friend in a public meeting by questioning the accuracy of Elder Lyman's charges. Anyone seeking evidence of Harold B. Lee's boldness and independence need only consider this astonishing incident. How many thirty-three-year-old men, with no powerful friends or relatives to support them, would publicly oppose a member of the Twelve Apostles? It is true that as a stake president Elder Lee had significant influence in the Salt Lake Valley. But, he had been in office for only two years and therefore was a relative unknown. The conventional wisdom would have suggested that he not speak out publicly against someone as prominent and as powerful as Elder Lyman. However, to him it was not a question of what was politic or popular. Still less was it a question of whether it would enhance or diminish his reputation. It was rather a question of whether he would remain silent while his mentor was wrongly attacked. It is safe to say that if Harold B. Lee had not previously appeared on the scope of the General Authorities, his opposition to Richard R. Lyman assuredly put him there. To have the youngest stake president in the Church speak out in opposition to a member of the Twelve was unusual, to say the least. Actually, it was unprecedented. The content of any discussions the incident may have touched off within the leading councils of the Church never seeped out to the public. Whether individual members were appalled or whether they secretly admired the young man's spunk and loyalty, they were all undoubtedly aware that something new and unusual had been added to the leadership on the west side of Salt Lake City. This would become even more abundantly clear with the passage of time.

Not long after the public meeting where President Lee had defended John M. Knight, he went to the commissioner's office to discuss the incident with him. During the conversation, the recent death of Salt Lake Commissioner Joseph H. Lake was mentioned. He had been elected from the west side of the city. In the discussion, John Knight asked whether President Lee would accept the appointment to fill the vacancy in the commission were it offered to him. "It was the furthest thing from my mind," wrote Elder Lee. Once the subject had been broached, however, he asked what the chances were that he could receive the appointment. "He said he thought I had all the chance in the world." With only a tacit indication that Harold would accept the appointment if it were offered to him, Commissioner Knight immediately began to make contacts to gather support for the candidacy of his protege. As President Lee left the commissioner's office, he met his brother-in-law, Clarence Cowan, a city employee, who suggested that he seek the appointment to fill the vacancy in the commission. And later in the day, when he visited the offices of the Presiding Bishopric on business, his counselor Charles S. Hyde, who worked there, and Frank Penrose said they had just been discussing the possibility of President Lee being appointed to fill the vacancy. At day's end, Brother Lee considered the coincidence of these three separate but similar events to be "rather startling." Having decided to try for it, he obtained Fern's less than enthusiastic approval and began to take positive steps toward obtaining the appointment. "It seemed that I was shoved from this place to the other," he wrote, as he sought the support of influential people whose voices might be heeded by the Board of City Commissioners as they made their decision. In the forefront of those who took up his candidacy and made it their own cause were Joseph H. Preece, E. C. Davies, Jack Findling, and Lee Lovinger, in addition to those already mentioned. In the process of drumming up support, President Lee met numerous other new friends who, in the future, would play important roles in his brief political career. Chief among these was John F. Fitzpatrick, who managed the widespread interests of the powerful Kearns family and who was the publisher of the Salt Lake Tribune and the Salt Lake Telegram. Historically, these newspapers had shown a consistent and sometimes bitter anti-Mormon bias whose roots traced to former United States Senator Thomas L. Kearns. It was he who had locked horns with the Mormon apostle Reed Smoot in the battle to deny Elder Smoot his seat in the United States Senate, and repeatedly thereafter, the Salt Lake Tribune had attacked various Mormon leaders and policies, often in the most blunt and vitriolic language. A favorite target in the past had been President Joseph F. Smith, whom Senator Kearns had characterized as "the ruling Monarch" of a dangerous monarchy, which, he charged, fed on the tithes of the people, covertly allowing its leaders to live in polygamy. Four days before his term in the United States Senate ended, Mr. Kearns berated President Smith on the floor of the Senate, saying in conclusion: "It is the duty of this great body—the Senate of the United States—to serve notice on this church monarch and his apostles that they must live within the law; that the nation is supreme; that the institutions of this country must prevail throughout the land, and that the compact upon which statehood was granted must be preserved inviolate." (Congressional Record. 58th Cong. Vol. 39, pt. 4, p. 3613.) Later blasts at President Joseph F. Smith and other leaders were more explicit and abusive than this, creating a bitter relationship between the Church and the owners and management of the Salt Lake Tribune. Now to have a harmonious rapport with the publisher of this paper boded well for the young stake president who sought to become one of the political leaders of Salt Lake City.

Elder Lee's efforts to receive the appointment proved successful when the city commission unanimously designated him to fill the vacancy effective December 1, 1932. An editorial that appeared in Mr. Fitzpatrick's Tribune the following day set the tone for the new commissioner's relationship with the press and the public during his brief political career. "The commission is entitled to public commendation for its wise and happy selection," it read. "The Tribune extends its congratulations to the new commissioner and commends the remainder of the commission for an appointment so promising of sound public service." The editorial also referred to President Lee's youth, his vigor, his courage, and to his keen interest in public affairs, notwithstanding a lack of experience in politics. The editorial announcing the appointment, which appeared in the Church-owned Deseret News, elaborated on this interest. "He has been prominent in civic organizations, particularly those interested in building up and improving the west side of the city. He has been the leader in battles before the city commission for the maintenance of adequate public transportation for west side residents." The Tribune editorial also emphasized the new commissioner's connection with the city's west side, suggesting that this was the key factor in his appointment since his predecessor had been elected from that area. President Lee's ecclesiastical role in aiding the Latter-day Saints living on the west side further underscores the significance of the decision he and Fern made to put their roots down in that area following their marriage.

While President Lee was lauded publicly and privately for it, there was a down side to his appointment. Most troubling was the reaction of some of Elder Lee's close friends to his entrance into politics. They felt it would be "disastrous" to his character and to his standing in the community. He apparently had similar concerns as he pursued the appointment. But, these seem to have left him as the result of a conversation he had with his counselor Paul Child. President Child told Elder Lee that he had "placed the matter before the Lord" and that if the appointment should materialize, it would be because the Lord wanted him there. Elder Lee noted that this "defined" his own feelings "very clearly." Therefore, the new commissioner had no concern about his reputation being tarnished if this was the place where the Lord wanted him to be. Moreover, this aspect of the appointment likely would have mitigated any concern he may have had over the financial consequences of his decision. By this time Elder Lee had become the intermountain manager of the Foundation Press with offices in the McIntyre Building in Salt Lake City. While the effects of the great depression had touched his business as they had all others, he had basic confidence in his ability to survive while building a solid base for future success. Politics, with its minimal compensation and all its uncertainties as to tenure, did not hold out any substantial hope for the financial security of his family. Still, as indicated, this and other drawbacks to a political career seem to have been swallowed up in his overriding feeling that this was the place where the Lord wanted him to be. Subsequent events demonstrated the soundness of this impression as Harold B. Lee's dual role as the president of the Pioneer Stake and a member of the Salt Lake City Commission representing the west side provided essential ingredients in the successful development of the welfare plan.

The timing of Elder Lee's appointment could not have been worse from the standpoint of his new duties. The budget for his department for the year 1933 had to be completed by December 15, which gave him only two weeks in which to do it. This heavy responsibility, added to the normal duties of administering the affairs of a sprawling department with which he had no familiarity, required the new commissioner to work almost around the clock during these first few days. His job was aggravated by the diminished funds available to the city because of the depression, notwithstanding the need for services continued at the same if not an increased level.

We get the sense in reading his account of this period that Elder Lee was exhilarated by the challenging complexity of his new assignment. It is also inferred that during this period he developed to a high degree his ability to keep many balls in the air at the same time and to do it with poise and grace. His duties as stake president were, as we shall see, especially demanding at this time as he and his brethren struggled to stem the tide of economic disaster that had engulfed their people. His family duties continued unabated as he fulfilled the needs of his wife and their maturing daughters, while taking care of the yard work and other chores around the home. In addition to all this, the new commissioner taught an early-morning seminary class. He had taken on this responsibility in 1931 when the Church organized a seminary at the then new South High School in Salt Lake City. There he was associated with Merrill D. Clayson, a full-time employee of the Church Education System, who supervised the overall curriculum and the activities of the students. These activities, Elder Lee recalled, "ranged from bonfire parties to dancing and Sunday night programs." Here Harold B. Lee, teacher and principal of schools in Idaho and Utah, was in his natural element. He revelled in his association with young people, enjoying the challenge of leading them toward personal testimony and commitment to the Church. In teaching the youth, he would often say to them in substance, "If you don't yet have a personal testimony of the truthfulness of the gospel, use mine for a while." Of his association with the seminary students at South High School, Elder Lee said, "This association to me was life at its best." And his students reciprocated that sentiment. Years afterward they reflected with a mixed sense of pride and awe on their relationship with their seminary teacher who ultimately became the prophet of the Lord. Many of them counted it as a badge of honor that he later performed their marriages in the temple. One of these, Allen H. Lundgren, whom the apostle sealed to his wife, Ruth Horne Lundgren, remembered the special rapport Elder Lee had with his students and the genuine interest he showed in their personal development. Another of Elder Lee's students at the South High seminary was D. Arthur Haycock, who later became President Lee's personal secretary when he was the president of the Church. Arthur remembers the notable day when Elder Lee called on him to pray in seminary. As he closed his eyes and began to speak, Arthur felt movement in his body and in the floor beneath him. Amazed that his prayer had such powerful impact, he opened his eyes to find the class scurrying for cover from an earthquake that had struck the valley.

Elder Lee's special interest in teaching and motivating young people never waned. In later years he compensated for the loss of a connection with the seminary students by giving special instruction to missionary groups about the meaning and significance of the temple ordinances. This practice continued even after he became a member of the First Presidency. On one occasion he took the author with him to such a meeting of newly called missionaries held in the Assembly Room in the Salt Lake Temple. He asked that a verbatim report be prepared of his preliminary comments and of the questions and answers that followed. His purpose was to have this transcribed and edited with the aim of preparing an outline, which could be used by others in instructing young people about temple ordinances. His unexpected death prevented this project from reaching fruition.

Once the new commissioner had completed his budget and had gotten through the Christmas holidays with their happy agenda of family and Church responsibilities, he was prepared to buckle down to the challenging task of directing the Salt Lake City Streets Department. It was not an enviable job. The area's cold and wet winters, with alternate freezing and thawing, played havoc with Salt Lake City's surfaced streets. As water filtered into cracks in the streets and then froze, damage was caused as the expanding ice opened up fissures in the pavement. Auto traffic often expanded these fissures into chuckholes, which endangered the safety and raised the anger of motorists. Public complaints aggravated by nagging news articles and editorials made the job of streets commissioner one of the most visible and miserable in the city. Added to the continuing problems of street maintenance was the problem of snow removal during the winter months. This work was more demanding on the bench areas of the city where the hills required that after the snow had been removed the streets had to be salted to prevent the buildup of ice. In addition to these duties, the Streets Department was responsible for garbage and sewage disposal.

The heavy and continuing work of the department required a force of 250 workers and extensive equipment with maintenance shops and material depots. Except for Public Safety, the Streets Department employed more workers than any other city department. The budget crunch caused by the depression made it necessary that the new commissioner pare down the size of his administrative staff. As a result he discharged the supervisor of streets and the office manager. However, he kept the laborers in the department on the job. The former supervisor of streets was so angry when he was discharged that he threatened the new commissioner and swore to defeat him at the election in 1933. As a condition to accepting the appointment, Harold B. Lee had agreed to be a candidate in that election. Later events proved the former supervisor's threat to be an idle boast.

Through budget economies and careful supervision, the new commissioner managed the Streets Department on $145,000 less during 1933 than was spent during the previous year. He did this while employing more laborers but without reducing the wage scale.

As the streets commissioner looked toward the election, he created an organization to help insure victory at the ballot box. In doing so, he showed a flair for organization, which would be revealed repeatedly in the future. He began by enlisting the support of the workers in his department. Since most of them were not on civil service, their continued employment depended on the success of Commissioner Lee. He was not content with their personal support, but organized them into precincts and then began to hold meetings with them. He explained it, "To become better acquainted, to outline plans, to define my position on various questions, to prepare them to answer complaints, and to meet opposition that might come." Meanwhile, he was busy making personal contacts outside the department among both members and nonmembers of the Church. He was driven toward success in the election, not only because of the commitment he had made but to protect the financial security of his family. In accepting the appointment as city commissioner, Elder Lee had turned away from the Foundation Press and from teaching. The deepening depression had made steady jobs extremely scarce. The tip-off as to the scarcity of jobs was the slate of twenty candidates for the city commission at the primary election in the autumn of 1933.

As election day drew near, Commissioner Lee and his supporters moved into action. In addition to organizing and training the members of his department, he appointed an advisory committee consisting of Joseph H. Preece, Clarence Cowan, E. C. Davis, and Lauren W. Gibbs. The campaign manager was Parley Eccles. Limited funds greatly restricted the quantity and variety of the campaign literature. It consisted of simple flyers that briefly listed his personal and professional background, his achievements as commissioner, and named his principal supporters. These flyers were widely distributed by the campaign workers who were organized into teams given specific neighborhoods to cover.

One of the flyers emphasized the candidate's youth as a point in his favor. Yet this was the very thing that caused the political professionals to predict his defeat. Traditionally, the Streets Department was considered to be worthless as a political base. The professionals thought Commissioner Lee was so young and inexperienced that he did not realize this and that therefore he was doomed to certain defeat. It came as a rude shock that this rank newcomer polled 13,336 votes, far outdistancing all the other candidates. By contrast, J. Fields Greenwood, who had sworn to defeat his former boss, polled fewer than five hundred votes. It was this remarkable showing by a young political neophyte in Utah's largest city that sent Harold B. Lee's political star into orbit. The outcome suggested that the public had witnessed the birth of the state's political luminary of the future. It was the extraordinary appeal he demonstrated in this election that caused politicians to approach Elder Lee repeatedly after his call to the Twelve, pleading with him to become a candidate for governor or for the United States Senate. He routinely turned these offers aside, advising that he would become a candidate only if he were directed to do so by the First Presidency.

The four top candidates for city commissioner in the primaries qualified to run in the general election held two weeks later. Because the proposed repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution was a hot political issue nationally, with public sentiment strongly favoring repeal, and because Commissioner Lee was known to oppose it, his opponents sought to inject this issue into the campaign. He first took the position that the issue was irrelevant in Salt Lake's municipal election since it would have to be decided at the national level. While this position was logically correct, the issue, nevertheless, was thrust into the campaign when a local newspaper demanded that each of the four candidates publicly state his position on it. Trading on his friendship with him, Elder Lee asked John F. Fitzpatrick how his statement should be worded. The Tribune's publisher suggested a nebulous statement to the effect that while the candidate was not "satisfied" with conditions as they existed under prohibition, he certainly could not sanction "the old saloon conditions of the past." While this was an obvious attempt to skirt the issue, the voters apparently saw through the effort to skewer Commissioner Lee who was a known dry, but who could have been damaged politically had he forthrightly said that. As expected, his opponents attacked the statement for its lack of clarity, but the effort to derail his candidacy failed as Commissioner Lee outpolled his three opponents, gaining 29,336 votes.

At this point in his life, Elder Lee's future appeared to trend toward a career in politics and public service. On this account, he "kept minute records of election returns, district by district, as they were reported in the public press." As a politician, he knew the value of statistics of this kind, which could be important in future campaigns as showing areas of strength or weakness and therefore suggesting strategies that could increase support or minimize opposition. The successful candidate also showed his political acumen by personally contacting influential voters after the election to express appreciation for support or to guarantee his willingness to work cooperatively with all groups as a means of improving the quality of his service to the community.

Among those whom Elder Lee contacted was the First Presidency of the Church. At the time, however, the only member of it available was President Anthony W. Ivins, first counselor to President Heber J. Grant. The commissioner told President Ivins that he would be pleased to counsel with the First Presidency about any matters of public interest in the city as to which the Brethren had any concern. President Ivins responded that the only counsel he had was that the commissioner take those actions that he thought were right. "I would ten times rather a man would make a mistake while doing that which he thought was right," Elder Lee quoted President Ivins as saying, "than to do right just for policy sake." To avoid any implication that the newly elected city commissioner intended to be controlled or unduly influenced in his decisions by the General Authorities of the Church, he paid similar courtesy calls on other prominent persons in the city who were not members of the Church, making the same offer to them. His obvious purpose, aside from cementing personal relationships, was to receive input from a wide spectrum of his constituency so as to improve the effectiveness of his administration. This attitude typified Harold B. Lee's performance as a Salt Lake City commissioner. While the high-profile nature of his department and his meteoric rise as a political force attracted his share of criticism, his reputation for sound, efficient, and honest dealings was never questioned. And he reciprocated the kindly feelings others had toward him. "My work brought me in contact with the leaders in every field," wrote he of his experiences as a Salt Lake City commissioner, "and I have formed friendships that wouldn't be possible otherwise."
