Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Nine

Shepherding the Flock

At the time of his election as Salt Lake City commissioner in the fall of 1933, Elder Lee had been the president of the Pioneer Stake for three years. During that period, he and his associates had set in motion important initiatives intended to alleviate the dire economic want of their people, which the deepening depression had produced. These efforts had been watched with avid interest by the General Authorities who were searching for remedies for similar ills that affected the entire membership of the Church to one degree or another. Already there appears to have developed a special affinity between Elder Lee and President J. Reuben Clark, who became the second counselor in the First Presidency in April 1933. Because of the need to be out of town on election day, President and Sister Clark went to the City and County Building before leaving to cast their votes. While in the building, they stopped at the office of Commissioner Lee to wish him luck in the election. It is apparent that at this early period, J. Reuben Clark had his eye on this promising young leader. In time, their relationship would almost be that of a father and son. Meanwhile, several years and many demanding challenges would intervene before this pair would be brought into almost daily personal contact as they labored, side by side, in helping to lay the foundations of what became known as the Church welfare program.

This program traces its beginnings to Pioneer Stake and other stakes in the Salt Lake Valley. As the depression took hold following the market crash in November 1929, unemployment became widespread as businesses folded and as confidence in the economy plummeted. By 1933, the national jobless rate had risen to 24.9 percent, but a survey of the seventy-three hundred members of the Pioneer Stake revealed that more than half of them were dependent on assistance outside the family for their livelihood. As President Lee and his associates in the leadership of the Pioneer Stake appraised this problem, they set on a course of action that would be a model for the entire Church in the years ahead. Basically, it consisted of determining needs and resources and then of matching the two. The needs were apparent from a survey that revealed about forty-eight hundred members of the stake needed help from outside the family in providing for their food, clothing, and shelter. The main resource available in the stake to fill these needs was idle manpower. The challenge, therefore, was to put the manpower to work to fill the needs. After long hours of study, fasting, and prayer, President Lee appointed a committee to take the leadership in meeting this challenge. It consisted of his counselor Paul Child as chairman, with C. O. Jensen, Thomas E. Wilding, Alfons J. Finck, and Fred J. Heath as members. The strategy, as outlined by President Lee, was to negotiate contracts with farmers in the area to harvest their crops in exchange for a percentage of the harvest. The produce obtained from these contracts was then to be gathered in a central place for distribution to needy members of the stake, with the surplus to be canned for future use. The implementation of the strategy involved these essential steps: obtain a facility for the warehousing and distribution of commodities, organize a staff to manage this facility, negotiate contracts with farmers to harvest their crops, and organize and supervise the harvesting crews. The first step was taken when the central committee obtained, without cost, a warehouse at 333 Pierpont Avenue, which was within the boundaries of the stake and which was owned by the Browning family of Ogden, Utah. Jesse M. Drury, bishop of the Fifth Ward, who was then unemployed, was appointed as the manager of the storehouse. Alfons J. Finck of the committee was selected as the bookkeeper and office manager, while Gladys May became the office secretary and stenographer. Three other unemployed bishops in the stake, C. E. Davey, R. F. W. Nickel, and James Graham were appointed to contact farmers in the surrounding area to negotiate harvesting contracts. They and others were then involved in recruiting and supervising the volunteer harvesting crews drawn from the membership of the stake. In anticipation of the flood of produce that would be garnered at harvest time, the storehouse crew was fleshed out to include numerous people who received, merchandised, and distributed the produce and who canned the surplus for use in the off-season. The storehouse organization also came to include many sisters who were productively involved in mending or making clothing and bedding for the use of the needy in the stake. In time, the stake contracted with local industries to provide work parties to help in times of emergency or seasonal overload. As this vast self-help organization was perfected, there developed with it an extensive network of volunteers and patrons, many of whom were not members of the stake, who donated items of clothing or equipment necessary for the successful operation of the system. As the work projects got into full swing, a system of welfare entitlement was perfected. Those who performed direct services, whether in the fieldwork crews or at the storehouse, were given "pay" slips that could be presented at the storehouse to obtain food or other commodities they needed. The needy in a ward who could not render services in the program could go to their bishop, who, with the aid of the ward Relief Society president, would determine worthiness and need and would then issue orders on the storehouse for designated items of food and clothing or other commodities. In exchange for this assistance, recipients were expected to render some kind of charitable service of which they were capable, thereby removing any stigma of a dole or a mere handout.

Eventually, an executive committee comprised of the eleven bishops in the stake was appointed to oversee the work of the storehouse, with Bishop Joseph H. McPhie of the Twenty-fifth Ward as the chairman. Later still, the neighboring Salt Lake Stake was invited to join with the Pioneer Stake in the operation of the storehouse, and its members thereafter were entitled to receive commodities from it on the same basis as the members of the Pioneer Stake.

It comes as no surprise that when this elaborate yet simple mechanism for supplying the needs of the poor in the Pioneer Stake became fully operative, it attracted widespread, favorable notice. John F. Fitzpatrick of the Tribune went to visit the Pierpont Avenue storehouse and was so intrigued by what he found that he assigned a reporter to prepare a feature article for his paper. "For the past month," the reporter wrote, "unemployed carpenters, painters, and other workmen have been working on the building, which includes a storage basement, a mezzanine sewing department for renovating old clothes, a main floor for canned goods and groceries and a second floor for dry goods and groceries." The article also reported that trucks had been donated to the program for transporting goods and workers and then described the procedure followed in fulfilling work assignments. "As many as twenty men a day are being sent out," the reporter explained, "to pitch hay on Salt Lake County farms, or to pick peas in American Fork, or cherries and apricots in Bountiful and other towns." The reporter then characterized the system as a form of barter in the tradition of the pioneer west, explaining, "No charity is involved and the unemployed person works strictly on a no wage basis, receiving goods and food necessary for his immediate needs."

But, the notoriety of what was being accomplished in the Pioneer Stake to solve the nagging problems of the depression extended far beyond the state of Utah. "Several Eastern men came to visit our projects," Elder Lee explained in his records, "among whom was a Mr. Pearmain from Washington, who was connected with government relief; Mr. Mackey, a friend of President Clark's from New York; and a brother of the Reverend Webb, who years ago wrote 'The Case Against the Mormons.'" As to the reaction of these visitors, President Lee wrote: "Each was the same in saying without hesitation, 'We dream of these accomplishments being possible in the east, but never hoped to have it worked out as practically as you have it here.'"

It is apparent from what has been said already that the welfare program as it was worked out in the Pioneer Stake was not a one-man show. President Lee did not feel it was necessary for him to be personally involved in every aspect of the work. He conceived it as his task to set the course, to develop overall strategy, to call able people to positions they were qualified to fill, to define their authority and responsibility, and then to let them do their job. With all this, he provided a mechanism of accountability so that those who served under him had the opportunity to report on their work and to receive any overall direction he considered necessary. This quality of leadership is best illustrated in the first committee he organized to supervise the welfare work in the Pioneer Stake. As already indicated, he appointed Paul Child as the committee chairman. When matters involving this committee were discussed in stake council meetings, he always called on President Child to take the lead in discussing the work. He received regular reports from his counselor, at which point he gave any necessary instruction or counsel. There was never a mis-understanding in the stake as to who held the ultimate authority and responsibility with respect to welfare or any other matters in the stake.

As a member of the Twelve, and later as a member of the First Presidency, Elder Lee was particular in training stake presidents about the key role they played in the administration of the stake affairs and of the void created when they stepped out of that role. He would occasionally illustrate the point with this story he once shared with the author: Not long after Elder Lee was called to the apostleship, he accompanied a senior member of the Twelve to a multi-stake meeting in an outlying area. On arriving at their destination, the two apostles went to the home of the host stake president to check on the final plans for the conference. The stake president's wife answered the door and when they asked to see her husband, she explained he was at the stake center setting up chairs for the meeting. On their way to the chapel, the senior apostle said to Elder Lee: "Well, if we have a stake president here who wants to fill the role of a deacon, we had better release him to do that and call a man who will fill the role of stake president." Within a year, that is what happened.

The wisdom of giving Paul Child wide latitude in directing the work of his committee is seen from the profusion of other initiatives President Lee originated as a means of helping the members of the Pioneer Stake. Very soon after the storehouse was acquired and renovated and the headquarters staff and committees were organized, a stake garden was prepared. It was located on a large vacant lot on South Second West (now Third West) within the stake boundaries. The owner made the lot available to the stake without cost. Here members of the stake of all ages and both sexes gathered to prepare the ground, to plant, to water, to weed, and to harvest. The produce from the garden was handled and distributed in the same way as the produce obtained from the work contracts the stake negotiated with farmers in the area. The garden became such a showplace that when President Lee took John F. Fitzpatrick on a tour to show him what the stake leaders were doing to help their people, a visit to the garden was one of the highlights.

Another highlight of the tour was a visit to the Pioneer Stake Gymnasium, located on South Eight West (now South Ninth West), which was then under construction. As President Lee and his brethren surveyed the resources of the stake, they found a large pool of unemployed artisans-bricklayers, carpenters, masons, painters, and laborers-who wanted to work but who could not find employment. Again, President Lee's ingenuity found a way to match resources with needs. The result was the construction of the Pioneer Stake Gymnasium. The first step was to organize. T. T. Burton was appointed as the overall superintendent of the project, and Fred J. Heath was called to recruit and to direct the laborers. Much of the material for the gymnasium was obtained from old buildings that the stake workers demolished with the approval of their owners. What little money was needed for new materials came from a donation of the First Presidency, forty-five hundred dollars, and from the sale of surplus commodities realized from the operation of the stake storehouse. The workers on the gymnasium were compensated by receiving "pay slips," which could then be used to purchase food, clothing, and other commodities at the storehouse. When completed, the building had an appraised value of thirty thousand dollars. After its completion, an opening social was held in the building on June 16, 1933. Honored guests were President Heber J. Grant and Presiding Bishop Sylvester Q. Cannon, a native of the stake and a former president of the Pioneer Stake.

As would be expected, President Lee then appointed a committee to operate the gymnasium and to schedule the athletic and cultural events held in it. During the first winter of its operation, it was in use every night except Sunday from 6:00 P.M. until 11:00 P.M., the events often drawing from four hundred to seven hundred spectators. Later the building was the focal point of a program devised by President Lee "to provide fully for the spiritual, physical, educational and recreational needs of every member of Pioneer Stake." To control the use of the facility and to provide funds for its maintenance, annual "budget tickets" were sold to families at a nominal cost, which admitted holders to all events held in the building. Those who lacked the means to purchase these tickets could obtain them without charge from their bishops.

As the economic crisis deepened during 1932, President Lee sought and received permission to use tithing funds collected in the stake to help care for the needy, but, as will be seen, by the fall of that year, even that added source of revenue was insufficient. It was at this point that the Pioneer Stake leaders were faced with a major crisis. They had promised the members of the stake that their needs would be met within the resources of individual families and of the Church without resorting to government aid. However, during the last months of the administration of President Herbert Hoover, the Federal Congress passed a measure that created what was known as the Reconstruction Finance Corporation through which vast sums were made available for loans to businesses as well as for direct relief to the needy. Some Church leaders outside the stake had authorized the Saints to resort to the RFC for relief funds. This put pressure on President Lee and his associates to follow suit. To have done so, however, would have violated a basic premise of the Pioneer Stake's welfare plan—that of caring for their own—and, in their view, would have represented a breach of faith with their people. In these circumstances, a meeting of the stake's central welfare committee was convened to discuss the matter. As the bishops asked what counsel they should give their people about accepting RFC aid, Paul Child, chairman of the committee, said: "We want you to see that every one of your people is taken care of. We don't know where the money will come from to pay the bills, but our people must be provided with their needs." President Lee, who had attended the meeting and who reported President Child's remarks as having been "moved by the spirit," heartily endorsed what he said but privately wondered about the source from which the help would come. Within days the answer was given. Through the influence of President Lee, who by then was a Salt Lake City commissioner, the Pioneer Stake storehouse was designated as a temporary county auxiliary storehouse. The government then purchased all the produce and other commodities on hand at market value. The proceeds from this sale were then distributed among the bishops for use in caring for their people.

Despite these vigorous efforts made by President Lee and his associates to provide for their people, they found they still needed additional aid. It was then they turned again to the General Authorities for help. President Lee and his counselors first went to the Presiding Bishopric, who turned them down. They then sought an audience with the First Presidency, where they outlined what they had done to solve their problems, failing which they had come to them for help. When they had finished, the prophet asked his counselors, Anthony W. Ivins and J. Reuben Clark, if they agreed with him that the Church should care for the needy. After receiving an affirmative response, he pounded the table with his fist for emphasis and according to President Lee's record said, "This is the decision of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: If necessary we will close every seminary, and church school, and temple, and take care of our people if it takes the hide off the church." The First Presidency then made additional funds available for the Pioneer Stake welfare program and President Lee was told if in the future more supplemental help was needed, he was to come directly to them.

Meanwhile, President Lee and his brethren continued to use their initiative to try to solve their own problems. Another one that surfaced at this time arose from the decision of the Presiding Bishopric to reduce the amounts allocated to local units for the maintenance and operation of Church buildings. In an attempt to find a source for funds to replace those lost because of the Presiding Bishopric's decision, President Lee and the presidents of the other five stakes in the city banded together to seek a solution. They created an organization called the Six Salt Lake Stakes Associated, which sold scrip certificates intended to be used as a medium of exchange. In redeeming the certificates, the association realized a two percent override, which was then distributed to the bishops of the sixty-six wards in the six stakes on a pro rata basis. This plan, which was approved by President Anthony W. Ivins while President Grant was away, and prior to the time President J. Reuben Clark became a member of the First Presidency, very soon met with widespread opposition. When President Grant returned, he rejected the plan as smacking of an attempt by the stakes to get something for nothing. So President Lee and his associates—President Wilford Beesley and the Salt Lake Stake, chairman of the association; Bryant S. Hinckley of the Liberty Stake; Winslow Farr Smith of the Ensign Stake; Hugh B. Brown of the Granite Stake; and Joseph J. Daynes of the Grant Stake—dissolved the association and redeemed all the outstanding scrip certificates at their full value.

All of these activities took place in an atmosphere supercharged with tension and uncertainty. The economic chaos that followed the market crash was matched by violent political turmoil, which seemed for a time to threaten the very foundations of government. As the major parties geared up for the 1932 presidential election, emotions ran high and occasionally spilled over into violence. Agitators who aimed for the overthrow of democratic government sought to capitalize on the political and economic unrest by creating incidents that would inflame public opinion. One of these, reported by President Lee in his annals, occurred on the steps of the Salt Lake City and County Building where he had his office. A group of communists and communist sympathizers gathered there to try to prevent the sheriff from conducting the sale of property whose owners were delinquent in the payment of taxes. When these agitators physically prevented the sale and forced the sheriff and his deputies into the building, the officers retaliated by spraying them with a fire hose. When the rioters wrested the hose away, the officers resorted to throwing tear gas bombs at them, which were as promptly thrown back. Aided by the surprise and the determination of the attack and by their overwhelming numbers, the agitators at length took control of the building, forcing the sheriff and his deputies to take refuge in their offices. Once having achieved their objective of stopping the sale and of demonstrating their dominance, the rioters withdrew. Encouraged by this success, they then began a campaign of terror and vilification against government officials, demanding concessions that, if granted, would have effectively placed them in charge. The crowning act of their rebellion occurred when, led by an alien revolutionary, Oscar Larson, they marched on the State Capitol while the legislature was in session, demanding to be heard. Wishing to avoid another violent confrontation like the one at the City and County Building, the legislators acquiesced. The radical demands of their spokesman, and their rude and unruly behavior, finally convinced the government officials that strong countermeasures were necessary to combat this rebellion. They convened a secret meeting of the American Legion at the armory, where the legionnaires were deputized and provided with truncheons. The following day, learning of another planned assault on the City and County Building by the agitators, the beefed-up police force assembled early, positioning themselves at all the entrances to the building. This massive show of force deterred any attempt by the rioters to occupy the building. Mass meetings held throughout the city during the day, where officials discussed strategies to quell the rebellion and to try to meet the economic crisis in a rational, orderly way, rallied public support behind the government. These initiatives effectively stalled the rebellion. The subsequent arrest, conviction, and deportation of the ringleader, Oscar Larson, eliminated the threat.

The high-profile positions of Harold B. Lee during these and other events connected with the depression, and with efforts to combat it, suddenly vaulted him to a place of eminence in the community. His youth, his energy, his courage, his creativity, and his bedrock integrity created an aura of excitement about him and a sense that what he had shown thus far was mere prelude. A sign of Elder Lee's growing reputation was a lengthy article about him that appeared in the Deseret News under date of October 24, 1934. The article, which appeared under the caption "Personality Portraits of Prominent Utahans," traced his life from birth, emphasizing his home life, his education, his teaching experiences in Idaho and Utah, his mission, his business experience, and his roles as stake president and city commissioner. The photograph of the thirty-five-year-old leader, which accompanied the article, showed a side view of Elder Lee, silhouetting his ample, dark, wavy hair and his strong, manly features. Asked about the extraordinary achievements of one so young, he modestly answered: "Anything I have done has been possible through my splendid associates." Then he made a statement that seemed to give expression to the widely held view that Harold B. Lee was a young man on the move who would bear watching in the future. Said he, "I have more ahead of me to do than I have ever done."

Another lengthy article about Elder Lee appeared in the November 23, 1935, issue of the Deseret News under the caption "One Administrative Unit of the Church Shows How Christian Living Brings Results," written by Dr. Francis W. Kirkham. The article cited a recent gathering of farm, industrial, and scientific leaders in Dearborn, Michigan, hosted by Henry and Edsel Ford, which concluded that "continued enforced idleness and the dole in a land of plenty . . . will eventually destroy those personal qualities of character upon which this country has been founded." It then outlined in detail the plan of self-maintenance being carried out in the Pioneer Stake. It also reported that "the person quietly directing and guiding the plan is Harold B. Lee, one of the five city commissioners of Salt Lake City."
