Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Ten

Managing Director of the Church Welfare Plan

What Dr. Francis W. Kirkham did not know was that several months before his article about Harold B. Lee was published in the Deseret News, Commissioner Lee had become involved, behind the scenes, in plans to launch a Churchwide welfare program. On April 30, 1935, he had been invited to meet with the First Presidency to discuss a Church welfare plan whose focus would be on self-reliance rather than on a direct relief, or a dole, formula. Held on a Saturday, this turned out to be a half-day session with President Heber J. Grant and his second counselor, President David O. McKay. President J. Reuben Clark, the first counselor, was out of the city at the time but was aware of the meeting and had previously approved the purpose of it and also the assignment given to Elder Lee at the conclusion of it.

At the invitation of President Grant, Elder Lee explained the details of the welfare plan as it had been developed in the Pioneer Stake. Most of this was already known by the First Presidency, but the explanation of it by the young stake president filled in any gaps of knowledge they may have had and also served as a point of discussion of alternative approaches in handling the massive welfare problems in the Church. The result of that meeting was explained by Elder Lee in his journal: "I left the First Presidency's office about noontime," he wrote, "with an assignment to work out a program of relief for the entire church based upon my experience with the relief problem in the Pioneer Stake, where, perhaps, the greatest problem of unemployment in the entire church was to be found." It is difficult to imagine the weight of anxiety and responsibility thrust upon Harold B. Lee by this assignment. Less than a month before this meeting he had celebrated his thirty-sixth birthday. At the October general conference in 1972 when he was sustained as the eleventh president of the Church, President Lee endeavored to describe the feelings this incident aroused in him. "There I was," he told the conference, "just a young man in my thirties. My experience had been limited. I was born in a little country town in Idaho. I had hardly been outside the boundaries of the states of Utah and Idaho. And now to put me in a position where I was to reach out to the entire membership of the church, world wide, was one of the most staggering contemplations that I could imagine. How could I do it with my limited understanding." (Conference Report, Oct. 1972, p. 124.)

In such a dilemma, Elder Lee emulated the example of the Prophet Joseph Smith whose anxiety over a perplexing question had led him to the Sacred Grove. There, through an astonishing spiritual manifestation, the restoration of the gospel was begun. In like manner, Elder Lee sought spiritual direction to help in fulfilling the heavy responsibility he had received. He got in his car and drove up City Creek Canyon, whose mouth is only a few blocks from the Church Administration Building. Driving through Memory Grove, which is near the canyon's mouth, he wound his way upward alongside the stream, which at that time of year would have begun to increase in volume as the snow on the high watersheds melted. Arriving at what was called Rotary Park, which was then the terminus of the canyon road, he parked his car. Elder Lee's journal describes what then happened: "I got out and walked up through the trees, seeking a secluded spot, where I knelt in prayer and sought the guidance of an all-wise God in this mighty undertaking. I asked the Lord to guide me to conclusions dictated by his will, and that, for the safety and blessing of his people, I must have his direction." As the Prophet Joseph Smith had a specific question as he kneeled in the Sacred Grove, "Which church is right?", so also Elder Lee had a specific question, which he asked in his prayer: "What kind of an organization should be set up in order to accomplish what the Presidency has assigned?" While the answer to his question did not come to Elder Lee in the same extraordinary way as it had to his predecessor, Joseph Smith, it came through a spiritual "prompting," which was no less explicit and inspiring. "It was as though something were saying to me," he explained in his journal," 'There is no new organization necessary to take care of the needs of the people. All that is necessary is to put the priesthood of God to work.'"

Some have erroneously thought that this was the beginning of welfare work or a welfare plan in the Church. President Lee certainly never considered it as such. It was merely a spiritual response to an urgent current need, which revealed an age-old, even an eternal, remedy for the ills that beset us. From the earliest days of the restored church, the priesthood has been invoked to help resolve serious problems of temporal need. So, in the early days at Kirtland, Ohio, Newel K. Whitney and Edward Partridge were called as bishops by the Prophet Joseph Smith and were given the charge to care for the hundreds of poor and needy who were flocking into Kirtland in response to the revelation that the Latter-day Saints should "assemble together at the Ohio." (See D&C 37.) The "welfare plan" Bishops Whitney and Partridge devised to care for the needy of the Church at that time differed markedly from the "welfare plan" that came into existence a century later because of vast differences in needs and resources, which the passage of time had produced. But, they were the same in that they were priesthood directed.

Elder Lee's role in developing the Church's welfare plan in the 1930s followed other initiatives that had taken place before the First Presidency asked him to outline a plan based on his experience in the Pioneer Stake. His record of the meeting with the First Presidency on April 20, 1935, makes this clear. "I was astounded to learn," he explained, "that for years there had been before them, as a result of their thinking and planning, and as a result of the inspiration of Almighty God, the genius of the very plan that was waiting and in preparation for a time when, in their judgment, the faith of the Latter-day Saints was such that they were willing to follow the counsel of the men who lead and preside in the church. My humble place in this program at that time was described."

The main initiatives looking toward the creation of a churchwide welfare program in the 1930s took place in 1933. President J. Reuben Clark was sustained as the second counselor in the First Presidency at the April general conference in that year. Soon after, at the direction of President Heber J. Grant, the new counselor began to sketch out the organization and philosophy of a Church welfare program. This was outlined in a pamphlet entitled "Suggested Direction for Church Relief Activities," completed in July 1933, three months after President Clark took office. Thereafter, the bishops were asked to make a survey to determine the extent to which the members of the Church were in need. The responses to this request were sporadic and incomplete. Meanwhile, President Clark, who had played the key role in laying the groundwork for the welfare plan, became heavily involved with President Grant's approval as the chief counsel to Secretary of State Cordell Hull at the Seventh Pan American Conference at Montevideo, Uruguay, and with the Foreign Bondholders Protective Council. These responsibilities entailed frequent, lengthy absences from Salt Lake City with the result that decisive action in developing the Church welfare program lagged. When by 1935 President Clark's outside commitments had not diminished, President David O. McKay was asked to assume the principal responsibility for the welfare plan. It was in that role that President McKay took the leading part at a special meeting of the First Presidency, the Twelve, and the Presiding Bishopric held just before the last general session of the April 1935 general conference. At that time, preliminary approval was given to develop a churchwide welfare program. It was two weeks later, on April 20, 1935, that President Heber J. Grant and President David O. McKay met with Elder Harold B. Lee to request that he sketch out a suggested plan based upon his experience in the Pioneer Stake.

In the weeks after April 20, 1935, Elder Lee, who continued to serve as a member of the Salt Lake City Commission and as president of the Pioneer Stake, worked diligently to fulfill the assignment given to him by the First Presidency. He not only reviewed his records about the development of the welfare program in his own stake, but he consulted many knowledgeable people to get their input about welfare principles and procedures. These included Elder Reed Smoot of the Twelve, a former United States Senator; John M. Knight, Salt Lake City Commissioner and Elder Lee's former mission president; Stringham Stevens; Lester Hewlett; Campbell Brown; and of course Paul C. Child, his counselor in the stake presidency and chairman of the Pioneer Stake welfare committee. Based upon this preparation, Elder Lee made a report that outlined "a preliminary program together with a chart showing the various agencies to participate in a churchwide relief program." This was submitted to the First Presidency about June 1, 1935. When this report was circulated among the General Authorities for review and comment, some negative reactions were generated to developing a churchwide welfare program based on Elder Lee's proposals. These created uncertainty in the mind of President Grant, who hesitated in going forward. "In the face of this indecision and opposition," Elder Lee noted in his record, "President McKay felt incapable of taking the initiative without the personal support and backing of at least one other member of the First Presidency." Since President Clark was not available to get involved, Elder Lee's plan lay dormant with no action being taken on it. However, between June 1, 1935, when the plan was submitted and the October 1935 general conference, Elder Lee met periodically with President McKay to discuss welfare principles. As a result of these meetings, preliminary steps were taken toward establishing a Church welfare plan (originally called the Church security plan) when in September 1935 a churchwide survey was initiated to determine the welfare needs of the members of the Church. In the ensuing months, a close follow-up was made to insure that these data were gathered and submitted to Church headquarters. Also, at the general priesthood meeting on October 5, 1935, the First Presidency developed themes that became fixtures of the Church welfare plan as it was rolled out. The brethren, for instance, were admonished to get out of debt and to stay out of debt and to be faithful in paying their tithes and offerings. As to the latter, President McKay said, "We have in the church one of the best systems in the world of aiding one another—the fast offerings. Our young people should be taught from their youth; our older people should practice it and set a proper example."

The survey of welfare needs commenced in September 1935 was completed in February 1936. At that time, Elder Lee and Campbell M. Brown were invited to meet with the First Presidency. According to Elder Lee's record, they were instructed "to study the results of the survey and in light of its findings, submit a revised report for further consideration of the presiding brethren." During a three-week period, when he worked at all hours of the day and night, Elder Lee "prepared a graph to show clearly the findings and, counselled by Brother Brown, revised, simplified and extended" his original report. "On March 15, 1936," Elder Lee recorded, "we read over the program carefully with President McKay. After the conclusion of the reading, he slapped the table with his hand and exclaimed, 'Brethren, now we have a program to present to the church. The Lord has inspired you in your work.'" Nine days later, President McKay met alone with Elder Lee to further discuss and analyze the report and recommendations in preparation for a special meeting of General Authorities, stake presidencies, bishoprics, and mission presidents to be held in the Assembly Hall following the last session of the general conference on April 6, 1936. At their private meeting, President McKay advised Elder Lee that President Grant wanted him to go to Fresno, California, to participate in a conference of the Farm Chemurgic Council. During this conference, held March 26-27, whose main focus was on the use of farm products for commercial purposes, Elder Lee sketched the outline of the Pioneer Stake's welfare activities in a talk billed as "Finding Our Way Out."

Following the morning session of the general conference on Monday, April 6, a special meeting of all General Authorities was held when the "security plan" was presented and approved. At the meeting held in the afternoon with the General Authorities, stake presidencies, bishoprics, and mission presidents, President Grant called on President McKay to make the presentation. He first referred to the survey conducted after the October 1935 general conference, which revealed that 17.9% of the entire Church membership, or 88,460 persons, were receiving some form of relief. To help in providing for the needs of the poor, a fast offering goal of one dollar per member per year was set. Tithing faithfulness was encouraged. Each bishop was urged to accumulate, by the following October general conference, enough food and clothing to provide for every member of his ward during the coming winter. The principle of performing services in exchange for assistance was emphasized. All members then employed on WPA projects were to be asked to continue but were admonished to do an honest day's work for a day's pay. It was announced that while the direction and coordination of this effort would be in the hands of the Presiding Bishopric, the First Presidency would appoint a Church relief committee to assist the Bishopric. In concluding his remarks, President McKay, echoing the spiritual direction Elder Lee had received as he prayed in City Creek Canyon, told the brethren that the organization necessary to accomplish the goal—the organization of the priesthood—was already in place. He reminded them that this organization had been established by divine revelation and that all that was necessary for success was "to turn on the power and to start the wheels in motion."

On April 15, 1936, nine days after this historic meeting, Elder Lee was again asked to meet with the First Presidency. At that time, he was called to serve as the managing director of the Church security plan and to launch it churchwide among the organized stakes. This entailed his resignation as a Salt Lake City commissioner. He was also advised at that time that a central security committee would be organized under which he would serve in a manner like a board of directors. Because of the sensitivities this central committee would create with the Presiding Bishopric, which historically had principal authority and responsibility for temporal matters, he was also told that a member of the Twelve would be designated as the chairman of the central committee so as to give it authority over any objection raised by the Presiding Bishopric or by priesthood leaders in the field. Soon after, Elder Melvin J. Ballard of the Twelve was designated as the chairman of the central security committee, with Elder Lee and Mark Austin as members. Within a few months, Campbell M. Brown, Stringham Stevens, Henry D. Moyle, and William E. Ryberg were added to the committee. Once this central organization had been put in place and the general and local leaders had been advised of its existence and of the scope of its authority and responsibility, Elder Harold B. Lee had a track to run on and, as the managing director of the churchwide security plan, was in a position to begin to implement the welfare program he was so instrumental in formulating.

Elder Lee set up shop in an office provided for him in the Church Administration Building. In addition to necessary clerical help, he was provided with a secretary, Theodore M. DeBry, who also served as the secretary to the central committee. He was of vital assistance to Elder Lee as he began to work with local leaders in implementing the plan. For ease and efficiency in administration, the stakes of the Church were divided into regions. In each region, a stake president was designated as the regional chairman, with all the stake presidents in the region serving as an advisory regional council. There was a security council at the stake level, and the bishops of the wards in a stake were organized into a stake bishops council, with one of the bishops being designated as the chairman of the council. In an article he wrote, published in the April 1937 issue of the Improvement Era, Elder Lee further sketched the existing Church priesthood and auxiliary organizations, which became part of the vast machinery of the Church welfare plan. "Reaching into every corner of the church," wrote he, "are organized quorums of the priesthood: 118 High Priests quorums with 20,214 members, 220 Seventies quorums with 13,621 members, 611 Elders quorums with 53,198 members, 850 Priests quorums, 820 Teachers quorums, 1351 Deacons quorums with a total membership of 79,953—a mighty army of 167,000 'soldiers', organized and officered and supported by an equal army of Relief Society sisters whose ordained mission is to 'provoke the brethren to good works in looking after the wants of the poor in each quorum, and searching after objects of charity.'" (Improvement Era, Apr. 1937, pp. 209-10.)

Once he had been called into full-time service as the managing director of the Church security plan, Elder Lee lost little time getting into the field to organize and instruct the regional councils. The first such meeting he held was at Ogden, Utah, on April 21, 1936, six days after his call. From then until May 4, 1936, he held thirteen regional council meetings in the states of Utah, Idaho, California, and Arizona. At each one of these, a regional chairman and vice-chairman were appointed from among the stake presidents in attendance and instructions were given about how the program would roll out. In order to lend authority and support to the young managing director, Elder Melvin J. Ballard attended most of these meetings, introducing Elder Lee and then leaving to him the detailed instructions and training. Also, President Heber J. Grant attended a few of these meetings in order to give the authoritative endorsement of the First Presidency to what was being done. And, on a few occasions, Sylvester Q. Cannon participated in order to demonstrate the cooperation and the relationship between the Presiding Bishop and the welfare department of the Church. At some meetings, in addition to the usual instructions about welfare principles and organizational matters, there was discussion about production assignments that had already been given and about possible welfare projects. So, at a meeting held in Provo, Utah, on April 23, 1936, there was discussion about promoting truck garden projects and about acquiring an old sugar factory that could be converted into a cannery. At Nephi, Utah, on April 27 there was discussion about a wheat growing project and about the creation of a farmers cooperative. The next morning at Richfield, Utah, commercial fertilizer and lumber mill projects were considered while that evening at St. George, Utah, the local brethren talked about growing beet seed and semi-tropical fruit. May 1, 1936, found Elder Lee, Elder Ballard, and Bishop Cannon in Oakland, California, where there was discussion about organizing a storehouse to serve as a distributing point for Utah and Idaho produce.

It was here at Oakland that Elder Lee found the first signs of a phenomenon that had cropped up during the early days of the Pioneer Stake welfare effort. "Elder Ballard was disappointed," wrote he, "that opposition continued among a few in high places." Undoubtedly this was not the first place where those attending a welfare meeting had had some lingering doubts about the program, nor would it be the last. It was, however, the first place where the doubts had surfaced openly and where they had been expressed by persons who sat "in high places." While Elder Ballard was disappointed at this discovery, he most likely was not surprised by it. Indeed, it likely would have surprised the brethren had everyone accepted the plan without doubt or hesitancy. There seems to be an inertial quality in people that causes them, almost instinctively, to resist change, especially change as far-reaching as that which was contemplated by the security plan. This inertial quality finds an analogy in the law of physics that a body at rest tends to remain at rest unless acted upon by an external force, a concept that provides the basis for Sir Isaac Newton's first law of motion. The germ of the same idea is found in Lehi's instruction to his son Jacob that "it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things." (2 Nephi 2:11.) Thus, the opposition to the security plan, which surfaced at Oakland, was not surprising, but it was disturbing. And this opposition was not limited to prominent persons in outlying areas but included some at Church headquarters.

In late April 1936 just before Elder Lee went to Oakland, he learned while in Salt Lake City that a story had been widely circulated that the welfare costs in caring for needy members of the Pioneer Stake had been much larger than those incurred in the adjoining Salt Lake Stake. The damaging effect of this story was spiked by compiling and publishing detailed statistics that revealed that almost twice as many persons were assisted in the Pioneer Stake as in the Salt Lake Stake at about one-half the per capita cost. This did not end the opposition, however, but only altered its focus. Because of his relative youth, Elder Lee became the target of some critics who characterized him as a boy wonder whose minimal experience as a high church leader did not qualify him to spearhead such a vast churchwide undertaking. Such criticism could have been devastating had not the First Presidency wisely installed a member of the Twelve as the chairman of the general committee and had they not given Elder Lee their unqualified support.

That support was dramatized at the October 1936 general conference. Until that time, the security plan had been implemented through priesthood channels without much general publicity. That changed at the first session of the conference held on October 2, 1936, when, in his keynote address, President Heber J. Grant read a message from the First Presidency, explaining and endorsing the security plan. It described the formation of the general committee of the plan, whose members were later identified by name in a report presented by President David O. McKay. It also explained that the functions of the general committee "were to represent the Presiding Bishopric in the detailed administrative work of coordinating and supervising the labors of the various regularly established church organizations in their large and important security operations." The message also explained the foundation upon which the plan rested and which, ever since, has been regarded as the basic charter of the Church welfare program. "Our primary purpose," it read, "was to set up, insofar as it might be possible, a system under which the curse of idleness would be done away with, the evils of a dole abolished, and independence, industry, thrift, and self-respect be once more established amongst our people. The aim of the church is to help people help themselves. Work is to be re-enthroned as the ruling principle of the lives of our church membership." (Conference Report, Oct. 1936, p. 3.)

In his remarks during the conference, President J. Reuben Clark stressed that as the security plan rolled out, its object would be twofold: To provide sustenance for the needy and to emphasize the overriding role of work in the plan of earth life. As to the latter, he said work "is the law of the earth." He added, "I wish it were within my power, as I know it is not, to express what is in my heart regarding this great plan, and to say how I feel about the dignity and honor of work." President Clark specifically commended the general committee, whose members were named, for "getting this security plan started." (Ibid., pp. 112-13.)

President David O. McKay's major conference sermon focused on another more pervasive and enduring facet of the plan. Said he, "It is something to supply clothing to the scantily clad, to furnish ample food to those whose table is thinly spread, to give activity to those who are fighting . . . the despair that comes from enforced idleness, but after all is said and done, the greatest blessings that will accrue from the church security plan are spiritual. Outwardly, every act seems to be directed toward the physical: remaking of dresses and suits of clothes, canning fruits and vegetables, storing foodstuffs . . . all seem strictly temporal, but permeating all these acts, inspiring and sanctifying them, is the element of spirituality." (Ibid., p. 103.)

The preliminary reports of the various security projects made at the October 1936 general conference showed that significant progress had been made. These revealed that almost three hundred thousand cans of fruits and vegetables had been accumulated, along with large quantities of wheat, beans, dried fruit, flour, potatoes, and shelled corn. Also twenty-three thousand articles of men's, women's, and children's clothing had been accumulated, along with more than two thousand quilts.

Realizing this was but a start, Elder Lee and his associates, heeding the admonition of President Clark, "There is still work to do," aggressively continued their task of training and motivating local leaders. This entailed extensive travel into various parts of the western states where welfare projects were inspected and where council meetings were held to iron out problems of procedure and to answer questions about the plan.

As the end of the first year of the Church security plan approached, Elder Lee was asked to prepare an article for the Improvement Era, explaining its purpose and objectives, its accomplishments, and its future needs. It appeared in the April 1937 issue of the Era and was provocatively entitled "Church Security, Retrospect, Introspect, Prospect." In defining what the plan was, Elder Lee wrote, "By now it is clear to the minds of most people that the Church security plan is not something new to the church; neither does it contemplate a new organization within the church to carry out its purpose; but rather it is the expression of a philosophy that is as old as the church itself, incorporated into a program of stimulation and cooperation to meet the demands of church members in the solution of present day economic problems." (Improvement Era, April 1937, p. 204.) The format of the article seemed to be designed not only to explain the plan but to strengthen the hand of Elder Lee in administering it. The author was identified as the "Managing Director of the Church Security Plan and President of the Pioneer Stake." A large picture on the first page showed him seated at the side of President Heber J. Grant, and below this large picture were inset pictures of Presidents J. Reuben Clark and David O. McKay. On the second page were pictures of Elder Melvin J. Ballard and other members of the general committee on Church security: Mark Austin, Campbell M. Brown, Stringham A. Stevens, Henry D. Moyle, and William E. Ryberg. The third page contained pictures of the Presiding Bishopric: Sylvester Q. Cannon, David A. Smith, and John Wells. And on the fourth page were pictures of the general Relief Society presidency: Louise Y. Robison, Amy Brown Lyman, and Kate M. Barker. Also included were numerous pictures of food and other commodities produced and stored in various regional and stake storehouses and pictures of many chapels built or remodeled in connection with the program. The article also listed twenty-eight categories of projects that had been undertaken. These included canning or drying fruits, vegetables, and meats; sewing; farming; shoe manufacture and repair; logging; coal mining; the manufacture of temple and other garments; and making cement building blocks, sorghum, molasses, furniture, toys, mattresses, and disinfectants. As the author looked forward to the unfolding of the plan, he foresaw these five steps as being essential to its success: the elimination of idleness in the Church, developing a spirit of self-sacrifice, mastering the art of living and working together, practicing greater brotherhood in priesthood quorums, and acquiring the courage to meet the challenge of current problems. In these steps are seen the philosophical basis of what came to be known as the Church welfare plan—work, sacrifice, cooperation, brotherhood, and courage. This underscores why Elder Lee and others repeatedly said that there was nothing really new in the plan. It merely involved the application of age-old principles to help solve the problems of the day, and it will be readily seen that these basic principles could be called into play to solve other than temporal problems. So, challenges in the realm of intellect or spirit will as readily yield to these principles as will the challenge of economic want. It is apparent, therefore, that those who at the time, or later, viewed the plan only as a response or reaction to then current political or economic pressures missed the mark. Equally in error are those who failed to recognize the revelatory impetus that caused President Heber J. Grant to invoke these basic principles in helping to solve the economic crisis brought on the Latter-day Saints by the Great Depression. Those closest to the event have left their explanation as to how it occurred. "But there is still another way in which revelation comes," said President J. Reuben Clark, "and that way is through the ministration of the Holy Ghost. . . . Now I say unto you, that that kind of revelation, revelation of the Holy Ghost, did come to President Grant. Not only in this case, but in others. And through that revelation, inspiration if you wish to call it, from the Holy Ghost, President Grant launched this great welfare plan." (Address to Central Utah Welfare Regional Meeting at Brigham Young University, August 3, 1951.) In the same vein is this statement of President David O. McKay made at a meeting of the Salt Lake Welfare Region in February 1937: "That Church Security Plan has not come up as a mushroom over night. It is the result of inspiration and that inspiration has come from the Lord." Later, one of the principal actors in developing the welfare plan, Marion G. Romney, added his testimony to the others: "I believe I have made a rather complete study and I now testify to you that I do know beyond any doubt, by the same power that Peter knew that Jesus is the Christ, that the Church Welfare Plan in its inception was and now is inspired of the Lord; and that the great principles implemented by it are eternal truths, which the Saints of God must abide if they are to purify and perfect themselves as the Lord has commanded." (Conference Report, Oct. 1945, p. 156.)

As the security plan developed, much ingenuity was shown. Local leaders, anxious to develop projects that would fit into the overall plan, came up with creative ideas, some of which were approved. Others were turned down. Two that were rejected surfaced shortly after Elder Lee's article appeared in the Improvement Era. On April 29, 1937, he accompanied President McKay and others to Layton, Utah, to see a demonstration of the Bonham Brothers tractor. It had been proposed that the Church manufacture and market these machines under a franchising agreement. While they were impressed with the tractor, the security committee, after study, rejected the proposal as being infeasible. Not long afterwards, Elder Lee went to Tooele, Utah, with members of the committee to consider a proposal to divert water from Tooele Valley to Salt Lake Valley by means of a tunnel in order to irrigate fertile land on the east side of the Oquirrh Mountains. Again, the idea was rejected as being infeasible. Despite the lack of merit of these and other proposals, no attempt was made by the central committee to dampen the enthusiasm of the local leaders. All ideas to advance the work were given respectful consideration. Many were accepted and implemented; and others, like these two, were rejected. In this manner, step by step, and sometimes by trial and error, the Church welfare program developed.

Meanwhile, Elder Lee and other members of the central committee continued to teach welfare principles at every opportunity. On July 2, 1937, he participated in a meeting presided over by President David O. McKay. All General Authorities and all members of general boards were instructed there in the principles of Church welfare and were asked to support and to promote them. Despite this and notwithstanding the frequent expressions of support of the program by the General Authorities and the frequent visits of Elder Lee and other members of the central committee into the regions where welfare principles were taught, there continued to be much opposition to the plan.

This caused Elder Lee moments of discouragement and occasionally some apprehension. His appointment as the managing director of the plan had placed him in an awkward position. His duty to train local leaders in welfare principles and to supervise the development and operation of welfare projects intruded on responsibilities traditionally thought to belong to the Presiding Bishopric. This awkwardness was increased because the Presiding Bishop at the time was a former president of the Pioneer Stake, whose welfare program, developed under Elder Lee, was the prototype of the churchwide security plan. The fact that President Lee's first counselor in the stake presidency was also the chief staff assistant in the office of the Presiding Bishopric created another layer of concern. All this, added to the voices of opposition that were raised, placed the managing director of welfare under great personal stress. Had it not been for the unqualified support of the First Presidency, it is questionable whether Elder Lee could have withstood the pressure.

By 1937, the outside commitments of President Clark had been largely fulfilled so that he had begun to play the most active role in welfare among the members of the First Presidency. This had placed him into more frequent contact with Elder Lee, who had begun to regard the older man as his mentor. In turn, President Clark had begun to regard Harold Lee as a protege and almost as a son. As this relationship developed, Elder Lee sought direct counsel from President Clark more frequently, a practice President Clark seemed to encourage. After their friendship had matured, President Clark began, in private, to address Elder Lee as "kid." On one occasion, during this period, Elder Lee had gone to President Clark for counsel when he expressed concern about the opposition he faced. After hearing him out, President Clark said, "Look, Kid, you continue to follow the course and it won't be long before they will all want to jump on the bandwagon." (As related to the author by President Lee.)

Buoyed up by the encouragement of President Clark, the other members of the First Presidency, and of Elder Ballard, the chairman of the central committee, Elder Lee struggled through the seemingly endless problems the security plan encountered. One of these involved the difficulty the owners of small homes had in complying with the recommendation to accumulate a store of food and clothing for future use. Some members lived in such cramped quarters there was no room for storage. Elder Lee raised this problem in one of his meetings with President Clark, who suggested that an old warehouse be obtained on the west side of Salt Lake City and that space be allocated in it to families whose homes lacked storage room. As they discussed this suggestion, which seemed to have some merit, it was decided to present it to the central committee for consideration. President Clark, anxious to learn how the committee would react, decided to attend the meeting where the proposal was to be considered. Knowing that if it were presented as his idea the members likely would be reluctant to express their true feelings, President Clark suggested that Elder Lee present it without divulging its source, which he did. The reaction was quite unexpected. Several members of the committee branded it as impractical if not foolish. During the entire discussion, President Clark sat quietly, never hinting that it was his brainchild being gored. Afterward when they were alone, President Clark said to Elder Lee, "Kid, you can see how lacking in imagination are those who trashed this idea and how soon the program would founder if they were in charge." (As related to the author by President Lee.)

In April 1937, a company was organized named the Cooperative Security Corporation, which handled the legal and financial transactions of the Church security program. Later that year, the federal social security legislation was passed. Out of concern that this might cause confusion, the name of the Church security program was changed to the Church welfare plan at the April 1938 general conference. Other significant changes made at that time had impact on the Church welfare plan and on Elder Lee's role as the managing director. Presiding Bishop Sylvester Q. Cannon and his counselors were released and were replaced by LeGrand Richards and his counselors, Marvin O. Ashton and Joseph L. Wirthlin. Also, about this time, Henry D. Moyle was appointed as the chairman of the general Church welfare committee and Elder Melvin J. Ballard, John A. Widtsoe, and Albert E. Bowen of the Twelve were designated as advisors to the general committee.

With intermittent changes in personnel, this welfare organization provided the leadership for a literal explosion of projects and facilities during the ensuing years. By 1964, the Church welfare plan included hundreds of enterprises located throughout the United States. Among these were over five hundred farming projects that produced soybeans, peas, hay, beans, sugar beets, peanuts, pineapples, cotton, grapefruit, oranges, and other crops. There were also numerous canneries that handled and processed these crops, as well as ranches or farms that produced cattle, hogs, and sheep. Along with these projects, numerous storehouses were constructed, which warehoused and distributed the foods and other commodities the welfare plan produced. In the process, there were developed companion enterprises designed to provide job opportunities and to improve work skills. Early on, Deseret Industries was organized, whose purpose was to repair, renovate, recycle, and resell used furniture, clothing, and other commodities donated to the system. Toward this end, factories were established where these commodities were renovated or renewed. They were then marketed through Deseret Industries retail stores. This creative system provided gainful employment for numerous people, many of whom would otherwise have been unemployable because of advanced age or physical disabilities. There also grew up an employment arm of the welfare plan, whose object was to help train and place the unemployed or to upgrade the skills of those who sought to improve their status. Later as the plan evolved, it came to embody the concept of "provident living," which embraced every aspect of human life, whether physical, mental, emotional, or spiritual. All of this grew out of the initiatives that were begun during the depression of the 1930s and were based upon timeless principles enunciated and reinforced by prophetic inspiration.

Working under the direct supervision of the First Presidency, and later within the framework of the formal organization that came into being, Harold B. Lee was the key player in this extraordinary effort. It was he who, as the president of the Pioneer Stake, first demonstrated practically how the ageless principles of work, self-help, and cooperation could be applied on a large scale to help satisfy the economic wants of the people. It was he who, under assignment of the First Presidency, first designed the basic structure used to implement the goals of the Church security, later the Church welfare plan, and who formulated the basic job descriptions of the principal leaders. And it was he who, over the first formative years, provided the executive drive and acumen that overcame the initial inertia and opposition to the plan, established it on a firm foundation, and kept up the momentum as it continued to grow and strengthen.

As one reflects on the origin and the development of the Church welfare plan and on President Harold B. Lee's role in it, several things stand out. The first is the wide gulf between what it was at the beginning and what it became. The extraordinary growth that took place over the years illustrates an eternal principle that operates in every earthly endeavor and is succinctly stated in a revelation received by the Prophet Joseph Smith on September 11, 1831, which states in part: "And out of small things proceedeth that which is great." (D&C 64:33.) The second is the way in which the seed, which grew into the full-blown welfare plan, was planted in the minds of the First Presidency and Harold B. Lee. He explained the process in a talk given at the general priesthood meeting of the general conference when he was sustained as the president of the Church: "It was as though something were saying to me, 'There is no new organization necessary to take care of the needs of this people. All that is necessary is to put the priesthood of God to work.'" (Conference Report, Oct. 1972, p. 124.) The revelatory process, which this incident illustrates, lay at the root of Harold B. Lee's extraordinary personality and achievements. He repeatedly relied on such "illumination" or "whisperings" to chart his life's course.

The third thing that stands out is the disciplined and determined way in which he pursued the objective shown to him by revelation.
