Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Eleven

The Newest Apostle

On February 9, 1941, Elder Reed Smoot of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles passed away in St. Petersburg, Florida. He was seventy-nine years old at the time and had served as a member of the Twelve for almost forty-one years. During that period he had also served for many years as a United States Senator, representing the state of Utah. Elder Smoot had not been well for some time and had gone to Florida to get away from the cold of a harsh Utah winter and to try to regain his health. His passing, therefore, was not entirely unexpected, but it still was a great shock to his family and friends and, for that matter, to the entire Church.

Those who comprise the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles occupy a position of special importance in the minds and hearts of the Latter-day Saints. These are the special witnesses of the life and ministry of Him for whom the Church was named and of His divinity as the Savior and Redeemer of the world. Aside from that special role played by these men, they hold a special fascination for Church members because the induction of a person into that body holds out the prospect that he may one day become the prophet of the Church. This is so because of the principle of apostolic seniority that has become firmly imbedded in the government of the Church. Under that principle, upon the death of a Church president, the senior surviving apostle immediately becomes the de facto head of the Church due to his status as the president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, which is then, because of the dissolution of the First Presidency at the death of the prophet, the presiding quorum of the Church. That de facto status is later confirmed and made official by his ordination under the hands of the other members of the Twelve, thereby investing him officially with the keys of authority necessary to direct the Church. These keys were conferred upon him in a suspended form at the time of his ordination as an apostle and his induction into the Twelve. So the prospect that a newly ordained member of the Twelve may one day become the president of the Church creates an unusual sense of anticipation among the Latter-day Saints as to the identity of the one to be called to fill a vacancy in the Twelve.

The passing of Elder Smoot, therefore, touched off the customary speculations about who would be called to fill the vacancy. There were many able men around whom these speculations centered, men who had served as stake or mission presidents or who had distinguished themselves in business, in education, or in the professions. The youngest among the potential candidates, and the one ultimately selected, was Elder Harold B. Lee, former stake president and Salt Lake City commissioner and the incumbent managing director of the Church welfare department. Elder Lee's call was probably a surprise to some because of a perception that the Brethren might not want to upset the smooth flow in the development of the welfare plan. However, this would not have been of critical significance to President Heber J. Grant, who made the decision and extended the call. The thing of significance to him would have been a spiritual witness or confirmation attesting that Harold B. Lee was the one the Lord wanted to fill the vacancy. While we are left to wonder precisely when the spiritual witness, or confirmation, came to President Grant, we know that it came to Elder Lee the morning of April 5, 1941. "Before I arose from my bed," he wrote under that date, "I received a definite impression that I would be named a member of the Quorum of the Twelve." Elder Lee was no stranger to impressions of this kind. Indeed, they were experiences of frequent occurrences, similar to the one he had as a little boy when he was warned to stay away from the fallen barn. Repeatedly thereafter, he received other spiritual impressions, or whisperings, which came to him by way of warning, or encouragement, or foreknowledge, or to point out what he should or should not do. These were the spiritual illuminations that lighted his way and by which he governed his conduct. So when he received this impression as he lay in bed that Saturday morning, he had confidence it would occur. Yet, the impression was not sufficiently explicit to confirm that he would be called to the Twelve to fill the vacancy created by the death of Elder Smoot. So, it is inferred that Elder Lee's anticipation was tinged with some uncertainty as he arose to prepare for the day.

There was much stirring that morning, which prevented Elder Lee from dwelling at length on what had been revealed to him. The house was brimming with guests, a customary condition at conference time. Harold's cousin, William H. Prince, and his entire family were visiting from St. George. Also, Mabel Hickman, a long-time friend of the family, whom Elder Lee had been instrumental in converting in Denver twenty years before, was staying with the Lees. This, together with the presence of two teenaged daughters, whose meticulous grooming standards, even without company, strained the limits of the family bathroom facilities, prompted their father to rise early to shave and shower and, after a light breakfast, to leave the home. After checking at his office at 47 East South Temple to see if any urgent matters had surfaced, Elder Lee went to the Tabernacle for the Saturday morning session of conference.

The general conference had convened the day before with two general sessions and was scheduled to continue through Sunday, April 6. According to the usual pattern, it was expected the General Authorities would be presented for sustaining vote on Sunday, the anniversary of the organization of the Church. However, it was not uncommon for the Brethren to deviate from the usual routine when special circumstances required it. Therefore, no one except those in the inner circle knew for certain when the General Authorities would be presented for sustaining vote. And because there had been cases when calls to the Twelve had been made from the pulpit without prior notification, Elder Lee was in a quandary as to whether his name might be read out as the new member of the Twelve at either the morning or afternoon session on Saturday. When this did not happen, the tension increased with the knowledge that the matter would be resolved one way or the other on Sunday.

Neither by word nor by intimation did Elder Lee receive a hint from the Brethren throughout Saturday that he was to be called to succeed Elder Smoot. However, at the end of the general priesthood meeting held in the Tabernacle Saturday night, April 5, an announcement was made that Harold B. Lee was to confer with Bishop Joseph L. Wirthlin on the stand. There was nothing unusual in this to alert Elder Lee as to what was afoot because he was in frequent contact with Bishop Wirthlin on welfare matters. However, when afterwards Joseph Anderson, the secretary to the First Presidency, told Elder Lee that President Heber J. Grant wanted to see him in the General Authorities room behind the pulpit, he knew instantly that something unusual was about to happen. "It amazed me," he wrote, "and I immediately sensed that there was something more than just a social visit that President Grant had in mind." When the two of them were alone, the eighty-four-year-old prophet told his young friend, who was only half his age, having turned forty-two just nine days before, that he had been chosen to fill the vacancy in the Twelve caused by the death of Elder Smoot. "Oh, President Grant," Elder Lee responded, "do you really think I am worthy of such an exalted calling?" The old prophet's answer must have been reassuring. "If I didn't think so, my boy, you wouldn't be called."

In that brief moment, Harold B. Lee was elevated to a place of eminence reached only by a select few. It placed him within a small circle of men who, under inspiration, chart the earthly destiny of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. And, it put him in the chairs, so to speak, which in the normal course of events would lead him to the prophetic office President Grant then occupied. That, in turn, would invest him with vast authority as to people, property, and programs all around the world. Yet, with that would come correlative responsibilities of crushing weight as the master of all would become the servant of all. In this process, Elder Lee would discover a fine irony—that the modest living allowance provided for General Authorities (which, incidentally, is not paid from tithes but from the income of Church-owned companies) was less than the salaries earned by some Church staff personnel. This reality would serve to underscore the dominant spiritual aspects of the apostolic calling as compared to those of a temporal nature.

The Harold B. Lee who left the Tabernacle that Saturday night was hardly the same man who entered it earlier. Outwardly it would have been difficult to detect a difference, except, perhaps, for a certain air of distracted nervousness that a careful appraisal of him might have revealed. Inwardly, however, a major revolution had undoubtedly taken place. While it is impossible for us to know precisely what went on in Elder Lee's mind as a result of this call, his later conduct, comments, and writings enable us to make a reasonable estimate. He knew that the course of his life had been irrevocably changed and that things would never be the same. He knew, also, that his life and that of his family would thereafter be subjected to the most intense scrutiny both by the loving, supportive members of the Church and by the critics and detractors of the Latter-day Saints. And he knew that his elevation to the highest echelons of Church leadership would radically alter his relationship with friends and associates he had known and with whom he had worked over the years. He had been around long enough to know of the idealized perception held toward members of the Twelve and of the tendency to defer to them and generally to ascribe to them superior qualities of knowledge and judgment in all matters. And he knew that these attitudes might tempt him to arrogate special qualities of character to himself, forgetting that such adulation is largely directed toward the apostolic office, not toward the individual who occupies it.

While it may be that any such thoughts were not formulated with completeness or coherency at the time but existed there only in a vague, amorphous state, there was one thought that, it is inferred, was crystal clear and upon which he acted promptly. That was to share what had happened to him with his family. Arriving home, he found Fern and Helen entertaining the house guests and making preparations for the next day's menus. On learning that Maurine had called asking to be picked up at a friend's home, Elder Lee volunteered to go get her, but insisted that Fern and Helen accompany him. Since it was after ten, they thought this strange but complied, as Helen explained it, "because of his serious manner and insistent voice." Alone in the car, he told them what had happened. He acted "very quietly and obviously more subdued in manner than I ever remember my father being before . . .," Helen explained. (Harold B. Lee, Prophet and Seer, p. 159.) Later Maurine was informed of what had happened. Returning home, the four of them had a private family prayer in the parents' bedroom before retiring.

In a sense, the events of the next day were anticlimactic as far as Elder Lee and the members of his immediate family were concerned. By then, the shock of his call had subsided, and he and Fern and the girls had adjusted their thinking to the reality of what had happened and of what lay ahead. However, among the audience assembled in the Tabernacle on Sunday morning, April 6, 1941, there was an air of great expectancy. The Saints had gathered with the knowledge that a new member of the Twelve likely would be sustained. When the name of Harold B. Lee was announced, a quiet murmur spread through the audience, caused perhaps by a combination of surprise and approval. Because of his visible role in Church welfare during the preceding six years, Elder Lee was widely known in the Church and was admired for his administrative skills, his spirituality, and his eloquence. However, for the reasons already mentioned, he was not generally regarded as the prime candidate for the call along the Mormon grapevine. When the new apostle was invited to take his place on the stand, the sense of surprise among the audience was accentuated. Daughter Helen captured the essence of this historic moment in these words: "It created a lasting picture when my father went up and sat by the side of Brother Cannon, who had snowy white hair. When the audience stood up during the rest break midway in the two-hour session, I remember how startled I was to see all of the members of the Council of the Twelve standing in their places before us. The contrast was graphic. There stood Brother Cannon, tall and stately with his beautiful, white hair, and next to him was my father, who was much shorter, with his black hair, which gave him a youthful appearance. He almost looked like he didn't belong, for he was so much younger than the next youngest of the men who were then members of the Council of the Twelve. It came as a new and rather surprising realization to me to consider how much younger he was than the other brethren." (Ibid., pp. 161-62.)

Helen's perception was most likely shared by the entire audience. The average age of the other members of the Twelve was seventy-one years, twenty-nine years older than Elder Lee. The oldest of them was eighty-four-year-old Rudger Clawson, the president of the Quorum, who was born in 1857, only a decade after the Saints arrived in the Salt Lake Valley. The youngest, next to Elder Lee, was Stephen L. Richards, age 62. But differences in chronological age and the color of her father's hair were not the only factors that may have caused Helen and others to feel that Harold B. Lee "didn't belong" in that group. It included one member, Rudger Clawson, who was ordained to the apostleship a year before Elder Lee was born; two university professors, John A. Widtsoe and Joseph F. Merrill (Elder Widtsoe also having served as a university president); a historian, Joseph Fielding Smith; and three lawyers: Stephen L. Richards, Charles A. Callis, and Albert E. Bowen. Cumulatively, these eleven men represented 239 years of apostolic service, years during which they had borne the principal burden in the direction of the Church. They, with the members of the First Presidency, were chiefly responsible for its recent growth and development under divine inspiration. Elder Lee's diary entry for that day hints that he, too, may have entertained some feelings of inadequacy in joining that distinguished body. Wrote he, "I was sustained before the general conference at the ten o'clock session by President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., after which I was invited to a place on the stand 'at the foot of the ladder,' as he expressed it, a member of the Twelve."

But despite his youth, Elder Lee brought special distinctions to the Twelve, which few, and in some respects, none of his brethren possessed. Except for Elders Clawson and Cannon, none of them had served as a stake president as he had done; none of them had held elective office as he had done; none of them had had such wide experience in welfare matters as Elder Lee; and, except for Elders Lyman, Widtsoe, and Merrill, none of them could match his experience as an educator, whether in teaching or administration. A special distinction Elder Lee brought to his new calling, which he shared in common with all the other members of the Twelve, was a personal, spiritual testimony and witness that Jesus Christ lives and is the Savior and Redeemer of the world and the head of the earthly Church that bears His name.

This general conference was also notable because five other Brethren were added to the roster of General Authorities when Marion G. Romney, Thomas E. McKay, Clifford E. Young, Alma Sonne, and Nicholas G. Smith were sustained as Assistants to the Twelve. This was a new category of General Authorities, ordained high priests, who would be able to relieve some of the burdens on the Twelve in ways the First Council of the Seventy were unable to do because of limitations under which they then served. Through his service as the managing director of the Church welfare plan, Elder Lee had become well acquainted with all of these brethren, but he had a special relationship with two of them, Elders Romney and Smith.

Some time after Elder Lee became the managing director of Church welfare, he and Elder Joseph Anderson, who was then the secretary to the First Presidency, and Elder Nicholas G. Smith, who was then serving as the acting Patriarch to the Church, organized a Church history study group comprised of these brethren and their wives, who met regularly to study Church history and to socialize. In time, others were added to this group, including Marion G. Romney and Hugh B. Brown. Five days after Elders Lee, Romney, and Smith were sustained in their new callings, their study group met in the home of Roscoe and Irene Hammond, where the three new General Authorities were honored. Elder Lee commented on that gathering in his diary under date of April 11, 1941: "There was an excellent spirit in the gathering," wrote he, "in no small part due to the splendid attitude manifested by Hugh B. Brown who had been prominently mentioned for appointment to fill the vacancy in the Quorum of Twelve." This unusual group, whose membership included Elders Lee, Romney, and Brown, who were ultimately elevated to the Twelve and then to the First Presidency; Elder Lee, who became the president of the Church; Elders Smith and Anderson, who became Assistants to the Twelve; and Elder Anderson, who became a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy when that quorum was reconstituted, also included other distinguished members like Heber Meeks, a prominent political leader who later became the president of the Southern States Mission and the first general manager of the Church's large ranch near Deer Park, Florida, and John Wahlquist, distinguished educator who became the president of a university in California. The wives of these brethren, who in their own right possessed qualities of intelligence and character equal to their husbands, added a vital element to this group that met intermittently over the years to share knowledge and testimony about the Church and its doctrines, to socialize, and to compare notes about raising children and nurturing grandchildren. Aside from their immediate families, this group appears to have exerted a more powerful and enduring influence on the personal lives of its members than almost any others.

The day before these new General Authorities were honored by their study group, Elder Lee enjoyed one of the crowning experiences of his life when he was ordained to the apostleship and set apart as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Earlier in the week, on Tuesday, April 8, 1941, Elder Lee was briefed by his mentor on what to expect in the upper room of the temple. "I went to lunch with President Clark," he noted in his diary on that day, "where he gave me careful and detailed explanations of the procedure on Thursday, where I was to be ordained an Apostle in the temple and accept a charge from the President of the Church as to my duties, obligations, and responsibilities as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve."

On the appointed day, Harold B. Lee entered the fabled "upper room" of the Salt Lake Temple for the first time. No picture or description of the room could have prepared him for the impact the experience would have upon him. The mystique that has built up around the room over the years because of frequent, veiled references made to it and to things that have taken place there, cannot fail to create a sense of wonder, or even awe, in one who enters it for the first time. Aside from this, the actual appearance of the room conveys a clear visual impression of its purpose, its historical significance, and the reason why it bears the name "council room." Arranged in a sweeping semicircle are twelve large easy chairs, facing the west side of the room, and so positioned that each member of the Twelve seated there can see all the others. Facing this semicircle is a desk, behind which, against the west wall, are positioned three other matching, upholstered chairs intended for the First Presidency. To the right and south of the First Presidency's desk and chairs, adjacent to the semicircle, stands a second desk for the use of the secretary. The only other pieces of furniture in the room are a third desk, standing against the south wall beyond the semicircle of chairs, which holds scriptures and reference books, a small bookcase in the southeast corner of the room, a movable altar used during prayer circles, a sacrament table with an upholstered stool for use by the one offering the kneeling sacramental prayer, and an organ with its bench, used to accompany the singing, which stands in the northwest corner of the room. It would not be long before Elder Lee's skill at the organ would earn him the role of "official" organist for the meetings of the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve, a role in which he would serve for almost thirty years, and which he would relinquish to Spencer W. Kimball only after he became a member of the First Presidency. On the walls of this unusual room hang portraits of all the former presidents of the Church, as also a portrait of the martyr Hyrum Smith, and three paintings of the Savior depicting him calling his disciples at the Sea of Galilee, on the cross, and at the tomb standing before Mary after his resurrection. The heavy carpeting in this isolated room, which produces a quiet hush on it, and the furniture, arranged as explained, create an atmosphere conducive to careful and deliberate council by the apostolic brethren who direct the worldwide affairs of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The imposing presence of the portraits and paintings described conveys the impression that all the deceased modern prophets, as well as heaven, are looking down and listening in on the deliberations going on there.

The deliberations of Thursday, April 10, 1941, were of special significance, not only to Elder Lee, but also to the entire Church. To him, they once and for all time placed him in a select circle of distinction from which he would never be removed, except by death or misconduct. Throughout the remainder of his days, he could look forward to returning to this room, again and again, to counsel with his brethren, to report his activities, and to be renewed in his spirituality and in his resolve to serve with diligence and discipline until the end of his life. This continual, unending routine, laden with the diverse joys and traumas of the conflict between light and darkness, has been called the "imperious mandate." To the Church, these deliberations meant that another distinguished name had been added to the select list of special witnesses of the divinity and mission of the Savior, Jesus Christ, and that the newest apostle had been set on a path whose tortuous and testing course could lead him ultimately to the prophetic office.

The procedure followed in the temple this day was one whose origin extended back to the dawn of the restored church. After the preliminaries of song and prayer, and after the newest member had taken his place anchoring the north end of the semicircle, the aged, bearded Prophet Heber J. Grant turned toward Elder Lee and, in slow, measured words, delivered the apostolic charge to him. Once this charge had been given by the prophet, Elder Lee was asked to respond to it, and then to express himself. With quiet humility, he accepted the charge without qualification, and then shared things of a personal, sacred nature.

After this part of the ceremony had been completed, a chair was placed within the circle. When Elder Lee had been seated there, the other members of the council surrounded him, placing their hands on his head. With President Grant acting as voice, he was then ordained an apostle and set apart as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve. In the ordination, he was given all the keys and authority necessary to lead the Church, although at the time, these were only in a suspended form and were to become operative only upon the happening of future events—that he survive to become the senior, living apostle, and that he then be ordained as the prophet of the Church by the united action of the other living apostles.

When this procedure was completed, Harold Bingham Lee had officially taken his place as the sixty-first apostle inducted into the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in this dispensation. He was then finally launched on the voyage, sometimes turbulent and sometimes placid, which would ultimately bring him to the prophetic office to which he had been foreordained before the dawn of time.
