Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Twelve

The Family behind the Man

Harold B. Lee was the same man after April 10, 1941, as he was before. Yet he was different. The difference lay largely in his self-perception and in the way others perceived him. His youth, his spirituality, and his achievements created a widespread perception that he would one day be the president of the Church. This and the normal reaction of the Saints toward one newly elevated to the Twelve produced an outpouring of love and congratulations that was astonishing. "In the days to follow," Elder Lee confided to his journal, "I was able to do little else than to receive telephone calls and letters of congratulation from many friends on my appointment as a member of the Council of the Twelve. It was pleasing that many of these were from those who were not members of the Church, with whom I had associated in politics or in business." This flood of excitement spilled over to affect the entire Lee family. "I remember that we had never been so busy," wrote youngest daughter, Helen, "with people coming to the home and calling on the phone. These were beautiful, warm memories. It was a tremendous time in our lives. We heard from people that we hadn't heard from for years and years." (Harold B. Lee, Prophet and Seer, p. 163.)

One effect of Elder Lee's call was to place the entire family on a pedestal where their actions were under the most careful scrutiny. He was fortunate in that there were no chinks in the armor of his inner circle. His wife, Fern, possessed a character and personality ideally suited for one who was the companion of a person such as he. She was quiet and unassuming, spiritually sensitive, and a gracious hostess. The home she had created was one of refinement and culture, tastefully decorated and immaculately maintained. Yet, it was not of such an appearance as would make one feel uncomfortable for fear of disturbing or breaking something. It was a home to be lived in and enjoyed, not only by the immediate family but also by the numerous relatives, friends, and associates who came there.

While the role Fern played as the genial and gracious hostess of this home and the catalyst of the order and peace that prevailed there was vital, her role as her husband's sweetheart, counselor, and confidant was of far greater significance. There was no one whose judgment or counsel Harold Lee was more willing to accept than that of his wife Fern. She was blessed with the gift of discernment, which enabled her to detect any signs of insincerity or deviousness in those who sought association with her husband or her daughters. And behind her demure and gentle exterior, which was not feigned but was inherent and habitual, lay a willpower of the most determined and inflexible kind. Anyone who thought this retiring, inoffensive lady was an easy mark, or was one who could be easily manipulated or controlled, was due for a rude awakening.

The influences that Fern Lee exerted upon her husband were subtle and were hardly discernible by outsiders. She was four years older than he, and this, added to the faster maturation rate of women and their greater tendency toward spirituality, provided a bulwark of strength and support for Harold B. Lee that cannot be minimized. It is apparent that Fern's influence was paramount in Elder Lee's decision to leave the safe and secure niche he had carved out in education. It was her unqualified encouragement, too, which helped him toward success in the business world. While she had some misgivings when her husband entered politics, once he became involved, she was a wise advisor, who gave sound counsel about critical issues, about his political plans, or about any political ally or opponent she perceived as posing a danger to him. As for Harold B. Lee's role in the Church, it is clear that from the beginning of their acquaintance, she felt instinctively he was destined for greatness. This vague, yet powerful, impression was affirmed repeatedly as she saw her husband steadily rise in the ranks of Church leadership and as she saw the results of his creative initiatives.

There is one additional aspect of the relationship between this pair that deserves special mention. Alongside his loving, kindly nature, there was an impetuous quality in Elder Lee's personality, tinged with a certain combativeness. It was a compelling quality that, it is believed, contributed significantly to the high achievements he attained. Yet, Fern's gentle but firm nature seems occasionally to have laid a mild restraint on her husband's conduct, smoothing ruffled feelings and minimizing any negative fallout.

This quality in Elder Lee's character, and Fern's influence on it, is best described by daughter Helen. "My father's personality," wrote she, "was one of being very quick, moving ahead into a situation, making a decision and taking action promptly, regardless of whether the given situation was in church work, employment, or in a family setting. He needed the influence of a wife who would say to him, as Mother would, 'Now, dear, you need to think about this and you must not fail to look at the other side of the situation.'" It is significant, however, that this appraisal, made from the perspective of a young daughter during the early years of her father's maturity, differs from the characteristics seen in the fully mature Harold B. Lee after more than three decades of apostolic service. By that time, there were few people who were more calm, deliberate, and careful in looking at all sides before making a decision than was he. In this change is seen good evidence of President Lee's capacity for growth.

It is noted, parenthetically, that this quality, which was more evident in Brother Lee's younger years, can be discerned in the lives of other notable leaders. Consider Peter's impetuous action in jumping into the sea to walk on water toward the beckoning Savior. Or think of the instances in Brigham Young's life when he boldly attacked his enemies or chastised his brethren, conduct he had occasionally observed in his mentor, Joseph Smith.

These contrasting yet complementary characteristics of Harold and Fern Lee, added to their mutual love and their shared qualities of compassion and concern for others, combined to create a favorable environment for their daughters, Maurine and Helen. Separated in age by only a few months, these girls were almost like twins in size and appearance, but were different in personality. From their earliest years, they were taught to do things together and to look out for each other. This relationship continued throughout their growing-up years and followed them into the university, where they shared sorority activities and where it was not uncommon for them to double date. Early on, through the encouragement of their parents, they were introduced to the pleasures and the discipline of music. Maurine was trained in piano and Helen in the violin. These musical skills, with those of the parents, added a special, cultural tone to the home as music became a routine part of family gatherings. As the girls matured, these skills, their close relationship, and the wise encouragement of their parents made the Lee home a favorite place for gatherings of young people. Here the Lee girls and their friends were sure to find a welcome mat out for dancing on the patio, for refreshments, or for visiting with Elder Lee who always made himself available to talk to and to counsel and to motivate young people. Frequently when the girls hosted gatherings at their home, their father would spend many hours beforehand manicuring the yards, painting and fixing up, and arranging the lights and furniture. Also, he would sometimes pitch in during the party to barbecue the meat, flip hamburgers, or otherwise make himself useful so the young people could enjoy themselves.

At the time Elder Lee was called to the Twelve, the place his family called home was located at 1208 South Eighth West (now Ninth West). It was a large, two-story, brick home, set on a big lot, whose backyard extended to the Jordan River. In the front yard were large shade trees, shrubbery, flower beds, and a wide expanse of lawn. In the backyard, which Elder Lee landscaped, were found more lawn and flowers, as well as fruit trees and, in season, a vegetable garden. Until the time the Lees sold this home in the late 1940s, Elder Lee did most of the work maintaining the yards and the exterior of the house. He also did most of the interior painting and was Fern's chief assistant during the annual spring housecleaning, which was a truly major undertaking. When Elder Lee's car needed washing or polishing, he did it himself, although when his daughters provided him with sons-in-law, they sometimes did it if they were available.

Because he did not engage in recreational sports, Elder Lee's work around the home was his recreation. But because there was so much of it to do, given the large size of his house and yard, and because there was so little time in which to do it because of his many outside duties, he had to hustle to get it done. We are again indebted to daughter Helen for this revealing insight: "He moved like lightning," she wrote in explaining how he was able to handle the heavy chores at home. "His movements were always very quick, and I suppose that as he became busier, and his life became more complicated, he compensated by just running at top speed to accomplish everything. This was especially true of the case demanded by the big yard around our home. He could cut a lawn faster than any man I ever knew, including our young, vigorous sons. He'd just tear back and forth, up and down, and if you had to deliver a message to him or say something to him, you would have to run along with him back and forth across the lawn, because he never stopped. Even mother had to do this if it was necessary for her to report a telephone message to him." (Harold B. Lee, Prophet and Seer, p. 128.)

At the time of Elder Lee's call to the Twelve, Maurine was seventeen and Helen sixteen. By then they were accomplished musicians who were frequently invited to play piano and violin duets at church and other gatherings. As word of their skill first spread when they were younger, they received invitations to play in different parts of the city. Before the girls learned to drive, it was not uncommon for their father to chauffeur them to their engagements if he were available. It was a service he enjoyed rendering as it provided him with a chance to visit his daughters and also to hear them perform, something he never tired of doing.

As Maurine and Helen matured, especially after entering the university, they had questions about the doctrines of the Church, raised by teachers or classmates or by their own inquisitiveness. Invariably they would pose them to their father, whom they considered to be an inexhaustible fount of knowledge. But being the skilled teacher he was, Elder Lee seldom answered outright but responded either by adroit questioning or by direct reference to the scriptures where the girls could read the answers for themselves. He was never abrupt with them or condescending on these occasions, but he treated them with the respect and dignity he would give to an adult.

It must not be inferred that the Lee household always functioned on an unbroken plane of peaceful accord. There were times of upset and disagreement, which most often arose from scheduling conflicts or dating practices. But these were not of a serious, persistent nature but were only occasional and, actually, quite trivial.

In essence, therefore, the family of Harold B. Lee was one characterized by love, scholarship, unity, and industry, which functioned in a gracious, well-ordered environment where music was frequently heard and where service to others and to the Church were dominant themes. It was, accordingly, a family that could be held up to the Church as a model for others to emulate. In this fact, Elder Lee found one of the most potent sources of strength and justification in his apostolic ministry.

Surrounding this inner core of family were a few other relatives who were frequently brought into special family events and celebrations. These were his parents and his youngest sister, Verda; and, after Verda married in 1946, her husband, Charles J. Ross, fondly called Uncle Chick by the girls, was added to the group. There was, of course, a congenial relationship with other members of the extended family, but contacts with them were less frequent and were not of the same intimate nature as were those with the ones just named. Later, as we shall see, when the daughters married, their husbands and the grandchildren occupied places of special favor in Elder Lee's estimation.

Beyond the scope of those related by blood or marriage were a select few who were drawn into the Lee family orbit, occupying a special status there. These are typified by the Hickman sisters, especially Mabel, whose relationship with Harold and Fern extended back to the missionary days in Denver. And, of course, in the years ahead, after Fern's passing, Joan Jensen Lee came into Elder Lee's life to play a vital role of love and companionship during the later apostolic years and during the years he served in the First Presidency.
