Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Thirteen

The First Apostolic Years

Once Elder Lee was ordained to the apostleship and was set apart as a member of the Twelve in April 1941, he immediately began to function in this new and intimidating role. It was intimidating, in large part, because of the high expectations the Saints have for members of the Twelve and the First Presidency who are in a class apart from all other leaders of the Church. These are the special witnesses of the Savior who bear responsibility to testify about His divinity and His atoning sacrifice in all the world.

The magnitude of this responsibility seems to have created a sense of inadequacy in Elder Lee during the first weeks of his ministry. His first assignment as an apostle was to accompany Elder Charles A. Callis to the conference of the Salt Lake Riverside Stake over the weekend beginning Saturday, April 12, 1941, two days after his ordination. Since the Riverside Stake was adjacent to the Pioneer Stake, where Elder Lee had presided, one would have thought he would have been at ease there among Saints who knew him well. It was not so. "I had extreme difficulty expressing myself," he noted in his diary. "Things I said seemed to lack spirit and enthusiasm." The following week found him at a stake conference in Vernal, Utah, where he had a similar experience. "Somewhat disappointed at my difficulty in gaining the freedom of speech necessary for a satisfying feeling." Over a month later, he experienced the same thing when on May 25 he delivered the graduation address at Snow College, located in Ephraim, Utah. "Dissatisfied with my efforts," he wrote of the event.

Soon after this, however, he seems to have gotten rid of these negative feelings about his public addresses and began to get into a satisfying rhythm. He had great freedom, accompanied apparently by a sense of satisfaction, in delivering the baccalaureate address at Brigham Young University on June 1, 1941.

Elder Lee's call to the apostleship shed a light of distinction over the Cache Valley and surrounding areas where he was born and raised. It at once marked him as one of its most distinguished alumni and caused him to become an object of great demand by those living there who wanted to honor him. Elder Lee accepted as many of these requests as he was able to fit into his schedule. On May 30, he spoke at a special service in Wellsville. With him were Fern and the two girls and his parents. Afterward, they drove on to Clifton, visiting the old farm where Harold was born and raised and other places of interest, both in Clifton and in the neighboring towns of Dayton and Oxford. He was the honored guest and speaker at the annual "Idaho Days" celebration at Franklin, Idaho. Also present to honor him was Idaho Governor Chase Clark. Of the occasion, Elder Lee wrote: "At the celebration were many of those whom I had known as a boy." A month later, Elder Lee was a special guest at the July 24 Pioneer Celebration at Bancroft where, again, he was lauded and lionized as the Church's newest apostle and as a native son of Idaho.

Such was his newfound notoriety that old friends and neighbors sought to rekindle their relationship by inviting him to speak at funerals or other special meetings, or by paying courtesy calls to reminisce about the old days before he became famous. So on June 27, Elder Lee travelled back to Clifton at the urgent request of the family of the deceased to speak at the funeral of a well-known townsman called "Uncle Joe Howell" by one and all, whether or not they were related by blood. Several days earlier, Elder Lee's former debating coach, A. D. Erickson, came to discuss old times and to remind him of incidents when the apostle was his student.

These incidents reveal a phenomenon experienced by anyone raised to a position of public prominence. Like moths attracted to a flame, or filings to a magnet, many seek to connect themselves with a person in the public eye, whether to bask in reflected glory or merely to express support and congratulations. The phenomenon, while flattering to the one experiencing it, carries the deadly danger of attributing the public attention strictly to personal qualities rather than to the prominence of the new position. It was a danger of which Elder Lee was fully aware and with which he struggled with notable success throughout his ministry.

Soon after his ordination, Elder Lee began to perform temple marriages, an activity that, in the future, would occupy an ever-increasing amount of his time. "Performed my first temple marriage," for John P. Gleave, Jr., and his bride, he noted on April 12, 1941. "Doctor John Gleave is the father of the bridegroom."

The second temple marriage he performed united Glen L. Rudd and Marva Sperry, two young people from the Pioneer Stake. The bridegroom would later be associated with Elder Lee in welfare work and would look to him as a mentor. Many years after Elder Lee's death, Glen Rudd would be called as a member of the Seventy.

Numerous couples, attracted by his youth and spirituality, sought a special relationship with Elder Lee through the distinction that he had performed their temple sealing. When it was learned he was accommodating, many flocked to him, though they often lacked any significant personal relationship. The counsel Elder Lee gave to newlyweds usually focused on mutual love and consideration, obedience to the commandments, and cleanliness of thought, word, and action in their marital relations.

Doctor Gleave mentioned above was the patriarch of the Bonneville Stake and was seated in the Tabernacle beside his stake president, Marion G. Romney, when, without previous notice, Brother Romney was named as the first Assistant to the Twelve. It was a source of mutual satisfaction that Elder Romney was appointed to serve as the assistant managing director of the welfare department under Elder Lee.

Thus began a close relationship between these two powerful men, which would extend over more than thirty-two years. It would end with President Lee's death in December 1973, eighteen months after the prophet had called Marion G. Romney as his second counselor in the First Presidency.

Actually, this acquaintance began in the early 1930s when Harold was the president of the Pioneer Stake. They first met in a grocery store on Thirteenth East in Salt Lake City. The store manager, who was Elder Lee's brother-in-law, introduced the pair. "He was dressed in striped coveralls," Elder Romney recalled in his sermon delivered at President Lee's funeral. "His left hand was on his breast, and he reached out his right to shake my hand. Captivated by his magnetic presence, I felt I had found a friend." That friendship grew into a personal relationship when, a few years later, they and their wives and others became associated in a study group. When Marion G. Romney was called as the president of the Bonneville Stake in 1938, he acquired an ecclesiastical relationship with his friend through Elder Lee's role as the managing director of Church welfare. That loop was closed in 1941 when, as noted, Elder Romney, newly called as an Assistant to the Twelve, became Elder Lee's assistant in welfare.

During his first years in the Twelve, Elder Lee's principal headquarters duties centered around his responsibilities in welfare. The far-flung and rapidly burgeoning welfare projects created vast and ever-changing problems of administration. It was big business with farms, ranches, fruit orchards, dairies, processing facilities, manufacturing plants, and distribution centers to oversee. The supervision of accounting practices and personnel policies, added to the ongoing process of recruiting and training local welfare leaders, were constant challenges.

In time Elder Lee's headquarters duties multiplied, despite the increasing load in welfare. The assignments that came to him along the way included the chairmanship of the servicemen's, music, and general priesthood committees; advisor to the general board of the Primary association; and member of the publications, garment, and expenditure committees. In addition to these duties were those arising directly out of his membership in the Twelve, in the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve, and in the Council on the Disposition of the Tithes. Beyond these fixed and continuing duties, of course, were the intermittent, though heavy, ones of counselling and comforting members; setting apart missionaries as they went into the field; speaking at funerals, graduations, and sacrament meetings; performing temple marriages; and serving on the boards of directors of Church-owned or other corporations.

The sheer volume of these duties was overwhelming. It required the juggler's art to keep all the balls constantly moving in the air. What amazes, however, is that over the weekends, when most working people have a chance to enjoy some leisure, the apostle, like his brethren, was usually involved in conducting stake conferences. And if the stake were located at a distance from Salt Lake City, the travel time spilled over into the "work" weeks that preceded and followed the conference. At this day, the practice has been set that the General Authorities may, if they wish, take off on Mondays following stake conferences, thus providing a break in the routine and allowing islands of free time to take care of personal needs. It was not so in the early days of Elder Lee's apostolic service. It was the practice then that if, for example, a General Authority attended a stake conference out of state over a weekend and arrived home Monday morning after spending the night on a sleeper, he would usually go home to freshen up and would then proceed to his office to handle any matters that had accumulated since the previous Friday when he had had to leave early in order to arrive at his destination for the weekend meetings.

Yet, for Elder Lee, and, undoubtedly for other General Authorities, there was a certain exhilaration in getting out into the field to mingle with the Saints, to teach them, and to bear testimony to them, which was renewing to mind, body, and spirit. On this account, Elder Lee genuinely looked forward to his conference assignments. An added attraction in the early years was that the Brethren travelled in pairs when it was possible to do so. This provided a rare opportunity, during the hours of travel, or at free moments over the weekend, to share insights into their work or to build up each other through testimony.

His first assignment out of state was to attend a conference in northern Arizona in late August. Because there was no train service there, he and his companion travelled by automobile. En route, a leak drained out all the oil from the motor. The crisis came when they were between towns and with no service station in sight. They hailed a passing motorist who had no spare oil but who had compassion. He pushed Elder Lee's car twenty-eight miles to the next town, where the leak was fixed and new oil added. When compensation was offered to the motorist for his generous service, he refused it.

The following day at their destination, Elder Lee and his companion found a different spirit. Two prominent local brethren were feuding over water rights. Neither was willing to yield anything to the other until the visitors counselled with them. Elder Lee noted with satisfaction that their differences were resolved amicably and the controversy was laid to rest. This was the first of many similar situations Elder Lee would encounter over the years. He found that most faithful Latter-day Saints were amenable to the counsel given by a General Authority, and especially by a member of the Twelve.

On the return trip, the visiting Brethren offered a ride home to Oscar A. Kirkham, a scout executive who had been counselling in the area. Elder Lee was impressed by the "human interest and faith promoting stories" shared by their passenger and confided to his diary that Oscar A. Kirkham was a likely candidate to fill the vacancy in the First Council of the Seventy created by the death of Rulon S. Wells on May 7, 1941. Five weeks later, on October 5, 1941, Elder Kirkham was sustained as the forty-first member of the First Council of Seventy at the semiannual general conference.

Two days after returning home from Arizona, Elder Lee experienced another conspicuous first when he was asked to lead the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve in their prayer at the altar in the upper room of the Salt Lake Temple. This was a ritual to which he attached great significance. He frequently attested to the spiritual power generated by these prayers, bringing solace, healing, and comfort to those remembered. Often through the years he would add names to the prayer list, placed on the altar during the prayer circle, confident that through the exercise of faith and the power of God, miracles could occur in the lives of men and women.

On September 12, 1941, Elder Lee left Salt Lake City for Chicago, Illinois, where he had been assigned to preside at a stake conference. It was the first time he had travelled that far east. Unlike the days when he was a missionary, or when he travelled in the interests of the welfare department, he was booked into a Pullman sleeper. This enabled him to move about and to have the room and facilities for study and reflection. He was impressed by the golden crops in Nebraska, Iowa, and Illinois ready to be harvested. On the return trip, he spent many quiet hours "reflecting on the relationship of the present welfare plan to the United Order as revealed." This was a subject that would often engage his interest over the years. He seemed to feel that the essential qualities that would have to characterize those who could successfully live the United Order were absolute faith and self-discipline. He was heard to say that the ultimate challenge of the Latter-day Saints was to learn to live at peace from day to day without fear of what the morrow might bring.

Elder Lee prepared thoroughly for the October semi-annual general conference held during the first week of the month. Yet, he did not feel satisfied with his talk. "I was conscious of my limitations," he wrote, "and did not speak with the freedom I hope to be able to enjoy after more experience." Over the years, he did, in fact, through wide experience, gain more "freedom" in speaking from the Tabernacle pulpit. Yet, until the very end, he seems to have approached each speaking assignment with a certain trepidation.

A week after the conference ended, Elder Lee, accompanied by Elder Marion G. Romney, travelled to the Gila Valley in southeastern Arizona to give on-the-ground counsel about relief efforts there, made necessary by a disastrous flood that had stricken the area two weeks before. Elder Lee first learned of the disaster on October 1 when he received a telephone call from Stake President Spencer W. Kimball of Safford, Arizona. At that time, tentative plans for relief through the welfare system had been formed. Meanwhile, President Kimball had gone forward to assist his people, many of whom had been financially ruined by the devastating flood whose waters had covered their fields and farms, drowned their animals, and wrecked their homes. The main devastation was near Duncan, Arizona, where the Gila River had overrun its banks, converting pleasant farmland into a lake. Now the main executives of the welfare plan were on the ground to help the local leaders assess their needs and to furnish resources beyond their own ability to provide.

This was the first major test of the welfare plan in a disaster situation. Therefore, the attention of the whole Church was riveted on the Gila Valley. Articles in the Church publications kept the Saints everywhere advised of what was going on there. Three main figures stood out in this glare of publicity: Elder Lee; his assistant, Marion G. Romney; and the young, energetic stake president, Spencer W. Kimball, who seemed to be everywhere at once as he rallied his people to rise to the challenge of the disaster. This was the first time the unusual leadership qualities of Spencer Kimball had come to the attention of the presiding brethren in Salt Lake City. That they were impressed is suggested by the fact that within two years, he would be called to the Twelve to take his place in the circle at the right hand of Elder Harold B. Lee. There for twenty-seven years this pair would sit, side by side, as they slowly moved up in apostolic seniority toward the prophetic office, which both were destined to fill. Their leadership styles present an interesting study in contrasts that stand out against the background of the Gila Valley flood.

On the one hand was Elder Lee, the consummate planner and delegator, whose genius was chiefly responsible for the development of the Church welfare system. He had the capacity to formulate plans of broad scope and to marshall the energies and the talents of numerous people to bring his vision to fruition. As he stood in Duncan, there were at his command vast resources, developed in large part through his skill, which could be called upon to alleviate the suffering of the Gila Valley Saints. On the other hand was Brother Kimball, whose chief role in this disaster was to lift the morale of the people and to set them to work, fighting off the flood and repairing the damage once the wasting waters had subsided. We can see him in that setting, hustling to put a sandbag in place, to lead a crew in rescuing a householder marooned on his housetop, or to bring food, clothing, and bedding to a family who had lost all to the angry waters of the Gila. Such qualities of leadership were showcased on a world stage when, as the president of the Church, he activated a whole people through his nonstop industry and his admonitions to the Saints to "do it," to "lengthen your stride," or to "quicken your pace." Meanwhile, quietly, persistently, and deliberately over the years, Elder Lee would put in place an intricate system of correlation and coordination in the Church whose impact and importance would survive him and would influence the direction of the Church for decades. He would also revamp the headquarters machinery of the Church to introduce more modern methods of preparing and distributing instructional and other materials and of facilitating public communications. If Harold B. Lee was more adept at designing and building an intricate vehicle, with all the planning, delegation, and follow-through that entailed, Spencer W. Kimball could demonstrate novel and daring ways to drive it. The contrasting leadership styles of these two unusual men would appear repeatedly during the long years of their association.

Shortly after returning from the Gila Valley, Elder Lee found another way to publicize and popularize Church welfare. In late October, representatives of Look magazine came to Utah to prepare an article about author Maurine Whipple and her book, Giant Joshua, which had a Utah setting. At the insistence of President Clark, Elder Lee went to St. George, Utah, to meet with them and the author in order to provide background information about the Church and its people. Back in Salt Lake City, he ushered them through Welfare Square to explain the purposes and procedures of the plan and to arrange for appropriate photographs of the facility for inclusion in the article. He also took them to Temple Square where he arranged for pictures of the temple and its grounds and the Tabernacle, especially of the baptistry. This enabled him to explain basic doctrines of the Church, tying them to what the visitors had been shown at Welfare Square, as indicating the concern of the Church for both the temporal and spiritual welfare of its members. Elder Lee's comparative youth, his natural eloquence, his detailed knowledge of Church doctrine and the development of Church welfare, and his inherent missionary focus made him an ideal host for visiting groups such as this. President Clark, especially, was anxious to put prominent visitors into the hands of Elder Lee, knowing that he would portray the Church and its purposes in the best possible light. So, during the several days the visitors from Look magazine were in the state, he stayed close with them to provide them with necessary information and to help form their itinerary.

These same qualities in Elder Lee, added to the magnetic attraction he had for young people, drew him to an activity during these early months of his service in the Twelve that would claim his avid interest throughout his apostolic ministry. Don B. Colton, director of the mission home, invited him to instruct the missionaries then in training about the temple ordinances. Before going to the temple, Elder Lee conferred with President David O. McKay, who had performed the same function over the years, to get his counsel. Thus authorized and prepared, he went to the Assembly Room on the fifth floor of the temple where a large group of missionaries awaited him. For an hour, in a quiet, informal way, using the scriptures extensively, Elder Lee explained the purposes and the symbolisms of the temple ordinances in language his young friends could not misunderstand. In this sacred setting, he was in his natural element, doing the thing for which he had been professionally trained and for which he was best qualified—teaching. His method, especially with young people like these missionaries, was usually Socratic. Questions he put to the group, and the responses, or questions volunteered from the audience were a tip-off to the things that were bothersome or as to which there was only a fuzzy understanding. Then, like the skilled physician who has diagnosed a patient's illness, he would apply the remedy, which might be a key scripture, an insightful comment, or perhaps follow-up questions that would help to clarify and to bring understanding. The set of scriptures Elder Lee used in teaching was one of a kind. Over the years he had inserted into them thin leaves containing explanatory comments, analogies, significant cross-references, or historical or anecdotal material. These added a richness and depth to his teaching, which could never have been attained by the mere citation or reading of a scripture.

There can be little doubt that interludes such as this, where he could discern flickerings of understanding or conviction in his listeners, were a tonic to Elder Lee, which helped to bridge over the less enjoyable aspects of his ministry. One must understand that apostolic service does not entail an unbroken skein of happy, enjoyable experiences. There is a down side, usually caused by human imperfection or the clash of personalities. Only nine days after his mountaintop experience in the temple, Elder Lee learned of a deep-seated rift between two key members of his staff in the welfare department. One of them had come to him complaining about the "somewhat domineering attitude" of the other, which, Elder Lee speculated, was "born of jealousy." Concerned that this would cause serious disruption in the work if it continued, Elder Lee counselled about it with Henry D. Moyle, who was then the chairman of the general welfare committee. Working together, they adroitly attempted to resolve the conflict.

Even Elder Lee's relationship with Brother Moyle was not always placid. Notwithstanding the deep love and respect they always had for each other, there were times when differences of opinion on policy or procedural matters evoked strong opposition or dissent. They were much alike. Both were strong-minded with opinions they did not yield easily. Both were self-confident. Both had ably served as stake presidents during the 1930s when the welfare plan was born. Both were spiritual by nature, although practical and analytical in administration. Both had political aspirations at one time and were well known and respected among nonmembers. Yet, they were unlike. Ten years older than he, Henry Moyle was six years Elder Lee's junior in apostolic seniority. The son of James H. Moyle, an affluent Salt Lake attorney, businessman, and politician, who once served as the assistant secretary of the U.S. Treasury, Elder Moyle was heavily subsidized by his family while being educated in engineering and law at major universities in Europe and the United States. Meanwhile, Elder Lee struggled financially to obtain primary and secondary teaching certificates at Albion Normal and afterwards turned over most of his teacher's salary to his parents until he entered the mission field. Finally, Elder Lee's early years of married life and Church service were spent in a modest neighborhood near an industrial area on the west side of the city, while Henry Moyle, himself a prominent attorney and businessman like his father, lived in an exclusive, affluent neighborhood in the southeast part of the Salt Lake Valley. So, their perceptions about the poor and the needy were vastly different. For Elder Lee, it was a matter of personal knowledge, having been raised in an environment where money was always in short supply. As the president of the Pioneer Stake, he had witnessed at firsthand poverty of the most abject kind. For Elder Moyle, however, poverty and economic want were largely abstractions. In essence, he seemed to approach welfare work as involving merely the solution of economic or legal problems.

One other difference between these two men should be noted: Having early on come under the powerful influence of President J. Reuben Clark, and being so disposed by nature, Elder Lee was inclined to follow policy guidelines with exactness. Elder Moyle, on the other hand, was inclined to cut through what he considered to be red tape in order to achieve an end that he considered to be proper and desirable. This occasionally brought them into conflict when they outspokenly opposed each other. But these occasional conflicts never permanently marred a relationship that continued on a congenial basis throughout their lives. Both were acquainted with the rough-and-tumble state of politics and debate, and therefore never allowed these periodic conflicts to color their personal relationship. A mark of their maturity and congeniality is shown in their cooperative relationship in welfare work over many years while Elder Moyle served as the chairman of the committee that directed Elder Lee's work as general manager, even though Elder Moyle was junior to Elder Lee in the apostleship, and, indeed, though for several years of that relationship, he was not a General Authority.

In addition to incidents such as these, which injected occasional controversy, there were other facets of the work that made Elder Lee's service in the Twelve less than ideal. On an almost daily basis, he was exposed to the trials and trauma, the sad tales of woe, of those who came to him for counsel and solace. There were also those whose lives hung in the balance, or who had grave physical or emotional problems, who came to be healed or comforted. Concern or empathy for these inevitably invaded his own feelings, causing sorrow or apprehension he otherwise would have avoided. Finally, Elder Lee's calling entailed almost constant travel by automobile or train, with awkward schedules, and sometimes with less than suitable housing facilities or diet. Sometimes, trips were undertaken when he was not well or was weary, or perhaps was troubled about Sister Lee's health, which was never robust. Yet, when duty called, he went regardless of his own feelings or convenience. So, like life itself, Elder Lee soon found that service in the Twelve was a mix, that there were happy times, and there were sad times, that there were sweet and peaceful experiences, and there were stressful experiences.

There were also times when Elder Lee's sense of humor shone through his diary entries, which ordinarily were very terse and factual. On November 14, 1941, for instance, which was his and Fern's eighteenth wedding anniversary and Fern's forty-sixth birthday, he wrote, tongue-in-cheek: "For her celebration, she went relief society block teaching, was a guide at the Lion House in the afternoon and she assisted in the MIA road show act from the ward." In between these events, Elder and Sister Lee enjoyed a rare privilege when, in celebration of their wedding anniversary, President and Sister Heber J. Grant called to take them for a ride up the canyon. This was a favorite pastime for the prophet and his wife, who would usually take members of their family or friends with them to enjoy the scenery and their conversation. A week after celebrating their wedding anniversary and Fern's birthday in this way, the Lees gathered for their Thanksgiving feast, of which Elder Lee wrote appreciatively: "I enjoyed this lovely association with my little family, an opportunity not often afforded me."

The day after Thanksgiving, Fern drove her husband to the depot where he boarded the train destined for Oakland, California, where he had a stake conference assignment. On the train he made the acquaintance of two government officials engaged in defense work. Of his conversation with them, Elder Lee noted: "I found them wholly in support of the idea that nothing short of complete participation in the war would suffice for the present situation." At the time, the United States government was providing heavy support to the war effort of the allies in Europe through the so-called Lend-Lease Act. It was that conflict about which the remarks of Elder Lee's travelling companions were directed. Only a few days later, the attention of all Americans suddenly shifted from Europe to the Pacific following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. On December 7, 1941, Elder Lee was attending the conference of the Grant Stake in Salt Lake City. "Received word over the radio," he wrote on that date, "that Japan had attacked at Hawaii and the Philippines with heavy losses." The next day, he noted that all cities along the Pacific Coast were blacked out for fear of air attacks and that unidentified planes had been reported in the vicinity of San Francisco. With the formal declaration of war against both Japan and the Axis powers, Germany and Italy, which followed soon after Pearl Harbor, the United States was plunged into a terrible war that would dominate its action, devour its resources, and destroy the flower of its youth for four stressful years. The conflict had a heavy impact upon the Latter-day Saints, altering plans, imposing burdens, and creating anxieties. For some, its impact was devastating. "Talked with President J. Reuben Clark," Elder Lee wrote on December 10, "and he just advised me they had heard definitely that their son-in-law, Mervyn Bennion, had lost his life at Pearl Harbor." President Clark, who harbored deep-felt pacifist views, was terribly shaken by this news, so much so that he excused himself from the temple meeting so he could mourn with his bereaved daughter.

Because of the shocking suddenness with which America had been plunged into the war, the devastation at Pearl Harbor, and the reports of unidentified aircraft on the west coast, the whole country became jittery to the point of paranoia. Fear of bombing attacks gripped most of the western United States. Even in remote Salt Lake City, the street lights were turned off at night and windows were shrouded. Trains travelling to Salt Lake from the West Coast at night regularly curtained their windows. And local officials began to organize for war. "Was asked by President Clark," Elder Lee wrote on December 19, "to submit names of leading younger men for membership on air raid committees now being organized for the city." And the following day, the Brethren received the disturbing news that some Church members, panicked by news of the war, had begun to hoard food in the wall partitions of their homes.

In these circumstances, the Christmas festivities were quiet and austere and hardly joyous. A highlight was the preparation of thirty-five hundred Christmas baskets at Welfare Square for the needy of the city. And on a personal basis, Elder Lee saw another evidence of the liberality of his friend Henry D. Moyle from whom he received a hundred shares of stock in the Wasatch Oil and Refining Company as a Christmas present, along with a dividend check for $250 and a dividend note for $450.

In reflecting on the significant events of the year 1941, Elder Lee confided these thoughts to his diary: "In my call to the apostleship, I have experienced the most intense schooling and preparation of any similar period. I have known the terror of the evil tempter and, in contrast, the sublime joy of the inspiration and revelation of the Holy Spirit. My wife and family have been a constant source of encouragement and happiness and despite the terrors of world war, the peace of God seems to be with us."

At the request of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, the Latter-day Saints joined in special prayers for the nation on January 4, 1942, the first Sunday of the year. In the morning, the Lee family attended a prayer meeting in the Cannon Ward; and in the evening, Elder Lee spoke at a sacrament meeting in the Garden Park Ward, where he experienced "considerable difficulty" in speaking. He attributed this to a lack of responsiveness on the part of the audience, which included "the governor . . . business leaders, etc." Throughout his ministry, Elder Lee found that his "freedom" in speaking depended largely on the spiritual receptivity of his audience. When that was lacking, he always felt a sense of letdown or disappointment as he did on this occasion.

The effects of the war very soon began to be felt in every aspect of the work. On January 14, 1942, Elder Lee participated in setting apart eighty-three missionaries who left later in the day for their various fields of labor. Called before Pearl Harbor, this would be the last large group of young missionaries to be sent out until the war ended. Stringent requirements of the draft thereafter limited mission calls to sisters, older men, and the physically disabled. A series of events in early February revealed some of the other significant changes the war had wrought: The nation went on what was then called "war time," later called daylight savings time, which set the clocks ahead an hour in the spring as a means of conserving energy; plans to construct a $126,000,000 steel plant in Utah Valley near Provo, Utah, were announced; Elder Lee registered for the draft; and the Brethren cancelled the June conference and decided that only certain priesthood leaders would be invited to the April general conference.

Meanwhile, Elder Lee and the other General Authorities continued to attend stake conferences on assignment. Indeed, these meetings took on new significance as they provided a means of welding the Church together in a time of crisis and enabled the Brethren to make sure there was uniformity of doctrine and procedure throughout the Church. So, during the first months of the year, Elder Lee attended stake conferences in San Bernardino, California; Blackfoot, Preston, Nampa, Paris, and Rigby, Idaho; Woodruff, Millard, Ogden, Delta, and Richfield, Utah; and Snowflake, Arizona, among others. En route to San Bernardino, California, all the shades on the train were drawn as it neared Barstow, presumably to prevent sightings by Japanese aircraft or to thwart the activities of Japanese snipers along the way. Later in passing through California en route to Snowflake, Arizona, Elder Lee saw army pickets on guard at all bridges, presumably to prevent their being blown up by Japanese saboteurs. Such was the paranoia brought on by the war, that in Salt Lake City members of the Veterans of Foreign Wars were assigned to guard the facilities at Welfare Square. During this period, Americans of Japanese descent were herded into "Relocation Centers," which in reality were concentration camps. One of these named Topaz was established not far from Salt Lake City in the spring of 1942, only a few months after Pearl Harbor. While in retrospect these precautions seem incredible, those living today who did not experience it cannot begin to understand the pall of uncertainty and fear that permeated the United States because of the shocking surprise attack on Pearl Harbor. These apprehensions were fed by incidents of the kind reported by Elder Lee on February 24, 1942, as he returned from his stake conference assignment at Snowflake, Arizona. "As the train left Los Angeles," wrote Elder Lee, "the radio station KFI went off the air and we learned later that a submarine had shelled a steel company plant near Santa Barbara. I think but little damage was done." Although such incidents were only sporadic and had no serious consequences, they achieved the apparent objective of the Japanese—to stir up anxiety among the people and to keep them wondering about what to expect.

When Elder Lee returned from this trip, he found that Fern was "in a highly nervous state," apparently caused by concern about the war and about her husband's frequent absences from home. While his heavy headquarters assignments limited the time he could spend with her, Elder Lee assisted his wife in her duties as often as he could. If available, he always pitched in to help with the spring cleaning and other household chores. His aid on these occasions was more than perfunctory. He got right in the middle of things, doing the heavy, physical work while leaving the more delicate touches to his wife. And he helped her with other things. "I spent this morning," he wrote on March 14, "helping Fern getting her costumes and other paraphernalia from the ward following her three act drama." These activities were a relaxing outlet for her energies as were her periodic guiding duties at the Beehive House and Lion House. They helped keep her mind off the loneliness caused by the frequent absences of her husband and off the dreary news of the war.

Beginning in mid-August 1942, Elder Lee commenced a war-related activity that would occupy him off and on for many years. On the fourteenth he left for Los Angeles with Elder Albert E. Bowen of the Twelve and Hugh B. Brown to visit defense facilities and LDS military personnel on the West Coast. Brother Brown had previously been appointed as the coordinator of LDS servicemen and the two apostles were to assist in indoctrinating him in his duties. They first inspected defense installations in the area before participating in a stake conference over the weekend. The next day, Monday, they met with the presidencies from the nearby stakes "to discuss problems of finding and caring for young men in the military or in defense work."

From Los Angeles, the Brethren went to San Diego where the same procedure was followed as at Los Angeles. In addition, they conferred with the Chief of Chaplains at the sprawling Naval Training Station and had dinner with a number of LDS servicemen at Fort Rosecrans. It soon became apparent that the most pressing problems of servicemen were loneliness and fear of what the future held for them. They concluded that the main antidotes for these were regular communications from home, Church-sponsored social activities near the military bases, and spiritual nourishment to be gained from private prayer, scripture study, and group worship services. These needs and the perceived remedies later gave rise to an aggressive campaign to encourage families and Church leaders at home to correspond frequently with their servicemen, to create an intricate Church network to identify and locate servicemen and defense workers, and to organize an ongoing program of LDS social gatherings and sacrament and testimony meetings among them. To foster private devotions, the Church later distributed to military personnel pocketsized editions of the scriptures, which could be easily carried on their persons, and which, therefore, were readily available at any time.

At Camp Roberts near Paso Robles, California, Elder Lee and his companions witnessed a phenomenon that usually occurred at stops along the way. Word of a hurriedly called meeting with the visitors spread throughout the camp like lightning via the efficient Mormon grapevine, bringing most of the Latter-day Saints to the appointed place on time. Once they were assembled, a chorister, a pianist, and those to pray and to administer and pass the sacrament were called up from the audience, who functioned with an efficiency and reverence that implied hours of careful preparation. Talks by the visitors were followed by testimonies from the audience. Such impromptu participation by the Latter-day Saints was always a source of amazement to non-Mormon chaplains who could not understand how such able and willing service could be obtained from lay people on such short notice.

Similar inspirational meetings were held at Fort Ord and at military installations in the vicinity of San Francisco. At a meeting in Oakland, with servicemen destined for combat duty in the Pacific, Elder Lee was overcome with emotion as he realized that some of these young men would not return.

While in the Bay Area, the Brethren visited war and defense installations in addition to conferring with military officers at the Presidio, the site of the pioneer fort at the mouth of San Francisco Bay. At Portland, Oregon, they were poignantly reminded of the grim aspects of war when Brother Brown received a copy of the memorial service held for his son who had been killed while flying for the Royal Air Force in Great Britain.

As a temporary diversion, the Brethren played a round of golf at Portland. This was a diversion in which Elder Lee engaged only infrequently. Indeed, following his mission, and during the remainder of his life, there were very few occasions when he participated in sports of any kind. This is an anomaly considering the active role he played in sports as a student and teacher. The explanation seems to lie in the vigorous life-style he adopted following his mission. With the time constraints imposed by working full time while completing his education, struggling to get ahead in the business world, meeting the constant demands of a political career while moonlighting as a stake president, supervising the development of a Church-wide welfare program, and, finally, confronting the constant demands of his apostolic calling left little time for competitive sports. Elder Lee's main physical activity after marriage was yard work, either at his own home or at the home of his daughter Helen. And, as already noted, he attacked his yard work with vigor so that it provided a good physical outlet for his energies. But, this was a seasonal activity, and even in season it was sporadic due to the complications of his travel schedule. It did not, therefore, provide the kind of consistent, year-round, physical activity essential to the maintenance of robust health. One must wonder, then, whether the frequent colds and intermittent stomach disorders Elder Lee suffered with over the years can be explained, in large part, by the absence of an ongoing exercise regimen. And the deterioration in his health this lack of exercise fostered could well have shortened his life.

While Elder Lee's active participation in sports was minimal during his married years, he remained an avid spectator until the end. He especially enjoyed football and basketball. After Helen's marriage, her husband, L. Brent Goates, frequently accompanied his father-in-law to sporting events.

The day following the round of golf in Portland, Elder Lee and his companions visited the huge army base at Fort Lewis, Washington, where they found a homesick group of Mormon GIs who hungered for more news from family and friends. It seems to have been here that Elder Lee became confirmed in his belief that there was nothing more vital to the emotional stability of a serviceman than the lifeline of letters from home. And during the many years of his involvement with military affairs, he laid great stress on this critical need.

The three brethren completed their tour of facilities in the Pacific Northwest by visiting the naval base at Bremerton, Washington. There the war assumed an aspect of greater immediacy for them when they saw the battleship Nevada, bristling with its guns and armor, which was undergoing repairs for the damage it sustained at Pearl Harbor.

Following a district conference in Spokane, Washington, on the last weekend in August, the two apostles headed for home while Hugh B. Brown remained in the Northwest to work with local leaders in completing the organization to track and to help servicemen. En route home, they stopped briefly at the Bay View military camp near Coeur d'Alene, Idaho, to visit LDS servicemen. Among them was a young man, Grant W. Lee, whom Elder Lee identified as a great-great-grandson of his own direct ancestor, Samuel Lee.

During the trip home, the two apostles reviewed their tour analytically, discussing the direction they felt the work with servicemen should go. They concluded that Hugh B. Brown should be given General Authority status as an Assistant to the Twelve in order to strengthen his hand in dealing with stake and mission leaders. While that suggestion did not materialize at the time, his status and authority were enhanced when, on October 9, he was appointed to serve on a three-man general Church servicemen's committee, chaired by Elder Harold B. Lee. (The other member was Elder John H. Taylor of the First Council of the Seventy.) This began a long association between these two old friends in the interest of Latter-day Saint servicemen. And over ten years later, the role Elders Lee and Bowen had envisioned for their associate became a reality when, on October 4, 1953, Hugh B. Brown was sustained as an Assistant to the Twelve.

Back home, Elder Lee was assigned to reorganize the presidency of the New York Stake, which entailed another long trip before the October general conference. He boarded the train at 6:30 P.M. September 9 and arrived in New York three days later. En route he stopped in Chicago long enough to visit Fern's cousin, Richard Tanner, who was studying medicine there. Through a miscommunication, no one met Elder Lee at the New York depot. Undeterred, he simply caught a cab to the Eastern States mission home, which he used as headquarters during a three-day stay in the city.

As he began the interviewing to find a new stake president, Elder Lee was inclined toward the young bishop of the Manhattan Ward, Howard S. Bennion. However, questions had been raised about him by prominent local men because of his relative youth, which had created some doubt in Elder Lee's mind. That doubt was removed in the early morning hours of September 13. "Had a remarkable demonstration as I awoke this morning," he noted on that day, "as to divine direction in showing Howard S. Bennion to become the new stake president, despite the objections that had been raised." This impression was confirmed when the man who was most prominently mentioned by the local brethren later made a "sarcastic remark" in a setting, which "conclusively" showed to Elder Lee that he was not the man.

The instantaneous way in which his preference was swung toward one man and away from the other reveals a key quality in the makeup of Harold B. Lee. Although he possessed superior analytical powers, which he used with significant effect, as in the slow and measured development of the welfare plan, these always yielded to the impromptu flashes of insight or revelation like those he received in reorganizing the New York Stake presidency. It was this quality, more than any other, which prompted so many of his associates to refer to Elder Lee as a "seer." It was this quality, also, which introduced an element of unpredictability in any dealings with him. Those close to him came to expect those sudden impulses, which would divert him from a course of action and take him away on a tangent toward something he had not originally aimed for. Such an instance occurred on his return home after reorganizing the New York Stake presidency. During a layover in Chicago, on September 15, he learned that a former member of the Pioneer Stake lay gravely ill in Lafayette, Indiana, a distance of ninety miles from Chicago. This was Theodore M. Burton, who was working on his Ph.D. at Purdue University. Theodore had undergone an appendectomy in June. A postoperative infection resulting in empyema caused his diaphragm to rupture and the infection spread to his body cavity. Then followed several operations that unsuccessfully sought to locate the source of the infection. By the time Elder Lee arrived in Chicago in mid-September, Theodore had lost so much weight he was little more than skin and bones. The doctors had decided on a final operation that involved removing part of some ribs so as to provide access to the chest cavity for a flushing procedure that might eliminate the infection.

Elder Lee learned of Theodore's peril from the mission president, Leo J. Muir, who was headquartered in Chicago. At the time, Charles S. Hyde, Elder Lee's former counselor in the Pioneer Stake presidency, was auditing the mission records. "Charlie," said the apostle to his friend, "I understand that Theodore T. Burton's son, young Theodore, is down in Indiana fighting for his life. I feel impressed that we should go down and give him a blessing." (See He Changed My Life, pp. 233-36.) Accompanied by President Muir, they went to Lafayette, arriving at the hospital just as the patient was being wheeled toward the operating room on a gurney. Elder Lee asked that it be wheeled back to the room so they could give the patient a blessing in private. What happened then is best told in the words of Theodore M. Burton. "Brother Hyde anointed me with consecrated oil. Then those three men placed their hands on my head, and Elder Lee, as mouth, sealed the anointing and gave me a blessing. I don't remember all he said, but one idea stays in my memory. He did not bless me to get well as the others had done. He commanded me to get well and said that my work on earth was not yet finished. He commanded my spirit to take over the healing process and, through me, blessed the doctors who were about to operate that they would know what to do to restore me to health." (Ibid.)

A Catholic sister, misunderstanding why the three brethren were there, later chastised Theodore's wife, Minnie, for inviting the "Mormon Priests" to administer the last rites to her husband. "I believe he can live until tomorrow," said the sister, "perhaps for another day, but now he knows he is going to die and all hope is gone." When Minnie explained that the blessing her husband had received was for life, not death, the sister knowingly observed: "My dear, it is well to have faith, but you must face up to reality. He cannot live, and you will only hurt yourself further by keeping up an impossible hope." That hope was fulfilled when, six weeks later, the patient was discharged from the hospital to return home. Less than twenty years later, the earthly mission for which Theodore M. Burton's life had been spared emerged when, on October 8, 1960, he was sustained as an Assistant to the Twelve.
