Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Fourteen

Maturing in the Apostleship

Shortly before the October 1942 general conference, Elder Lee was assigned to conduct a conference in the Ensign Stake. Twenty years before, he had attended a conference there shortly after his release from the Western States Mission. He had been intimidated then when he was called on to speak briefly because it was the stake in which President Grant and other General Authorities lived. That sense of intimidation had not entirely left when he attended the conference there on this occasion. He always had a deferential feeling toward President Grant and toward President Clark, who also lived in the Ensign Stake, not only because of the positions they occupied in the First Presidency, but also because of their business and professional achievements. It was, therefore, a sense of relief to him when the conference was over, and he could concentrate on his less conspicuous assignments in connection with the general conference.

It was at this general conference that Joseph F. Smith was sustained as the Patriarch to the Church. In his remarks responding to the call, the new patriarch, who had been a professor at the University of Utah, said his colleagues there had derided him for giving up his academic career in order "to pray" the rest of his life. While there is no indication it was intended as such, Elder Lee's conference address could have served as an answer to these critics. In it he focused on spirituality and its importance as an anchor in the lives of the Latter-day Saints.

On October 14, 1942, he left Salt Lake City by automobile with President J. Reuben Clark. Fern and Sister Clark accompanied them. The two-week trip ahead would take them to southeastern Arizona and back. Along the way, they would hold meetings with members and leaders. It was the only time during their association that they travelled together as companions over such a long period.

The crisp, clear weather, good roads free of snow and ice, and the congenial, relaxed conversation made the trip through the autumn splendor of southern Utah and Arizona's Kaibab Forest an idyllic experience never to be forgotten. Their first meetings were at Snowflake, a remote Mormon outpost in northeastern Arizona, settled in part by descendants of Silas Smith, the Prophet Joseph Smith's uncle. Here President Clark focused on obedience in his preaching, while his companion discussed the baptismal covenants and their implications.

The travelers were met at Snowflake by Levi S. Udall, president of the neighboring stake, who led them to nearby St. Johns. En route, they visited the Painted Desert and the Petrified Forest, ancient tokens of the earth's generative and erosive forces. As they teamed up to speak at St. Johns, President Clark talked about the power of prayer, while Elder Lee discussed the value of adversity in a world where it was foreordained that there would be an opposition in all things.

Driving south across the Mogollon Rim, where they saw some of the most ruggedly beautiful and heavily forested terrain in all of Arizona, the travelers reached Safford in the Gila Valley, the home of Spencer W. Kimball, then the president of the Mount Graham Stake. This energetic young stake president, whose leadership capabilities were magnified during the previous year's flood, was President Clark's cousin through the Woolley family. It had been said of a distinguished member of this clan that if his body were to be thrown in the river at his death, it would float upstream. The quality of persistence this story implies would be repeatedly reflected in the life and ministry of Spencer W. Kimball after his call to the apostleship less than a year following the visit of these guests.

Led by President Kimball, the visitors were taken to Duncan, Arizona, and Virden, New Mexico, where still could be seen evidence of the ravages wrought by the flood. At one of the meetings held on this side trip, President Clark made comments about Elder Lee, which had special meaning to him and which he recorded in detail. "He was very kind to me," wrote Elder Lee. "He related my experience in the welfare plan, and in politics, and told the people he was confident that if I had remained in politics, I would have been in the United States Senate. He said he loved me as his son and that . . . I reciprocated that love as a son to a father. He said, further, that while he was not prophesying, that in the providence of the Lord, because of my age, I would one day become the president of the church." These words, spoken analytically, and not by revelation, expressed the views of most Latter-day Saints who were knowledgeable about Church history. There was a widespread assumption among them that because of the age differential between Elder Lee and the other apostles he would in time become the senior living apostle and, therefore, the president of the Church.

After parting with President Kimball, the travelers went to Tucson and thence to Phoenix, holding meetings in both places. While at Tucson the Brethren also conferred with Church institute teachers at the University of Arizona, admonishing them to teach sound doctrine and to avoid delving into controversial philosophies. This counsel seems to have been prompted by reports that in some classes at the institute, things had been taught that had questionable relevance to accepted Church doctrine.

Also, since they were so close to the border while at Tucson, the party traveled to Nogales and, crossing into Mexico, enjoyed a meal of Mexican food, which the Clarks had grown to love while they lived in Mexico City while President Clark served as the United States Ambassador there.

The travelers had hoped to visit the Boulder (Hoover) Dam near Las Vegas, Nevada, on the way home, but were unable to do so because of the tight security imposed by the war. This evoked strong comments by President Clark, deploring the war, which he said was needless, and predicting that it would not end until the nations that had caused it had been "humbled."

A week after completing this trip in the comfort of a private automobile, Elder Lee boarded a crowded, cluttered chair car, which reeked of tobacco smoke and echoed with the boisterous talk and laughter of the numerous servicemen who were aboard. He was en route to Austin, Texas, where he would begin a tour of the Texas-Louisiana Mission. The servicemen were destined for military camps. The transportation crush, caused by frequent troop movements, had made it impossible for Elder Lee to get a Pullman reservation out of Salt Lake City. However, he was able to transfer to one out of Denver, so he traveled in greater comfort and privacy during the last leg of the trip.

The two-week mission tour commenced in Austin on November 8, with a public meeting and a training session with Mission President William L. Warner and his missionaries. The next day, the party, which included Elder Antoine R. Ivins, who had joined Elder Lee at Austin, drove southwest to San Antonio, the site of the famed battle of the Alamo. Here, in addition to the public and missionary meetings like those held in Austin, Elder Lee dedicated a new chapel to accommodate the rapidly growing Mormon population in that city. Then followed a motor marathon that took the party, in succession, to Houston, Texas, and in Louisiana to Lake Charles, New Orleans, Albany, Baton Rouge, Many, Monroe, and Shreveport. Returning to Texas, the Brethren held meetings in Kelsey, Kilgore, Dallas, and Fort Worth. At each stop, in addition to the meetings already mentioned, Elder Lee conducted private interviews with each missionary, conferred priesthood blessings on the many who requested them, counselled with local leaders, and met with media and government representatives. This hectic schedule, added to the long distances between stops, left little time for relaxation. The only exception was at New Orleans when Elder Lee took several hours to visit the places of historic interest, including the massive Catholic Cathedral, the depiction of the Battle of New Orleans, and the French Quarter with its quaint shops and restaurants. Here he bought some French perfume as a gift for Fern. At the state capital in Baton Rouge, Elder Lee was impressed with Huey Long's "masterpiece," the twenty-seven-story capitol building. And at the meeting in Many, Louisiana, where another new chapel was dedicated, the apostle was introduced to the sister of Huey Long, who was investigating the Church. Here the visitors also enjoyed a southern specialty, "dinner on the ground," featuring mounds of fried chicken, "greens," and banana pudding for dessert.

At Kelsey, Texas, and the neighboring communities of Gilmer and Tyler, Elder Lee found the nucleus of a Mormon colony that had been established more than fifty years before. Originating in the deep South, the pioneers of this group, who had planned to migrate to the mountainous west, were impressed by the moderate climate, the lush vegetation, and the fertile soil of the area and decided to put down roots here. It was the first large Mormon community established in the state of Texas. It may have been this background that prompted some of the Saints at Kelsey to ask Elder Lee whether, in view of the war, they should go to the Rocky Mountains for safety. In answer, Elder Lee's public sermon used the text, "If Ye are Prepared, Ye Shall Not Fear." The essence of his message was that real peace and safety must be found within, despite the stresses of outside pressures.

The tour ended with meetings in Dallas and Fort Worth. At Fort Worth, a city where today the Church is firmly rooted, with thriving stakes and wards and a nearby temple, Elder Lee met with a handful of Saints in a rented Knights of Pythias Hall. The vigorous growth that occurred in the interim resulted from the wise policies of Elder Lee and his brethren, the industry of the numerous missionaries who served under them, and the blessings of heaven.

Elder Lee boarded a train for Denver, Colorado, soon after the meeting in the Knights of Pythias Hall ended. It was also filled with military personnel and tobacco smoke. He was met at Denver by Western States Mission President Elbert Curtis who took him to the mission home Elder Lee knew so well at 538 East Seventh Avenue. After freshening up, he counselled with the missionaries laboring with President Curtis, who could not have failed to recall that only two decades had elapsed since the apostle had labored where they then served.

Elder Lee's Salt Lake bound train was delayed for several hours to make way for a special troop train that was given the right of way. "Spent the afternoon," he wrote on November 24, "getting cleaned up from the tobacco smoke and grime of travel."

This mission tour was typical of the many Elder Lee made during his service in the Twelve. While the tight schedules, the long distances traveled, the irregularity and sometimes the inadequacy of meals, and the constant changes in sleeping accommodations were inconvenient and wearing, these were more than outweighed by the pleasure he had in counselling with the young missionaries, mingling with the Saints, visiting new places, and feeling the thrill of the Holy Spirit working through him. Therefore, he always received with enthusiasm any assignment from the president of his quorum to tour a mission.

The same was true of his assignments to attend stake conferences. These, of course, came with greater frequency-on an average of three a month-and took him throughout the Church. The fixed meetings of a stake conference included welfare, priesthood leadership, and general sessions held over Saturday and Sunday, interspersed occasionally with special missionary and youth sessions. Aside from these meetings, he was usually heavily involved in between them, counselling with leaders and members, giving priesthood blessings, interviewing prospective missionaries, and setting apart officers. Because in the early days of his ministry, only members of the Twelve could ordain or set apart stake presidencies, bishoprics, high councilors, and patriarchs, it often happened that brethren from adjoining stakes would travel to the place where the conference was being held so Elder Lee could do it. This meant that from the time he arrived in a stake, usually about noon on Saturday, until he left Sunday night or Monday morning, he was on duty practically all the time with little opportunity to rest or to eat. When he did eat, it was usually a sumptuous meal that the sisters had lovingly prepared to fete him, which ordinarily included their most delectable and caloric dishes. Thus occupied and stuffed, sitting down during most of two days, it is little wonder that early in his ministry Elder Lee developed stomach problems. These would stress him intermittently throughout the remainder of his life and would even contribute to his comparatively early death at age seventy-four.

As a prelude to the significant events of the following year, Elder Lee ended 1942 on a quiet note. He had only two stake conference assignments during December, both close to home. One was at the Bonneville Stake in Salt Lake City. His major address during the conference mirrored the tensions and frustrations of the time. It was titled "How to Find Peace in the Midst of Great Trial and Trouble." As if to underscore the uncertainty of the times, Salt Lake City had its first air-raid warning the following night, which ironically was on December 7, 1942, the first anniversary of Pearl Harbor. Word received from Portland, Oregon, indicated that planes, presumably Japanese, were on their way toward Salt Lake City. The city was blacked out for forty-five minutes before the "all clear" was sounded. So jittery was everybody that no one seemed to question the fantastic idea that the Japanese could mount an air attack on an inland city like Salt Lake.

Also on Pearl Harbor Day, 1942, Elder Lee was contacted by "an old German brother," who told him his sermon at the afternoon session of the Bonneville Stake conference "was too long." The apostle noted agreeably, "I thought so too."

Elder Lee enjoyed an interesting change of pace during the first few months of 1943. Beginning on February 25, he gave a series of six lectures at the Lion House, which focused on the subject, "Finding Oneself in the World." As he so frequently did, the speaker emphasized the key role of spirituality in life, which would safely anchor one to eternal principles, which, if lived, would insure a return to God's presence. The last lecture was given on April 1, of which Elder Lee wrote: "There has been an attendance of from 200 to 250 at each lecture. They presented Fern with a bouquet of flowers. They called on Father to dismiss the meeting and he seemed very tender toward me in his expression." The father, the child of promise, saw in the achievements of his son an affirmation of his own self-worth and a fulfillment of some of God's purposes in the miraculous preservation of his own life.

The general conference, which convened a few days after Elder Lee's last Lion House lecture, passed without incident. However, following the conference, an official action was taken, which Elder Lee considered to be of major importance. "A most historic meeting was held of the Twelve and the First Presidency," he recorded on April 8, "in which it was decided that hereafter the tithes of the church would be disbursed by a council composed of the First Presidency, the Twelve and the Presiding Bishopric instead of by just the First Presidency and the Presiding Bishopric as in the past. This will contemplate also the Twelve giving approval to the financial budget each year." This change brought Church procedure into harmony with the revelation given July 18, 1838, which designated the First Presidency, the Twelve (referred to as the "high council"), and the Presiding Bishopric (referred to as "the bishop and his council") as the body authorized to dispose of the tithes of the Church. (See D&C 120.) The significance of this change to Elder Lee and his brethren of the Twelve was incalculable. It gave them a vital voice in one of the most important aspects of Church administration. At the same time, it added significantly to the weight of their responsibilities.

A responsibility Elder Lee had in welfare took him to Washington, D.C., a week after this historic meeting. His purpose in visiting the capital was to seek an exemption for the welfare department from the government's food rationing policy. Enlisting the aid of this boyhood friend, "T" Benson, who was then the executive secretary of a national farm cooperative, Elder Lee met with officials of the Office of Price Administration. The results of the meeting was inconclusive. There was hope that commodities distributed to the needy from bishops storehouses would be exempt from rationing. Elder Lee left for home on April 18, asking Brother Benson to follow through in meeting with the O. P. A. officials to resolve the rationing issue. Little did these two old friends know as they bid good-bye at the Washington depot, that unforeseen events in the near future would bring them together as colleagues in the Quorum of the Twelve.

Elder Lee's return trip was on the new streamliner, a bullet-shaped train with a diesel engine. He marvelled that it took only fifteen and one-half hours to get home. Because it was his first experience with this "train of the future," in a sense it opened up a new world of transportation for him and the other General Authorities. A few years later, the widespread use of airplanes would completely revolutionize their travel habits. Ironically, they would find this hardly reduced their work load. It simply enabled them to do more and more, faster and faster.

Not long after Elder Lee returned home from this trip to Washington, events began to unfold that led to the elevation of his friend Ezra Taft Benson to the Quorum of the Twelve. On May 29, 1943, Elder Sylvester Q. Cannon of the Twelve passed away at the comparatively young age of sixty-five, creating a vacancy in the quorum. He had served as an apostle for only five years, and during that entire time he was in frail health so that his passing was no great surprise. Then on June 21, 1943, Rudger Clawson, president of the Twelve, died at the ripe age of eighty-six, creating a second vacancy in the quorum. However, President Clawson had completed forty-five years of apostolic service and enjoyed the distinction of being the only man in the history of the Church who had been sustained as counselor in the First Presidency, but who had never been set apart to that office. On October 6, 1901, at the age of forty-four, he was sustained in general conference as the second counselor to President Lorenzo Snow. Since President Snow died four days later and since President Joseph F. Smith did not select Elder Clawson as a counselor, he was never set apart.

Soon after President Clawson's death, President Heber J. Grant set in motion the process for filling the two vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve by asking his brethren to submit nominations for his consideration. On July 1, 1943, Elder Lee spent an hour visiting at the home of President J. Reuben Clark when the subject of filling the two vacancies came up. Of that interview, Elder Lee wrote: "We discussed the names of Spencer W. Kimball and Ezra Taft Benson. . . . I was pleased to know that President Grant had already decided to appoint one or the other of these two, or probably both, inasmuch as they had both been in my mind as the logical men to appoint." That Elder Lee was "pleased" with this knowledge likely derived from his admiration for these two men with whom he had had recent, favorable contacts and from a sense of comfort that his impressions coincided with those of the prophet. Significantly, in this conversation with President Clark, Elder Lee mentioned Mark E. Petersen as a third possibility to fill one of the vacancies. Months later, when the excommunication of Richard R. Lyman created still another vacancy, Mark E. Petersen would be called to fill it. As Elder Lee prepared to leave his study, President Clark kissed him on the cheek and complimented him on the "wonderful work" he was doing. Revealing the admiration he had for his mentor, Elder Lee wrote: "I told him that there was nothing more I desired than to please him and my Heavenly Father."

Soon after this elevating experience with President Clark, Elder Lee had a depressing experience when he was called on to cast out an evil spirit. There was a stultifying feeling in the room that oppressed the apostle as he laid his hands on the woman's head and, through priesthood authority, rebuked the evil spirit in her. The terror that the incident produced is hinted at in Elder Lee's diary. "I trembled like a leaf," wrote he, "and my hair seemed to almost be as pin pricks." This seems to have been the first time in Elder Lee's ministry when he was directly exposed to the power of the adversary. It was not an imaginary thing, but was something real and powerful and beyond his individual ability to control. Intermittently during the remainder of his ministry, Elder Lee was exposed to the power of Satan, revealed in changing forms and in different degrees of intensity. It was a power that he detested but, at the same time, he respected because of the dangerous influences it exerted.

At the meeting of the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve held on July 8, 1943, George Albert Smith was set apart as the president of the Quorum of the Twelve, replacing President Rudger Clawson. At the same meeting, Spencer W. Kimball was approved as a new member of the Twelve. And two weeks later, Ezra Taft Benson was approved to fill the other vacancy. Because both men were serving as stake presidents, the reorganization of their stakes was necessary before the October general conference when they would be presented for sustaining vote. Elder Lee was assigned to reorganize President Kimball's stake. In early September, he traveled to Safford, Arizona, by train via Los Angeles for this purpose. Assisted by Brother Kimball, Elder Lee interviewed the leaders of the stake until 1:00 A.M. on Saturday the eleventh when, by analysis and spiritual confirmation, J. Harold Mitchell was selected as the new stake president. At the general session on the twelfth, there was an outpouring of love for Elder Kimball, who was presented with gifts and mementoes to remind him of his Arizona flock. Those present doubtless did not perceive the historical significance of what took place when Harold B. Lee, a future president of the Church, released as stake president the man who would succeed him as the prophet.

Elder Lee remained in Safford for two days after the conference, setting apart and instructing the leaders and counselling with his new colleague. It was a difficult time for Elder Kimball, whose children faced the trauma of being uprooted from the place they loved and of moving to a city where they were unknown. "He had arisen at 4:45 A.M.," Elder Lee noted on September 14, 1991, "and had written them a long letter pleading for their cooperation and support." Often unnoticed is the way Church callings have severe impact on family members, through sacrifices and difficulties they experience in supporting their father or husband.

En route home, Elder Lee stopped again in Tucson to check into reports about questionable teachings at the Church institute at the University of Arizona and to participate in a community worship service on campus. He stayed in the home of his cousin Sterling W. McMurrin, whom he counselled about "the importance of keeping foremost in his mind the responsibility of stimulating the faith of the institute students." At the community service on Sunday, September 19, where a thousand students were present, Elder Lee "spoke on the value of religion in the solution of individual and world problems."

As the October 1943 general conference approached, Elder Lee met privately with Elders Kimball and Benson to brief them on what to expect as they went through the process of sustaining and ordination to the apostleship. This likely was done at the behest of President J. Reuben Clark, who in the future would occasionally refer to Elder Lee as "the dean of the younger men." Because he had been a member of the quorum for two and a half years and, before that, had worked for five years at Church headquarters where he was constantly in contact with the Church leaders, Elder Lee was in a position to give them tips on protocol and procedure, which would smooth their way into the Church hierarchy. Elder Lee especially focused on the procedure to be followed at the time of their ordination by President Grant. But, he went further than this, giving advice about matters that would help them to avoid needless difficulties or embarrassments. He suggested to Elder Benson that he not make too much out of the reduction in income he had suffered by leaving the employment of the farm cooperative in Washington. "He was somewhat taken back," wrote Elder Lee, "but like the good soldier that he is, I am sure he will be wise." The incident reflects, again, a salient quality of Elder Lee's character and leadership. He seldom failed to teach a lesson regardless of the time, the place, the circumstances, or the person involved. He took every opportunity to plant an idea, or to stimulate faith, or to lay a remonstrance upon someone, whether gentle or firm. He seldom, if ever, engaged in small talk. What he said had meaning and purpose. And a wise stake president would have done well to listen carefully to his words at the pulpit which though ostensibly addressed to the audience may well have been intended especially for him. It was not uncommon for him to speak "over the heads" of an audience to a specific person or persons. This reflected an interesting aspect of Elder Lee's makeup. There were few leaders of his day more plainspoken than he. Yet, if the circumstances required it, he could be indirect and remote, accomplishing a desired result by finesse and adroit maneuvering rather than by direct speech. Occasionally, he would induce obedience by his silence.

Ordinarily, new members of the Twelve are ordained in the upper room of the Salt Lake Temple. However, because of President Heber J. Grant's physical disabilities, this procedure was not followed in the case of Elders Spencer W. Kimball and Ezra Taft Benson. Instead, for the prophet's convenience, a special meeting was convened in the First Presidency's council room, located at the north end of the main floor of the Church Administration Building. Here, after the usual preliminaries, the aging prophet, lacking strength to stand, invited the new brethren, in turn, Elder Kimball being first, to kneel before him. He then invited his counselors and the members of the Twelve to stand round in a circle, joining him in laying hands on the head of the one kneeling before him. Acting as voice, the prophet then ordained each one to the apostleship and set him apart as a member of the Twelve.

"Today marked a new chapter in church history," Elder Lee wrote of the occasion. "The two new members of the Council of the Twelve, Spencer W. Kimball and Ezra Taft Benson, were ordained apostles by President Grant in a special meeting of the Twelve and the First Presidency held in the office of the First Presidency." The historical significance of the event was apparent to all because both were direct descendants of men who had held the apostleship, Elder Kimball being a grandson of Heber C. Kimball and Elder Benson being a great-grandson of the first Ezra Taft Benson. It was historically significant, too, that both were ordained on the same day and that at the time of their calls, both were serving as stake presidents. However, future events would add further historical significance to this day: Both would live to serve as the president of the Church, something which had never happened before to men ordained on the same day, and the induction of this pair into the quorum began an astounding turnover in the makeup of the Twelve, unprecedented in the history of the Church. In the decade from 1943 to October 1953, ten vacancies were created in the Quorum of the Twelve, caused either by death, by calls to the First Presidency, or, in the case of Richard R. Lyman, by excommunication. As already noted, President Rudger Clawson and Sylvester Q. Cannon passed away in the fore part of 1943. Later that year, Elder Lyman was excommunicated. Then in 1945, George Albert Smith left to become the president of the Church, Charles A. Callis died in 1947 as did George F. Richards in 1950, Stephen L. Richards became a counselor in the First Presidency in 1951, John A. Widtsoe and Joseph F. Merrill died in 1952, and Albert E. Bowen passed away in 1953. These departures and their replacements advanced Elder Lee in seniority in the quorum so that in October 1953 when Elder Richard L. Evans was called to the Twelve, Elder Lee was its second ranking member, junior only to President Joseph Fielding Smith. President Smith and the members of the First Presidency, David O. McKay, Stephen L. Richards, and J. Reuben Clark, who were also senior to Elder Lee in the apostleship, had an average age of over seventy-eight years. Since Elder Lee was then fifty-four, the perception that he would one day be the president of the Church was even more pronounced than it was in 1941 when, as the newest member of the quorum, he stood at the end of the long line of white-haired men who were senior to him. The magnitude of the changes that occurred in the decade 1943 to 1953 is better understood by the fact that for seven years from 1963 to 1970, Elder Thomas S. Monson was the junior member of the Twelve.

Less than a month after the ordination of Elders Kimball and Benson, Elder Lee was assigned by the First Presidency to work with President Joseph Fielding Smith to investigate charges that had been made against Elder Lyman. This resulted in his excommunication, which took place on November 12, 1943. By any measure, it was the most stressful thing that occurred to Elder Lee as part of his apostolic service. "It was a most saddening experience," wrote he, "with most of the Twelve in tears as Brother Lyman was asked to leave the meeting and shook hands in parting."

The following weekend, Elder Lee and Elder Kimball were assigned to attend the stake conference together in Parowan, Utah. They found that the sense of shock and disbelief with which the Twelve had faced the reality of the excommunication had extended there. "I sought to strengthen the faith of the people in my sermon," wrote Elder Lee, "by showing the evidence of continuing warfare between the forces of good and evil and the power of the gospel in meeting every crisis in life."

The epilogue of this tragedy had already begun to be written before the excommunication took place. Earlier, Mark E. Petersen, managing editor of the Deseret News, had a vivid dream, which was a rarity for him. In it he saw a headline in the Deseret News, "Lyman R. Richard Dies." In the dream, it was also shown to him he would be called to the Twelve to fill the vacancy. On awakening, he was troubled as much by the glaring error in the head-line as by the personal implication of the dream. He sent the Church reporter, Henry A. Smith, to 47 East South Temple to inquire about the health of the Brethren; he returned to say everyone seemed to be well. It was some time later that Elder Petersen was informed of the excommunication and instructed to publish a notice of it in the news. In early April 1944 when he was called to the prophet's office and told he was to fill the vacancy, Elder Petersen said: "President Grant, I have known for some weeks that this was coming." After hearing the account of the dream, President Grant said the Lord had given him "the right impression." (Mark E. Petersen, A Biography, p. 86.) The call of Elder Petersen confirmed the impression Elder Lee had received about him the previous year when there were discussions about filling the vacancies created by the deaths of Sylvester Q. Cannon and Rudger Clawson.

As part of the 1944 April general conference, the Twelve held their quarterly meeting. These meetings, which usually last for several hours, convene in a room on the fourth floor of the Salt Lake Temple. At these meetings, each member of the quorum is at liberty to express himself at length as to any subject of his choosing. At the quarterly meeting held on April 5, 1944, Elder Lee discussed a subject that to him was vital. It was summarized in his diary when he expressed the hope that "we would never discourage the relating of faith promoting experiences in testimony bearing." This was prompted by comments he had heard expressing the contrary view. It was difficult for Elder Lee to understand this attitude, given the aim of the Latterday Saints to be led constantly by the whisperings of the Spirit. This was a reality for him. Seldom did a day pass but that he received spiritual direction from the Lord. It was his lifeblood. And the thought that he should not mention these faith-promoting experiences in bearing testimony was incomprehensible. Therefore, whenever the circumstances were appropriate, Elder Lee never failed to share spiritual direction or insight he had received. In doing so, he bolstered the faith of many who, seeing how the Lord had revealed to him, were anxious to receive similar spiritual direction. In this practice, Elder Lee emulated the Prophet Joseph Smith, whose repeated testimonies about heavenly visitations and other extraordinary phenomena have provided spiritual nourishment for generations of Latter-day Saints.

During this period, Elder Lee's family went through a crisis. Fern, the heart of the home, was ill. Always frail, she had begun to tire more easily and lacked the energy to care for their large two-story home. Yet her compulsive nature dictated that the house undergo its annual cleaning. On May 18, Elder Lee "helped Fern get the house cleaning started." He was around for two days to assist but was then on the road to a conference in the San Juan Stake in southern Utah. The following week found him in Gridley, California. And prior to the July break, he attended stake conferences or other special meetings in Ogden, Utah; Salmon, Idaho; and Provo, Utah. Of course, the girls helped their mother, and Elder Lee assisted with the work as his crowded schedule allowed. But, the heaviest burden rested on Fern. These exertions, added to her natural frailty, put Fern in bed. By mid-July, the doctor decided major surgery was necessary. She was admitted to the hospital on July 21, and four days later, Doctor A. C. Callister performed abdominal surgery on her, removing several tumors. Fortunately, none was malignant. "She was colorless throughout the day," wrote Elder Lee the day of the surgery. During the next twelve days, the harried husband haunted the hospital at every opportunity, anxiously monitoring his wife's recovery. "Fern miserable with gas pains," he wrote the day following the operation. Thereafter, he watched carefully for any change in her condition, whether for better or for worse.

Elder Lee was stressed as he tried to keep all the balls in the air at the office, at home, and at the hospital as he comforted his wife. Before the surgery became necessary, the girls had planned two major social events at the home. Unable to reschedule them, or to transfer them to another home, their father stepped into the breach to help. Four days after the operation, he spent several hours working in the garden and beautifying the yards for a party the following night. This was sandwiched in between duties at the office and visits to the hospital. The next night, he presided at the grill, barbecuing hot dogs for a large group of young people who came to the Lee home. Four days later, he returned to his yard work, between visits to the hospital, preparing for a party of the Alpha Chi sorority for which the girls were hostesses.

The next Sunday, the crisis ended. "Fern was like one released from prison," wrote Elder Lee on August 6 after bringing his wife home from the hospital. "Everything seemed beautiful and lovely to her." Several weeks of convalescence lay ahead for the patient as she recovered from her ordeal. The girls, who had part-time summer work, pitched in on their off hours and this, with their father's help when he was home, made it possible to maintain the home and to help Fern in her recovery without outside assistance.

Toward the end of August, Elder Lee counselled with Maurine and Helen about their courses at the University of Utah for the coming year. However, when their father dropped a hint they might be able to accompany their parents on a trip to Mexico in the fall, their plans changed. They decided to drop out of school for a year to work and to go to Mexico, if the opportunity to do so came. It did. After the October general conference when Elder Lee's itinerary firmed up, the family began to plan for their once-in-a-lifetime trip. It would be the only long trip they would take together while the girls were single. And even before they left Salt Lake, Helen's single status was in jeopardy. "Helen went out last night with Brent Goates," Elder Lee recorded on October 29, "whom I met as a missionary in Fort Worth, Texas, two years ago; and they seemed to be immediately in love with each other. Each had seemingly been admiring the other at a distance and hardly daring to confess their real (feelings) to each other. He is leaving in ten days for the Merchant Marine service; and they will have their love put to a real test." Later events revealed that Helen and her young man met that test since on June 24, 1946, Elder Lee performed their temple sealing. By this act, the apostle received into his family a son-in-law who, in every respect, filled the role of the natural son he had never had.

The family packed their things in Elder Lee's Buick and left Salt Lake City early on November 3, 1944. Driving south through Price, Moab, and Monticello, Utah, they bent eastward into southwestern Colorado, passing Cortez and thence proceeding south to Albuquerque, New Mexico. They spent the night there before driving on to El Paso, Texas, on the border of Old Mexico. With their two vivacious daughters in the car with them, drinking in sights they had never seen before and bubbling over with youthful exuberance, the time passed quickly for the travellers. Amazingly, that enthusiasm hardly lagged during the five weeks they were together, despite wearing travel in a foreign land where the language, the customs, and the food were different from anything they had previously known.

At El Paso, the travellers were met by President Arwell L. Pierce of the Mexican Mission who would be their guide and host. Although born in Utah, President Pierce was raised in the Mormon colonies in Old Mexico, spoke Spanish as fluently as English, and with the insight of a native, understood the culture of the people his guests were to visit. Moreover, he had served as the first bishop of the El Paso Ward, whose membership included many Mexicans, so that he had had extensive grass roots experience in administering Church affairs among these people. All this, added to his buoyant, positive personality and the fact that his middle name was Lee, made President Pierce the ideal guide and companion for Elder Lee and his family.

During the two days the travellers remained in El Paso, getting their identification papers in order and organizing for their trip into the heart of Mexico, Elder Lee and President Pierce crossed the Rio Grande into Cuidad Juarez where they organized a branch of the Church. The branch president told the brethren that the action taken "fulfilled a vision" he had received eight years before when he was baptized. This experience typified the high level of spirituality Elder Lee found among the Mexican people during this tour, and which he would find years later as he toured throughout Latin America. The high level of poverty among them and their reliance on divine influences for help in battling life's problems tends to make many Latin Americans more spiritually attuned than those who enjoy material abundance.

The travellers left El Paso on November 6 for the three-day trip to Mexico City. The first part of their journey, through the states of Chihuahua and Durango, treated them to landscapes similar to those they had seen in Texas and New Mexico north of the border. Lying on a plateau between the Sierra Madre Occidental and the Sierra Madre Oriental, the area travelled was marked by broad and distant vistas, dotted with rugged mountains and carpeted with desert grasses and plants. Here lay winter ranges for cattle. Occasional green valleys appeared, surrounding villages, whose existence depended on variable water resources. As the travellers moved further south, the terrain and the climate changed, becoming more mountainous and tropical as they came nearer to the equator. They arrived in Mexico City on November 9, feeling, no doubt, the effect of the city's seventy-four-hundred-foot altitude, three thousand feet higher than Salt Lake City.

The visitors spent three weeks in and around Mexico City. The apostle, joined by President Pierce, held meetings with members and missionaries. He also conducted special training sessions with local leaders. A pressing problem at the time arose from the militant activities of a group of dissidents called the Third Convention. The members of this group became disaffected because they resented Anglo leaders from the United States and insisted that their leaders be selected from among Mexican members. Later they added other planks to their platform of dissent, including a demand that the Church resume the practice of polygamy. At meetings held in Mexico City and Ozumba, the apostle explained in detail the status of those involved in the Third Convention and the points of doctrine and policy underlying the controversy. This rebellion, which ultimately resulted in the excommunication of eight of its ringleaders, simmered for two more years, when it was largely quelled during a personal visit from George Albert Smith in 1946, the first president of the Church to visit Mexico during his prophetic tenure. The third prophet to do so was President Harold B. Lee, who attended an area general conference in Mexico City in August 1972, a month after he was ordained the eleventh president of the Church.

Elder Lee held additional meetings with members and missionaries at Puebla, Toluca, Cabrerra, San Marcos, San Pedro, Martin, Guereiu, and Santiago in the Mexico City area. In between, he joined his family in visiting historic sites. Within the city itself, the Lees were most interested in the National University, the National Museum, and Chapultepec Park, including the Chapultepec Castle. Outside the city, the main attractions were the pyramids and other archaeological sites at San Juan Teotihuacan, remnants of an ancient civilization that once flourished in the area. While it was not possible to precisely identify the builders of these structures with peoples named in the Book of Mormon, the mere existence of these buildings, revealing the kind of intelligence and skill possessed by the people who built them, added powerful credence to the story told by Joseph Smith about the origin of the Book of Mormon.

The travellers began their meandering return home on November 28 when they left Mexico City at 4:40 A.M., destined for Uruapan to the west. Because of gas shortages caused by the war, Mexican motorists were allowed to drive their cars only on certain days of the week. However, Brother Periu, a branch president, was able to obtain a special permit, which enabled the Lees to travel every day. After leaving Uruapan, the party veered northwest toward Guadalajara, Mexico's second largest city. En route they passed an active volcano, Paricutin, where they rented saddle horses in order to obtain a better view of the surroundings. What they saw was graphically described by Elder Lee. "With the intermittent rolling and ground shaking, the molten rocks and lava, with smoke and dust belching forth, and (with) the miles of red lava flowing, a most impressive and soul stirring spectacle was presented, one never to be forgotten."

The usual meetings were held in Guadalajara, in between which was a visit to the Plaza Mayor, the heart of the old city. Here are found the three-hundred-year-old cathedral and the state capitol, called the Palacio del Gobierno. The nearby shops contain a wide variety of the items for which Guadalajara is noted-pottery, clay figurines, leather goods, and glassware of various hues: green, amber, and blue-and which are alluring to visitors. Elder Lee did not make note of any purchases made there by his wife and daughters. But, it is difficult to imagine that these three, who took such pride in the decor of the home, could have wholly refrained from sampling these wares.

After spending a day at San Luis Potosi, northeast of Guadalajara, which is in the heart of Mexico's cattle, wheat, and corn country, the travelers went to Monterrey, located in the foothills of the Sierra Madre Oriental. In this area, at an elevation of sixteen hundred feet, the Lees found a moderate, balmy climate, not unlike that of southern Arizona, with palm trees and an abundance of citrus fruit. Here Elder Lee held a two-day conference on Saturday and Sunday, December 2 and 3. And, it was here that they encountered the only really inclement weather of the entire tour when a storm of cloudburst proportions hit the area.

Leaving Monterrey, the visitors reentered the United States at Laredo, Texas, on December 4. Travelling through Eagle Pass; El Paso, Texas; Albuquerque, New Mexico; and Moab, Utah, Elder Lee and his family negotiated the last leg of their journey, arriving home December 9. They were as happy to return as they had been to leave. Indeed, they may have been even happier to return because Fern had contracted an annoying head cold during the last part of the tour.

The images and impressions created by this tour-the vastness, the variety, and the beauty of Mexico, the warmth and the spirituality of its people, the vigor of the Church that was beginning to gain a foothold there, the enthusiasm and the dedication of its young leaders, and the lingering reminders of an extinct civilization, mirrored in the crumbling ruins of its gigantic buildings-all these, and many more, would remain securely stored in the memories of the members of the Lee family, to provide moments of quiet reverie in the days ahead or the grist for future sermons, lessons, or leadership counselling.
