Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Fifteen

Patterns of Change

The year 1945, and those immediately following it, brought many changes in the life of Elder Harold B. Lee and the Church that he served. By this time, he had been a member of the Twelve for four years, during which he had grown in stature and in personal influence and maturity. His increasing stature among the Brethren was reflected by an assignment he received during the first half of 1945, when he was asked by the First Presidency to give a series of talks on Sunday evenings over radio station KSL in Salt Lake City. During this time, he was excused from attending stake conferences in order to have adequate time to prepare and to deliver these talks. Because of Elder Lee's youth, compared to most of the other General Authorities of the Church, and because of the extraordinary influence he had with young people, he was asked to focus his talks on the youth. Thus, the series was given the title "Youth and the Church." Later, the talks were compiled in a book bearing the same title. Still later, after Elder Lee became the president of the Church, the talks, as modified, were published again, this time under the title Decisions for Successful Living.

It is clear Elder Lee found his main laboratory for studying and counselling young people at home. "When this material was first prepared," he wrote in the preface to Decisions for Successful Living, "my own daughters, Maurine and Helen, served as representatives of the modern youth of the day, and were my chief critics and consultants in the preparation of these chapters." In addition, of course, he relied on the experiences he had had as a teacher and principal of youth in the public schools, as a seminary teacher in the Church Education System, and as a tutor of young missionaries about the temple ordinances as they prepared to enter the mission field. All these experiences had given him a keen insight into the problems and challenges of the youth of the Church and a special rapport with them. He addressed them as a friend and a confidant, not as a scolding schoolmaster, and as one genuinely interested in them and their future. They reciprocated in kind, taking him into their confidence and regarding him as one of their own.

The titles of a few of the twenty-six talks delivered in this series give a flavor of Elder Lee's approach: "Why The Church?," "Your Search for Truth," "Ideals," "The Worth of a Human Soul," "The Rapture of a Moment or the Peace of Years," and "Toward Happy Homes." Undoubtedly, the impact of these talks was a chief factor that caused so many young people to flock to Elder Lee, requesting that he perform their temple sealings. Although a couple may never have met him personally, nor have had even a remote connection with him through family or friends, they felt no reluctance to invite him to perform their sealing, apparently because of a sense that there was a bond between them. And ever after, they could point with a sense of pride to the fact that Elder Lee, their "special friend," had sealed them in the temple. We gain some insight into the magnitude of the added administrative burden this placed on the apostle from the fact that during a nine-day period in June 1946, he performed twenty-one temple sealings. It is not known that he ever declined a request to do this, except for illness, absence from the city, or a conflicting appointment. We infer that this was not a mechanical thing for Elder Lee, because he would not merely record that he had performed, say, seven sealings on a given day in June, as he did on June 12, 1946, but he recorded the full names of each couple.

Major changes occurred in the hierarchy of the Church during the year 1945. The First Council of the Seventy was most significantly affected when two of its members passed away on successive days, Rufus K. Hardy on March 7 and Samuel O. Bennion on March 8. They were replaced by Elders S. Dilworth Young and Milton R. Hunter at the following April general conference. At that time, President Heber J. Grant was grievously ill, suffering from a debilitating stroke he had suffered several years before. The end came for the eighty-eight-year-old prophet on Monday, May 14. Elder Lee was advised of President Grant's passing by Elder Joseph Fielding Smith at 7:00 P.M. that night, only twenty-five minutes after the prophet died. Elder and Sister Lee immediately went to the Grant home, high on the avenues in Salt Lake City, to pay their respects to President Grant's widow, Augusta. There they joined in a kneeling prayer with members of the Grant family and others who had assembled.

The following morning, a special meeting of the Council of the Twelve was held where the funeral arrangements were discussed and where Elder Lee was assigned to prepare a tribute from the Twelve to the prophet. Three days after the funeral, a special meeting of the Twelve convened in the upper room of the Salt Lake Temple to consider the reorganization of the First Presidency. Following the established precedent, it was decided that the reorganization should not be delayed because of the pressing need to have a functioning First Presidency in place. President George Albert Smith was then unanimously approved to replace President Grant, and he selected the same counselors President Grant had had, J. Reuben Clark and David O. McKay. Elder Lee joined with the other apostles present to place their hands on the head of Brother Smith to ordain and to set him apart as the eighth president of the Church, and George F. Richards was approved and set apart as the president of the Twelve.

This was the first of four times Elder Lee was to witness this formal transfer of prophetic authority to a new president of the Church. The fourth and last time, of course, was when in July 1972 he was ordained, in the same manner, as the eleventh president of the Church, with Spencer W. Kimball acting as voice in the ordination. On each occasion, he was struck by the simple, orderly way in which the transfer of such vast authority was effected, without dissent or controversy, and without any divisive "campaigning," which often accompanies changes in ecclesiastical or other leadership.

The last change in the general officers of the Church during 1945 occurred at the October general conference when Matthew Cowley was chosen to fill the vacancy in the Twelve created when George Albert Smith became the president of the Church.

These significant changes in Church leadership during the period of a few months corresponded with major changes in world affairs, which occurred at the same time. In early March 1945, World War II still raged both in Europe and in the Pacific. The terrible effects of this conflagration were being felt in communities around the world. Elder Lee's journal entry of March 18, 1945, reflects the grim consequences of war. "I received a call from Wm. E. Ryberg," he wrote on that date, "saying 'Harold, my boy is gone.' He was killed in Italy." Elder Lee immediately went to the Ryberg home to console the grieving parents and to give them a blessing. Later, he was the main speaker at memorial services for the Ryberg boy. Later he performed the same service for the Gold family, whose son, Oscar, had been killed in Germany. Fortunately, events that followed not long afterward signalled the end of the war and of sad experiences like this. By early May 1945, both Germany and Italy had been defeated. And by that time, the Okinawa campaign pointed the way toward victory in the Pacific, which became a reality the following August after the atomic bombs were dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.

Once it became clear the end of the war was near, Elder Lee and his brethren moved promptly to prepare for the changes that event would produce. Elder Lee convened a meeting of the military relations committee to consider the steps to be taken to help returning servicemen smoothly reenter civilian life. Also it was decided Hugh B. Brown would return to England to remain for a year to help coordinate the return of LDS servicemen from the European theatre.

When this meeting was held, it was uncertain how long the war in the Pacific would last. The Japanese were fighting tenaciously and apparently had the will and the resources to continue the struggle into the indefinite future. It was under these circumstances that Elder Lee received an assignment to go to the Hawaiian Islands to hold a series of meetings with members and missionaries and to check on the LDS servicemen's facilities at Honolulu. Because he would be travelling into areas where he might be exposed to enemy fire, his father, as already noted, wanted to give him a special blessing. "He reminded me of my lineage," the son reported in his diary, "rehearsed my life, and blessed me for the trip to Hawaii."

The first leg of the journey, from Salt Lake to San Francisco, was taken in high style. President J. Reuben Clark, who was travelling to the coast on business in a private car of the Western Pacific Railroad, invited his protege to go with him. "It was luxury class," Elder Lee reported, "with modern bedroom accommodations and a private chef and steward." His accommodations on the last leg, from San Francisco to Honolulu, suffered badly by comparison.

After spending twelve vexing days in the bay area, the apostle was finally able to book passage on a dumpy old freighter, whose unkempt and tired appearance hardly inspired visions of a classic voyage on the blue Pacific. Elder Lee and twenty-three other travellers boarded this nameless old tub on July 9 and were assigned to the four ten-foot by twelve-foot cabins reserved for passengers. Elder Lee chose an upper bunk nearest the entryway "so the tobacco smoke would not be too obnoxious." After stowing his gear and making the acquaintance of his cabin mates, Elder Lee went on deck to watch with fascination as the ship eased out of its berth, maneuvered through the bay, and passing under the Golden Gate Bridge, headed into the Pacific toward Hawaii.

It was Elder Lee's first voyage. Therefore, every aspect of it was new and exciting. As the freighter breasted the heavy ground swells off the California coast, he was pleased to find that the motion of the ship did not nauseate him. This enabled him to enjoy the sights, the sounds, and the smells of the open sea to the fullest extent. Since the weather was clear for the entire seven-day voyage, he spent many hours on deck, watching the albatross, which glided effortlessly behind the ship, or the flying fish, which occasionally were seen alongside. After dark, he was treated to a dazzling view of the heavens, unobstructed by clouds or pollution and undimmed by man-made lights. And standing at the rail at night, he was fascinated by the phosphorescent particles in the water, which sparkled like tiny flecks of light, a phenomenon that had intrigued mariners through the centuries. During the day when he was not gazing at the sea, the apostle spent his time profitably, reading, writing, and preparing for the meetings to be held in the islands. The only distractions to this enjoyable routine, aside from his smoke-filled sleeping compartment, were the vulgarities and profanities of the crew, a motley bunch who made no effort to accommodate or to defer to the passengers, whom they regarded as an annoyance and an impediment to their work. Here was none of the glitz and glamor found on a luxury liner, whose sole objective is the comfort and pleasure of its passengers.

On Sunday, nine of the twenty-four passengers joined for an ecumenical worship service. Elder Lee offered the opening and closing prayers; a Catholic, connected with the USO, read a scripture; and a Korean minister gave an impromptu speech.

On arriving at Pearl Harbor, the apostle was met by Stake President Ralph E. Woolley and his son and Bishop Jay Qualey. The absence of a jovial group of Hawaiian members at the pier to greet and to sing to the visitor and to load him with leis resulted from the deadening effect of the war on this sprawling harbor, which bristled with fighting ships and bustled with work as crews from the base toiled around-the-clock to repair or to outfit the ships and to load them with munitions.

The day after his arrival in Honolulu, Elder Lee, accompanied by LDS chaplain Lt. Commander John W. Boud, visited the military cemetery where Naval Captain Mervyn Bennion was buried. Here, at the grave site of President Clark's son-in-law, the apostle paid symbolic respect to all LDS servicemen who had fallen in the war. From there, he and Commander Boud visited the LDS Servicemen's Center near downtown Honolulu. Located in an old home, the center was a focal point for all LDS servicemen who passed through Pearl Harbor, destined either for the mainland and rehab leave or for the shooting war in the Pacific. Here a lonely GI could find a place to relax, to visit with those who shared his values, or, perhaps, to locate a friend from home. To facilitate this, the center maintained a registry in which visitors were invited to record their names, homes, and military billets. A large bulletin board, plastered with messages and greetings, scrawled on paper snippets of different sizes and colors, provided a means of communication between buddies passing through Pearl. Elder Lee spent time at the center to counsel with those in charge, to thank them for their service and to make sure that everything possible was being done to care for the Mormon GI's.

During his two-week stay in the islands, Elder Lee, in addition to the island of Oahu, on which Honolulu is located, visited the islands of Maui, Kauai, Hawaii, and Molokai, where he held meetings with members and missionaries. At Molokai, he also visited the leper colony at Kalaupapa, where fifty-two members of the Church lived. The apostle and Mission President Castle E. Murphy descended to the colony by mules over a steep, narrow, winding trail. Here they found a dispirited people, doomed to wear out their lives in isolation, devoid of hope for happiness or fulfillment here, except as they might find it within themselves through mental and spiritual exertion. Elder Lee endeavored to feed that glimmer of hope at a meeting he and President Murphy held with members of the Kalaupapa Branch.

The mournful and hopeless condition found in the leper colony stood in contrast to the happiness and joviality Elder Lee found at luaus given in his honor at Laie and Kauai. The menus at these feasts were impressive to the visitor, so much so that he took time to record them in his diary. They included poi, roast pig, chicken, bananas, pineapple, coconut cake, and mounds of other food he could not describe or spell. Draped with fragrant leis as he ate and was entertained with song and dance, Elder Lee seemingly had never before felt so fully feted. "The genuine love and adoration of these people," wrote he of his Hawaiian friends, "is almost unbelievable."

The main purpose of the apostle's visit to Hawaii was to attend the quarterly conference of the Honolulu Stake. At the morning session, almost fifteen hundred crowded into the stake center. Elder Lee had never before seen such a mix of different cultures and races as was represented in the audience. It was pleasing to note that there were apparent harmony and good feelings among them, despite their differences. He was especially pleased to see that there were no apparent lingering antagonisms toward the Church members of Japanese origin because of the attack on Pearl Harbor. In an effort to cement these good feelings, and to forestall a backlash of enmity toward the Japanese, Elder Lee had dinner with the president of the Japanese Branch and some of his co-workers. He also inspected the temple at Laie before leaving the islands, counselling with the temple presidency about some of their challenges.

Not anxious to spend another week in a smoke-filled cabin aboard a cargo ship, Elder Lee was elated when the local brethren were able to arrange passage for him on a clipper flight from Honolulu on July 31. With a transit stop and a change of planes at Mills Field in San Mateo, California, the apostle arrived home on August 3 where he was warmly welcomed by Fern and the girls and other members of the family.

Along with everyone else, Elder Lee's enthusiasm mounted later when the war in the Pacific ended as suddenly as it had commenced. The atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki revealed to Japan the futility of continuing the fight. With the signing of the articles of peace aboard the battleship Missouri, a new era was ushered in for the world and for the Church. Because of his role as the chairman of the servicemen's committee, a main concern of Elder Lee was the orderly demobilization of the Latter-day Saints who were in the service and their smooth transition to civilian life. So in September 1945, he went to Washington, D.C., to confer with government officials. As always, stake conference and other assignments were clustered around the main purpose of the trip in order to conserve on time and expense. From September 7 to 9, Elder Lee presided at a stake conference in Chicago where the prominent attorney John K. Edmunds was installed as the new stake president. The following weekend found the apostle in New York where he presided over a stake conference there. The time between these two conferences was spent in the nation's capital. There, with the assistance of J. Willard Marriott, he was able to confer with various government officials, including the Chief of Chaplains. "Found them very cooperative," he reported. On the twelfth, Elder Lee spent the day with Ernest L. Wilkinson, a future president of the Brigham Young University, who was then a counselor in the stake presidency and a prominent Washington attorney. At the request of the stake presidency, Elder Lee agreed to hold a meeting with priesthood leaders that evening. He was surprised to find that it convened in the cultural hall instead of in the adjacent, air-conditioned chapel. He was even more surprised when, during the meeting, he was asked to keep his voice down so as not to disturb the organ recital in the chapel. The incident, while inconsequential, reflects an attitude that was prevalent at the time, an attitude that relegated priesthood functions to a subordinate position in the Church's order of priorities. In the years ahead, through the revolutionary correlation program, Harold B. Lee would play the major role in altering these attitudes.

Elder Lee returned from the East just in time to participate in the dedication of the Idaho Falls Temple. Twenty-five thousand members participated in the eight sessions. Since this was the first time President George Albert Smith had presided at a significant occasion since his ordination in May, the Brethren were anxious for his success. In recapping the event, Elder Lee noted, with apparent gratitude, how well the prophet had acquitted himself. "The outstanding feature of the services," he wrote, "were the inspired addresses of President George Albert Smith, who rose to the occasion in a wonderful way. The spirit of inspiration and leadership was upon him. The dedicatory prayer was most impressive and covered every conceivable interest of the church for blessing and guidance." One significant source of the deep spiritual stirrings Elder Lee felt during these services is suggested by his diary entry of September 24. Wrote he, "Both President Clark and President McKay declared that we had an unseen audience made up of our leaders of the past and worthy saints who had passed on before."

The spiritual feelings generated by the temple dedication carried forward and permeated the October general conference, which followed soon after. These were especially pronounced at the Solemn Assembly session where George Albert Smith was sustained as the eighth president of the Church and where Matthew Cowley was sustained as the newest member of the Twelve. Circumstances surrounding Elder Cowley's call illustrate the way in which prophetic calls are sometimes confirmed spiritually to others. Before Elder Cowley left New Zealand earlier in 1945, a Maori leader, who was bemoaning the death of Rufus K. Hardy, whom the Maoris looked upon as "their" General Authority, predicted that Matthew Cowley would fill the next vacancy in the Twelve, which he did. And an incident that occurred after the October 1945 general conference illustrates how these special witnesses are sometimes brought to the attention of the presiding brethren years before their actual call and who, in the interim, are, in a sense, groomed for their service in the Twelve. Two days after the conference ended, President J. Reuben Clark came to Elder Lee's office to ask him to take up a labor with the "younger brethren" to urge them not to write out their conference talks. President Clark was "fearful that the next step would be for them to write their prayers." (This counsel was given, of course, before the tight strictures on timing imposed by telecasts of the conference made it mandatory to write the talks.) At the time of this visit, Delbert L. Stapley was in Elder Lee's office discussing matters about the Phoenix Stake, where he presided. Elder Lee had had many contacts with this Arizona leader, which had convinced him of his potential as a General Authority. He was pleased, therefore, that this chance meeting had given President Clark "an opportunity to become acquainted with [Delbert Stapley] for future reference." Five years would elapse before Elder Stapley was called to the Twelve, during which others were able to gauge the depth of his character and the qualities of his leadership.

In the months that followed the October 1945 general conference, Elder Lee was heavily involved in attending stake conferences. Between then and April 1946, he attended no fewer than fourteen of them in Utah, Idaho, California, Arizona, and Washington, D.C. In addition, he held several regional welfare meetings, and spoke at funerals and at other special functions. Two funerals where he spoke, for Nicholas G. Smith, Assistant to the Twelve, and Dr. Allen R. Cutler, prominent leader of Preston, Idaho, evoked many vivid memories. Elder Lee and Elder Smith were called as General Authorities the same day, socialized together in their study group, and officed side by side with the understanding that a connecting door would never be locked. Dr. Cutler was a boyhood friend from the Oneida Academy days, whose funeral drew and audience of a thousand from all over Cache Valley and beyond. The passing of contemporaries such as these reminded the speaker of his own mortality and of the fleeting and tenuous nature of life.

At a training seminar held in Provo, Utah, in late January, Elder Lee addressed the subject of "The Application of the Welfare Plan in the Solution of the After-war Problems." The most critical and complex postwar welfare problem arose out of the devastation wrought by the war in Europe. The Church responded promptly to provide emergency welfare assistance to the beleaguered European Saints. It was also decided to send a member of the Twelve to Europe to supervise the distribution of welfare commodities and to reestablish the Church organizations in the countries devastated by the war. Elder John A. Widtsoe, who was born in Norway, and who was the only native European among the Brethren, was first assigned to this task. When Elder Widtsoe later became ill, he was replaced by Elder Ezra Taft Benson. At the time of Elder Benson's appointment, President J. Reuben Clark told Elder Lee it was felt he was the logical one to go, presumably because of his long experience in welfare matters, but Elder Benson was chosen instead because Elder Lee "was needed here." That need apparently related to Elder Lee's key role in preparing for the flood of returning servicemen and to his intimate knowledge of the welfare machinery at home, which would enable him to expedite the flow of the vast quantities of welfare commodities that the European Saints would require.

The wisdom of this decision quickly became apparent. Elder Lee and his committee soon were busily engaged in preparing instructions for returning LDS servicemen who faced major challenges in the transition from military to civilian life. His interest in them was not perfunctory. He listened avidly to the reports of their military experiences and carefully recorded those he considered to be noteworthy. He was impressed with the depth of their faith, with their bravery, and with their commitment to the Church and its mission. He was specially interested, for instance, in the reports of two marines, A. Theodore Tuttle and Murray Rawson, who participated in the bloody battle at Iwo Jima and who later rendered significant Church service, Ted Tuttle as a General Authority and Murray Rawson as a mission president. Of the latter, Elder Lee wrote: "As his boat neared Iwo, he felt that there was such a power around him that no harm could befall him. He said he owed his life to the blessings of God." Of Elder Tuttle, he wrote, "He and his buddy stayed on the deck the night before they invaded Iwo. They were nervous but full of faith. They were both wounded. Tuttle insisted on returning because of a feeling of responsibility for the LDS boys of his company." When Elder Lee prepared instructions for returning servicemen, he had in mind men like these two, and many others whom he had met, whose lives had been radically changed by the war and who would be faced with major readjustments as they eased back into civilian life.

The wisdom of keeping Elder Lee home instead of sending him to Europe was also shown in the skillful way in which he supervised the production, collection, and shipping of the necessary commodities. By late February 1946, massive shipments of food and clothing were already on the way. Based upon reports received from Elder Benson and information gleaned from other sources, Elder Lee and his associates had begun to calculate the quantities of commodities that would be needed. He reported that it had been decided to ship thirteen and one-fourth cars of food and five and one-fourth cars of clothing, in addition to that already sent. These figures were periodically upgraded as the work developed on the other end.

Later, Elder Lee and his assistant, Marion G. Romney, travelled to Washington, D.C., to try to remove a bureaucratic roadblock that was barring the shipment of welfare wheat to Europe. A functionary in the Department of Agriculture had decreed that government regulations required that wheat stored in Mormon granaries had to be sold to the United States government and could not, therefore, be shipped to Europe to feed the needy. Arriving in the nation's capital, the Brethren enlisted the aid of Ernest L. Wilkinson. He accompanied them to a meeting with the honorable S. B. Hutson, an undersecretary of agriculture. When the whole matter was laid before Mr. Hutson, the offending regulation was interpreted to allow the Mormon wheat to be shipped to Europe.

Meanwhile, the wisdom of sending Elder Benson to Europe instead of Elder Lee was confirmed dramatically soon after the appointment was made. As Elder Widtsoe had begun to seek diplomatic clearance to go, the predictions were that it would take months to complete the process. But, due to his intimate knowledge of the ways of Washington and the many key contacts he had made during his work there, Elder Benson was able to cut through the red tape and to obtain his clearance, almost in a matter of days. Thus, working in tandem, with Elder Lee directing affairs at home and Elder Benson on the job in Europe, the two boyhood friends from the Oneida Academy, now grown to apostolic maturity, were the key figures in a modern drama not unlike the ancient one when Joseph fed Israel from the granaries of Egypt.

It is significant to see the tender regard this pair had for each other as they worked through the various phases of this drama. When it was first announced that a member of the Twelve would be assigned to go to Europe, Elder Lee felt it would not be "T" Benson because of his large, young family. Then when the call came, he lent every support to Elder Benson, assisting him in his preparation to leave, seeing him off on the train as he left Salt Lake City, and providing advice and support to the family after his departure. When Flora Benson became ill while her husband was away, it was Elder Lee who gave her special blessings for her health and peace of mind.

Of the many changes that took place during this period, none was more personally significant and satisfying to Elder Lee than the one that took place on June 24, 1946. "I had the glorious experience of sealing my own baby daughter, Helen, to L. Brent Goates," he wrote on that day. "It was the greatest experience of my life." The proud father had watched the budding romance between this couple from its inception and had given his unqualified approval and encouragement to it. He saw in Brent Goates the qualities he would have wanted in a natural son, had he been blessed with one; and he also saw in him a gentleness and kindness to which he could safely entrust his baby daughter. So, when Brent had completed his tour of duty with the Merchant Marines, he and Helen made plans for their marriage. The Lees offered to host a reception at their home the night of the marriage, which the couple accepted with alacrity. The parents exhausted their imagination and ingenuity in making preparations. The lawns and flower beds were groomed to perfection, special lighting was arranged, small decorative plantings were obtained to add beauty and grace to the surroundings, and food and drink for the eight hundred invited guests were purchased. Because Plan B for the event would force the huge reception inside, the Lees became alarmed when on the twenty-first a stiff wind kicked up, bringing with it the threat of rain. It continued to the twenty-third, once knocking out the power so that the house had no electricity for three hours. The Lees' response to this threat was typical. "We laid the whole matter before the Lord," wrote the apostle, "and He tempered the elements and gave us a perfect day for our wedding reception."

A year later, Elder and Sister Lee went through the adventure of a second wedding reception when, on June 11, 1947, Maurine was married to Ernest J. Wilkins, an Arizona native who had served a mission in Argentina. They had met while attending the Brigham Young University, both graduating a week before their nuptials, Maurine with an undergraduate degree and her fiance with a graduate degree in languages. Maurine's parents repeated the procedure of the year before, sprucing up the grounds of their Eighth West home and preparing for the huge crowd the night of the temple sealing. The results, however, were quite different. An unexpected rainstorm the day of the wedding drove the reception inside where the hundreds of guests literally filled the house while they extended their best wishes to the newlyweds. Although there was some temporary and understandable upset, especially on the part of the bride, who had anticipated a magical evening on the patio and the spacious lawns of the home, once the guests began to arrive, all disappointment was submerged in the excitement and gaiety of the moment.

During the year between these two weddings, Elder Lee had an experience unlike anything he had had before or would ever have again. It arose out of an assignment he received to assist Elder Charles A. Callis in organizing a stake in Jacksonville, Florida, the first stake in the south-eastern part of the United States. Elder Callis, who had served for many years as the mission president in the south, had literally lived for the day when the first stake would be created there. He seemed to look upon the event as a fitting capstone to his ministry and was as happy and as excited as a child as preparations were made to depart.

Elder and Sister Lee travelled separately from Elder Callis, planning to meet him in Jacksonville. They left Salt Lake City by train on Saturday, January 11, 1947, attended Church services in Chicago on the twelfth, and arrived in Atlanta, Georgia, on the thirteenth. There they were met by Heber Meeks, president of the Southern States Mission, and his wife, Effie, old friends with whom the Lees had been associated for years in their Salt Lake study group. It being the Lees' first visit to Atlanta, their hosts were anxious to show them one of the city's most famous attractions, the Cyclorama, which dramatically depicts the siege of Atlanta by Union General William Tecumseh Sherman, during his famous-or infamous as the Southerners would have it-march to the sea during the Civil War. The attitude of most old-line Southerners toward the general and his campaign is reflected in the large picture of him that hangs in the foyer of the building, a picture that the organizers of the Cyclorama must have searched long to find. It shows the general dressed in a disheveled uniform, with a scruffy beard, uncombed hair, and a vacant, haggard look in his eye. At a glance, the picture seems to represent the saying General Sherman popularized, "War is Hell," and to convey the idea that he is one of the reigning monarchs there.

The Lees were moved when they viewed the Cyclorama from the platform in its center. There are seen lifelike figures of soldiers, northern and southern, engaged in combat or lying wounded or dead on the battlefield amidst their muskets, their horses, their cannon, and other weapons of war. And in the distance is seen Atlanta in flames.

There can be little doubt that on the following day during the drive from Atlanta to Jacksonville, President Meeks, a keen student of the South and the Civil War, who had lived for a while in Augusta, Georgia, before his call as mission president, briefed the Lees about the history of the South and about the growth of the Church in the Jacksonville area where the stake was to be created.

In Jacksonville, Elder and Sister Lee stayed with Archie O. Jenkins and his wife at their palatial home on the banks of the St. Johns River. The owner of the Duvall Jewelry Company, with nineteen stores throughout Florida, A. O. Jenkins had begun a career selling watches and jewelry accessories, house-to-house, from a suitcase. Charles A. Callis was the catalyst that brought about a radical change in the Jenkinses' business future. As the president of the branch in Jacksonville, Elder Callis went to Brother Jenkins, who was semi-active, to ask him to serve as the president of the Young Men's organization. Accepting with a notable lack of enthusiasm, the new leader was surprised, if not shocked, when the branch president told him that now that he was a leader he would be expected to keep all the commandments, including the payment of tithing. Unwilling to recant on his acceptance, or to serve halfheartedly, Archie Jenkins began from that moment to pay an honest tithing. And from that moment his business began to thrive, progressing from home-to-home selling to a very small shop and then to the chain of exclusive stores he owned in 1947. Generations of Southern States missionaries heard this inspiring story related by the man who lived it. Because of the role Elder Callis played in their success, and because of the significant event that had brought him to Jacksonville, the Jenkinses would have been honored to have had their friend stay at their home with Elder and Sister Lee. However, he declined graciously, but with firmness. Instead of the luxury he would have found at the Jenkinses' home, Elder Callis opted for the spartan accommodations of a small apartment adjacent to the Jacksonville Branch chapel. He and his wife, Grace, had lived there when he served as the branch president many years before, and he wanted to stay in these humble surroundings where he could relive some of the cherished moments of their life together. It was a bittersweet time for the aged apostle. Elder Lee noted that when Elder Callis heard a rendition of "O My Father" at one of the meetings, "he broke into tears, saying 'Take care of your wives, I haven't mine. She is gone.'" Continuing with his entry, Elder Lee wrote: "I had the impression, and so expressed myself to Sister Jenkins, that Brother Callis wanted to go and had wished it could be in that room by himself."

In the organization of the stake, the two apostles went through the usual procedure of interviewing the principal leaders, and then, through inspiration, of selecting the president. The one chosen was a young native of Florida, Alvin Chase, who in turn selected as his counselors E. Coleman Madsen, an attorney whose roots were in the West, and J. M. Lindsey. In this laborious process, which later included setting apart sixty-four ward and stake officers, Elder Callis, who was then eighty-two years old and not in robust health, deferred to his young companion, being actively involved chiefly in the interviews and the selection of the president, in speaking at the conference sessions, and in a few of the settings apart.

Elder Lee reported that in the principal talk he delivered at the conference, Elder Callis said that his wife and other spiritual beings were present, that other stakes would be organized in the Southern States, that eventually a temple would be built there, and that the younger members of the Church in attendance would live to see these things happen.

Once the organization of the stake had been completed, a great sense of peace seemed to descend upon Elder Callis. Despite having had heart palpitations on January 19, the day of the organizational meetings, he was jovial and in apparent good health when, on the twentieth, Elder Lee and Fern, along with the Meekses, left for Miami, Florida, to hold other meetings. The travellers spent the night in historic St. Augustine, the oldest European settlement in the United States, which was established in 1565 by Spain. Here they visited the old slave market and the massive battlements facing the Atlantic, which the Spaniards had constructed to guard this prized outpost. Elder Lee and his party drove south along the Atlantic Coast, enjoying the sights of southern Florida with its extensive, sandy beaches, its tropical vegetation, and its mild climate, a welcome change from the cold and icy January of Salt Lake City. Just south of Vero Beach, the companionable conversation of the travellers was interrupted when their car was stopped by a highway patrolman who advised there was a death message for them and to call a telephone number in Jacksonville. When he called, Elder Lee was informed that Elder Callis had passed away suddenly. He and the others immediately returned.

On arriving back in Jacksonville, he learned about the circumstances of his companion's death. Elder Callis was riding with A. O. Jenkins in his car when, without warning, the apostle fell silent and slumped forward, unconscious. Unable to rouse him, but finding a pulse, Brother Jenkins drove speedily to the hospital where Elder Callis passed away without regaining consciousness.

With the assistance of President Meeks and the local brethren, Elder Lee laid plans for the funeral which was held Thursday, January 23, 1947. The speakers, in addition to the apostle and President Meeks, who had served as a missionary under Elder Callis, were A. O. Jenkins and D. Homer Yarn of Atlanta, Georgia, the patriarch of a prominent Mormon family in the South who had been associated with Elder Callis for many years. As Elder Lee rose to conduct the service shortly after noon, he was so filled with emotion as to be unable to speak coherently. Motioning to President Meeks to take over, he sat down to compose himself. It was an extraordinary reaction since Harold B. Lee was known for self-control in the pulpit as, over the years, he had spoken at numberless funerals and other meetings. As Elder Lee described the incident to the author, a great sense of peace came over him after a while, and he was able to continue without further difficulty. He later learned that at about the same time in Salt Lake City, the First Presidency and the Twelve had joined in their weekly Thursday prayer circle where President David O. McKay, who was voice at the altar, especially remembered Elder Lee and prayed that he would be strengthened and inspired as he presided at the funeral services of Elder Callis in Jacksonville. Elder Lee later referred to this incident to illustrate the spiritual power generated by the prayers offered at the altar in the upper room of the temple.

Following the funeral service, Elder and Sister Lee accompanied the body of Elder Callis on the return trip to Salt Lake City. At the depot to meet them were President George Albert Smith and several other General Authorities and the son and daughter of Elder Callis. Later that day, Elder Lee met privately with the Callis family to brief them about the extraordinary circumstances surrounding their parent's death, which served as a fitting climax to his ministry. The following day, funeral services for Elder Callis were held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle.
