Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Sixteen

The Centennial Year

The striking events connected with the creation of the Jacksonville Stake and the sudden death of Elder Charles A. Callis were the prelude to an unusual year in the history of the Church and in the life of Harold B. Lee and his family. For many months, numerous committees had been hard at work to plan for the centennial celebration of the arrival of the Mormon pioneers in the Salt Lake Valley. The official celebration, which would last for five-and-a-half months, was commenced on May 1 with a special meeting in the Tabernacle, the lighting of the Brigham Young Monument, and the hoisting of a flag atop Ensign Peak north of downtown Salt Lake City. As a member of the Twelve, Elder Lee was an interested participant in these events. Earlier, on March 8, he had participated in another event, which, though not part of the formal celebration, had symbolic relevance to the centennial. On that day, Elder Lee travelled to Fillmore, Utah, where he addressed a joint session of the Utah legislature that had convened in the old State House, which was used during the time Fillmore was Utah's capital. Elder Lee was selected to represent the Church on this occasion because of his interest in politics, his previous involvement in Salt Lake City government, and because of the repeated efforts of Utah politicians to get him to run for governor or the United States Senate. Elder Lee routinely referred to the First Presidency any delegation that sought to persuade him to run for political office. He enjoyed political activity, but his Church responsibilities took precedence over all else and would continue to do so unless his leaders decreed otherwise.

The day after Elder Lee returned from Fillmore, his entire family gathered for dinner, an event which now occurred only infrequently. "The opportunities now to visit with our family are rare, and we appreciated this day very much," Elder Lee wrote on this occasion. These family gatherings would soon include Ernest Wilkins who was then dating Maurine regularly. Later in the month while Elder Lee was attending the conference in the Palmyra Stake, he saw them together and noted that his daughter "seemed very happy in the company of Ernest Wilkins." And during the April general conference, which followed soon after, that relationship assumed new dimensions when Maurine's suitor was invited to stay at the Lee home.

This was a busy time for Elder Lee, not only because of the pressures attending his preparation to speak at the conference and to accommodate the numerous requests for interviews by conference visitors, but because of a special assignment he received from President Clark. This was to visit Henry D. Moyle at his home, who had been called to the Twelve, to counsel him about his response. It was suggested that Elder Moyle not attempt to deliver a sermon, but that he merely bear his testimony. While at the Moyle home, Elder Lee responded to his friend's request to kneel in prayer with the family. A few days after the general conference, Elder Lee, accompanied by Henry D. Moyle, presided at the conference of the Cottonwood Stake, where Elder Moyle had served as stake president. It was Brother Moyle's first stake conference in his new role as a General Authority. He had been assigned to accompany Elder Lee, both for training in his new duties and to allow his many friends to congratulate him personally on his call. After watching the outpouring of love and friendship toward his colleague, Elder Lee noted in his diary: "Henry very much enjoyed the reunion with the saints over (whom) he formerly presided."

The April general conference where Elder Moyle was sustained as a member of the Twelve also saw other important changes in the general leadership of the Church. Because of the death of Marvin O. Ashton, first counselor in the Presiding Bishopric, the previous October, Joseph L. Wirthlin, former second counselor, was sustained in his place and Thorpe B. Isaacson was approved as the new second counselor. Also, due to the release for illness of Joseph F. Smith, Patriarch to the Church, the previous October, Eldred G. Smith was sustained to replace him. Both of these Patriarchs were direct descendants of Hyrum Smith, although Brother Eldred Smith descended through John Smith, Hyrum's oldest son, while Joseph F. descended through his grandfather, President Joseph F. Smith, who was Hyrum's son by his second wife, Mary Fielding. Elder Lee reported on April 3, the day the Brethren approved Eldred G. Smith as the Patriarch, that although he descended through John Smith's line, it was the understanding that the Patriarch to the Church could come from any of the direct descendants of Hyrum Smith. A week later, Elder Lee reported this was confirmed by George Richards who advised Eldred G. Smith "that the First Presidency and the Twelve had decided that any direct descendant of Hyrum would qualify."

The changes made at this conference, viewed in retrospect, reveal again the shifting patterns of Church leadership. In twelve years, Henry D. Moyle, six years junior to Harold B. Lee in apostolic seniority, would be elevated to the First Presidency where he would exercise presiding authority over his friend; and eighteen years later, Thorpe B. Isaacson would be elevated to the First Presidency, with similar presiding authority over Elder Lee, even though he was never ordained to the apostleship. Judging from his diary entries, these shifts were a matter of indifference to Elder Lee. Position meant little to him. Performance meant everything. Tutored by his mentor, President J. Reuben Clark, he believed the how not the where of service was all important.

Two events that occurred shortly after the April general conference effected important changes in the Lee family. One of these, Maurine's marriage, has already been mentioned. The other was the death of Elder Lee's father, who passed away on May 9, 1947. Samuel Lee, who had been ailing for some time, became worse in early May. Concerned about his father's condition, Harold spent long hours with him; and on the night of the seventh, was at his bedside until 3:00 A.M. The next day, aware that the end was near, Elder Lee made arrangements to be excused from a stake conference in Palo Alto, California. Later that evening, the son, accompanied by President J. Reuben Clark, administered to the father. Since it was apparent the illness was terminal, the blessing was one of comfort, not healing. The father passed away quietly the next morning, May 9.

Harold B. Lee loved his father fervently. That love was demonstrated by the way he lived and by the treatment accorded to his parents. The son could never forget how they had sacrificed to raise a large family under stressful economic conditions and how they had scrimped to keep him in the mission field. In turn, the parents idolized the son who had more than achieved the "big things" they anticipated for him when he entered the mission field. It is undoubtedly true that Samuel Marion Lee, Jr., the child of promise, died a happy man, surrounded by a loving family, one member of whom had already been elevated to a place of high honor and who, potentially, might become God's earthly mouthpiece.

The funeral was held on Monday, May 12, in the North Twentieth Ward chapel, located at Second Avenue and G Street in Salt Lake City. (The funeral of the father's last surviving child, Verda Lee Ross, was held in the same chapel on August 29, 1991.) Relatives and friends flocked in from Panaca and Clifton to attend the services. The speakers were President J. Reuben Clark, who regularly attended worship services in this building, and Harold H. Bennett, the president of ZCMI, where Samuel had worked for so many years and where Verda would work for so many years in the future.

The father's death came in the midst of the preparations for Maurine's wedding. Three days later, arrangements were made to have the wedding announcements printed; and there were in progress numerous preparations at the house, with various painting, decorating, pruning, and planting projects going on. Meanwhile, Elder Lee had to float a temporary loan to pay for all this. And amidst these exertions, he continued to fulfill his weekend assignments with stake conferences at Morgan, Utah; Manassa, Colorado; and Davis County, north of Salt Lake City.

The havoc wrought by the weather at Maurine's reception has already been noted. Elder Lee found soon afterward that this was part of a blustery, long-term meteorological system that had settled over most of the intermountain area. Three days after the reception, he left for a three-week tour of the Western States Mission, during which he was intermittently troubled by heavy winds and rain, presumably part of this weather pattern. He travelled to Denver, Colorado, by train on June 14, where he was met by Mission President Francis A. Child. They left immediately by automobile for southwestern New Mexico, holding meetings along the way. The following day found them in Bluewater, New Mexico, in the northwest part of the state, four hundred miles from Denver. There the little branch was "rejoicing" over a new Hammond organ it had acquired, which was played "proudly" at the meeting the visitors held. Later that evening, they travelled to nearby Gallup, where another meeting was held. Here there were some nonmembers present who were accompanied by the missionaries working in the area.

In this place, where the travellers spent the night, they were figuratively ringed by Indian reservations: the Navajo, the Hopi, and the Zuni reservations being nearby. The long trip the following day would take them near the Apache Indian Reservation. This day's trip, covering another 350 miles, would also take them through the bleak Petrified Forest and through the verdant and stunningly beautiful Gila National Forest in eastern Arizona. This route through the Gila, over a twisting, turning road, which was then unsurfaced, is called the Coronado Trail and generally follows the route of the Spanish explorer and conquistador. After making this trip, Elder Lee, while acknowledging the magnificence of the scenery, admitted that it "was very tiring." Despite their weariness, the travellers held a good meeting that night in Silver City, New Mexico, where there were ninety in attendance. The next night at Alamogordo, the site where the atomic bomb was tested, the Brethren encountered heavy winds that knocked out the electricity so that the last fifteen minutes of Elder Lee's talk was delivered in the dark. The next day found the tourists at Carlsbad, New Mexico, where, after visiting the spectacular caverns, they held a meeting in a schoolhouse where seventy-five were present. The next day, June 19, they travelled 505 miles to La Junta, Colorado, in a steady rain that assumed cloudburst proportions at Las Vegas, New Mexico. Notwithstanding the long distance travelled this day, the Brethren paused long enough at Las Vegas to hold a meeting. And before leaving La Junta the morning of the twentieth for Denver, the Brethren held a three-and-a-half-hour meeting with the missionaries, which included the usual instruction period followed by a period of testimony bearing.

Marking the halfway point of the tour, Elder Lee spent the morning of the twenty-first examining the mission records in the Denver office before driving to Grand Island, Nebraska, with the mission president. "The storm constantly with us," he reported. At Omaha the next day, the travellers held a "delightful" instruction and testimony meeting with thirty-five missionaries. But an open-air meeting scheduled that evening at the old Winter Quarters Cemetery was "washed out" because of torrential rain. The trip to North Platte the next day was made in rain so heavy that at one point water a foot deep covered the highway where stakes had been set alongside the roadbed to guide the motorists.

At North Platte, Elder Lee reported "one of the rarest stories of courage" he had ever heard. It related to a girl who had dwarfism, Mary Lou Danks. She played piano accompaniment for the singing. Despite her handicap, this girl was valedictorian of her high school graduating class, planned to go on to the university, and was popular with her classmates. Elder Lee, being a professional teacher, was impressed with the way in which the girl's mother had trained her to be optimistic and outgoing despite her handicap.

From North Platte, the tourists veered northward into the Dakotas, visiting Mt. Rushmore in the Black Hills and holding meetings at Belle Fourche, South Dakota, and at other towns along the way. Then bending westward, they went into Wyoming, where meetings were held at Casper and Sheridan. Apparently reminded of the recent death of his father, Elder Lee spoke there about heritage and about the blessing of being well born. Turning southward, the Brethren reentered Colorado via Rawlings, Wyoming, where meetings were held at Craig, Baggs, Rifle, Grand Junction, Salida, and Colorado Springs. "Although very weary and hungry," he wrote of the meeting in Colorado Springs on July 1, "the Spirit of the Lord picked us up and I felt the greatest freedom I have had yet on this tour in sharing the value of testimony and how, through faith, the work of the Lord has progressed." Back in Denver the next day, Elder Lee met with his old friend and counselor Charles Hyde, who was conducting an audit of the mission records, was taken on a tour of the new Crestmoor residential district of the city, and in the afternoon, met with the twenty missionaries laboring in Denver, including the office staff. Here, and at the last meeting of the tour held at Ft. Lupton the next day, the apostle gave instructions to help the missionaries in working with students at the University of Colorado in nearby Boulder and about relationships with administrative officers of the mission.

In appraising the status of the Western States Mission during this tour, compared with its condition twenty-five years earlier when he was a young missionary, Elder Lee was impressed with the progress that had been made. In the Denver area, where earlier there was but a single branch, he now found a thriving stake that had been organized in 1940. While this was the only stake in the vast area covered by the mission, except for the Lyman Stake in the Star Valley of Wyoming, settled very early by the Latter-day Saints, there were strong branches that would be the nucleus for many other stakes in the future.

Elder Lee returned home in time to celebrate the Fourth of July with his family. "I cooked hamburgers for the crowd out in the back yard," he reported, a service he had rendered for many years and at which he had become very adept. That afternoon he and Brent—who was a frequent companion of his at sporting events—went to the Forest Dale Tennis Club to watch the finals of the National Tennis Championship between Frankie Parker and Ted Schroeder. This was but one of several special athletic events that had been scheduled in Utah this year as part of the state's centennial celebration. Later in the summer, for instance, the National Track-and-Field Championships were held in the University of Utah stadium, which attracted most of the top track-and-field athletes.

Another centennial event was a banquet for most of the governors of the United States held in the Hotel Utah on July 14, where Elder Lee offered the invocation and blessing on the food. Three days later, the Lees personally entered into the spirit of the centennial by hosting a party at home for their study group, where the guests came attired in pioneer garb and were served a traditional pioneer dinner. Two days later found the Lees at a Tanner family reunion held in the Jordan Park, where Elder Lee again presided at the hamburger grill. "Repeated a similar service in our back yard," he reported on that date, "for Irene Hales and Sheila Woodland and forty invited guests who had a dancing party on our patio."

On Monday, July 21, Elder and Sister Lee participated in one of the most novel events of the centennial celebration when they drove to Fort Bridger, Wyoming, where they joined a "Modern Pioneer Encampment," which consisted of 148 persons travelling in seventy-two automobiles, simulating the westward trek of Brigham Young's pioneer company of 1847. They then accompanied the caravan to the Pioneer Park in Salt Lake City, where a program was presented that featured talks by Elder Lee, Elder Spencer W. Kimball, and President David O. McKay. The speakers traced the history of the Mormon Exodus and the founding of the Church in the Salt Lake Valley. The event was specially significant to Elder Lee due to his earlier role in Salt Lake City government and because the park lay within the boundaries of the Pioneer Stake where he had presided.

On Thursday, July 24, 1947, Elder Lee joined other leaders at the mouth of Emigration Canyon for the dedication of the new "This Is the Place" monument. Assembled, in addition to high Mormon leaders, were the governor and the mayor and representatives of the Catholic, Protestant, and Jewish clergy. Thousands of spectators had also gathered under a hot, summer sun, amidst the dust and the scruffy vegetation surrounding the monument. For weeks before the twenty-fourth, seeds had been strewn around the base of the monument each morning at the hour of the dedication, so that at the moment the monument was unveiled, the air was filled with seagulls who had come for breakfast.

The next day, the traditional Pioneer Parade was staged. It featured dozens of theme floats, bands, and marching and horseback units. "It was the most artistic and finished of any in the history of Salt Lake," wrote Elder Lee. "Everyone seemed to be thrilled with the result." He was equally enthusiastic about the play "Promised Valley," which he and Fern saw a few days later at the University of Utah stadium. This production was written and composed by Arnold Sundgaard and Crawford Gates especially for the centennial celebration.

Later in the summer, the Lees enjoyed a break in their schedule with two brief outings. The first was an overnight stay at the Judd cabin in Brighton, where the Lees, their daughters, and sons-in-law enjoyed games, good food, and unlimited conversation, the most enjoyable activity of all. The second was an outing at the Thousand Peak Ranch on the upper Weber River. Here for four days, the Lees "enjoyed to the full (a) complete rest." One day they rode to the top of the mountain on horseback, from where they had a spectacular view of the rugged, verdant terrain spread below, through which the river, looking now like a silver thread, gushed and gurgled its way toward the distant lake. On Sunday, thirty-seven neighbors from up and down the river gathered in the Lee cabin for a worship service. Here the apostle, dressed in leisure clothes, joined the others in partaking of the sacrament and in sharing testimony in a relaxed, rustic setting. Unlike gatherings in a chapel, Elder Lee did not feel like he was "on stage" here, so that the meeting was characterized by a restful, slow-paced informality that had a soothing, calming effect upon him.

Refreshed by this brief interlude, the Lees returned home, ready to resume the hectic tempo of their lives. Soon afterward, Elder Lee presided at conferences in the Ogden and Box Elder Stakes, the latter entailing a reorganization of the stake presidency. These were always time-consuming and sometimes stressful affairs as the qualifications of the various candidates were carefully weighed and analyzed. It was a matter of great consequence to select a man who would have the responsibility for the spiritual and temporal welfare of several thousand Latter-day Saints. Therefore, it was not something that could be decided in an offhand manner but required the most diligent and concentrated effort of which he was capable. Once the critical decision about the identity of the new stake president had been made, there followed the meeting where the president and the new slate of officers were presented, which necessarily included instruction and sermonizing from the presiding officer, all to be followed by the setting apart of the numerous officers sustained by the conference. Elder Lee never completed one of these weekends but that he felt emotionally drained from the tensions to which it subjected him.

In late August, Elder Lee attended funeral services for the wife of Elder Clifford E. Young, Edith Grant Young, who was one of the daughters of President Heber J. Grant. Elder Lee and Elder Young had been sustained as General Authorities on the same day, six years before, which had created a special bond between them, notwithstanding a significant difference in their ages. Actually, that bond had been forged first some time before when Elder Young was a stake president and banker in American Fork, Utah, and Elder Lee was the managing director of Church welfare. Due to that relationship, Elder Lee was anxious to mourn with his friend and was asked to dedicate Sister Young's grave.

Through this summer, following their June marriage, Maurine and her husband had lived with the Lees in their spacious home to save money for Ernie's education. He had been accepted in a doctoral program at Stanford University in California. The newlyweds left Salt Lake City early Thursday morning, September 5, for Palo Alto where they would live. With them was family friend Mabel Hickman, Elder Lee's first convert, who owned a home there. The same day, the apostle left by train for San Francisco, where he had a series of welfare and servicemen's meetings scheduled. He learned later that the brakes had failed on Ernie's car at Battle Mountain, Nevada, where he had remained while Maurine and Mabel went on by bus. After his meetings in the city, Elder Lee drove to Palo Alto to spend the weekend with the Wilkinses. He inspected the home where they were to live at 1680 College Avenue and attended a meeting in the Palo Alto Ward, where he found a large group of "married couples with whom Ernie and Maurine should be happily associated." The next day was special and would always stand out in memory. "I had a delightful day with my wonderful little girl," the proud father wrote of it. "Together we went to her new home to water the lawns and then for a walk through the Stanford University Campus where we had a lovely lunch at the University Cafeteria." Ernie arrived that evening after a twelve-hour drive from Battle Mountain, and the next morning, at 4:00 A.M., moved their belongings into the new home. While things were being straightened around, "Fern called to announce the birth of a baby to our Helen." That evening, Elder Lee and the Wilkinses" ate dinner in honor of my new grandson."

The Wilkinses' move to Palo Alto created a magnet that repeatedly drew the Lees to the Bay Area during the next three years while Ernie was working on his Ph.D. Whenever Elder Lee had an assignment in the general area of Palo Alto, he would arrange to spend an extra day or two there visiting his "little family." These visits became more frequent and urgent after the Wilkinses' first child, Alan, was born. The doting grandfather, as he did with all his grandchildren, showered Alan with all manner of gifts and gewgaws for the child's entertainment. And whenever Grandpa was near, he usually usurped the privilege of holding and cuddling the baby. In this, Elder Lee revealed the deeply tender and loving quality in his makeup that instinctively attracted people to him and caused them to feel a special relationship with him. Typical of the unnumbered people who, attracted by this quality, felt a special rapport with Elder Lee is Russell Holt, who has prepared a film documentary of the apostle, but who "knew" him only from a passing handshake following a Church meeting where the apostle had spoken many years before. Such was the impact created by that chance encounter that the filmmaker was impelled to make the documentary after Elder Lee's death in celebration of the mysterious bond of love that bound them together.

Elder Lee's frequent visits to Palo Alto did more than to cement family relationships. Here he frequently met and counselled with local leaders, and out of these contacts came future associations in Church leadership. Here, among others, he met Stake President Claude Petersen, who would later become the secretary to the Council of the Twelve Apostles; Bishop Richard B. Sonne, who would later become the president of the Oakland Temple; and David B. Haight, a fellow Idahoan and alumnus of Albion College, who would later become a stake president, mission president, Assistant to the Twelve, and a member of the Twelve. Moreover, during these visits, the apostle exerted a lasting influence upon a wide circle of friends of Maurine and Ernie who were occasional guests in the Wilkins home during Elder Lee's stays there. Informal gatherings in the home, sitting in a circle with the apostle, who freely shared his testimony and gospel scholarship, provided a rare opportunity for young Stanford students and their spouses to gain special insights into the Church, its inner workings, and into the character and spiritual depth of the man who would later become the president of the Church. Among the Stanford students so affected were Lee Valentine, a future mission president in South America; Mitchell Hunt, who would later become a prominent California real-estate developer and also a key player in a vast Church cattle-feeding operation in the southern United States; Terry Hansen, a future mission president in Guatemala and a future director of the missionary training center at BYU, a position son-in-law Ernest Wilkins would also occupy; and the author.

Ernest Wilkins, unlike Brent Goates, had come lately on the scene. An Arizonan, he was unknown to the Lees until only a short while before he and Maurine were married. Brent, on the other hand, a native of Salt Lake, had been well known to the Lee family for some time before his marriage to Helen. Indeed, George R. Hill of the Seventy, once a bishop of Elder Lee's ward, was told by the apostle that he had "chosen" Brent as his son-in-law. In not too long a time after his marriage to Maurine, Ernie Wilkins, the newcomer, also earned a special place in the hearts of his wife's parents. Elder Lee was impressed by the desire of his newest son-in-law for higher education and by his energetic efforts to finance it. Elder Lee was pleased, if not somewhat surprised, that the day after his arrival in Palo Alto found Ernie applying for a part-time position to teach foreign languages at a boys school in nearby Menlo Park. And as the apostle had more opportunity to observe this young man, to visit with him, and to gauge the quality of his mind and the depth of his spirituality, he soon came to love him as a son as he had loved Brent Goates from the beginning. So, in early November 1947, during a short stay in Palo Alto, Elder Lee noted that Ernie Wilkins was "growing in my affection." The next several days revealed a close father-son relationship between them when Ernie took Brother Lee to the Stanford campus to hear a lecture by the noted educator Robert M. Hutchins and later chauffeured him to Berkeley, where Elder Lee presided at a stake conference. An entry made later in the month while the Wilkinses were in Salt Lake City for Thanksgiving clearly demonstrated that Ernest J. Wilkins had been accepted into the heart of the Lee family with unqualified enthusiasm. "We enjoyed with righteous pride our family," wrote Elder Lee on November 28, "and we find ourselves wholly satisfied with our two sons as we have always been with our girls." Another evidence of the bonding that had taken place between Elder Lee and his two "sons" is that the three of them went together to see the Thanksgiving Day football game between the University of Utah and Utah State.

The October general conference was, in reality, the concluding event of the Church's centennial celebration. The pioneer theme was interwoven throughout many of the talks delivered by the Brethren. One of these, in particular, prompted special comments from Elder Lee. "The conference was climaxed by the closing address of President Clark," he wrote, "paying tribute to the unsung heroes of the pioneers who, as he styled it, were in the last wagon." In his analysis of the talk, which he apparently had discussed with the speaker, Elder Lee had this to say: "It was a protest to the church aristocracy that some name families in the church have seemed to feel." This reflected a concern of Elder Lee, which was shared by President Clark, that the descendants of some of the early Mormon leaders might succumb to the folly of the Jews at the time of Christ who asserted superiority over others merely because they were descendants of Abraham.

It was during the centennial year that the first faltering steps were taken toward the correlation of priesthood and auxiliary functions in the Church. At this early period, Elder Lee's role was a subordinate one. He had been appointed to serve on a committee of the Twelve assigned to study and to make recommendations about the problem. It was a committee of three, chaired by Elder Stephen L. Richards, with Elder Albert E. Bowen as the other member. The committee had begun its work in the forepart of the centennial year and by late summer had prepared a report of its findings and recommendations. The findings focused on the way in which the auxiliaries had become so powerful as almost to be separate, independent entities, functioning alone without reference to the priesthood or to each other. Each of them prepared, approved, and published its own instructional materials. All of them had their own budgets, which fostered the image of separate autonomy. All of them had large general boards, comprised of some of the most able and creative leaders in the Church. And members of these boards travelled extensively throughout the Church, holding separate training sessions with local auxiliary leaders. Usually, these training sessions were held independent of any input from or involvement of the local priesthood leaders. Moreover, the status and image of the auxiliaries had been greatly enhanced over the years because, with the exception of the Young Women organization, they had been directly presided over by members of the Twelve or by the president of the Church. The basic recommendations of the committee were to bring all the auxiliaries at Church headquarters under the umbrella of priesthood control and direction and in the field to give local priesthood leaders greater authority and responsibility for auxiliary activities and the training of auxiliary leaders. The inevitable effect of adopting the committee's recommendations would have been, of course, to greatly diminish the authority and status of the general auxiliary executives and their boards. Given this reality, we can assume that the committee moved with caution, and not a little trepidation, as they sought to introduce proposals of such revolutionary impact. Elder Lee noted that the committee first surfaced its report "on a simplification of our present priesthood—auxiliary programs" at a temple meeting on September 11, 1947. At that time it was decided only that the Brethren would study the report looking toward a future discussion of it. Eleven days later the committee met to compare notes about the reaction they had received to their report. The results were not promising. "It seems doubtful the time is here," noted Elder Lee, "for much modification in our present programs because of sentimental objections." Notwithstanding this unpromising appraisal, the committee pressed forward with its study. Four days later they decided to "ask permission to get with the executives of the general boards of Sunday School and MIA to consider methods of simplifying the present overburdened and overlapping priesthood and auxiliary programs." At the quarterly meeting of the Twelve held on October 1, Elder Lee reported that "the chief topic of discussion was our proposed simplification program, emphasizing greater priesthood responsibility." Encouraged by the positive reaction of the Twelve, the members of the committee decided to seek an audience with the First Presidency in order to present it to them. The request was granted and on December 8, 1947, Elders Stephen L. Richards and Harold B. Lee met with the First Presidency for this purpose, Elder Albert E. Bowen not being available. The Brethren learned later that Presidents J. Reuben Clark and David O. McKay thought they were "headed in the right direction." That view, however, was not shared by the one whose opinion counted most, President George Albert Smith, who emerged as the one who entertained the "sentimental objections" Elder Lee had previously referred to. Three days after their meeting with the First Presidency, Elder Richards confided to Elder Lee his feeling that their proposals for simplification had little chance for acceptance at the moment "because of the opposition of President George Albert Smith."

The reasons for the opposition of the prophet are apparent. For many years he had been the president of the Young Men organization of the Church. In that capacity, he had also exerted a strong influence over the Young Women organization through a system of regular meetings and interchanges between the two organizations. As the Young Men president, President Smith had organized and directed an unusual group of leaders whose talent and energy had created an extraordinary program of activities and instruction for the youth of the Church. The dance, the drama, and a host of athletic events and competitions had flourished under their direction. Moreover, a strong esprit de corps had developed throughout the Church among the youth and their leaders, which, it was feared, might be lost were the MIA to lose its autonomous status and to be placed under the more direct and controlling priesthood leadership. During the remainder of his life, President George Albert Smith never changed his views on the subject. And once the Brethren learned about his fixed attitude toward it, they never raised the issue with him again.
