Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Seventeen

A Peaceful Interlude

Despite the customary stresses and strains, the years 1948 to 1950 marked a period of relative peace and prosperity for Elder Lee, his family, and the Church. It witnessed the addition of three new Lee grandchildren, two in the Wilkins family, Alan and Larry, and one in the Goates family, Harold Lee Goates. Prior to the birth of Alan Wilkins, Maurine's first child, prenatal complications of the mother created concern in the family. Elder Lee responded to the uncertainty in a typical way. He had returned from St. George, Utah, "very much worn out with the strain of the conference and long drive," when, on March 22, 1948, he had a special fast for Maurine and "went to the temple where [he] had a prayer for her." The following night brought the heartening news that she had given birth naturally to a healthy seven-pound, twelve-ounce boy. "I had little sleep afterwards," the proud and grateful grandfather wrote later.

Fern had gone to Palo Alto earlier to be with Maurine at the time of the birth, and Elder Lee urgently sought an opportunity to join her there. He found it on April 19, when, following a series of welfare meetings at Stockton, California, and prior to a stake conference there, he drove to Palo Alto to see the newest addition to his "little family." Because of the crowded conditions in the Wilkinses' small home, Elder and Sister Lee spent their nights in the President Hotel in Palo Alto. He returned to Stockton, where he and Elder Albert E. Bowen installed Wendell B. Mendenhall as the new stake president. In the future, Elder Lee would have a close association with President Mendenhall over a period of many years, after the latter's appointment to head the Church building committee. Following the stake conference, Elder Lee returned to Palo Alto for another short visit with the Wilkinses and especially with the new baby. "Our train left (from San Francisco) at 7:00 P.M.," Elder Lee wrote the next day, "and we were left with the beautiful picture of our little family as they left to return to Palo Alto."

The long train ride home was the first time Elder Lee had been able to truly relax for a month. After learning about Alan's birth the night of March 23, he began preparing for the general conference, which was only nine days away. "Spent several hours through last night," he wrote the morning of March 24, "in some profitable study of the scriptures in contemplation of what the spirit might direct me to say at the coming general conference." Soon after, he had to leave for a series of meetings in Logan, Utah, and Pocatello, Idaho. At Logan on the twenty-sixth, following meetings in the Logan Fourth Ward, he was up until midnight, visiting in the home of Theodore M. Burton with members of the bishopric and the stake presidency and their wives. He left early the next morning for Pocatello, where, over the weekend, he held a series of meetings in connection with their stake conference. The normal tensions of a conference were heightened when Elder Lee found it necessary to publicly correct one of the speakers who had implied the stake would be unfairly deprived unless it received a new building. He was concerned lest what he had said might cause offense. Yet, he could not let the remarks go unanswered as his silence could have been misinterpreted as agreement with what was said. It was hardly a satisfying experience.

Back in Salt Lake City, Elder Lee immediately became involved in the events connected with the April general conference. An inspiring meeting with the mission presidents somewhat mitigated his unpleasant experience in Pocatello. "It was the most spiritual meeting with mission presidents I have yet attended," he wrote. "Some of the most remarkable testimonies of the power of healing given to the elders were related by the presidents." At the Primary conference on April 2, Elder Lee spoke on "Spiritual Guidance the Year Round," and two days later, he addressed a general session of the conference on the subject of "The Gathering of Israel." He was buoyed up in delivering this address by a telephone call he received the night before. "Fern called last night from Palo Alto," wrote he, "to tell me of her love and her faith in my behalf tomorrow as I am called upon to speak." The impact of the love and faith of Fern Lee upon her husband cannot be measured. It is clear, however, they were vital to him and accounted, in large part, for the success and spiritual stature he attained.

After the conference, which included a special meeting where the General Authorities administered the sacrament, the apostle attended a Lee family reunion, where he agreed to be the president of the organization "until I can get it going." Meanwhile, on the two weekends following the the general conference, he attended conferences in the Kolob and Huntington Park stakes. In his "spare time" between these conferences, he did the spring house-cleaning. "Worked far into the night to get our house cleaning done before I leave for California." His tight schedule at the Huntington Park stake conference the following weekend was typical. On Sunday, in addition to two general sessions, he instructed the high council, spoke at a fireside, performed many ordinations and settings apart, and interviewed several prospective missionaries. "I was going until 10:30 P.M.," he wrote, "with hardly time for a sandwich." He was then "taken to a down town hotel to sleep." This preceded the midweek welfare meetings and the stake conference in Stockton, already mentioned, between which, as noted, he travelled to and from Palo Alto, and then after the conference ended, he travelled back there again.

Thus, Elder Lee enjoyed the leisurely train ride from San Francisco to Salt Lake City, when he alternately rested, visited with Fern, studied, or contemplated past or future events. While sometimes there was a tedium in train travel, which was eliminated in later years when air travel became the norm, Elder Lee sometimes missed the leisurely hours aboard a train of the kind he enjoyed while returning to Salt Lake City on this occasion.

At home, Elder Lee had a brief respite before beginning another marathon of meetings. The month of May found him successively in Logan, Utah; St. David, Arizona; and Sacramento, California, on stake conference assignments. In between, he comforted and blessed his colleague, Spencer W. Kimball, who had recently suffered two separate heart attacks. These were part of a whole compendium of ailments that afflicted Elder Kimball over the years, ailments that nearly everyone thought would cut short his ministry. No one, it seems, believed Elder Kimball, who was four years older than he, could conceivably outlive Harold B. Lee, who seemed so strong and robust. Elder Lee blessed his friend Friday night, May 28, 1948; and the next morning, he and Fern left for the East where they were to conduct a three-week tour of the New England States Mission. Elder S. Dilworth Young of the First Council of the Seventy was the mission president. En route to the mission field, the Lees stopped in New York City, where their good friends Gordon Affleck and his wife hosted them at a dinner and a Broadway show. Gordon Affleck, who was a member of a prestigious Wall Street law firm, would later move back to Salt Lake City, where he would become a close confidant and advisor to Elder Lee during the years he served in the First Presidency.

The tour commenced with a missionary meeting in Bridgeport, Connecticut, on the first of June. Here Elder Lee was in his element, counselling, instructing, and motivating young missionaries, some of whom would have been previously exposed to him at one of his question-and-answer sessions in the Salt Lake Temple, during their training in the mission home. Whenever it was feasible to do so, Elder Lee used the Socratic method of instruction, responding to the questions and concerns of his audience. In this way, he was able to get at the heart of the challenges facing his listeners and to help them to confront and to overcome them.

A chief challenge some of these missionaries faced was working in nearby New Haven, the home of Yale University. Some felt that those who worked in an intellectual community such as this ought to alter their proselyting methods. Elder Lee disagreed. He taught that conversion comes through the Spirit and that missionaries should approach their contacts at that level. At the same time, he urged that those who worked among people of high intellect and training should be sure of their facts and the doctrine but should not aim merely at intellectual assent. Spiritual conversion was the goal. Yet, he realized that not all converts would receive a spiritual witness by the Holy Ghost. As to these, he counselled a patient acceptance of a secondary testimony, based on the witness of others, confidently awaiting the time when the primary testimony, imparted by the Holy Ghost, would come. Elder Lee's usual admonition to young friends was that if they had not yet received a primary testimony, through the Spirit, that they "use" his for a while. Still, he was quick to acknowledge that either kind of testimony was valid. (See D&C 46:11-14.)

Following the meeting in Bridgeport, the touring party went to nearby New Haven to visit the Yale University campus, founded almost two hundred and fifty years before. Of special interest was the main library, with its hushed atmosphere, and the Jonathon Edwards College Yard, over whose rooftops could be seen the imposing Harkness Memorial Tower. Elder Lee's academic background, his intimate connection with the Brigham Young University as a member of its Board of Trustees, and his son-in-law's current attendance at Stanford University lent special significance to this visit, as they did to his later visit to the campus of Harvard University at Cambridge, Massachusetts.

This mission tour was the first time Elder and Sister Lee had been exposed to the rich heritage of the New England states. Knowing this, Elder Young had included in the tour visits to places of historic interest, places whose names evoke memories of the dawn of American independence, places like Lexington, Concord, Faneuil Hall, the Old North Church, and Bunker Hill. While in the Boston area, the party also visited the homes of some of the pillars of early New England society, including those of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Nathaniel Hawthorne, and Ralph Waldo Emerson. All these things, and many others that they saw, were brought into clearer focus when they spent several hours examining the displays in the Harvard Museum. While in Cambridge, Elder Lee and his party were also the guests of George Albert Smith, Jr., the prophet's son, who was a well-respected professor at Harvard's school of business administration.

Leaving the Boston area, the party visited Plymouth Rock, which commemorates the landing of the Pilgrim Fathers, and Gloucester Rock, reputed to be the place where the Massachusetts Bay Colony landed. There followed a visit to Salem, Massachusetts, the Atlantic seaport that loomed large in America's early maritime trade when her wharves burgeoned with commodities from around the world, but which is chiefly remembered in the American psyche as the site of the infamous witch trials.

Leaving Massachusetts, the party travelled into Vermont, where the apostle was intrigued to visit Sharon, Windsor County, where the Prophet Joseph Smith was born. In the cottage near the granite shaft that commemorates the Prophet's birth and death, Elder Lee and his party held a three-hour meeting, attended by the missionaries working in the area and by some of the local leaders and members. Elder Lee capped the meeting with a fervent testimony about the divine calling of Joseph Smith, about the global destiny of the Church, and about the key role and responsibility of missionaries in its fulfillment.

Lest this recital of the historic places visited be misunderstood, it should be emphasized that all along the way, meetings were held intermittently with missionaries, where Elder Lee received reports about their work and where he gave instruction about improving the quality of it. Special emphasis was given to the discipline, the worthiness, and the spirituality of the missionaries. Elder Lee learned that the most success was being had by the missionaries who worked in rural areas without purse or scrip. Aside from the conversions this work produced, it also brought a commendable sense of humility and dedication to those who engaged in it. Still, Elder Lee and his brethren had reservations about this kind of proselyting, although they did not take steps to curtail or to discontinue it. The drawback was that these converts, living as they did in isolated areas, lacked the opportunity to associate with other Latter-day Saints in the full program of the Church. This increased the risk that, left alone, they would drift into spiritual inertia, lacking the drive toward personal development fostered by this type of situation. On this account, Elder Lee and his associates would later discourage this kind of proselyting, opting instead for growth from centers of strength. This strategy depends for its success upon the active involvement of Church members in the conversion process through the neighborly nurturing of potential investigators. Obviously, this strategy fails when neighbors live miles apart. The result was to focus on urban instead of rural proselyting.

From Vermont, the party travelled to Maine, where missionary and member meetings were held in Bangor. Here Elder Lee found missionaries who functioned as he had done in Denver a quarter of a century before, having responsibility for both proselyting and directing the local branch.

Crossing the border, they travelled into Canada, where they spent nine days, repeating the procedures followed in New England. Here, in turn, they visited St. Johns, Halifax, and the French Provinces of Acadia, which provided the setting for Longfellow's "Evangeline." At Sydney, on the Island of Cape Breton, they inspected the crumbling fortifications that had survived the French and Indian Wars, then visited Emma Marr Petersen's aunt, Sister Ferguson. This doughty lady, whose sister, Emma Marr Petersen's mother, was once reported by a deacon in the Salt Lake First Ward to be his "bishop," had earlier fought the missionaries for having converted her sister, Mrs. McDonald, causing her to move to Salt Lake City. Later, after her own conversion, Sister Ferguson became the most avid champion of the missionaries, defending them vigorously against criticism, and providing them unstintingly with food, shelter, and motherly encouragement.

Elder Lee was struck by the almost ethereal quality of Prince Edward Island, "The Beautiful Garden Island," and the rural charm of the area around Borden prompted this poetic comment: "We saw the most picturesque farm country, with lakes which mirrored the red soil, the green foliage, and the light blue sky." Returning to the United States, the party held meetings at Portland, Maine, and concluded the tour with special meetings in Cambridge with the missionaries and with students who were attending Harvard.

Though it was inspiring and educational, the tour was exhausting. This, added to nervous tensions Elder Lee had suffered in March prior to the birth of Maurine's baby, pointed to the need for a break in his schedule. It came during the first part of July when he and Fern, accompanied by Helen, Brent, and grandson David, spent a relaxing week at the Thousand Peaks Ranch. Intermingling hikes with horseback riding, visiting, reading, snoozing, and leisurely study, the apostle was able to revive his energies for the full season ahead. Especially pleasing to Elder Lee were the carefree and spontaneous antics of his grandson. There was a special bond between him and the boy, both resembling each other so much in both appearance and temperament. And as David matured, the physical resemblance became almost startling. Not long after his birth, Elder Lee conferred the name "Skipper" on David, a pet name that mirrored the affection he had for him. The grandfather lavished gifts and special attention on David, as he did on the other grandchildren as they came along. So, a few days before the family went to the Thousand Peaks Ranch, Elder Lee drove out in the late evening "to cool baby David off so he could sleep."

Two weeks after returning from the ranch, Fern accompanied her husband to San Francisco, where he held a series of welfare meetings. They then stayed on in nearby Palo Alto for eleven days, helping the Wilkinses move into a larger home. "Cleaned the house on Waverly to be occupied by Maurine and Ernie," wrote Elder Lee on August 4. The next day, he "bought a crib for Alan," and the day after that found him "house cleaning." He was still at it three days later when he noted optimistically, "beginning to see the end." Later, his optimism dimmed. "There are some doubts," wrote he, "as to a satisfactory arrangement being worked out for our family this winter." But things looked up again two days later when the Lees returned home. They did so with the satisfying feeling that their "little family" would be comfortable and happy.

This typified the caring concern Elder and Sister Lee had for the families of their two daughters. Later when they moved into homes they had purchased, the parents not only provided menial help, as they had done in Palo Alto, but also helped in locating suitable homes and with some of the financial arrangements.

The weekend after returning from Palo Alto found Elder Lee in Green River, Wyoming, for a stake conference. Although he did not arrive home until 2:00 A.M. the Monday morning after the conference, he was at his desk a few hours later to handle matters that had accumulated during the previous week and to prepare for the schedule ahead. From August 18 to August 25, Elder Lee performed twenty-three marriages in the Salt Lake Temple and over the weekend, presided at a conference in the Sevier South Stake at Monroe, Utah, where he was joined by Elder Marion G. Romney.

Elder Lee and Fern left Salt Lake City on Wednesday, August 25, for Western Canada, where he had several assignments. The first was a stake conference in Lethbridge the following weekend. Here Elder Lee found many descendants of the old-line Mormon families who had come to Canada many decades before at the behest of the Church leaders. He felt a special kinship with these people who reminded him so much of the sturdy Latter-day Saints with whom he had grown up in Clifton. At conferences held in Calgary and Cardston on the two succeeding weekends, he found more of the same, people of faith and integrity who could be relied upon in any emergency.

A touch of early autumn lay upon the Canadian Rockies as the Lees took advantage of several free days between the Lethbridge and Calgary conferences to travel to Banff and Lake Louise. At the lake, one of the most picturesque settings in western Canada, they stayed at the large hotel, which commands a spectacular view of the lake and the towering peaks of the Rockies that surround it. As they walked along the footpath that borders the lake, Elder and Sister Lee enjoyed the nip in the air and the first showing of early fall colors. It was a delightful and restful interlude for them.

During the week between the Calgary and Cardston conferences, Elder Lee met President George Albert Smith at Lethbridge and accompanied him to Cardston. There he was pleased to assist the prophet in installing a new presidency of the Cardston Temple. Released was President E. S. Wood, a stalwart among the Mormon leaders in Canada, and a man of extraordinary spiritual sensitivity. He was replaced by Willard L. Smith, also a man of commanding stature. It was upon men such as these, whose counterparts could be found in Mormon communities reaching from the Canadian Rockies to Old Mexico, that the leaders in Salt Lake City relied for the effective administration of the Church.

During the weekend following the installation of the new temple presidency, Elder Lee was personally exposed to all of the key leaders in Cardston as he conducted the usual interviews in connection with the reorganization of the stake presidency, which took place on Sunday. After setting the new leaders apart and giving general instructions to them, he and Fern returned to Salt Lake City.

Not long after returning from Canada, Elder Lee received a telephone call from President Clark, who asked about the woman seen getting out of his car a short while before. It was a neighbor Elder Lee had seen waiting for the bus and to whom he had given a ride to work. "He warned me against giving a lone woman a ride," wrote Elder Lee. President Clark reinforced his counsel by suggesting the dilemma he would have faced had there been an accident, an investigation, and an official report stating Elder Harold B. Lee had had an automobile accident and that a woman not his wife was in the car alone with him. The counsel took. Afterward he refrained from giving lone women rides in his car. He also routinely followed the practice of leaving a crack in the door when a woman, other than a member of his family, was alone with him in the office. Sometimes, he would ask that a secretary join him inside the office if a lone woman were there with him. These precautions were a safeguard against any false accusations of improper conduct being made against him.

This incident typified the close relationship between Elder Lee and President Clark. The older man frequently imparted counsel on both official and personal matters, whether sought for or not. Periodically he briefed Elder Lee on policy matters outside the scope of his responsibility in the expectation the data would be helpful when he rose to "higher position." And, fatherlike, he gave unsolicited advice about personal matters, as when after the Lees sold their home on the west side President Clark admonished him not to live in an apartment but to buy another home. The mentor never gave reasons for this advice. That was irrelevant to Elder Lee, who never lived in an apartment, except for a short time between homes.

President Clark occasionally used Elder Lee to float ideas in committee meetings, which ideas he did not want to have seen as originating with him. We have already seen how he used this device in advancing the idea of acquiring an old warehouse where members who lived in overcrowded houses could store their year supply of food. In addition, he used him occasionally to pass on words of "counsel" to some of the Brethren, or to headquarters personnel, in cases where it was felt inappropriate for such to come directly from him.

Elder Lee never complained or balked whenever his mentor asked him to perform such a service. In fact, he seemed to regard it as an honor that the older man took him into his confidence and used him in this way. But, there was a fine line between this kind of a confidential, cooperative relationship and any action by the mentor that intruded on Elder Lee's sense of dignity or independence. President Clark's innate adroitness and diplomacy assured that this line would seldom be crossed and, if crossed, would not be done deliberately. An exception occurred in late November 1948, when President Clark criticized Elder Lee for having gone to the hospital to visit one of the Brethren. He asked whether Elder Lee didn't realize that people go to the hospital to recuperate and should not be intruded upon. The criticism did not set well with Elder Lee, especially because he had been asked to go there. Later in a meeting President Clark said something that Elder Lee interpreted as a criticism of the extent of his participation in a discussion. These incidents caused Elder Lee to become withdrawn in his attitude toward President Clark, something that the older man sensed. To clear the air, President Clark invited Elder Lee to his office, where he mentioned the negative attitude toward him he had detected. "He pleaded that there be no coolness between us," Elder Lee wrote. "He said it wouldn't be long before the younger brethren would rise to the leadership of the church and he must do all he can to see that there is unity." This bridged over the misunderstanding that had developed between them, a misunderstanding that, if left to fester, could have created a serious rift in their relationship. As it was, the effect of it was to bring the two men closer together and to promote a greater sensitivity in their relationship.

During 1949, Elder Lee conducted two mission tours, the California Mission in the spring and the East Central States Mission in the autumn. On March 14, the day before beginning the California Mission tour, he wrote discouragingly: "I seem weary and hardly in the mood; but I am hoping to feel better as the visit progresses." His weariness traced to a tiring trip into a remote part of Arizona for a stake conference the previous weekend; to a hurried trip to Palo Alto afterward where he helped Maurine prepare a nursery school she and a friend had organized, and to a special welfare meeting held in Los Angeles after returning from Palo Alto. Moreover, Elder Lee was concerned about the condition of President George Albert Smith, who was then convalescing at Laguna Beach from a mild stroke he had suffered in February. On the way to his stake conference in Arizona, Elder Lee, joined by Elder Spencer W. Kimball, had gone to Laguna Beach to administer to the ailing prophet. Besides all this, he had already been away from home for eight days and now faced eighteen more grueling days on the road touring the mission. But, as it always happened in such cases, Elder Lee's hopes were realized, and once he got under way on the tour, things looked up.

His companion was the mission president, Oscar W. McConkie, Sr., whose son, Bruce R. McConkie, had been called as a member of the First Council of Seventy in October 1946. Widely known as "Judge" McConkie, the mission president had ended his legal career on the bench, serving for many years in the Third Judicial District Court in Salt Lake City. He was a man of deep spirituality, learned in the law and the scriptures, who spoke with authority and conviction. The depth of his spirituality is seen in an experience he had with Bruce when the son was a little boy growing up in Monticello, Utah. As the father sat reading on the porch one day, he sprang from his chair and raced toward the field in response to a spiritual prompting to get up and run. There he found the boy, one foot caught in a stirrup, being dragged by his pony. The father's prompt response to the spiritual whispering doubtless saved the future apostle from serious injury, or even death. Such spiritual sensitivity was something with which Elder Lee could readily relate. This, and President McConkie's perceptive knowledge of the scriptures, provided the grist for many enlightening gospel conversations between them during the course of the tour.

The first meetings of members and missionaries were held in Blythe, California, near the Colorado River east of the Salton Sea. This "sea," which under ordinary conditions is a salt marsh covered in places by shallow lakes, is, second to Death Valley, the lowest point in the United States, being more than 235 feet below sea level. Here the Brethren found a thriving branch, whose growth had justified a new chapel that Elder Lee dedicated at a meeting held on Sunday, March 16. In recounting the service, Elder Lee commented on the vigor and power of the mission president's pulpit style, which, in some ways, was mirrored in the style of his well-known son. Elder Lee also noted the uniform kindness President McConkie showed toward the members and the missionaries and the "marked deference" he showed toward the apostle, which evidenced "a depth of humility."

Retracing their steps, the Brethren returned to Cathedral City and Hemet, California, not far from Palm Springs, where meetings were held. Then, returning to the coast, they held meetings at Carlsbad, San Juan Capistrano, and Laguna Beach. At Laguna, Elder Lee stopped to see President George Albert Smith again, who was still ailing and seemingly unable to throw off the effects of the mild stroke he had suffered.

Elder Lee and his companion travelled southeasterly to Brawley, California, in the heart of the Imperial Valley, whose lush fields, nourished by the waters of the Colorado River, reminded Judge McConkie of the continuing legal battle between the upper basin and lower basin states over water rights in the river. At the moment, however, the Imperial Valley was the recipient of surplus waters in the river, which the upper basin states were unable to utilize through the lack of sufficient impounding facilities. The Brethren found a thriving economy here, with ample jobs for all, including many field workers from across the border in Mexico. Some of these workers had joined the Church and were in attendance at the public meetings. However, they were merely a trickle compared to the flood of Hispanic converts who would come into the Church in the years ahead.

Leaving California, the party travelled into Arizona, where meetings were held at Ajo, Prescott, and Cotton-wood. At Ajo, Elder Lee received a telephone call from Arthur Haycock, President Smith's secretary, asking if he could come and again administer to the prophet who had taken a turn for the worse. However, when Brother Haycock learned about the long distance from Laguna Beach and the remoteness of Ajo, he decided to look elsewhere for someone to come and bless President Smith.

At Prescott, Arizona, Elder Lee was impressed with the dedication and productivity of a group of missionaries, among whom was a young elder named Ray L. White. Several decades later, Elder White would become the president of the mission headquartered in Dallas, Texas.

In California, meetings were held in Needles, Barstow, and Death Valley. En route to Death Valley, the lowest point in the United States at 282 feet below sea level, President McConkie told about a vivid dream he had had in which Satan had appeared to him. After mulling it over, Elder Lee offered his interpretation of the dream. It reminded him of an experience he had had with a woman possessed of an evil spirit who had said to him, "You are the head of the Church." In response, "President McConkie said he thought that the evil spirit in her had spoken, not of that which I now was, but of that which Satan knew I was ordained to become."

The tour ended with meetings in Ridgecrest, Mohave, Bakersfield, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara, and Ventura, California. In all of these cities, Elder Lee found small but thriving branches, most of which would ultimately grow into stakes. He also found a corps of dedicated missionaries who, motivated by their president, had learned to rely on the promptings of the Spirit in their work, which was reflected in special experiences they had. "We had time to hear faith promoting experiences," Elder Lee reported of a meeting held with eight missionaries at Mohave, "which included conversions of those who had been shown in dreams the coming of the elders and instant healings, etc."

On his last day with President McConkie, Elder Lee joined in welcoming and instructing eight new missionaries who had just arrived in the mission field. The counsel he gave on this occasion reflects a proselyting initiative that he and his brethren would promote in the future with success. "I was impressed," he wrote of the incident, "to show how one could overcome opposition of a person by bringing him within the power of the Holy Ghost, operating through a faithful member of the Church who was keeping the commandments." Herein is the essence of the "Every Member a Missionary" program that would be developed in the future.

Less than a month after completing the tour of his mission, Elder Lee spent several hours with two of President McConkie's sons, Bruce R. McConkie and Oscar W. McConkie, Jr. Elder Lee rode with them from Salt Lake City to Richmond, Utah, where he had a stake conference assignment. This incident, taken with his recent tour of the father's mission, gave Elder Lee insight into the McConkie family he had not had before. During the first week in November of the following year, Elder Lee received another important insight into the ability and character of Bruce R. McConkie when they joined in reorganizing the Gridley California Stake. It was the first time they had shared such an assignment. Working together as companions, they conducted the usual personal interviews of the leaders of the stake, following which H. E. McLure was selected as the new stake president. After the new leaders had been set apart and instructed, they also participated in the dedication of a new chapel at Yuba City from which they entrained for Salt Lake City. Of the trip home, Elder Lee reported: "I had a delightful visit with Bruce McConkie on the way home and found him entirely responsive to my suggestions relative to the work of the First Council of the Seventy and missionary work." Twenty-two years later, Harold B. Lee, as the president of the Church, would call Bruce R. McConkie to the Twelve, the only man he would call to that position during his short tenure.

As already noted, Elder Lee's second mission tour of 1949 took him to the Central States, where Thomas W. Richards presided. He left Salt Lake City on October 6 by train with Louisville, Kentucky, as his immediate destination. On board in their private car were two high officials of the Denver & Rio Grande Railroad Company, E. A. West and Willard Richards, who invited Elder Lee to have breakfast with them. Afterward, in his own car, he made the acquaintance of an elderly man "who was nearly ready for baptism" when they parted. With this positive missionary experience in mind, he was primed for the sixteen-day tour that would take him into the states of Kentucky, West Virginia, and Tennessee.

Elder Lee was met at the Louisville depot by President Richards and Elder Stanfield and was driven to the mission home, where he was greeted by Sister Richards. He found her still agitated over the brutal murder of her daughter, which had occurred in Palo Alto, California, a few months before. This tragic event had destroyed the mother's peace of mind, interfered with her work, and cast a pall of gloom over everything she did. This cloud hung over the entire party until the last day of the tour when an unusual incident dispelled it.

The procedure followed on this tour corresponded with that of other tours. Meetings were held with members and missionaries, including personal interviews Elder Lee held with each missionary. He also spent time alone with President Richards, reviewing his proselyting techniques, the supervision of his missionaries, the management of the mission home and office, and the relationships in his family.

The tour commenced with a training and testimony meeting held with twenty-two missionaries in Huntington, West Virginia, on October 8. Here, following instructions given by President Richards and Elder Lee, each missionary had the opportunity to bear testimony without restriction either as to time or subject matter. It was in this context, where the missionaries spoke extemporaneously, that the visitor was able to gauge the status of the work and the missionaries in ways a statistical report could not reveal. In Huntington the next day, Elder Lee spoke over the radio in addition to holding the other usual meetings. During the next week, a similar routine was followed in six different cities: Fairmont, Clarksburg, and Charleston, West Virginia; Martin, Kentucky; and Knoxville and Nashville, Tennessee. At Knoxville, the general meeting was held in a "stuffy basement," although Elder Lee reported optimistically that "the spirit was splendid . . . and some excellent friends and investigators were in attendance." By contrast, the meeting in Nashville was held in the ornate ballroom of the Hermitage Hotel. Here he was pleased to report that among the missionaries were elders from Clifton, Oxford, and Preston, another generation of Idaho farm boys who were enjoying the same kind of experiences he had enjoyed almost thirty years before.

En route to Memphis, Tennessee, the next day, the party stopped at Cane Creek in Lewis County to visit the site of the murder of Elders William S. Berry and John H. Gibbs, who were shot to death by a masked mob on Sunday morning, August 10, 1884. Killed during the same assault were Martin Condor and James R. Hudson, son and stepson of James Condor, at whose home the dead elders were to have held a worship service that morning. The host's wife, Mrs. Condor, was seriously wounded during the attack. The details of the tragedy came alive for the visitors when they were retold by a seventy-three-year-old man, Bud Talley, who was an eyewitness. After the killings, B. H. Roberts, the General Authority who set Elder Lee apart for his mission, prepared the bodies for shipment home. The experience revealed how time had altered public attitudes toward the Church, its message, and its missionaries.

After holding the usual meetings in Memphis and Clarksville, Tennessee, the party returned to Kentucky, where additional meetings were held at Greenville and Bowling Green. Near Bowling Green, another meeting was held in a "little backwoods schoolhouse, lighted by kerosene lamps."

En route to Lexington, Kentucky, the party travelled through Hardin County, visiting the birthplace of Abraham Lincoln. It was a rustic cabin, reportedly built by President Lincoln's father of logs hewn from nearby woods and fashioned according to his own design. Nearer to Lexington, the party also visited the home of the composer Stephen Foster, whose song "My Old Kentucky Home" is traditionally played before the annual running of the Kentucky Derby. This is the heart of Kentucky's bluegrass country, famous as a breeding place for thoroughbred horses. Knowing this, President Richards was anxious that Elder Lee visit Calumet Farms, the best known of the local fraternity of horse breeders. Here the visitor was shown Whirlaway and Bull Lea, two Derby winners who had been turned out to stud.

That night, a public meeting was held in an old barracks being used temporarily while a new chapel was being constructed for the branch in Lexington. The next day, October 22, was spent quietly at the mission home in Louisville, interrupted only by a brief visit to Churchill Downs, the home of the Kentucky Derby. This was a day of prayer and fasting for Elder Lee in preparation to give a special blessing to Sister Richards, who continued to anguish over the death of her daughter. A quiet calmness pervaded the home as he pronounced the blessing. Afterward, he made this record of it: "I had the distinct impression that Marriner W. Merrill, her father, was giving her a blessing through us. She said a remarkable peace came over her, the first since the tragedy of her daughter's murder."

Elder Lee returned home via St. Louis, Missouri, grateful to be able to spend a few days relaxing with his family. His relaxation included two days of vigorous physical activity helping Helen and Brent move into their new home at 1022 McFarland Avenue in Salt Lake's Rose Park sub-division. He also accompanied Fern to a dinner party with their study group hosted by Joseph and Norma Anderson. Also present were President and Sister J. Reuben Clark. In commenting on the evening, Elder Lee wrote: "President Clark described Joseph as the finest man he had ever worked with," a noteworthy compliment given President Clark's long career in the Church and his government and professional involvements. Later President Clark said of Brother Anderson: "His merit should be rewarded by an appointment in the higher councils of the church." That recognition came to Elder Anderson twenty-one years later when, in 1970, he was called as an Assistant to the Twelve. In describing his call, which came when Brother Anderson was eighty years old, Elder Lee said the Brethren knew "instinctively" that Elder Anderson was to be called as a General Authority. In setting him apart as an Assistant to the Twelve, President Lee said in part, "Joseph is like unto Moses of old; his eye shall never be dimmed nor his natural force abated." At this writing (January 1992) Elder Anderson, now an emeritus member of the Seventy, is over 102 years old; his mind is sharp and uncluttered; he remembers with equal precision things that happened yesterday or long ago; he continues to walk regularly when the weather permits; and until a few years ago, he swam regularly to keep trim. Joseph Anderson stands as a testimony to the rewards of merit, perseverance, and diligence, to the favorable influences of friends and associates, and to the blessings of heaven pronounced by apostolic authority.

The year 1950 saw more significant changes in Elder Lee's family and in the evolution of his ministry. The new year found the Lees in Palo Alto, where they had gone to spend the holidays with the Wilkinses. Maurine was expecting again and in February gave birth to her second child, a boy, whom the parents named Larry. Numerically this childbirth, which was much easier than Maurine's first, evened the score with Helen, who, several months before, had given birth to her second son, Harold Lee Goates, named in honor of his grandfather. At this point, providence seemed to be compensating for Elder Lee's lack of sons by blessing him with an abundance of grandsons. In reality, the sex of his children and grandchildren seemed irrelevant to him. Only their physical, mental, and spiritual health and their conduct had relevance for him.

This would be the Lees' last lengthy visit to Palo Alto. Ernie's studies at Stanford were winding down, although he was gearing up for his doctoral exams. As they approached, his father-in-law, as was Elder Lee's habit in matters of family crisis, conducted a special fast and prayer in his behalf. The son-in-law later confided that during the lengthy and searching oral examinations conducted by his doctoral committee of Stanford professors, answers to obscure questions came to him with effortless ease. He attributed this to spiritual insights given to him in answer to prayers offered in his behalf.

Later in the year, the Wilkinses moved to Provo, Utah, where Ernest Wilkins had been accepted as a member of the faculty of the Brigham Young University. Typically, Elder and Sister Lee were involved in helping their "little family" to locate suitable housing, to make financial arrangements, and to move their belongings into the new quarters.

The day after returning home from Palo Alto following the holiday visit, Elder Lee received the disquieting news that Aldredge Evans, whom he had recently installed as the president of the Ensign Stake, had died unexpectedly. Of the funeral service held shortly afterward, where he was the principal speaker, Elder Lee wrote: "Many had seemingly questioned the inspiration in calling a man to the presidency if he was soon to be taken in death. I sought to allay their anxieties on this question." President Lee wanted the questioners to understand that calls such as this one confirm foreordained calls given in the premortal existence and that the quality, not the length of service, is the crucial thing. Moreover, man's limited and often skewed view of things can seldom comprehend the designs of an omniscient God, who, during a limited time, through a chosen servant, can set in motion things that will have vast, eternal consequences. What person, therefore, lacking omniscience, would presume to question the inspiration of calling this man to serve for only a few weeks, or, had it been the case, for only a few days? Conceivably, his particular combination of skills and experience could have initiated, either through personal contacts or projects he commenced, vital actions that no one else could have achieved. Three weeks later, Elder Lee presided at a special conference in the Ensign Stake where David E. Judd was called to succeed Aldredge Evans.

As if to contrast Aldredge Evans's short tenure in office, three of Elder Lee's long-time associates in welfare work, Wm. E. Ryberg, Stringham Stevens, and Roscoe Eardley, passed away in the early months of 1950. Joining Elder Lee in eulogizing these men for their service in helping to lay the foundations of Church welfare, and in mourning with their families, was Elder Henry D. Moyle. A few days after the funeral of Brother Eardley, the last of the three, Elder Lee and Elder Moyle left Salt Lake City by train on a three-week trip that would take them to Washington, D. C., and then to Florida on Church business. It would be the longest trip they would take together. En route to Washington, they held a stake conference in Chicago. "It was an enjoyable experience to be with Brother Moyle," wrote Elder Lee, "and I appreciated his wise counsel and able address." They travelled to Milwaukee Sunday evening, where they dedicated a new chapel, and the next day went with David M. Kennedy, a member of the Chicago stake presidency, to look at an experimental dairy farm. Although he was a suave and successful banker, David Kennedy was no novice when it came to cows and farms since he was born and raised in the small, rural town of Randolph, Utah, where these things were a way of life. So, in talking with the Brethren about this dairy farm, he spoke with a voice of authority and experience, as he would speak authoritatively in the future about international finance and diplomacy when he became the United States Secretary of the Treasury and later the United States Ambassador at large. Still later, these skills would qualify Brother Kennedy to serve as a special assistant to the First Presidency, advising about matters of international diplomacy, as the Church mounted a major, global missionary effort.

The next day in Washington, D.C., the two apostles met with the chief of the Bureau of Internal Revenue and his staff attorneys, at which time they successfully negotiated a tax exemption for Deseret Industries facilities in California. Travelling to New York, they consulted with local Church leaders about the purchase of an expensive chapel site. This entailed a review of the local demographics, the patterns of Church growth, and the accessibility of the proposed site to transportation facilities. Predictably, during the discussions, the Brethren inquired about the status of the welfare plan in the area. Elder Lee expressed "considerable anxiety" about the lack of enthusiasm for welfare work in the stake. This quality, or the lack of it, almost became a litmus test for Elder Lee and his associates in welfare in determining the qualifications of a person to serve in key positions of leadership.

On May 12, the two apostles flew to Jacksonville, Florida, and then motored to Deer Park near Orlando where the Church had acquired large acreages of ranch and farmland. In charge of this development was Heber Meeks, President Lee's close friend and former president of the Southern States Mission. "It is a pioneer venture of great magnitude," wrote Elder Lee of the Florida ranch, "which, when completed, will have about 180,000 acres of the best ranch land in Florida." At this time, the involvement of the Church in the ownership of the ranch was generally unknown. And since Elder Moyle and Joseph L. Wirthlin of the Presiding Bishopric were the ones who had been most prominently involved in acquiring the property and in managing the ranch, the local public perception was that they owned it. This misconception, and the failure of nonmembers of the Church to understand the significance of apostolic seniority, created a comic situation when the Brethren conferred with a local businessman about the possibility of purchasing some of his land. This man, whom Elder Lee characterized as "something of a drunken sot," was "insulting" to him "as he tried to play up to Brother Moyle whom he thought was the man with the money to play up to."

When the Brethren were taken on a tour of the ranch, they, like the local businessman, also learned that things are not always what they seem to be. As they drove along a side road, which seemed perfectly safe, they became mired in the sand. The efforts of the driver to get unstuck, which were made more anxious by the knowledge that a special luncheon with local business and civic leaders awaited them in Orlando, only served to worsen the situation. They were finally rescued, but not before the motor on Heber Meeks's vehicle was almost burned out. They were three hours late for the luncheon.

Returning to Jacksonville, Elder Lee and his companion visited the home of the Jenkins family located on the banks of the St. Johns River, where he and Fern had happily stayed three years before when the Jacksonville Stake was organized. However, he found sadness there on this occasion. The husband, Archie O. Jenkins, had died not long before, and Sister Jenkins and her children were struggling, not only with the loss of the family patriarch but also with the myriad problems connected with his personal estate and his far-flung business holdings. There was little that could be done to help, except to give personal counsel and an apostolic blessing.

After holding a series of meetings with leaders and members in Jacksonville, Elder Lee finally succumbed to the urging of Elder Moyle to join him in a favorite pastime—deep sea fishing. Driving to the Atlantic Coast nearby, they rented a boat and, with a pilot who knew the waters, were taken to an area where success was likely. "Enjoyed the thrill of landing a great sail fish," Elder Lee wrote excitedly.

On that triumphant note, the Brethren returned home by train. Elder Lee used the time en route to prepare for future assignments, especially a commencement address he had agreed to give at one of the high schools in Ogden. Arriving home, he learned of the death of a cousin in Clifton, Irvin Davis, whose family had urgently requested that he speak at the funeral, a request he honored. "There were about 250 in attendance," he wrote of the occasion, "and [it was] one of the most satisfying visits I have made back home in meeting and renewing acquaintances with old friends." Although he never lived there after his marriage, and returned only sporadically for occasions like this, Elder Lee never seemed to lose the feeling that Clifton was home. This was the place where his roots had been planted and, despite his far-ranging travels, would always be the place where he seemed to feel more in touch with his past and his life's purpose.

For the moment, that purpose was to resume the regular round of stake conference assignments, interspersed with headquarters duties. Before the customary July break, he presided at stake conferences in Boise, Idaho; Ogden, Utah; Richland, Washington; and San Bernardino, California. "Finished the day very weary," he wrote of the Ogden conference, "after setting apart new high counselors, presidents of Seventy, etc., etc." These organizational tasks usually came at the end of two full days of instructional and motivational meetings where he had been "on stage," unable really to relax or to find time for private reflection. Because stake presidents had not yet been given authority to do some of these things, members from nearby stakes would often come for the visiting authority to do them while he was in the area. Occasionally, the conference visitor found sensitive situations that were difficult, or awkward, to resolve, thus adding to the normal tensions of the weekend. Such a situation arose at Richland, where a new stake was created out of a mission district. After completing the usual organizational procedures, it was decided to call a former counselor in the district presidency as the stake president. That the district president was passed over was, of itself, awkward, given the normal expectation that he would be called as the stake president. That awkwardness was intensified when the new stake president selected his former leader as a counselor. "Although this move was somewhat delicate," Elder Lee noted, "we were convinced it was the thing to do." Even though stressful, the best interests of the work took precedence over personal feelings.

What made it possible for Elder Lee to maintain perspective and a sense of equilibrium were the periodic breaks in the routine and occasional interludes of good humor. A lighthearted moment occurred shortly before Elder Lee left for Richland, when two women and a man from California came for counsel. They "needed someone to teach them about revelation they have been receiving," he wrote. Then added, "Apparently I did not qualify."

After the conference in San Bernardino, he returned home to celebrate the Fourth of July with his family. He bought some sparklers and shared them with Skipper and Hal Goates, whose enthusiasms were infectious. The next day, he returned to the Goates home where he shed some of his tensions by hard physical work in their yard: mowing, trimming, and pruning. A session like this was Elder Lee's best source of physical therapy from the stresses of his work. Later in the month, and extending into August, he spent long hours over many days at the Goates home, helping to construct a picket fence around their yard so Helen would be able to tend the children more easily. He also helped Brent prepare the forms and pour concrete for a patio at the rear of the home where they could enjoy the outdoors and entertain their guests. The neighbors who were unacquainted with Elder Lee must have wondered how the Goates family could afford such an able worker, over such a long period of time, whose distinguished looks could not be hidden under his rough work clothes. Meanwhile, he and Fern made several trips to Provo during the break to help the Wilkinses in finding a home.

The Lees also enjoyed several social events during the period, the most memorable, perhaps, being the party celebrating the third wedding anniversary of Elder George F. Richards and his wife, Bessie Hollings Richards. The eighty-nine-year-old apostle, who was the president of the Twelve, and his much younger bride were, according to Elder Lee, "the life of the party." At the time of their marriage, Bessie, a close friend of Fern Lee, had wondered about it because of the wide difference in their ages. In counselling with Elder Lee, she was told that if she married Elder Richards, she would have him for at least three years. As their demeanor at the anniversary party indicated, they had had three happy years together. Seventeen days later, Elder Richards passed away quietly, having told Elder Lee earlier in the day that he was tired "and that all he wanted to do was to rest." At the funeral held a few days later, Elder Lee was one of the speakers, eulogizing his friend who had been a member of the Twelve for forty-four years.

The effect of the death of Elder Richards was to elevate President David O. McKay to the position of president of the Twelve, a position he would occupy in tandem with his role as a counselor in the First Presidency. This dual role for President McKay would be short-lived since, within less than a year, he would become the president of the Church at the death of President George Albert Smith.

Two weeks after President Richards's funeral, Elder Lee resumed his usual responsibilities by touring the Northwestern States Mission, whose president, Joel Richards, was a son of George F. Richards. The tour started on August 26, 1950, in Butte, Montana, and ended in Portland, Oregon, the mission headquarters, on September 17. During that three-week period, Elder Lee held the usual missionary and member meetings in many cities in the states of Montana, Washington, and Oregon, in the course of which he encountered the usual grist of problems. At Butte, he gave kindly counsel to a branch president who had insisted that he interview and clear all prospective new members before their baptism. It was a mistake of the head, not the heart, the new and inexperienced branch president not having understood until then that he had no such authority, which rested only with the mission president and his missionaries. Later Elder Lee gave counsel about a missionary who had run up a large phone bill calling his sweetheart at home, and about another missionary whose lack of discipline in getting up on time, and in other matters, was seriously impeding the work. Cases like this gave Elder Lee the opportunity to discuss the reasons for mission rules and the need for missionaries to be disciplined in following them.

After holding meetings in Butte, Great Falls, Chinook, Cutbank, Kalispell, St. Ignatius, and Charles, Montana, Elder Lee and the touring party travelled into the state of Washington for a series of meetings in Spokane, Ephrata, and Tacoma. Here Elder Lee found an atmosphere reminiscent of World War II as the defense industries and military and naval installations were gearing up for the Korean War, which had erupted in open hostilities three months before. On September 15, 1950, only a week after the visit to Tacoma, the United States Navy landed marines and soldiers of the American Tenth Army Corps, commanded by Major General Edward M. Almond, at Inchon, Korea, in a brilliant amphibious operation. This laid the groundwork for a successful offensive of United Nations forces against the North Koreans, followed by the massive intervention of Chinese communist forces. A bloody war of attrition ensued, complicated by the United Nations decision not to attack communist troops and supply depots in their sanctuaries north of the Yalu River. These and other events connected with the Korean War would have heavy impact on the work of Elder Lee and his brethren in the months ahead as they struggled with the problems of Latter-day Saint personnel in the armed services and the radical reduction of the Church's missionary force occasioned by restrictive draft policies. While these events lay in the future, the war mentality that hung over the Pacific Northwest at this time colored the remainder of Elder Lee's mission tour in subtle, indefinable ways.

At Bend, Oregon, Elder Lee detected an attitude among the missionaries that was troubling and prompted him to speak out strongly about the need to be on guard always against sexual temptation. In doing so, he related the incident when Potiphar's wife sought to seduce Joseph. Later, one of the missionaries went to President Richards to report that not long before, he had had an experience similar to the one related by Elder Lee. That it had happened at all suggested that the elder had not been following the counsel never to be separated from his companion. This and other incidents that cropped up along the way illustrated the need, which Elder Lee sought faithfully to fill, to come back repeatedly to the basics of missionary work, outlined in the handbook, which contained the condensed wisdom gained over more than a hundred years of proselyting all around the world.

The last meeting of the tour was held with the mission staff and missionaries working in the Portland area. Elder Lee then presided over a conference of the Portland Stake before returning home on September 18. He was met at the Salt Lake train depot by Fern, both daughters, and their husbands. Hungry to be filled in about events in their separate, busy lives, the six of them stayed up for several hours until after midnight, visiting and reminiscing, while enjoying some of Fern's famous sandwiches.

The next day, Elder and Sister Lee went to Provo, Utah, with the Wilkinses to help them further in their search for suitable housing. There they conferred with Elder Lee's friend Howard McKean, who showed them a new house he had recently completed and who later gave helpful counsel that enabled Maurine and Ernie and their children to become comfortably settled in a home not far from the BYU campus. While in Provo on this occasion, Elder Lee was introduced to one of his numberless namesakes around the world, a baby named Harold Lee Ricks, the child of good friends Irene and Eldon Ricks.

Elder Lee had one last assignment before the October general conference, a conference in the Park Stake in Salt Lake City. Since this did not entail travel out of town, it was a relatively pressure-free weekend, which enabled him to prepare in a leisurely way for the general conference, where he was the concluding speaker at the Sunday morning session. "The spirit was wonderful," he wrote of the occasion, "and I found myself so much under the influence that I had difficulty controlling my feelings."

The spirit of the conference was greatly enhanced by the call of Delbert L. Stapley to fill the vacancy in the Twelve caused by the recent death of Elder George F. Richards. Once Elder Stapley had been sustained by the conference, ordained, and set apart, he was quickly integrated into the work of his new quorum. A duty he shared with all of its other members was to serve on the missionary committee of the Church. A pressing problem this committee then faced had arisen, as already mentioned, from the Korean War. By the first of December the problem had assumed major proportions as some local draft boards had begun to refuse to grant military deferments for missionaries. The issue reached the boiling point in mid-January 1951, when the selective service administration registered formal complaints about the large size of the Church's missionary groups (there was a group of 426 in early January, for instance) and when, as Elder Lee reported, a few of the local draft boards began "recalling some missionaries" from the mission field for induction into the armed services. Because the adverse publicity from these incidents reflected negatively on the Church, subjecting it to widespread criticism, the Brethren revised their policy after carefully reviewing it. "It was decided," Elder Lee recorded on January 30, 1951," that as of February 1, 1951, no young men of draft age will be recommended for missionary service." This change in policy put a crimp in missionary work during the remainder of the Korean War. However, the shortfall in the number of missionaries, occasioned by the loss of the young elders, was compensated in part by the call of older brethren and their wives. But it took time to build up the numbers of these older missionaries; and they never equalled the totals achieved earlier. However, by the following November, Elder Lee was pleased to report that he had participated in setting apart 117 new missionaries, "mostly older 70's and their wives."
