Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Eighteen

The Reins Change Hands

Elder Lee interrupted the usual New Year's Day celebration with his family on January 1, 1951, to pay a courtesy call on President George Albert Smith. "I found him in good spirits and looking fine," wrote he optimistically. The appearances were misleading. President Smith was notoriously secretive about his inner feelings. The outward appearances, of course, implied that all was well with the prophet as he sat cheerfully before an open fire, surrounded by members of his family, amid evidences of a joyful Christmas just passed. But, in fact, President Smith was a sick man, having suffered major illnesses during much of his adulthood. He was able to mask his physical ills stoically so that others ordinarily could not gauge his real condition from his appearance and demeanor. Therefore, when Elder Lee left his home that day, he erroneously believed that President Smith's physical condition was good, and that despite the fact his eightieth birthday was only three months away, he would be able to lead the Church for some time to come. On this account, it came as a surprise when, at a meeting on February 15, a letter was read from President Smith, "indicating that he felt his end was drawing near and that he was arranging his affairs with that prospect." Word came two weeks later that the prophet's condition had worsened. In an effort to revive his spirits, two of the Brethren took the sacrament to President Smith's home following the weekly council meeting in the temple. On March 22, Elder Lee noted in his diary: "A very discouraging report of President Smith's condition was made by President Clark. There is a suspicion that some paralysis is setting in."

During this period, Elder Lee himself was not in robust health. In the last weeks of 1950, he had suffered digestive disorders intermittently, so much so that he had declined speaking engagements when possible. Only three days before the surprising letter from President Smith was read, Elder Lee had written, following a busy weekend where he had installed new presidencies in the Grant, Granite, and Wilford stakes, "I finished the day very weary from my exertions." This weariness, which was aggravated by a throbbing sinus infection, hung on so tenaciously that on the first weekend in March, Elder Lee was excused from attending a stake conference in Idaho Falls, Idaho. It was the first time in ten years he had missed a stake conference assignment because of illness. Three weeks later, on March 26, as he returned to Salt Lake City from a stake conference in Rexburg, Idaho, Elder Lee was stricken with a sinus attack so severe that it put him in bed for several days. It was while convalescing from this attack that he wrote, under date of March 30, 1951: "The word from President Smith continues to be discouraging and hope for his recovery has been abandoned."

It was in these circumstances, with the prophet near death and Elder Lee weaker with illnesses than he had ever been, that plans were laid for the general conference, which was scheduled to begin on Friday, April 6, 1951, and to end on Sunday the eighth. However, the death of President Smith on Wednesday, April 4, his eightieth birthday, radically altered these plans. Elder Lee was notified of the prophet's death shortly after he passed away at 7:27 P.M. Wednesday evening. He immediately called Elder Albert E. Bowen, by whose side he had sat in the temple council meetings after the death of Elder Sylvester Q. Cannon in 1943, and the two of them went together to the prophet's home. There they joined with other General Authorities to extend condolences to members of the family who also had assembled at President Smith's home. As the Brethren left after having had prayer with the family, it was decided that the Quorum of the Twelve would meet the next morning to discuss what to do about the funeral and the conference. At this meeting, where President David O. McKay presided and conducted as the President of the Twelve, a question was raised about the advisability of holding the general session Friday morning as planned and then of cancelling the remainder of the conference in honor of President Smith. After discussion, it was decided not to do this, but instead to hold both Friday sessions as planned; to cancel the Saturday sessions, and in their place to hold President Smith's funeral; then to hold the usual Sunday general sessions, followed by a Solemn Assembly on Monday where the General Authorities would be presented for sustaining vote.

Following the Sunday afternoon session, the members of the Twelve convened in a special meeting. After the usual preliminaries, there was discussion whether the First Presidency should be reorganized or whether it should be deferred. After each one had expressed his views, it was decided that the reorganization should not be delayed. Then, on motion of President Joseph Fielding Smith, seconded by Elder Lee, President David O. McKay was approved as the ninth president of the Church and was then ordained and set apart by the other apostles. President McKay then nominated Stephen L. Richards as his first counselor and President Clark as his second counselor. While this action surprised the Twelve, they unanimously sustained President McKay's recommendation.

At the Solemn Assembly the next day, President Clark delivered the classic speech in which he affirmed that performance, not position, should be the governing criterion in evaluating Church service. Of that meeting, Elder Lee wrote: "A wonderful spirit was in evidence, highlighted by the majestic conduct of President Clark who won the love and honor to himself and the Lord's work seldom equalled, and perhaps never excelled."

President Stephen L. Richards was greatly respected by all the Brethren. Following a conference in the Cottonwood Stake in early 1950, which he attended with President Richards, Elder Lee wrote: "His counsel was wise and timely and his procedure was an excellent training for me." Elder Lee had seen, and had come to admire, another aspect of President Richards's character. This was a deep spiritual sense, which occasionally seemed to be obscured by his high intellect. This side of his nature was shown to Elder Lee several weeks after the Cottonwood stake conference when they travelled to California together to divide the Pasadena Stake. On the return trip on the train, President Richards related a special experience he had had several years before when, in a vivid dream, he was "warned" about the misconduct of a man, known to both of them, before it surfaced.

Elder Lee had also seen President Richards's skills in analysis and organization when he had served with him and Elder Albert E. Bowen on the priesthood committee that had recommended changes in the relationship between the priesthood and the auxiliaries. He had also been impressed with the wise way in which President Richards had suggested that the matter be laid aside in view of President George Albert Smith's attitude toward it. In the years ahead there developed basic differences between them in welfare matters, but these never resulted in a loss of the confidence or respect they held for each other.

The day after he was sustained as the first counselor in the First Presidency, President Richards attended a meeting of the Twelve where he told the Brethren he would try to move forward the recommendations made several years before about a simplified program to give more emphasis to the priesthood; a revised priesthood ward teaching program; recommendations relative to ordaining and setting apart high counselors, bishoprics, and stake presidents; and developing a priesthood insurance program. "He promised to expedite these matters," wrote Elder Lee, "and to get us some action one way or the other." Unforeseen events, and the rolling out of President McKay's agenda, of which President Richards was unaware, prevented the implementation of the proposals as to home teaching and a change in the role of the priesthood and the auxiliaries. Indeed, action on these would be deferred for another ten years, some time following the death of President Richards.

The events President Richards did not foresee, which postponed action on these proposals, were physical problems of the prophet, his preoccupation with the demands of his new office, and the ambitious program of world travel President McKay undertook the year following his installation as the head of the Church.

On May 3 following the Solemn Assembly, President McKay entered the hospital for major surgery. Although he was hospitalized for only four days, the prophet functioned at only about half-speed for a month. Then in August, following his return from the Hill Cumorah Pageant, he was stricken with an attack of vertigo so severe it was almost impossible for him to stand without support. He was hospitalized immediately when his ailment was diagnosed as an inner ear disorder. He was in the hospital for a week and then for a month afterward he experienced difficulty and discomfort. During this period, the counselors could not take action alone on matters of such importance as those President Richards had outlined to the Twelve, and President McKay, with all the other demands on his time, was unable to get into these matters. When the prophet began the series of lengthy trips in May 1952, which would take him to many parts of the world—to Great Britain, Europe, Africa, South America, and the islands of the Pacific—his time at home was restricted and the matters President Richards had discussed with the Twelve had to yield to other things that, at the moment, President McKay considered to be of greater importance.

The semiannual conference in October 1951, the first one following President McKay's installation, was a busy and important one. At that time, Elder Marion G. Romney was called as a member of the Twelve to fill the vacancy caused by the call of President Richards to the First Presidency. Also at that time, George Q. Morris, Stayner Richards, ElRay Christiansen, and John Longden were called as Assistants to the Twelve. The call of Marion G. Romney was a source of special satisfaction to Elder Lee. "President Clark came to my office," wrote he on October 4, "to share with me my joy in Brother Romney's appointment." Two days later, when the name of his friend was presented for sustaining vote, Elder Lee noted: "Needless to say, my joy is unbounded at his coming into the council."

But, Elder Lee's joy at the call of his friend was alloyed with a sadness caused by an enervating weariness. In an attempt to get some relief, Elder Lee asked Henry D. Moyle and Delbert Stapley to administer to him the evening of the fifth. It helped, but did not eliminate the problem. A week later, following a stake conference in Idaho, Elder Lee did something that he did repeatedly over the years when he had a difficult problem. "I went to an upper room of the temple," wrote he, "for some spiritual strength I sorely need." It seems not to be happenstance that during most of the ensuing year, no entries appear in Elder Lee's diary referring to such a problem. This experience in the temple seems to have provided the necessary spiritual strength to lift him out of the feeling of weariness he had felt for many weeks.

One thing that had contributed to Elder Lee's upset during this period was the purchase of a home at 849 Connor Street and the complications of moving into it. The move was completed only three days after his special prayer in the temple. It proved to be a boon to live again in a home where he had a yard to putter in. While the Lees had a lovely, spacious apartment at 109 First Avenue, only a block from the Church Administration Building, he felt restrained there because of the lack of a yard and flower beds where he could work off his frustrations. Fern, too, felt a new sense of freedom and welcomed the opportunity to decorate and rearrange their new quarters.

The following weekend, Elder Lee travelled to Long Beach, California, for a stake conference. The Wilkinses, who had moved to Southern California, where Ernie had accepted employment with the Hughes organization, met him at the depot and took him to their home where he spent the night. When he returned to Salt Lake City, Maurine and her two little boys went back with him to give Ernie some time without interruption to work on his doctoral dissertation. Arriving at Salt Lake, Elder Lee was met at the depot by Henry D. Moyle. The two of them then left immediately for Washington, D.C., where they had an appointment to meet with officials of the United Mine Workers Union about a labor dispute, which had arisen over the Church's operation of a coal mine in Carbon County, Utah. "I enjoyed visiting throughout the day with Brother Moyle," wrote Elder Lee, "with his great faith and loyalty, his constant support and strength." At Washington, they were met by Elder Moyle's brother, Walter, who took them to his home, where they stayed as his guests.

The meeting with the second tier of union leaders the next day was a standoff. The Brethren explained the welfare program and the reasons why the mine couldn't be unionized, because of the principle of donated labor upon which it was based. The union men seemed not to be listening and countered by saying, "It is merely a matter of pure economics." After that, the Brethren felt it would be useless to try to go higher and decided not to seek an interview with the union's top man, tough and bellicose John L. Lewis.

While they were in the nation's capital, they met with local leaders to review their welfare assignments, then travelled to New York with Walter Moyle, where they joined with him in blessing his grandson. Later, in reporting the incident, Elder Lee noted that Elder Moyle, uncharacteristically, became quite emotional while blessing the child, explaining later that during the prayer, "he felt the presence of his own father, James H. Moyle, very near." Later in New York City, Elder Lee blessed Elder Moyle's grandson, the eight-month-old son of Marie Moyle Wangeman and her husband, Frank, a prominent New York hotel executive. "It was a lovely experience," wrote Elder Lee, "and gave evidence that the son-in-law feels a growing bond to the church. Henry and Alberta were thrilled." It is inferred Elder Moyle's joy was significantly enhanced by the fact the grandson was named Henry Moyle Wangeman. On the way home, Elder Lee, perhaps caught up in the euphoria of the grandfatherhood he had witnessed recently, stopped at Marshall Field's in Chicago to buy Christmas presents for his own grandchildren.

The remainder of 1951 was an amalgam of Church chores and achievements and family trials and triumphs. At a stake conference in Oregon, Elder Lee found a woeful lack of qualified leaders in one of the branches, a problem he solved in an unconventional way. "We selected a branch president," Elder Lee explained, "on condition he would stop smoking and pay his tithing, which he humbly agreed to do after we had given him a blessing." In Colorado, his diplomatic skills were tested when he laid at rest serious frictions that had arisen when the headquarters of the San Luis Stake were moved from Manassa to La Jara. Elder Lee joined President McKay in attending the Ogden stake conference where the prophet dedicated a new chapel on November 25. "It was an enjoyable experience to be with him," Elder Lee wrote of the occasion.

The following day brought a significant change in Elder Lee's responsibilities. At a meeting of the Church board of education, the executive committee of the board was reorganized. Released were John A. Widtsoe, Joseph F. Merrill, and Albert E. Bowen; and sustained in their places were Joseph Fielding Smith, chairman, and Harold B. Lee, Henry D. Moyle, and Marion G. Romney as members. This placed Elder Lee in a position where his influence on Church education would be powerfully felt for many years.

The Lees' trauma during this period came from the death of Fern's mother two weeks before Thanksgiving. She was buried on November 13 following beautiful services attended by numerous members of the family and friends. At the time, Fern was in the midst of completing the decoration of her new home and the arrangements for the holiday season. Two days before Thanksgiving, she was in the ZCMI department store, looking at fabrics and shopping for accessories, when suddenly she became terribly nauseated. Employees of the store took her to a rest area and called Elder Lee, whose office was just across the street. At the time he was in a meeting of the new executive committee of the Church Board of Education, its first. He hurried across the street to comfort his wife. Then he took her home. Her illness was not serious, and she was soon back to normal.

Elder and Sister Lee enjoyed a pleasant Christmas in their new home. Afterward, they and the Goateses travelled to Los Angeles to spend the New Year's holiday with the Wilkinses. With the help of Bishop Dean Olson, brother of Ruby Haight, the family obtained seats for the Rose Bowl Parade the morning of January 1; and in the afternoon, Elder Lee and his sons-in-law were Bishop Olson's guests for the annual Rose Bowl football game, following which they joined with the other members of the family for a New Year's feast. Two days later, the Lees hosted their daughters and sons-in-law at a special dinner at the exclusive Miramar Restaurant in Santa Monica.

When Elder Lee returned to Salt Lake City after the holidays, two main things claimed his attention at headquarters: Church education and Church welfare. On January 10, a lengthy meeting of the Board of Trustees of Brigham Young University was held where matters previously reviewed by the executive committee were presented for consideration—matters pertaining to attendance, budget, and proposed additions to the faculty. A few months before, Ernest L. Wilkinson had been installed as the new president of BYU, who had ambitious plans for the growth of the physical plant at the university, the improvement of the professional standing of its faculty, and the enlargement of its student body. He had been counselling with the new executive committee, which had approved some of his recommendations, modified some, and rejected others. The matters on which all agreed were presented to the full board for consideration. It was a process that went on for many years.

The university experienced a phenomenal growth during the 1950s and 1960s. The main figures contributing to that growth from among the ecclesiastical leaders were President Joseph Fielding Smith and Elder Harold B. Lee. Working as a team, they were heavily involved in every aspect of the work that caused the emergence of Brigham Young University as a major American institution of higher learning.

Elder Lee's involvement in this growth was a matter of personal satisfaction, given his background in education. And to have become involved in it at the threshold of that growth repeated, in a sense, his pioneering involvement in the development of Church welfare and later in the development of Church correlation and the restructuring of the Church's headquarters organizations.

At this time, the modern Church welfare program, then in the twilight of its second decade, was undergoing some significant reevaluations. President McKay believed some midcourse adjustments in the program were necessary. There was concern about the heavy, continuing welfare "assessments" that were imposed by the general welfare committee. There also was concern about the increasing number of complaints from LDS businessmen who protested against the sale of welfare commodities in the open market in direct competition with them. And there was a sense in some quarters that there had been an undue proliferation of welfare projects, beyond what was strictly necessary for the care of the needy, especially because the dire conditions of high unemployment and economic depression of the 1930s no longer existed. Moreover, there was a perception that the policy against the acceptance of government subsidies by the members of the Church was overly rigid, particularly in view of the heavy and constantly increasing tax burden imposed on the people. In these circumstances, an incident involving subsidies under Canadian law created widespread concern in the welfare department. It was reported that leaders of the Church in Canada had been advised that there was no Church policy that would prohibit members of the Church there from accepting these government subsidies. This ran counter to the philosophy that had been taught for many years by welfare leaders in the United States who had admonished Latter-day Saints that the Church should stand independent of all earthly agencies, and that if Church members needed assistance, they should reject government subsidies and should turn, instead, to their families and, if necessary, to their bishops who would provide assistance through the Church welfare system. This philosophy had its roots in the depression of the 1930s when Church leaders branded some U.S. relief measures as a dole whose effect created unwanted dependencies on government, robbed the recipients of dignity and independence, imposed heavy tax burdens on society, and fostered the idea of a welfare state. By contrast, it was taught, Church welfare provided a mechanism to enable the needy to obtain help in exchange for which they rendered service, thereby removing the stigma of a dole and preserving feelings of dignity and self-worth.

Lost in this equation was the reality that democratic government rests on people and that government assistance, therefore, represents assistance from the people, including those who might claim government subsidies. It was this rationale that supported the decision not to object to the Canadian Saints accepting the government subsidies should they elect to do so. But to the pioneers in Church welfare, especially President Clark, Elder Lee, and Elder Romney, the idea was surprising and disturbing.

As the pendulum swung away from emphasis on Church welfare, President Clark, Elder Lee, and others involved in the program developed a cautious approach to any proposal to expand it. They were concerned this might precipitate further cutbacks. So, on July 31, 1953, Elder Lee reported he had "counselled with President Clark who urged that any requests for welfare construction be handled wisely so as to prevent the welfare program from diminishing."

The reevaluation of Church welfare mainly occurred during the first six years of President McKay's administration, from 1951 to 1957. Throughout this period, the prophet was preoccupied with the initiatives that would distinguish his administration, initiatives that would signal the internationalization of the Church. During this period, President McKay made three lengthy trips to Europe during which he selected sites for temples in Bern, Switzerland, and London, England. On his third European tour he dedicated the temple in Bern, which underscored his message that the Church was international in character, that new members should remain in their native lands, and that all the blessings of the Church, including temple blessings, would be made available to all. During this period, President McKay also made a lengthy trip into Africa, and South and Central America; and another separate lengthy trip was made into the Pacific, during which he approved the site for a temple in New Zealand. During this period, he was also heavily involved in the completion of the temple in Los Angeles, California, and its dedication in March 1956. It is apparent, therefore, that President McKay had his mind on many things other than Church welfare during this period. While he undoubtedly was aware of and approved the positions his second counselor took on this issue, he had no intention that the welfare plan would be scrapped or seriously cut back, but only that there would be some trimming of its programs and some reining in of its growth. President McKay's heavy, enthusiastic involvement in laying the groundwork of Church welfare affirmed this; and the keynote address he delivered at the opening session of the April general conference in 1957 clearly demonstrated it. Of that address, Elder Lee reported, "He, for the first time during his presidency, made reference to the welfare program, extolling its leaders and declaring that its methods had been tested and proven sound." Elated by this unexpected praise, Elder Lee went to the prophet to thank him for it. "I told him that I felt as though the welfare program had gained a reprieve and that I had relived the feelings I had in the beginning when I was almost daily in his office as he directed me."

Yet, Elder Lee and his associates in Church welfare deplored some of the changes that had been made in the program. He was disturbed when, on September 3, 1957, Elder Delbert L. Stapley advised him that the First Presidency "had given instructions to the Presiding Bishop to provide government social security for all church employees, in addition to church insurance." The following day, Elder Lee recorded this lamentation of his associate, Marion G. Romney: "Marion Romney expressed anxiety that we had lost almost every one of our cherished principles in the welfare program, even including the question of accepting government aid. . . . Our ablest welfare men are called to preside over missions and no new committee members are approved. The Canadians are informed by telegram that they are to counsel their people to accept government dole. We are told to put money in the bank rather than in commodities for a year in home storage. City stakes are now proposing to build old folks homes in lieu of production projects; [and] government social security benefits are gradually replacing the Church employees welfare aid." Notwithstanding these and other changes in Church welfare, the plan remained essentially intact, providing an efficient mechanism to help the needy of the Church in time of want.

These changes in Church welfare were matched by significant changes in the Church hierarchy during the same six-year period. During the years 1952 and 1953, four members of the Twelve passed away: Joseph F. Merrill, John A. Widtsoe, Albert E. Bowen, and Matthew Cowley. These apostles were replaced, in order, by LeGrand Richards, Adam S. Bennion, Richard L. Evans, and George Q. Morris. The call of Elder Richards to the Twelve entailed a reorganization of the Presiding Bishopric, with Joseph L. Wirthlin being called as the new Presiding Bishop and Thorpe B. Isaacson and Carl W. Buehner as his counselors. Continuing the domino effect, Elder Evans's call created a vacancy in the First Council of the Seventy that was filled by the call of thirty-two-year-old Marion D. Hanks. At the October 1953 general conference when Elders Evans and Hanks were called, Elder Hugh B. Brown was sustained as an Assistant to the Twelve, filling the vacancy created by the death of Elder Stayner Richards, a younger brother of President Stephen L. Richards.

As with most of the other new members of the Twelve called after 1941, Elder Lee carefully briefed Adam S. Bennion about headquarters procedures prior to his induction into the quorum. However, because Elders Richards and Evans had served as General Authorities for many years before their calls, and because Elder Morris had served as the general superintendent of the YMMIA, and therefore knew his way around Church headquarters, it was unnecessary for Elder Lee to perform this service for them.

Although it involved neither a call, nor a release, nor a death, another significant change in the Twelve occurred in 1952. A few weeks after his election as the President of the United States in early November, Dwight D. Eisenhower named Ezra Taft Benson as the secretary of agriculture in his cabinet. Before accepting the appointment, Elder Benson had cleared it with President David O. McKay, knowing that acceptance would preclude him from performing his apostolic duties during the time he served in the cabinet. The prophet felt inclined to approve the appointment out of a sense of obligation to the country, and because of a perception that having an ordained apostle functioning at the center of the government of the United States would have a beneficial effect on it.

Elder Lee was pleased about this significant recognition that had come to his boyhood friend, "T" Benson. He first learned about it on November 24, while he was in the midst of dividing the Mount Ogden Stake, in Ogden, Utah, to create the new East Ogden Stake. A press release out of Washington, D.C., on that day was picked up and rebroadcast over the radio in Utah. Preoccupation with the work of the conference prevented Elder Lee from attempting to contact his friend that day to congratulate him. But, he called the next morning, and learning that Elder Benson was in the East, he talked with his wife, Flora, instead, conveying his genuine congratulations on the appointment and the recognition it had brought to Elder Benson personally and to the Church.

Neither President McKay, nor Elder Lee, nor any of the other Brethren, had any misconception about the impact this appointment would have on Elder Benson and the Church. It would cast Elder Benson in the midst of a heated political controversy that marked the end of twenty years of Democratic dominance of the White House. Not since Herbert Hoover left the executive mansion following his defeat in November 1932 had a Republican president presided over the government of the United States. During the intervening twenty years, Democratic presidents and legislators had put in place a host of economic measures designed to adjust what the policy makers considered to be inequities in the system. A key plank in this platform of economic reform was an elaborate system of price supports, which guaranteed minimum prices for farm products, irrespective of market demands or values. It was known at the time of Elder Benson's appointment that both he and President Eisenhower opposed this system, advocating instead a free market. It was known, too, that a shift in policy would entail major upheavals in the agriculture community as farmers lost the secure status that the system of price supports guaranteed. There was no doubt, therefore, that Ezra Taft Benson would occupy the hot seat in President Eisenhower's cabinet, that he would be the main target of criticism by groups and individuals who would be adversely affected by a change in policy, and consequently that he and his family would be subjected to continual upset and harassment. One aspect of this new status, which Elder Benson and his brethren knew would be especially troubling, if not galling, was that some members of the Church who disagreed with his policies would openly oppose him and would seek to have him removed from office, either by discharge or by the political defeat of the man who had appointed him. To one who held the apostolic office, whose life had been dedicated to the aims of the Savior, the Prince of Peace, and who, during the nine years of his apostolic ministry, had preached unity among the Saints, this was an unhappy prospect that would make his service in the cabinet an onerous burden. Being fully aware of this, Elder Benson's associates in the Twelve were very solicitous toward him and sought, by word and deed, to support him in the challenging assignment he had undertaken.

Among the most supportive of Elder Benson's brethren in this situation was his boyhood friend and fellow alumnus of the Oneida Stake Academy, Harold B. Lee. Elder Lee had an opportunity to give open support to his friend at a conference in the Washington, D.C., Stake to which he had been assigned, held only a few weeks after Elder Benson had taken office. Elder Lee arrived in the capital on Saturday, February 28, 1953, by train from New York City. He was met at the train depot by J. Willard Marriott, whose business, which he had started from scratch, was just beginning to take off and which, in the future, would become an international giant. After freshening up at the Marriott home, Elder Lee began the usual round of training and motivational meetings with the leaders and members of the stake. Elder Benson came to the Saturday evening adult session of the conference where Elder Lee insisted that he be seated beside him on the stand and that he share the time with him at the pulpit. Afterward, obviously pleased to again be doing the thing he enjoyed doing most—preaching the gospel—the new secretary of agriculture drove "Hal" to Brother Marriott's home in his chauffeured limousine, which was one of the perks of his new office. It is undoubtedly true that the Oneida classmates of this pair scarcely could have imagined, in their wildest flights of fancy, that these two Cache Valley farm boys would rise so high, so fast. And the end was not yet.

At the general sessions on Sunday, Elder Benson was seated by his friend on the stand and again was asked to share the time at the pulpit. Of this day, Elder Lee reported: "Brother Benson was needing the uplift of the conference; and I did all I could to build him up before the people. There was a remarkable spirit with our entire congressional delegation in attendance."

Following the Sunday sessions, Elder Lee went to the home of Wallace F. Bennett, one of Utah's United States senators, and Mrs. Bennett, who was the youngest daughter of President Heber J. Grant. After dinner, these friends stayed up until midnight, discussing old times and current events as they related to the Church, the federal government, and world affairs. Because of his background in politics, and because of the efforts that had been made to persuade him to run for the Senate, or other high political office, conversations such as this were fascinating to Elder Lee. That fascination was undoubtedly enhanced, on this occasion, because of his gracious hostess, Frances Grant Bennett, whom Elder Lee had known since his early days in Church welfare in the 1930s and whose knowledge of contemporary Church leaders was unmatched. What Elder Lee learned during this lengthy visit with the Bennetts would be helpful in the future, perhaps in ways he could not then foresee.

Although he was up late the night before, Elder Lee arose early the next morning to have breakfast with Elder Benson, who also provided helpful insights about what was going on in Washington. Afterward, Elder Benson invited Elder Lee to accompany him to his office. There he took his visitor on a tour of the executive suite of the Department of the Interior, a large, almost palatial facility, from which he directed the activities of tens of thousands of employees located in offices throughout the country. During the tour, Elder Lee met two men whom he had known for many years who were serving on Elder Benson's administrative staff: D. Arthur Haycock, who had recently served as President George Albert Smith's personal secretary, and Fredrick Babbel, who had served as Elder Benson's secretary and travelling companion while he directed the relief work in Europe after World War II. Brother Haycock, of course, would later serve as his private secretary after Elder Lee became the President of the Church in July 1972. "They are showing the effect of tension in the department," Elder Lee wrote after this visit, "being lashed by their enemies because of a change of policy away from government price supports." However, there was an encouraging sign three days later when Elder Lee noted: "Had a good report on Ezra Taft Benson's talk at Des Moines where he won his audience to his viewpoint on agricultural questions." The public attitude toward Elder Benson and his policies would oscillate back and forth during his service as the secretary of agriculture. But, the support of Elder Lee and the other members of the Twelve would remain constant.

Before leaving Washington on this occasion, Elder Lee also visited Arthur V. Watkins, Utah's other United States Senator, who provided additional important insights about conditions in the capital and the directions in which the new administration was moving. Elder Lee and the senator had been closely associated in the early days of Church welfare while the senator served as a stake president in the Provo, Utah, area.

Elder Lee travelled home via New York City, where he was hosted by Frank Wangeman and his wife, who took him to Radio City to see "Cinerama," a new movie production that had caught the fancy of the country.

"It was good to be home again with my dear wife and my little ones," Elder Lee wrote on March 6 after returning from the East. There was no time to relax and enjoy his family, however, as the next day found him presiding at the conference of the Bear Lake Stake in northern Utah. Between then and the end of the month, he also presided at stake conferences in Tremonton, Hurricane, and Tooele, Utah. Meanwhile, on assignment from President McKay, he and Henry D. Moyle were active in monitoring "hot issues before the legislature" in which the Brethren had taken an interest. They were closeted with the prophet on March 12 for this purpose. By the end of the month, the pressure of this hectic schedule had taken a heavy toll on his health. "Came home in considerable distress in my abdominal region," he wrote on March 30 after completing the assignment to Tooele where he had divided the stake. "I went to the doctor where I spent three hours being examined" to try to find the cause of abdominal pains and recurring headaches. He returned for additional tests the two following days. Medications prescribed by the doctor provided some relief. It was in this condition that Elder Lee entered into the April general conference schedule. He spoke at the Primary conference, where he addressed the subject, "The Building of Testimonies by Primary Workers," and he was the first speaker at the afternoon session on the first day of the general conference where his subject was, "The Gates of Hell Shall Not Prevail Against My Church." Typically, he focused on spiritual things, which is somewhat of an anomaly given the fact his reputation in the Church was then founded on the temporal aspects of welfare.

When the general conference had ended, it was apparent to all that Elder Lee was not well. President Clark and President Joseph Fielding Smith intervened to cancel his assignments and to insist that he go away for a week to convalesce. In company with Fern and close relatives, Bill and Lida Prince, he obediently left Salt Lake City on April 10, headed for southern California and a week of relaxation. Judging from what happened, Elder Lee obviously had a skewed idea about what it meant to relax. On the way down, he stopped in Cedar City, Utah, to instruct a new stake presidency in their duties. Arriving in Los Angeles, he accepted the invitation to dedicate the new Westwood Ward chapel. Then, he acceded to the request of Soren Jacobsen to speak to the workers involved in building the Los Angeles Temple. Meanwhile, he could not disappoint a man who came to him pleading for a blessing. Finally, he was able to spend two quiet days at Brother Jacobsen's beach cottage on Balboa Island. "Slept last night," he wrote on April 16, "as I have never done for years. I awoke at 10:30." After a leisurely brunch and a few desultory hours watching the sea and reading, Elder Lee was jerked back to reality by a call from his secretary who advised he had just received assignments to attend stake conferences at Panguitch, Utah, and Oahu, Hawaii. "My promised vacation was immediately ended," he wrote, "as we began to keep the telephone busy making arrangements to leave Balboa." In the meantime, Salt Lake apparently became aware how Elder Lee's vacation had been short-circuited and advised that his assignment to Panguitch had been cancelled and that he could leave immediately for Hawaii. Since the assignment in Hawaii was two weeks away, this meant he would get his vacation after all.

This was Elder Lee's first trip to Hawaii since his visit more than ten years before when he had shared cramped quarters aboard a freighter with twenty-three others, including smokers. It was the first trip to Hawaii for Fern. They left San Francisco on the Lurline on April 21, assigned to a comfortable stateroom with a private lavatory and shower. Elder Lee characterized the Lurline as "a floating hotel with recreational facilities, sumptuous dining rooms and continuing activities throughout the day or night, suited to all kinds of travellers." And, he also noted, the Lees "proved to be good travellers" with no signs of nausea, helped undoubtedly by dosages of Dramamine, the motion sickness pills that friends had given them at San Francisco.

The casual ambience aboard ship had a soothing effect on the apostle. He settled into an unstructured routine, sleeping as long as he wanted, walking the decks for exercise, reading and writing when the urge came, and in between, gazing at the sea and the marine life that abounded there. On the last night aboard ship, the Lees joined other passengers at the traditional Captain's Dinner, a formal affair with "paper hats and balloons to spice the occasion." Harold Lee had not enjoyed such carefree frivolity since his school days. And, the fact he was on assignment from his leaders, was insulated from all telephone calls and visitors and had no meetings to attend or sermons to deliver, removed any sense of guilt or selfreproach.

The Lurline was destined, first, for Hilo, on the big island, where it would remain for a few hours before going on to Honolulu on the smaller, but better known, island of Oahu. Elder Lee apparently did not learn about this scheduling until late in the voyage. "We regretted that we did not know soon enough," he explained to his diary, "to have notified our missionaries there so that we could have the day with them and our Saints in Hilo inasmuch as we would be there from 8:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M." In these circumstances, he resorted to the only means of communication then available to him: "In our prayers," he explained, "we asked the Lord to alert them somehow to our coming so that our day could be profitably spent with them." The next day's entry, April 26, 1953, reported the outcome. "As we saw the crowd assembled on the pier, we noted a distinctive group of about fifty whom we recognized as our Latter-day Saints. Our prayers had been answered. They greeted us with a profusion of flower leis and took us to a priesthood and Relief Society meeting in our branch."

Elder Lee was impressed by stories told there about how the Saints had been blessed during the devastating tidal wave in 1946, "when 35-foot waves washed away a number of buildings at the waterfront, leaving one lone building which had housed some of the missionaries." A sister also told how she had been washed to sea, but was saved by clinging to a door, and who testified that her temple garments had protected her body from mutilation by sharks. And later in Honolulu, Sister Mary Kaliki told Elder Lee how the tidal wave had receded when she 'commanded' it 'to spare her home.' Such stories confirmed the tradition of Polynesian faith that Matthew Cowley had shared with Elder Lee and the Brethren.

The outpouring of love and leis showered on the Lees at Hilo was repeated when they arrived at Honolulu. The unpretentious affection shown the visitors captivated them and created in them a lasting love for these whole-souled people. That love grew and intensified during the thirteen days they spent on Oahu, days during which they were feted at luaus and shown places of interest, in between which they attended stake conference and missionary meetings, as well as a session at the Laie Temple. The Lees also did some shopping for gifts to take home to the family, made plans to go deep sea fishing, but had to give it up because of rough seas, and had dinner with several different families, among whom was Joseph F. Smith who, several years before, had been released as the Patriarch to the Church. At this time, Brother Smith was on the faculty at the University of Hawaii and was anxious to visit with Elder and Sister Lee to be briefed about their mutual friends. At his request, Elder Lee also gave a special blessing to their host, who, the next day, showed the visitors around the campus. As he had a free day, Elder Lee spent most of it in the university library, "seeking for some ideas which might [be suitable] for the baccalaureate sermon at the USAC on May 31." That night, the Lees "had dinner with the Woolleys [Ralph and wife] at their lovely home atop 'Tantalua.'" Thoroughly rested, the travellers boarded the Lurline on May 9, cleared customs on the fourteenth, and arrived home on the sixteenth, ready to resume their normal schedules.

Before delivering the baccalaureate address at the USAC in Logan, which he had prepared while in Hawaii, Elder Lee presided at stake conferences in Davis County, Utah, and Star Valley, Wyoming. He also attended a special meeting in Clifton, where, as the town's favorite son, he dedicated an addition to their newly remodeled chapel. In order to perpetuate the connection between him and the community, local leaders later erected a monument on the chapel grounds, bearing a plaque with key data about Elder Lee and identifying Clifton as his birthplace.

Elder Lee's baccalaureate address at Logan a few days later, and the events which followed it, were another effort to pay homage to a Cache Valley boy who had made good and had brought distinction to his neighborhood. His address bore the title, "I Dare You to Believe," in which he discussed the fundamental concepts of true religion. At the graduation exercises the following day, he was awarded an honorary doctor of humanities degree, one of several such recognitions that would come to him.

Two days after receiving his honorary degree, Elder Lee joined with the other General Authorities in paying their respects to Elder Stayner Richards, Assistant to the Twelve, who had passed away on May 28. Elder Richards's unexpected death at age sixty-seven, after only two years of service as a General Authority, prompted discussions about the need for some help at the general level to handle the ever-increasing load of work. It also precipitated one of the "brainstorming" sessions that President Clark and Elder Lee engaged in from time to time as they considered various ways in which the work could be facilitated. "President Clark came to the office," Elder Lee noted on June 12, 1953, "to make an observation related to the supervision of wards and stakes as the Church grows." What the president had in mind was to appoint three men in each region on a Church service basis who could train and motivate stake and ward leaders within their respective regions and who, in turn, would report periodically to "the Twelve, or those whom they designate." An interesting feature of President Clark's proposal was the personalities of the three men who would comprise the regional teams he envisioned. He speculated one would be "hard headed or hard boiled," another would be "suave or easy going," and the third would be "of a practical turn of mind." But, all three of them were to be "sound in doctrine and loyal and true." Elder Lee noted that this idea coincided, to an extent, with one he had had about organizing the general priesthood committee, which he chaired, into three groups: children, youth, and adult, "with one of the full time assistants as the executive secretary." In this we see the germ of several ideas that, in the years ahead, would become incorporated in the organizational structure of the Church, the concepts of regional training and supervision, of priesthood coordination and correlation at the general level, and even of area presidencies who would oversee groups of regions, and their constituent stakes, wards, and missions. In instances such as this, we also see the dynamics of Church growth and supervision at work, within the general framework of the priesthood, directed and controlled by apostolic authority.

After the summer break in 1953, Elder Lee was introduced to another phase of Church work when, on August 27, he was appointed to the temple committee, which was chaired by President Joseph Fielding Smith. Elder Spencer W. Kimball was the other member of this three-man committee. This opened a new vista of Church work for Elder Lee and marked the beginning of an intensive study of the origins, the purposes, and the implications of the temple ordinances. In a sense, it was an extension and an intensification of his interest in the temple ordinances that was kindled shortly after his call to the Twelve when he began to instruct groups of missionaries in the Salt Lake Temple. Now, however, his involvement would be much broader and would extend beyond theory to matters of supervision and administration.

In the wake of this appointment came other temple related assignments. In September of that year, he was given the responsibility to make arrangements for a Solemn Assembly in the Logan Temple; and a year later, he performed the same function as to a Solemn Assembly in the St. George Temple. He also chaired the committee that made the arrangements for the cornerstone laying ceremony at the Los Angeles Temple. Afterward, he played a key role in making the final arrangements for the dedication of that temple. Moreover, in connection with his stake conference and other assignments, he began to take care of temple matters while in outlying areas. In mid - October 1953 during an assignment in Alberta, Canada, he visited the Cardston Temple "to make some inquiries [he] had been asked to make by the First Presidency."

The main reason for this trip to Canada was to preside at a quarterly conference of the Lethbridge Stake. With Elder Lee on this occasion was Elder Hugh B. Brown, who, the previous weekend, had been sustained as an Assistant to the Twelve. Having lived in Canada for many years, Elder Brown was almost regarded as a native son, and that perception was enhanced by his marriage to Zina Card, the daughter of one of the Church's most noted pioneers in Canada, and by the death of his son, who was killed in World War II while flying in a Canadian contingent of the Royal Air Force. These things, added to the fact that this was Elder Brown's first assignment as a General Authority, created an air of expectancy in the conference toward what he might say during his public addresses. What he said was electrifying to the Lethbridge Saints, as it was to others when Elder Brown repeated it later on other occasions. Elder Lee summarized what his companion said: "He bore a remarkable testimony," wrote Elder Lee in his diary on October 11, "of a power that tried to crush him and overcome him by a terrible despondency. This came on Friday night before he was notified by telephone late Saturday night by President McKay that he would be named as an Assistant to the Council of the Twelve." Two days later at a special meeting in Edmonton, Elder Lee again shared the pulpit with his companion when he wrote of Elder Brown: "Hugh was very nervous and in distress, possibly due to the strains and tensions of the past week." It may also be that Elder Brown was overwhelmed with the prospect of what lay ahead, having learned by personal acquaintance with many of the Brethren over the years the demands made on the time and energies of the General Authorities. At this time, Elder Brown was within a few days of his seventieth birthday, an age when most men would already have been in retirement for several years. Ahead for him, however, lay the most active, the most demanding, the most stressful, albeit the most productive and enjoyable years of his life, which would extend into his ninety-third year. Indeed, Elder Brown, although sixteen years older than Elder Lee, would outlive him by a year. And the remaining years of their lives would see them switching leadership roles as Elder Brown would be elevated to the Twelve, then to the First Presidency, then returned to the Twelve at the same time Elder Lee would become the first counselor in the First Presidency, and then the president of the Church.

The day after this special meeting in Edmonton, Elder Lee dedicated a Church institute building to be used by the LDS students attending the University of Edmonton. Sharing the rostrum with him on this occasion were Elder Brown, Andrew Stewart, the president of the university, and prominent local Latter-day Saint political, business, and church leader N. Eldon Tanner. Eldon Tanner, a distant cousin of Fern Tanner Lee, would play a significant role in the future leadership of the Church, both at the local and the general levels, serving ultimately as a counselor to four presidents of the Church: David O. McKay, Joseph Fielding Smith, Harold B. Lee, and Spencer W. Kimball.

Brother Tanner's meteoric rise to the highest echelons of Church leadership began a month after the dedication of the Edmonton Institute Building when the Lethbridge Stake was divided to create the new Calgary Stake. Elder Lee was assigned to effect the division, assisted by Elder Mark E. Petersen. The two apostles went by automobile to Great Falls, Montana, the first day in clear autumn weather. On the second day, November 13, 1953, they drove to Calgary, Alberta, Canada, where the headquarters of the new stake were to be established. There they had dinner with N. Eldon Tanner "to get better acquainted as he was being considered as a leader in the new stake," wrote Elder Lee. The apostles apparently wanted to see the candidate in his home setting to determine whether his family and his personal life-style were of a kind they could urge the local members to emulate. Brother Tanner had already received strong endorsement from people who knew him well, including his uncle, Hugh B. Brown, who had known Eldon since he was a boy. Elder Lee had seen him in action a month before at the dedication ceremony in Edmonton and had been favorably impressed. But he and Elder Petersen still wanted to go behind the curtain of his public life and reputation to see him in the place where he lived.

Elder Lee's diary entry of the next day reveals that N. Eldon Tanner had met every test. "We went into a series of interviews throughout the day," wrote he, "and particularly with Eldon Tanner who for years has been one of the strongest leaders in the Social Credit Party of Alberta, having served as the Minister of Lands and Mines. We satisfied ourselves as to his soundness and his loyalty to church principles and leadership." Another entry in the diary indicates one of the special" church principles" Elder Lee felt the candidate should accept without qualification. "He told us," wrote Elder Lee, "that neither he, nor any of his children, had accepted the 'Family Allowance' paid by the Dominion Government. He said he valued his freedom too much to sell it for so little." Having learned that, the conclusion seemed inevitable. "We finally selected him for our stake president." It is apparent that although Salt Lake had indicated its approval for Church members in Canada to accept the "Family Allowance," if they elected, Elder Lee wanted to be certain that the stake president he installed in Calgary did not accept the allowance and, in principle, was opposed to it.

It is an interesting commentary on the fluid nature of leadership in the Mormon church to note that in less than ten years from the date he was called at age fifty-five, as the Church's newest stake president, of a new remote stake, hundreds of miles from Church headquarters, N. Eldon Tanner would be catapulted into the First Presidency where he would have supervisory responsibilities over Elder Harold B. Lee, the apostle who called him as stake president. These leadership roles would, of course, be reversed in 1970 when Elder Lee became President Joseph Fielding Smith's first counselor, with Brother Tanner as the second counselor, and in 1972 when President Lee became the president of the Church.

It is anomalous that alongside the fluidity in Church leadership, reflected in N. Eldon Tanner's rapid rise to the First Presidency, stands a bedrock stability in the members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and the First Presidency, who, once called, serve for life, conditioned on their faithfulness.

The strain of travel and the pressures of events in Canada caused a recurrence of the nervous tension and headaches that had troubled Elder Lee in recent years. He was bedridden a few days before Thanksgiving, but was sufficiently recovered to go to the football game on Thanks-giving Day with son-in-law Ernie Wilkins. It was a nationally televised game between the University of Utah and Brigham Young University, which Utah won thirty-three to thirty-two. It was a tonic to Elder Lee to spend several hours in the brisk autumn air, enjoying the excitement of the close, hard-fought game and the companionship of his son-in-law.
