Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Nineteen

The Cycle Continues

Elder Lee loved this young man, Ernie Wilkins, who with Maurine had struggled to complete his formal education at Stanford, but for lack of time and means had not completed his doctoral dissertation. Lacking his Ph.D., he had first accepted a low entry position on the BYU faculty, then had given that up to accept employment in industry in southern California and later had returned to Utah after stressful experiences in business convinced him that he wanted to pursue an academic career, despite the slim financial rewards it offered. Meanwhile, he and Maurine had provided the Lees with their first granddaughter, Marlee, who had been born the previous June. Now the Wilkinses were in the process of sinking deep family roots in Provo, much to the happiness of Elder and Sister Lee. The security of the Wilkins family was significantly enhanced by an event that occurred a few months after the Thanksgiving celebration in 1953. "Today," Elder Lee wrote on April 2, 1954," our dear son-in-law, Ernest J. Wilkins, was awarded his doctors degree at the Stanford University in languages. I believe I am even more thrilled than he, not because of the honor thus conferred, but because of the victory won and the assurance and security it will give."

The joy this incident brought was muted by a serious injury Fern had suffered a few days before. While climbing the stairs in their home, she had fallen and fractured her left hip. Because of low blood pressure, an operation had been postponed. By April 2, however, she was strong enough to undergo the needed surgery, which consisted of knitting the fracture together with a metal plate. This serious accident and his wife's natural frailty had been a cause of concern to Elder Lee. The relief he felt once the delicate surgery had been successfully completed is mirrored in this entry of April 5: "The love and faith of the First Presidency and the Twelve and Bishop Wirthlin was never in greater evidence. Fern has undoubtedly been [blessed] by the wonderful prayers and faith offered by so many." And the next day, during which George Q. Morris was sustained as a member of the Twelve, and Sterling W. Sill was sustained as an Assistant to the Twelve, Elder Lee wrote: "While seated in the tabernacle, in the closing service of conference, I seemed to have been bathed in Heavenly peace which assured me that the Lord had given my beloved Fern back to me."

Sister Lee's recovery was steady, although marked by occasional setbacks. "Fern took a turn for the worse," Elder Lee wrote on April 8. During the three following days, he spent long hours at the hospital, comforting his wife. Afterward, he was "weary" and his nerves were "somewhat unstrung," which brought on a "nervous stomach disorder." In this condition, he drove to Pocatello, Idaho, the following weekend for a stake conference. While there, he suffered a severe attack of sinusitis which was temporarily alleviated by a blessing given by the local brethren. Indeed, he felt so much better the next day after returning to Salt Lake that he cancelled an appointment at a laboratory for "allergy tests."

Elder Lee brought Fern home from the hospital on April 20. "She was revived by the smell of the yard and the feel of home," he wrote. "I brought my mattress and slept on the floor by her throughout the night." During the ensuing week, Elder Lee's sinus problem flared up again. After consultation, it was decided surgery was necessary; so on April 27, a week after Fern returned home, Dr. Leroy Smith operated to "remove some growths" from his nose, "which had been causing difficulty in breathing." This surgery, and minor follow-up surgery in July, seems to have effected a significant improvement in Elder Lee's health. For several years afterward, his diary is devoid of references to physical problems, except once, about eighteen months after the surgeries, he noted he had suffered some "nervous tension."

The dawning of May, with the colorful display of flowers in their tidy yards, seemed to infuse the Lees with new enthusiasm. They were both on the mend and looked forward to resuming their normal routines. Both daughters, with their husbands and children, lived nearby, which enabled them to enjoy the nurturing of these two "little families." On the first Sunday in May, Helen and Brent brought their six-week-old daughter, Elizabeth Jane, to visit her Lee grandparents. Elder Lee had just returned from a stake conference in Moroni, Utah, and with his wife, enjoyed holding and cuddling this their second granddaughter.

Later in the month, the Lees' horizons were broadened when President McKay asked them to tour the Orient. They were given latitude to leave when Fern had regained her strength. By August, she felt well enough to go. Meanwhile, Elder Lee was involved during much of the summer directing a course on the Bible for seminary and institute teachers given for credit at Brigham Young University. He gave some of the weekly lessons and assigned the remainder to other General Authorities, whom he accompanied to Provo where he introduced them. Among those who assisted him were President J. Reuben Clark, who spoke twice, President Joseph Fielding Smith, and Elders Henry D. Moyle, Marion G. Romney, and Adam S. Bennion of the Twelve. It was a stimulating and enjoyable experience for Elder Lee, which was reminiscent of the past when he regularly taught in an academic setting. The benefit to the students was attested by the many favorable reports received during and after the course.

But the experience had its downside. At the outset, he learned secondhand of grumbling among members of the faculty that the one directing the course, Elder Lee, not only did not have a bona fide Ph.D., but did not even have an undergraduate degree from an accredited four-year university. In the view of these critics, the honorary Ph.D. awarded to Elder Lee the previous year by the Utah State University was insufficient to remove the academic stigma they feared his directing a "for credit" class would bring to BYU. This situation understandably created the awkward and anomalous feeling in Elder Lee that he was unwelcome there, although he served on the executive committee of the Board of Trustees that directed the university and controlled its administration, including the hiring and firing of its faculty. These feelings were intensified when, during the course, a member of the faculty confronted him following a lecture, to criticize his citation of scriptures in the Doctrine and Covenants, something he felt was inappropriate in a study of the Bible and he said might endanger the university's accreditation.

Having received a series of vaccinations during the summer, and later having received special blessings from President McKay, Elder and Sister Lee left Salt Lake City on the California Zephyr on August 3 destined first for San Francisco. Two days later, they boarded the SS Cleveland, bound first for Hawaii, then Yokohama, Japan. Aboard the Cleveland were BYU President Ernest L. Wilkinson and his wife, who were going to Honolulu where President Wilkinson would study the feasibility of establishing a junior college there. Elder Lee's position on the executive committee of the Board of Trustees of BYU brought him into frequent contact with President Wilkinson to discuss university policies. So, during the five-day voyage to Hawaii, they spent many hours together, talking about matters of mutual interest. The thing that seemed uppermost in President Wilkinson's mind was his relationship with the First Presidency, all of whom were members of the Board of Trustees of the university, but none of whom served on the executive committee. Obviously he did not want to violate protocol, either by failing to keep these brethren fully advised about his administration or by intruding unduly on their time. Elder Lee, who by this time had been intimately connected with the First Presidency for almost twenty years, was able to give President Wilkinson counsel that, in the future, would help him to avoid needless embarrassments.

Waiting to greet Elder and Sister Lee at the pier in Pearl Harbor were the temple president, the stake president, and the mission president and their wives, the latter being D. Arthur Haycock and his wife, Maurine. In addition, of course, there were many Polynesian Saints present who welcomed the visitors in traditional fashion with song, dance, and a profusion of fragrant leis.

The Lees made the mission home their headquarters during the two-day layover in Honolulu. This enabled Elder Lee to counsel his friend Arthur Haycock, who had been called to Hawaii from Elder Ezra Taft Benson's staff in the Department of Agriculture. Elder Lee also spent some time with Henry Aki and Colonel Gillette of the Oahu Stake high council, to be briefed about conditions in the Orient.

The travellers boarded their ship at 10:30 P.M., August 13, for the six-day voyage to Yokohama. Unlike the smooth passage from San Francisco to Hawaii, this leg of their trip was marked by heavy storms and much seasickness. This limited their enjoyment of the elaborate cuisine, which was available to them on request, night or day, and the host of other amenities to be found aboard a luxury liner.

The Lees' ship eased into Yokohama Bay on the nineteenth after the submarine net guarding the mouth of the bay had been lifted. This protective measure was considered necessary because of the tensions in the Orient arising out of the Korean War and its aftermath. Shortly after the ship dropped anchor, the passengers were surprised to hear the announcement over the ship's PA system, "The port of Yokohama is closed until further orders. The time of docking will depend solely upon weather conditions." This was a major disappointment as they had anticipated quitting the ship and its constant movements immediately upon their arrival, movements that, though not nearly as pronounced in port as in the open sea, still were noticeable as she rode at anchor.

The wait ended on the twenty-first when their ship eased into the Yokohama dock to disgorge its passengers and cargo. The pier teemed with longshoremen who, with typical Japanese dispatch, unloaded the baggage of the passengers along with the extra cargo the ship carried. Waiting on the pier to greet the Lees were Mission President Hilton A. Robertson and his wife and several missionaries and servicemen, including Colonel Reed Richards and Colonel Vasco Laub. After clearing customs, a usually complex procedure that had been simplified through the help of President Robertson and his staff, the travellers were taken directly to the Eighth Army Base. There they were greeted by the commanding general of the Eighth Army, Lt. General Thomas B. Hickey, and Chaplain Wilson, who supervised all chaplains in the area. After the usual pleasantries, Elder Lee was outfitted with army clothing and insignia that would enable him to visit army camps as a VIP with all the privileges normally accorded to a major general. After an elaborate meal at the officers club, the Lees were taken to the mission home, where they made preparations for meetings to be held the next day, a Sunday.

Separate priesthood and Relief Society meetings were held in Yokohama on August 22, followed by a sacrament meeting attended by a congregation of two hundred, twenty-five of whom were investigators. Among the members present was a Korean convert, Lt. Commander S. Lee, an officer in the Korean Navy, who, Elder Lee was surprised to learn, travelled three hours each way on Sunday to meet with two other members of the Church. He also found other similar examples of dedication among the converts whom he would meet during the five-week tour that lay ahead. That tour would take him to many cities and military bases in Japan, Korea, China, Taiwan, the Philippines, Okinawa, Guam, and Wake Island. Fern spoke at many meetings. Her qualities of spirituality and loving concern increased the impact of her husband's words. His report of her participation in the Yokohama meetings illustrates the quality of her influence. "Fern's motherly talk to the boys," wrote he on August 23, "brought almost universal requests from the servicemen to contact their mothers, wives, and sweethearts."

The next day the visitors flew to Sapporo on the island of Hokkaido, where they met with a group of servicemen at Camp Crawford. Here Elder Lee focused on chastity, a theme that was interwoven throughout the talks he gave to servicemen during the tour. He referred to reports that in a nearby city, classified as one of the most wicked cities in the world, there were four thousand prostitutes and their purveyors. In contrast, he cited the example of a serviceman who contributed over half of his monthly allotment to help finance his brother in the mission field.

Then followed meetings in Tokyo, Itazuki, and Osaka, Japan, before the visitors were flown to Seoul, Korea, in a Globemaster military craft. The Lees were met at the Seoul airport by five LDS chaplains and were then driven to U.S. Army headquarters in a staff car, where they were welcomed by General Oates, the divisional chief of staff. Here they were given ID cards and were outfitted in fatigues before being taken on a tour to see the city and the ravages it had suffered during the war. That it had changed hands four times during the bitter fighting was evident from the many gutted and blackened buildings that still remained standing.

The next day the visitors were briefed on the history of Korea. Elder Lee was interested to learn that of over two thousand Korean clan names, the four predominant ones were Kim, Yi, Chang, and Lee. His name, therefore, opened many doors and provided the grist for many friendly conversations. Given his name, it seems altogether fitting that Harold B. Lee was the first General Authority of the Church to visit Korea.

A conference was held at the Seoul army post chapel on Sunday, September 2. There were 325 in attendance at the morning session and 338 in the afternoon. Those attending included military personnel, thirty Korean converts, and some nonmembers, both from the military and from the Korean population. The speakers, in addition to Elder and Sister Lee, included LDS chaplains, group leaders from the military camps, and Dr. H. Kim, a graduate of Cornell University. Elder Lee found later that the ratio of Ph.D.'s to the total population is perhaps higher in Korea than in any other country.

During the following three days, Elder Lee flew to army camps located some distance from Seoul, identified as camps Abel 2 and Abel 143, where worship services were held. On the flight to Abel 143, the pilot of the F-19 was Captain Daniel Lewis who had been a student at the Woodrow Wilson grammar school in Salt Lake City when Elder Lee was its principal. Captain Lewis flew his passengers up the Chun Haun Valley where hundreds of ROK troops had been annihilated and across the demilitarized zone where, Elder Lee wrote, "We could see the smoke from the Chinese camps."

At Abel 143, Elder Lee was briefed by General McLure, the commander of the Twenty-fourth Division. "In this valley," Elder Lee reported, "we got a glimpse of what total war can do. Two entire villages, one with a population of forty thousand, were completely wiped out."

Returning to Seoul, Elder Lee was introduced to General Maxwell D. Taylor, chief of the Far Eastern command of the US Armed Forces. He gained many helpful insights from this seasoned military leader who was two years younger than he. A graduate of West Point, General Taylor was a skilled linguist who had taught French and Spanish at the academy and who had studied Japanese in Tokyo in the 1930s. He also had commanded the 101st Airborne Division in its airborne landings in France and the Netherlands in 1944 and had been commander of the American military government in Berlin. The year following Elder Lee's visit to Korea, General Taylor became the chief of staff of the United States Army.

The next day, the Lees witnessed the baptism of a Korean convert, Ho Nam Rhee, one of many investigators who were then being taught the gospel by returned missionaries among the United States servicemen. Afterward, Elder Lee talked at length with Dr. H. Kim, asking for suggestions about how proselyting work could be carried on effectively in Korea. Many of Dr. Kim's suggestions were utilized when, the next year, Korea became part of the Northern Far East Mission under President Hilton A. Robertson. And in 1962, a separate Korean mission was organized with Gail E. Carr as its president. Brother Carr, who intermittently visited Korea as a serviceman in the early 1950s, served in the Korea district of the Northern Far East Mission from 1956 to 1958 when he learned the language that enabled him to serve as the first mission president in Korea. These events, which preceded or followed Elder Lee's trailbreaking visit in 1954, reveal the evolutionary process by which Church growth expands following the initial planting of Latter-day Saint influences.

The day after witnessing the baptism in Seoul, Elder Lee was scheduled to fly to Pusan, Korea, for a series of meetings. However, foul weather socked in the Seoul airport, which required a switch to the train. Chaplain Palmer was stressed by this change because, unknown to Elder Lee, he and others had planned a surprise dinner in Pusan honoring the Lees and General Richard E. Whitcomb, which was scheduled hours before the train would arrive. When Elder Lee was informed of the dilemma, he told the chaplain "not to worry, that if it was vital, the way would be opened to attend." That afternoon, the storm let up briefly to allow a military plane to take off. Hurried arrangements were made for Elder and Sister Lee to board it, but not until they had donned parachutes and Mae West jackets and had been given a crash course in how to bail out of a crippled plane and how to survive in the water should they land at sea. Luckily, they had no need to use this riveting information and arrived safely in Pusan in time to prepare to look surprised at the dinner. It was encouraging to learn that at the meeting the next day, there were eighty-seven nonmember Koreans in attendance.

The travellers flew directly to Tokyo from Pusan, arriving in time to enable Elder Lee to meet with the leaders of fifteen religious denominations on September 11. The plan was for him to speak for an hour and to respond to questions for half an hour. However, the interest in what he said was so intense, they kept him at the lectern for three hours during which he discussed, among other things, the organization of the Church, the restoration, authority in the priesthood, temple work, tithing, missionary work, and the Word of Wisdom. Elder Lee spoke through his interpreter, Brother Sato. "They were most cordial and attentive," he wrote of his hosts.

The visitors travelled by train from Tokyo to Sendai and Nikko, where special worship services were held; and on September 15, Elder Lee met in Tokyo with eighty missionaries in a report and testimony meeting that lasted from 6:00 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. Even then, the missionaries were reluctant to see it end, so sweet and powerful was the Spirit that attended it. It was reported that thirty-two converts had been baptized during the year and that others were in line for baptism in the future. Obviously, new attitudes were stirring in Japan. Fifty years before when Heber J. Grant presided there, only two Japanese joined the Church during his two-year tenure; and they fell away. Elder Lee gained an insight into a main reason for this change through the testimony of Elder Aki. "He thanked the Lord for the war, despite its terrors because through it, the LDS servicemen [came among them]."

From Tokyo, the travellers flew to Okinawa, the site of the last major battle of World War II. Here Elder Lee was introduced to generals Fay Upthegrove and David D. Ogden, who hosted him on a tour of the island while they described the bloody battles that took the lives of nineteen thousand Americans, ninety thousand Japanese, and one hundred thousand Okinawans. Worship services were conducted in a chapel just off the beaches where the first amphibious landings were made nine years before. Outside the pounding surf, devoid of tongue, was mute to tell of deaths the war had won. Inside the Seer, endowed with golden speech, explained unending life within man's reach.

Leaving Okinawa, the party flew to Kowloon with a brief stop in Taipei. A meeting was held with members of the small Kowloon branch on September 22. The next day, they were taken on a tour of Kowloon, with its narrow streets lined with shops whose merchandise spilled on to the sidewalks and where customers and shopkeepers talked animatedly. It is said strangers who buy at the listed amounts deprive Kowloon shopkeepers of a chief joy, that of trade-haggling over the price of their goods.

The visitors were then ferried to Hong Kong across the harbor where they were the honored guests at a dinner hosted by George Liu and his sister, Eva, and her husband. It was a typical Chinese feast, served in fourteen courses with friendly conversation. During the dinner, President Robertson presented Elder Lee with a Rolex watch and Sister Lee with a beautiful painted ivory piece, both gifts to the Lees from Wendell Mendenhall. Two days later, the visitors were the guests of Daniel F. Y. Chan at another elaborate Chinese dinner.

Before leaving the area, Elder Lee visited the spot where, on July 24, 1949, Elder Matthew Cowley dedicated the land of China for the preaching of the gospel. While they were there, Elder Lee, at the request of President Robertson, also offered a prayer in behalf of the Chinese people and of the missionary work to be performed among them in the future.

From Hong Kong, the party flew to the Philippine Islands where they were shown around Manila by a wealthy nonmember businessman, Peter Grimm, who later joined the Church, and his Latter-day Saint wife, Maxine Tate Grimm of Tooele, Utah. Elder Lee also held a meeting with servicemen at Clark Field where he met General Wm. L. Lee, who gave him the name of a Lee relative in North Carolina who would be able to provide genealogical information that might show a family tie between them.

Leaving the Philippines, the Lees headed eastward toward home with brief stops at Guam and Wake Islands and Hawaii. They arrived in Salt Lake City on October 3 in time to enable Elder Lee to be the last speaker at the general conference where he reported on his recent tour of the Orient.

This tour opened Elder Lee's mind to the proselyting prospects in the Far East. It also gave him insights into the attitudes of orientals, their qualities of character and their receptivity to the gospel. Moreover, it revealed the interactions between orientals and visitors from the West and the potential for future leadership of the oriental converts. All these and other insights gleaned from the tour would be important in the future as Elder Lee's voice would be heard in the inner councils of the Church, advocating an acceleration of the work in that part of the world. The tour also gave Elder Lee a better understanding of the needs and mentality of LDS servicemen, which would be important in his continuing role as the chairman of the servicemen's committee; and it enhanced the image and status of the Church in the eyes of military leaders as Elder Lee had been hosted and assisted by army and air force generals all along the way. These contacts would prove valuable in the future as the Church sought greater consideration for LDS chaplains.

Soon after returning from the Orient, Elder Lee received the frightening assignment to give the Church of the Air address at the coming April general conference. It was frightening because he would have a nationwide audience, comprised overwhelmingly of nonmembers. Because the talk would be given near Easter, he decided on an Easter theme. His text was taken from the "Hosanna Shout," found in Zechariah 9:9, "Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of the Lord. Hosanna, to the Son of David." The main focus of the talk, which was given at the Sunday morning session of the conference on April 3, 1955, was the ministry of the early apostles who came in the name of the Lord. After tracing their calls to the apostleship and the beginning of their ministry, Elder Lee asked rhetorically: "How was it possible that a handful of apostles, who as fishermen and publicans could engage the learned and the mighty as well as the simple and those of low degree to forsake their religion and embrace a new religion?" In answering his own question, Elder Lee said: "There were undoubted marks of celestial power, perpetually attending their ministry. There was in their very language," he said, quoting Mosheim," 'an incredible energy or amazing power of sending light into the understanding and convictions of the heart.'" (Conference Report, April 1955, p. 19.) He characterized these early apostles as "God's engineers," who "by following a blueprint made in heaven have charted the course for safest and happiest passage [through life] and have forewarned us of the danger areas." Then, after alluding to the Savior's triumphant entry into Jerusalem and to his later triumph over death through the Crucifixion and Resurrection, Elder Lee, speaking in the spirit and authority of his own apostolic calling, concluded by saying: "Today, as did they in past generations, we declare boldly, that 'The fundamental principles of our religion are the testimony of the Apostles and Prophets concerning Jesus Christ, that He died, was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven; and all other things which pertain to our religion are only appendages to it.' O that the inhabitants of an unrepentant world would humble themselves and with faith in the Redeemer of mankind join in the chorus of the multitude who welcomed the Master into the Holy City. . . . For that I pray humbly." (Ibid., p. 20.)

Elder Lee was touched when, at 7:30 the morning he delivered this talk, President J. Reuben Clark came to his office "to be with me [and] to give personal support and uplift." This gracious act was appreciated all the more because President Clark was recuperating from a bad fall he had suffered and was still mourning the death of his brother, Ted. A few days later, the Lees and several others were dinner guests at President Clark's home. "We were shocked," Elder Lee wrote of the occasion, "at the realization that he was failing in health. He was unsteady on his feet and was obviously not his usual self. When he wanted to relate an incident, he usually would refer it to me and ask me to tell it." President Clark, who was eighty-four years old at the time, would later throw off the effects of this temporary despondency and would live for six more years.

Two days after the dinner at President Clark's home, Elder Lee left by train to tour the Central States Mission, where Alvin R. Dyer presided. The apostle had become well acquainted with the mission president after he moved to the home on Connor Street. President Dyer was the bishop of the Monument Park Ward in which the Lees then lived and had enjoyed unusual success in motivating the priests in the ward to fill missions and in creating enthusiasm in the ward. Because there had been favorable reports about Brother Dyer's service in the mission field, Elder Lee noted on April 15, 1955, following their first meeting of the tour, held in Dodge City, Kansas, "I am pleased to be able to inquire into the work of a 'master craftsman of human engineering.'" President Dyer's good work as a mission president would be acknowledged three years later when, in 1958, he was called as an Assistant to the Twelve. Several years after that, he was ordained an apostle, although he was never inducted into the Twelve, and later still he was called as a counselor to the First Presidency, where he had some supervisory responsibilities over Elder Lee.

Oblivious to these future events, the touring party left Dodge City, reputed in pioneer days to be one of the wildest cities in America, to drive to Wichita, Kansas. This took them through a major wheat growing area, then in its third year of a serious drouth, which had created havoc with the local economy, crippling the wheat farmers and the flour and feed mills that were dependent on them. At Wichita, they were the guests in the luxurious home of prominent local businessman T. Bowring Woodbury and his wife. Brother Woodbury, called "By" by his friends, was a counselor to President Dyer in the mission presidency. The training he received in this position and his exposure to Elder Lee and other general Church leaders resulted in By Woodbury being recommended as a mission president, a recommendation that the prophet later followed when Brother Woodbury was called as a mission president in Great Britain. It was under the leadership of men like Brother Woodbury that a massive increase in convert baptisms occurred in Great Britain in the late 1950s and early 1960s. And the harvest from that effort produced many of the staunch leaders of the Church in Great Britain a few decades later.

After holding meetings with missionaries and members in Wichita, the party travelled into Oklahoma. Here Elder Lee met another man who would later render significant service in the Church. "One of the outstanding men of the mission is James Cullimore," wrote Elder Lee on April 19, 1955. "He owns three furniture stores." James A. Cullimore would later serve as a mission president in Great Britain during the period of rapid growth there and, in 1966, would be called as an Assistant to the Twelve.

At this point of the tour, Elder Lee received word of the death of Howard McKean, chairman of the Church building department. Since Elder Lee had previously agreed to speak at his friend's funeral, he flew home for this purpose and then returned immediately to complete the tour. District conferences and missionary meetings were then held in St. Louis, Independence, Columbia, and Springfield, Missouri. Also meetings with servicemen were held at the Scott Air Force Base near Bellville, Illinois, and at Fort Leonard Wood. At this last base, Elder Lee was pleased to hear the commanding officer, Major General Frank Bowman, say "that the boys [Latter-day Saints] did not forget the church and the church did not forget the boys."

Elder Lee took three days after the tour ended to visit places of Church historic interest in Independence, Richmond, Liberty, Far West, and Adam-ondi-Ahman, Missouri. At Independence, in addition to inspecting the temple site, he paid a courtesy call on the two counselors in the first presidency of the Reorganized church: Francis Henry Edwards, a fifty-seven-year-old convert from England, and W. Wallace Smith, fifty-five-year-old brother of Israel Smith. Elder Lee was interested to learn that President Edwards had followed President David O. McKay around during his recent tour in the Pacific and that President Smith planned to follow Elder Spencer W. Kimball around during his coming tour of Europe. Their reasons for doing this were not made clear.

President Dyer was helpful in briefing Elder Lee about the historic sites in Missouri. He had made a detailed study of the area and had a special interest in the events that had taken place there and those that were predicted to occur in the future. Their first stop north of Independence was at Richmond, where the Prophet Joseph Smith and Hyrum were imprisoned for a while in 1838 in an old house that was later torn down. Here they saw the grave sites of David Whitmer and Oliver Cowdery and a monument erected in memory of the three witnesses of the Book of Mormon. At nearby Liberty, they inspected the old jail where the Smith brothers had been incarcerated. At Far West, they walked around the temple site; and at Adam-ondi-Ahman, they examined the remains of the ancient altar. Elder Lee was amazed that at all these sites, and at places in between, there were no buildings standing that had been constructed by the Latter-day Saints, except a small house built by Lyman Wight, which stood on the side of the hill below the altar at Adam-ondi-Ahman. In contrast, there were numerous buildings standing in both Kirtland, Ohio, and Nauvoo, Illinois, constructed by the Mormon people, places where they had lived for a shorter period of time than in Missouri.

Elder Lee boarded the City of St. Louis at Kansas City at 9:30 P.M. on May 1955 for the long trip home. He was startled to find that Fern had suffered hemorrhaging in one of her eyes while he was gone, which had produced a red blotch in it. "As usual, her courage and faith were great," he noted, "but my heart melted as I contemplated the possibility of her failing health." The major concern for her health was high blood pressure, which ranged from 200 to 230. This and medication the doctor prescribed limited her activity. The help of a German sister hired by Elder Lee, who lived in a basement apartment with her young daughter, and assistance from Maurine and Helen, who were nearby, eased Fern's household duties and made it possible for things at home to function smoothly. And counsel given by President McKay at the last meeting of the Brethren in June proved to be providential to the Lees. The prophet then instructed the Brethren to take full advantage of the summer break to spend time with their families and to take care of personal affairs. Following that counsel, Elder Lee spent July and part of August close to home, working in the yards, quietly studying and visiting with Fern. With help from the German sister and her daughter, Fern planned and hosted a dinner party during the month in honor of President and Sister Joseph Fielding Smith, prior to their departure for the Far East. The guests included President David O. McKay, who, when he was introduced to the Lees' grandson, David Goates, said to him, "David, let's you and I keep that name honorable, what do you say?" The only other interruption to the Lees' peaceful summer break was during three days over the Twenty-fourth of July celebration. With his sons-in-law and grandsons, Elder Lee went to Treasure Mountain Scout Camp near Driggs, Idaho, where about a thousand Scouts and their leaders and families had gathered for an encampment. There the title "Chief Friend of the Forest" was conferred upon him. In response, Elder Lee spoke to the group, focusing mainly on the Scouts, whom he admonished to live worthily. It was a significant privilege to be in this ruggedly beautiful setting with his young grandsons. It was fortuitous, too, that their fathers were along so that when Grandpa was through visiting or playing with them, Brent and Ernie could take over to feed and supervise them. While the men and boys were thus employed, Fern and her daughters and granddaughters were enjoying each other at the Lee home in Salt Lake City. Two months later, Maurine added to the treasure trove of Lee grandchildren when she gave birth to another son, Jay, who was born on the same day that "Skipper," the oldest grandchild, was baptized.

Toward the end of summer, Elder Lee was assigned by President McKay to lead out in making and executing final plans for the dedication of the Los Angeles Temple. This brought them into frequent contact as the arrangements were finalized. In late February 1956, Elder Lee had a vivid dream about President McKay in which the prophet gave instructions about the love of God and its relationship to the command that we love our neighbors as ourselves. When President McKay offered the prayer dedicating the Los Angeles Temple on March 11, 1956, Elder Lee was startled that the prayer's ending essentially repeated what he had seen and heard in the dream. "I was deeply moved as the dedicatory prayer was read," he explained in his diary under that date, "because of a dream I had two weeks ago, in which President McKay was impressing me with the meaning of the love of God, as it relates to the love of our fellowmen and of His service. The dedicatory prayer closed with similar instructions to those I had heard in my dream two weeks before." The impact of this dream upon Elder Lee, and the dedicatory prayer that followed it, seems to have been profound and lasting.

Several weeks after the Los Angeles Temple dedication, President McKay assigned Elder Lee to travel to Mexico to create a new mission. Elder Spencer W. Kimball was assigned to accompany him. They would be together for three weeks, during which their relationship, which had always been cordial and close, would be firmly cemented. Elder Lee had loved and admired Spencer Kimball from the time they first met. He was amazed at his friend's brimming energy, his thoroughness, and his nonstop activity. He marvelled at the enthusiasm with which he undertook any assigned task and the persistent way in which he pursued it to conclusion.

These feelings of love and admiration toward him were reciprocated by Elder Kimball. He regarded Harold B. Lee as one of the greatest men of his generation. While he was four years older than Elder Lee and a member of one of the most distinguished families in the Church, he was always subordinate to his friend and anxious to do his bidding. Because of the age differential and his seeming poorer health, Elder Kimball never expected to become the President of the Church and, therefore, had reconciled himself to the idea that throughout his apostolic ministry he would follow the lead of Harold B. Lee.

The two apostles left Salt Lake City by train on June 3, 1956. With them were Sister Kimball and Brother and Sister Joseph T. Bentley, who were to lead the new mission. Fern's frail health dictated that she not go. Given her high blood pressure, the doctors feared that the altitude in Mexico and the heat of a Mexican summer could seriously impair her health or could even be life threatening.

The party travelled by rail to El Paso, Texas, via Los Angeles, Phoenix, and Tucson. En route, the two apostles spent time instructing Brother Bentley about his duties as a mission president, whose headquarters would be in Monterrey. Crossing the border at El Paso, the party headed for Monterrey. Brother Bentley, who was fluent in Spanish and whose family roots were deep in the Mormon colonies in northern Mexico, served as translator and as advisor about Mexican protocol. Arriving safely in Monterrey, after a hot and dusty two-day trip, the party was met by Harold A. Pratt, president of the Spanish American Mission. With the assistance of President Pratt, and the concurrence of President Bentley, the brethren rented facilities in Monterrey that would serve as the headquarters of the Northern Mexican Mission.

The members of the Church in Monterrey were in awe to have two members of the Twelve in their midst. This seems never to have happened before. Although the brethren were on a tight schedule, they met briefly with the members and leaders there, speaking to them through brothers Pratt and Bentley, their interpreters. Here Elder Lee was pleased to meet his son-in-law Ernest Wilkins, who was serving as a guide and translator for a group touring in Mexico.

On June 8, the party drove the six hundred miles from Monterrey to Mexico City over high mountain passes and through country of wild, picturesque beauty. After spending a day to prepare, to recuperate from their tiring trip, and to adjust to the higher elevation, the apostles held a meeting in Mexico City on June 10 with members and missionaries where the Mexican Mission was officially divided, creating the Northern Mexican Mission, the forty-fifth mission in the Church.

The day after this organizational meeting, the visiting apostles held a ten-and-a-half hour testimony meeting with the seventy-nine missionaries who were to remain in the Mexican Mission. "President Bentley seems to have his eye fixed on a young Elder Lee," wrote Brother Harold B. Lee, "a great-grandson of John D. Lee, as his second counselor, provided President Bowman will consent." He didn't consent. "We talked with President Bowman," wrote the apostle, "about the possibility of allowing President Bentley to take Elder Rex Lee as a counselor from this mission to the new mission; but, we found him adamant in his determination to keep Elder Lee as a prospective new leader here." The special qualities of intelligence and character the two mission presidents saw in this young elder flowered in the years ahead to see him successively become a prominent Phoenix, Arizona, attorney, the first dean of the Brigham Young University law school, solicitor general of the United States, and the president of the Brigham Young University.

Having completed the work that brought them to Mexico, the visitors spent a week visiting historic sites south-east of Mexico City in Vera Cruz, Palenque, Merida, on the Yucatan peninsula, Chichen Itza, and Oaxaca. Elder Lee noted that some scholars had speculated that the Savior had made his appearance to the Nephites near Palanque and that some had speculated that the state of Oaxaca was the area settled by the Mulekites. While the brethren realized that such conclusions were highly speculative, they were interesting and provocative.

Returning to Mexico City from Oaxaca on June 25, Elder Lee became ill with an intestinal ailment. The following day, he returned to Salt Lake City, via Los Angeles, still suffering stomach upset. When it hadn't cleared up four days later, he consulted Dr. Leroy Kimball, who prescribed some medication that seemed to do the trick.

Elder Lee enjoyed a variety of family activities during the July break. There was a relaxing outing at Fish Lake. Less relaxing, but perhaps more enjoyable, were activities with some of Elder Lee's grandchildren. Maurine had accompanied Ernie on a tour of Central America, and the two older Wilkins children, Alan and Larry, had come to stay with their grandparents for a while. Shortly afterward, Elder Lee, accompanied by Brent and his sons, took his charges on an overnight trip near Huntsville, Utah. It seems to have been a nonstop affair. A few days later, he decided on some urban entertainment for his grandsons. "Took Helen's and Maurine's older boys with me to a cowboy show," he wrote on July 30, "which took much of the afternoon. That, preceded by some shopping and followed by refreshments at Keeleys, was about all the energy and patience I had."

Elder Lee ended his diversions during the summer break with an outing at Yellowstone Park for some fishing with bishops Joseph L. Wirthlin and Carl W. Beuhner. A few days later, he and Fern hosted a party at their home for several General Authorities and their wives. The honored guests were Elder and Sister Henry D. Moyle, who had just returned from a lengthy tour of South and Central America.

Refreshed, Elder Lee returned to his normal routine. A few days after the dinner party, he conducted the graduation exercises at BYU. This was followed in quick succession by a stake conference in Orem, Utah, with Eldred G. Smith; an assignment to speak at a banquet honoring the participants in a softball tournament; and an appointment with Elder Hugh B. Brown to divide the Oakland and Berkley, California, stakes to create the new Walnut Creek Stake. Elder Lee called this last assignment "one of the most difficult and yet most satisfying experiences I have yet had as a member of the Twelve. There was unmistakable evidence of divine direction which could not be denied."

The month leading up to the October general conference was equally busy. On successive weekends, he presided at conferences in the Oneida, Idaho; Pasadena, California; East Rigby, Idaho; Smithfield, Utah; and Spanish Fork, Utah, stakes. At Oneida, he reported that "many of those present were old friends," and at Pasadena he was impressed by the thoughtfulness of Stake President Howard W. Hunter, who had invited Fern's relatives, Bill Tanner and his wife, to have breakfast at the Hunter home so Elder Lee could visit with them. In three years, President Hunter would join Elder Lee as a member of the Twelve.

As usual, the Saints poured in to Salt Lake City from around the Church for the October general conference, filling up the hotels, overcrowding the restaurants, and giving downtown stores a welcome surge of business. They were a cosmopolitan lot, representing every culture where the Church was located and speaking a score of different languages. As usual, Elder Lee was involved not only in the formal meetings but in counselling with many from outlying areas who came to see him.

He delivered a talk of major importance at the beginning of the last session of the conference, Sunday afternoon, October 7. His subject was "The Preparation of the People for the Beginning of the Millennial Reign." While the talk did not presume to say precisely when the millennial reign would begin, it acknowledged the reality of it and the need for the wise to be prepared.

During the remainder of the year, stake conferences occupied most of his time. Two of them stood out. At Rexburg, he and Elder Moyle "found the usual wavering between sentiment and good judgment as to the qualities of leadership." Most of those interviewed recommended the incumbent counselors, even though others appeared to be better qualified. Seemingly they felt it would be an act of disloyalty to nominate anyone else.

The following weekend, he and Elder Mark E. Petersen organized a new stake in Independence, Missouri, carved out of the mission. They found high excitement among some members who believed the apostles were there to create "the center stake of Zion," which would foreshadow the Second Coming. Perhaps some of them saw confirming evidence of this in the subject of Elder Lee's recent conference talk, "The Preparation of the People for the Beginning of the Millennial Reign." Whatever the reason for the excitement, the visiting brethren sought to quell it. They named the new stake the Kansas City Stake rather than the Independence, Missouri, Stake.
