Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Twenty

Signs of Growing Influence

Elder and Sister Lee enjoyed a quiet Christmas holiday, which included several gatherings with members of their family. One of these was an evening spent with Maurine and Ernie Wilkins, who had driven up from Provo. "It was a joy to have them with us," Elder Lee noted on December 29," and we talked late into the night before a roaring fire."

It is safe to assume two of the subjects discussed around the fire that night related to recent happenings affecting Ernie Wilkins and Elder Lee. The son-in-law, a recently called bishop, had been long enough in office by this time to have gained insight into the scope and the complexity of his duties. Given Elder Lee's extensive knowledge about these matters and the son-in-law's penchant to seek his advice, it is not unlikely there were comments about the bishop's role in Church administration. As to Elder Lee, the thing most likely discussed was an invitation extended to him on November 24, 1956, to become a member of the board of directors of the Union Pacific Railroad Company. This occurred while he was in New York on an assignment to attend a stake conference. Since he had no inkling it was coming, the invitation stunned Elder Lee. Union Pacific was one of the most powerful companies in the United States. It counted among its officers and directors men of the first rank among American businessmen. Not only was the company a giant in transportation, but its assets and land holdings represented one of the major pools of potential wealth in the country. When the company constructed its portion of the Transcontinental Railroad in the 1860s, it received as a government subsidy alternate sections of land within a certain distance on either side of the tracks along the 1,086 miles of its line, extending from Omaha, Nebraska, to Promontory Point, Utah. Later consolidation with other railroads had, by 1957, increased its trackage almost tenfold, and through reciprocal agreements with still other companies, it had extended its transportation outreach from midcontinent to the West Coast and northwesterly into Canada. Meanwhile, it had become involved in mineral development in several western states as the direct result of the extensive landholdings it had acquired by subsidy from the United States government. As a member of the board of directors of this company, Elder Lee would have an important voice in its management, giving him an influence in temporal affairs far beyond the influence of the Church. Moreover, the men with whom he would become closely associated on the UP board, drawn as they were from among the leaders of other major companies or institutions in the country, would provide another rich source of information and of networking influence that would extend deep into the fabric of American affairs.

While the invitation to become a member of this board of directors was flattering to Elder Lee, he did not look on it as a means of personal benefit or aggrandizement but as a means of extending the influence of the Church. It was in this spirit he was prepared to accept. When he consulted his mentor about it, however, President Clark threw cold water on the idea and advised him to decline. Elder Lee, seemingly, was almost as shocked at this as he was when he received the invitation. President Clark did not elaborate on the reasons supporting his advice, but implied that acceptance might interfere with Elder Lee's Church duties or would unduly increase his responsibilities or time commitments. President Clark later changed this advice, but his original opposition weighed heavily on Elder Lee.

On December 20, 1956, the invitation to join the UP board was confirmed by A. E. Stoddard, president of the company, who was passing through Salt Lake City in the company's private car. He invited Elder Lee to join him at the UP depot, where the car had been put on a siding. During their conversation, Mr. Stoddard advised that Elder Lee's appointment, which had been approved by E. Roland Harriman, chairman of the board, and Mr. Lovett, chairman of the executive committee, would be made official at the meeting of the board scheduled on January 24, 1957, in New York City. "He indicated that he had thoroughly inquired about me," Elder Lee noted in his diary, "and that such an appointment would have been made much earlier had it not been that he had been advised by someone whom he thought knew that such an appointment could only be given to one of the First Presidency among the general authorities." In reflecting on this interview, Elder Lee wrote that he "was left with overpowering conflicting emotions." The first was a sense of elation at the recognition, which thus had come to him and the Church. The second was a sense of sadness because of the seeming lack of an unqualified endorsement by the First Presidency. This sense of sadness was largely mitigated by two subsequent events. First, at a meeting on January 31, 1957, President Stephen L. Richards announced approvingly that Elder Lee "had been elected to the board of one of the great corporations of the world." Second, on February 6, the First Presidency and Elder Lee were the luncheon guests of A. E. Stoddard in the company's private car, where there was a discussion of Elder Lee's appointment with apparent good feelings all around.

Elder Lee left for New York on January 21 to attend the meeting where he was to be formally inducted into the UP board. He stopped in Chicago on the twenty-second to visit with David M. Kennedy and to congratulate him on his recent appointment as the president of the Continental Bank. He arrived in New York the next day, where he was met at the airport by Theodore C. Jacobsen, president of the Eastern States Mission, who later drove him to the Waldorf Astoria where reservations had been made for him by his friend, Hilton Hotel executive Frank Wangeman, Elder Henry D. Moyle's son-in-law. During the years ahead when Elder Lee made monthly trips to New York to attend UP board meetings, and later the Equitable Life board meetings, he usually stayed at the Waldorf where he always received royal treatment.

The day before his induction, Elder Lee engaged in a special fast and prayer. He did so because he believed he had been appointed as a representative of the Church. At the meeting, three other new board members were also inducted: Eldredge Gerry of New York, Oscar Lawler of Los Angeles, and George S. Eccles, a Salt Lake City banker. Later, Elder Lee had lunch with Mr. Harriman in his private dining room, and that night he had dinner in the mission home with the Jacobsens.

It is obvious why the Union Pacific brass invited Elder Lee to join them on their board. He had seniority among the leaders of the Church, yet was a comparatively young man. His key role in the development of the Church's welfare program had proven him to be both creative and persistent. And his work on the boards of directors of Church-owned and controlled companies had given him broad business perceptions that would be valuable as Union Pacific charted its future strategies. Moreover, his political experience and his prominent position in the administration of the Brigham Young University would provide the board with vital insights. All things considered, Harold B. Lee brought more to this board than he received from it.

On his way home, Elder Lee stopped in Kansas City to conduct a stake conference, where he was able to check on the progress of this new stake and to counsel its members and leaders. This assignment set a pattern that would be followed during the many years Elder Lee travelled regularly to New York for board meetings. He would usually have a stake conference or other special assignment on the weekend before or after the board meeting, or sometimes on both weekends in order to economize on time and travel expense.

After returning from New York, Elder Lee received from the First Presidency a copy of a report prepared by the financial secretary to the First Presidency, which proposed that the responsibility for welfare be transferred to the Presiding Bishopric. He took a dim view of some aspects of the report. He was not necessarily opposed to transferring welfare responsibility back to the Bishopric, but he was concerned that Bishop Joseph L. Wirthlin was not well and that a transfer at the time might impose such an additional heavy burden as to require his release. Moreover, he wanted to correct any misunderstandings about the program. He received that opportunity when on March 22, he and Elders Henry D. Moyle and Marion G. Romney were invited to meet with the First Presidency, where these matters were fully aired. As a result the action to transfer responsibility for Church welfare back to the Presiding Bishopric was deferred until April 1963, eighteen months after John H. Vandenburg succeeded Joseph L. Wirthlin as the Presiding Bishop.

During this period, Elder Lee and other members of the council were concerned about the condition of Elder Spencer W. Kimball, who had suffered a recurrence of the hoarseness that had troubled him several years before. While he was in New York to attend a stake conference in late February 1957, it was decided Elder Kimball would consult a specialist. At home, the Brethren joined in prayer, pleading with the Lord to bless him. After a meeting in the temple, Elder Lee wrote to Brother Kimball in New York, telling him of their prayers that the Lord would heal him "if necessary by His miraculous power." In conclusion, he added: "All I know, Spencer, after what we experienced today, is that if He does not listen to that plea, it will be an evidence that He has plans for a greater mission that we know nothing about. Somehow there seemed to be expressed with all the brethren a feeling that because of the magnificence of your service, and because of the greatness of the mission you are now performing, that as measured by all human understanding, that mission is still uncompleted." The New York doctors performed an extensive biopsy on Elder Kimball to determine whether a malignancy had caused the hoarseness. Instructing him that he should not try to speak for at least thirty days, they sent him home to be monitored by his Salt Lake doctor, pending a decision about the need for major surgery. He arrived at Salt Lake's Union Pacific depot on March 16, where he and Sister Kimball were met by Elder Lee and Fern, who accompanied them to their home. Five days later at the weekly council meeting, Elder Kimball, rendered mute by the doctor's decree, had Elder Lee read his report.

The following weekend, Elder Lee presided at a stake conference in Denver, Colorado. Since Fern accompanied him, it proved to be a nostalgic treat for them. "There was an opportunity," wrote he, "for us to meet many of our old friends from our missionary days in the Western States Mission." Afterward, the Lees travelled by train to New York City, where Elder Lee attended the monthly UP board meeting on March 28. At that time he was elected as a member of the boards of UP's three subsidiary companies: the Oregon Short Line Railroad, the Oregon Washington Railroad and Navigation company, and the Los Angeles and Salt Lake Railroad. Reflecting on the significance of the day, he confided to his diary: "It was my fifty-eighth birthday with a realization that advancing years bring increased problems and anxieties."

Because of scheduling problems, the Lees flew from New York to Salt Lake City rather than going by train. It was the first time Elder Lee had flown cross-country and marked the beginning of a new mode of travel for him. In time, Elder Lee and the other brethren travelled by train only in cases of emergency.

A few weeks later, Elder Lee returned to New York in company with President Clark, who was going there to attend a meeting of the Equitable Life board. While they were in the city together, President Clark arranged to introduce Elder Lee to the chairman of the board and the president of Equitable Life, Ray D. Murphy and James F. Ostler. "It was a pleasant meeting," wrote Elder Lee, "and for a purpose which at present does not seem clear but may later have meaning." As we shall see, that purpose became clear the following year when Elder Lee was appointed to the Equitable Life board to replace President Clark when he retired.

Because the UP board meeting was scheduled the following week, Elder Lee flew to Jacksonville, Florida, to hold a stake conference over the weekend of June 23 and 24. After the Jacksonville conference, he flew to Washington, D.C., where he conferred with local leaders and had lunch with Elder Benson and his family in the executive dining room of his suite. Following the UP board meeting he flew to Norfolk, Virginia, where he met Fern, who had travelled there from Salt Lake with Elder and Sister Delbert L. Stapley. The two apostles had been assigned to create a new stake, assisted by Mission President Henry A. Smith. Following the usual procedure, the brethren selected Cashell Donahoe, Sr., as the stake president. Afterward, the Lees and Stapleys accompanied Henry A. Smith and his wife to Newport News, where a two-day conference was held with 160 missionaries. The usual instruction and testimony meetings were held, interspersed with personal interviews by the visitors.

Travelling to Williamsburg, the party attended a pageant on July 4, which portrayed the struggle for independence. "A most fitting way to celebrate the Fourth of July," noted Elder Lee.

The following day, the party visited Monticello, Thomas Jefferson's home. Nearby, in the family burial plot, they saw Jefferson's tomb, surmounted by an obelisk on which is inscribed the epitaph he composed for himself: "Here was buried Thomas Jefferson, author of the Declaration of American Independence, of the statute of Virginia for religious freedom, and the father of the University of Virginia." Conspicuous by their absence were his roles as Governor of Virginia and President of the United States.

The party then drove to Washington, D.C., through the scenic Blue Ridge Mountains. Nearby in the Shenandoah Valley, many notable battles of the Civil War were fought. The names of nearby towns or places along the route they followed brought memories of the war that defined the American character—Staunton, Manassas, and Bull Run being a few.

Elders Lee and Stapley had also received an assignment to represent the Church at the Scout jamboree at Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, later in July. As they had several extra days, they decided to spend them in the capital. They were hosted by J. Willard Marriott and his wife, who took them to see a professional baseball game between the Washington Senators and the New York Yankees Saturday afternoon, then accompanied them to church on Sunday. On Monday the two apostles paid courtesy calls on senators Arthur V. Watkins and Wallace F. Bennett of Utah and the two senators from Arizona, Carl Hayden and Barry Goldwater. Then on Tuesday, the visitors were hosted on a tour of the area, especially for the benefit of the wives who had never had this experience. Among other things, they were shown through the White House, visited the Lincoln Memorial, and attended part of a session of the United States Senate where, according to Elder Lee, they were "just introducing the debate on the proposed civil rights legislation."

Elder Lee would see the revolutionary effect of this legislation, once it had been enacted into law after long, and sometimes acrimonious, debate.

The following day in Philadelphia, the brethren attended a banquet for Scout executives, where Henry Cabot Lodge gave what Elder Lee called an "impressive address." At Valley Forge, the party found fifty thousand Boy Scouts and their leaders encamped for the jamboree. This included twenty-five hundred LDS Boy Scouts with their leaders, among whom were Elbert R. Curtis, YMMIA superintendent, Lavern Parmley, president of the Primary, and T. C. Jacobsen, mission president. An impressive pageant was followed by remarks from Vice-President Richard M. Nixon and by what Elder Lee said was a "stupendous" fireworks show.

Returning to New York City, the Lees and the Stapleys parted, the Stapleys returning to Salt Lake City and the Lees remaining in the East, where Elder Lee had several other assignments. During a break of several days, he and Fern went to Laconia, New Hampshire, where they were guests of the Marriotts at their summer home. On returning to New York, Elder Lee attended his Union Pacific board meeting and on July 26, with Fern, met Elder Spencer W. Kimball and his wife Camilla at the train depot. Elder Kimball had an appointment with the cancer specialists and asked Elder Lee to accompany him there. "After a careful examination by Doctor Martin and his two assistants," wrote Elder Lee, "he told Spencer that further surgery was imperative immediately to check the cancerous growth that had advanced on the other vocal cord. . . . Both Spencer and I impressed the necessity of preserving his voice if at all possible because his voice in his present position was his very life. . . . He then said that it seemed likely that by an immediate operation that he might be able to save one vocal cord, although he would insist upon an understanding that he must be left free to decide when he operated and also . . . to determine" the extent of the surgery. The doctor was hopeful he would be able to leave Elder Kimball with some voice, although he warned it might not be "even as good as at present." After lengthy discussion and prayer, the decision was made to go forward with the surgery. "It seemed the only thing to do," wrote Elder Lee, "and arrangements were made to admit Spencer to the . . . hospital Sunday afternoon in preparation for an operation on Monday."

Since Elder Lee had a commitment in New Haven, Connecticut, over the weekend, he and Fern left the Kimballs on Saturday, but returned in time Monday for Elder Lee and Roy Fugal to give Brother Kimball a blessing before the surgery. Elder Lee reported the results the following day: "They removed completely the left vocal cord and trimmed off a portion of the right where the two join. They also removed a portion of the larynx which also was malignant." The following day, Elder Lee visited Elder Kimball in the hospital and then called President David O. McKay in Salt Lake City to brief him about the surgery and its aftermath.

Having done all that he could to help Elder Kimball and his wife, Camilla, the Lees went to Palmyra, New

York, where they attended the annual pageant staged on the Hill Cumorah. While there, Elder Lee and President Jacobsen held two separate meetings in the sacred grove with the missionaries and other guests. Here Elder Lee alluded to the extraordinary events that had occurred in the grove when the Father and the Son appeared in open vision to young Joseph Smith, and to other significant events in Church history that had occurred nearby. Later the Lees were taken on a tour of the area where they saw many sites connected with early Church history, including the Joseph Smith, Sr., home, the Peter Whitmer home, and the Martin Harris home. They also had lunch at the bureau of information at the Hill Cumorah, hosted by Brother Joseph Olsen and his wife, who were the directors. Brother Olsen was a teacher at the Oneida Stake Academy when Elder Lee attended there.

Leaving Palmyra, the Lees were driven to Rochester, where they caught the plane home. They arrived in Salt Lake on August 4, 1957. After an absence of seven weeks, it was good to be back.

On the three successive days following his return, Elder Lee was confronted with issues that were stressful and controversial. On August 5, President Ernest L. Wilkinson came to express dismay at a decision made by the Church Board of Education to leave Ricks Junior College at Rexburg, Idaho. President Wilkinson, and others, had made a determined effort to have the school moved to Idaho Falls, where they thought it would better serve the people in the southeast part of the state. At one point, it looked as if they had won their point. More mature consideration, however, dictated that it remain in Rexburg. President Wilkinson came to Elder Lee because of his role on the executive committee of the board, hoping, perhaps, that he could revive the issue. It remained for Elder Lee to divert him and to endeavor to convince him of the wisdom of the board's decision and to cause him to accept it. Given President Wilkinson's determined personality, this was not an easy thing to do. However, he yielded at length and let the matter lie. It was hardly a restful way for Elder Lee to resume his headquarters duties after a seven-week absence.

The issue raised the next day was even more troubling for him. It was whether the Church should provide social security insurance for the employees at the Deseret Clothing Factory. Elder Lee was adamant in voting no. He felt a yes vote would be "a step away from the welfare program," which he believed would provide every benefit the employees needed, free of government interference or control. There were powerful voices among the leaders of the Church that opposed Elder Lee on this issue, and his negative vote unavoidably created tension. As we shall see, time and circumstances would moderate Elder Lee's views toward social security; but at the moment, it was an issue fraught with emotional dynamite.

On August 7, Elder Lee had a visit with Ted Tuttle and Boyd Packer, "seminary supervisors, who came to talk over problems for beginning their year's work." For some time, Elder Lee had been dissatisfied with the way the seminary and institute program had been administered. He believed that there were some on the staff and among the teachers who held unorthodox views on doctrine and on the mission of the Church, and who were, therefore, creating confusion and, in some instances, apostasy among the students. When, following World War II, Ted Tuttle and Boyd Packer were employed by the Church Educational System, Elder Lee saw in them the kind of young men whose character and outlook had been tempered by spiritual conversion and the discipline of war, who could provide the leadership he believed the system required. So, he had encouraged and counselled them over the years, while promoting their advancement in the system and receiving their recommendations. This had brought the three of them close together, providing the younger men with wise counsel and a role model while enabling Elder Lee to gauge the leadership potential of his associates. It would not be long before these young men would have a broader field in which to exercise their abilities. In less than eight months after this meeting, A. Theodore Tuttle was called as a member of the First Council of Seventy; and three and a half years after that, Boyd K. Packer was called as an Assistant to the Twelve, to be followed in 1970 with a call as a member of the Twelve. Meanwhile, in the fall of 1958, both Brother Tuttle and Brother Packer were appointed as members of an administrative council for seminaries and institutes chaired by Ernest L. Wilkinson, and in September 1962, they both became members of the Church Board of Education and the Board of Trustees of Brigham Young University. In these positions, Elder Lee's two proteges, in concert with him, were able to exert a strong influence on the policies governing church schools, altering the deficiencies in the administration of seminaries and institutes as Elder Lee had perceived them.

As Elder Lee resumed his schedule of stake conference assignments, he encountered a headstrong attitude in one stake president, a condition he found from time to time. Apparently exasperated by the man's obstinate refusal to follow counsel, Elder Lee took refuge in his diary. "Here is an able business executive as stake president," wrote he, "who sets out to change every program he receives to suit his own ideas of how it should be administered. There is little to be done to change his thinking."

The October general conference was cancelled this year because of a widespread flu epidemic. It was one of the few times such an action had been taken. Since the main danger in spreading the epidemic lay in bringing people together in large numbers from around the world, there was no restriction on holding ward and stake meetings. So on the first Sunday in October, when he ordinarily would have been in general conference, Elder Lee accepted the invitation of Ernest Wilkins to speak in the ward where the son-in-law served as bishop. Commenting on the occasion with evident pleasure, Elder Lee noted that "Ernie was emotional" in introducing him, stating that Elder Lee was "like a father to him."

Aside from the never-ending stake conferences, Elder Lee's last assignment of 1957 was to tour the Southern States Mission in company with the mission president, Berkley Bunker. Elder Lee flew to Atlanta, Georgia, November 1, 1957, from New York City, where he had attended the monthly Union Pacific board meeting. After inspecting the mission office facilities and interviewing the members of the staff, Elder Lee and the touring party travelled to Birmingham, Alabama, on the second where the first zone meeting was held with fourteen missionaries. While in Birmingham, Elder Lee also met with local leaders and members in a district conference. The small branches he found there would be organized into a stake within a decade.

Leaving Birmingham, the party drove south through Montgomery, Alabama, the site of the first capital of the Confederacy, and into northwest Florida and southwest Georgia where meetings were held at Pensacola and Marianna, Florida, and Moultrie, Georgia. Being in the heart of the "Old South," some in this area were agitated by the debate over civil rights, which had commenced in Washington. The more extreme of these had begun again to use time-tested tactics of terror, designed to keep the African Americans "in their place." "The local people are worried about the Ku Klux Klan," wrote Elder Lee on November 6 during his visit in Moultrie. While at this time Church policy precluded male African Americans from holding the priesthood, Church membership was open to all who met the scriptural standards. Therefore, Elder Lee and the other leaders deplored any attempts to use terror, force, or undue influence to prevent these people from asserting their rights, or from enjoying the privileges of Church membership. This volatile issue would trouble members of the Church in the South for many years, especially after the issue was taken to the streets.

Leaving Moultrie, the party travelled through Orlando and Deer Park, Florida, where the large Church ranch is located, and thence to Miami, holding meetings along the way. At Miami, Elder Lee and President Bunker caught a flight to Puerto Rico, where meetings were held with the servicemen stationed there and their families. Other members also attended these meetings, among whom was businessman Gardner Russell, an acquaintance of Ernest Wilkins from their missionary days in Argentina and their school days at Stanford University. Almost thirty years later, more than a decade after Elder Lee's death, Gardner Russell would be called to the Seventy.

The brethren then flew from Puerto Rico to Atlanta, where they picked up the mission car that members of the staff had driven there from Miami. The tour was then concluded by automobile with missionary and member meetings in Aiken and Moncks Corner, South Carolina, Savannah, Georgia, and Orlando and Tampa, Florida. In these and other cities in the South, Elder Lee found conditions and attitudes that foreshadowed the fierce struggle over civil rights that would take place there in the years ahead. At Savannah, for instance, he noted that "color lines are strictly observed on buses [and in] restaurants, toilets and theatres."

On the way home, Elder Lee stopped in New York to attend the monthly meeting of the Union Pacific board of directors and arrived in Salt Lake City on November 28. He had been gone for five weeks, having missed Thanks-giving with his family. The next day his mother called to chide him for trying to do too much and to admonish him to guard his time and his health. "No one else will do it for you," she warned. Then she asked him to speak at their Christmas program.
