Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Twenty-one

Grinding It Out

After a few days of respite with his family between Christmas and New Year's, Elder Lee was ready for another round. He started it with a stake conference in Bountiful, Utah, north of Salt Lake City, where, in addition to the usual duties, he dedicated an addition to a chapel. Three days later, he left on the train with Elder Spencer W. Kimball to organize new stakes in San Antonio, Texas, and Shreveport, Louisiana. This was the second speaking assignment Elder Kimball had received since the operation on his throat six months before. The first was a stake conference in the Gila Valley of Arizona in December with Elder Delbert L. Stapley. He had spoken briefly three times during that conference. This assignment with Elder Lee, however, was to be the acid test for Elder Kimball since there would be numerous meetings and interviews before the organizational sessions. En route to their assignment, Elder Lee wrote of his companion: "It is remarkable how diligently Brother Kimball struggles to use his remaining voice which is greatly hampered by noise interference, as on the train." Elder Lee reported that during the first three days of their work together after they reached Texas, "Brother Kimball did his share of the speaking, although his voice was little more than a hoarse whisper; but a sensitive microphone around his neck gave him needed volume." Unknown to Elder Lee, his companion had been suffering from diarrhea, nosebleeds caused by two boils that had started in his nose, and from excruciating back pain. Finally, at three in the morning, the night of the eighteenth, he decided to awaken Elder Lee to tell him about his condition. "Brother Kimball . . . had refrained from telling me," Elder Lee wrote, "for fear I would . . . curtail his activities. I had some tablets in my grip and administered to him. He declared he had no return of the pain he had suffered."

In preparation for the organizational meetings of the new stake in Shreveport, the brethren held meetings in several small branches that were to be brought into the stake. "Brother Kimball excused himself from speaking because of soreness in his throat which gave him a little anxiety, lest it be the result of overtaxing his voice so soon after the operation." Seemingly, this concern prompted Elder Kimball to go to New York with Elder Lee, instead of returning to Salt Lake, "to get some clinical training to help him in his speaking." In the city, Elder Lee accompanied his friend to a special clinic where he made arrangements for a series of lessons. These were helpful and enabled Elder Kimball to resume the full scope of his duties more speedily. By the end of March when they were again assigned together, this time to reorganize the Houston Texas Stake, Elder Lee noted a distinct improvement in his companion's voice, his physical condition, and his mental outlook. "Brother Kimball is a wonderful travelling companion," wrote he, "and is full of zeal and devotion to the work." These qualities seemed evident a few days later when Elder Kimball delivered his first sermon in general conference after his throat surgery. "Spencer Kimball's talk touched the heart of everyone," wrote Elder Lee.

The camaraderie created between Elder Lee and Elder Kimball in fulfilling these stake conference assignments was duplicated, in varying degrees, with other General Authorities as they travelled and worked together over the years. While in a sense all stake conferences were alike in the uniformity of the meeting schedule and often in the content of the instruction, yet each one was different because of differences in the personalities and the abilities of the local leaders and in the nature and the gravity of the problems encountered. A frequent problem raised was how to handle transgressors. Many local leaders wanted Elder Lee to tell them how to decide specific cases. He would never do that but, instead, would teach principles to assist them in their decision making. Typical of his responses to such questions is this: "I counselled the bishop," he wrote on May 21, 1958, "to proceed as he felt he should and be guided by the inspiration to which he is entitled as a common judge in Israel."

In reality, this is the essence of the counsel Elder Lee gave to any leader or member, counsel which laid on the individual the responsibility to obtain spiritual direction for himself. At a stake conference held in Washington, D.C., in September 1958, Elder Lee admonished the members "to prayerfully [seek] for spiritual solutions to personal problems," and at an evening meeting with young people, he talked about "being fortified against the wiles of the devil." And what Elder Lee preached, he lived. He constantly sought spiritual guidance in reaching decisions affecting his personal life or his ministry. Typical was his experience in seeking guidance in the call of a patriarch during a stake division. "I awoke early this morning," he wrote on February 26, 1961, "with an impression as to the calling of John D. Hill as a patriarch in the new stake." Typical also was his experience in reorganizing the Detroit Michigan Stake in January 1963, made necessary by the election of Stake President George Romney as governor of Michigan. "I stayed in the O'Hare Inn for the night," wrote he. "The storms were closing in and on Saturday there seemed to be doubt that the plane could land at Detroit, even if we could leave Chicago. After talking to the Lord about the importance of my Detroit assignment, I went to the airport with full faith that He would control the weather. Just as we were loading, the word came that the plane would proceed to Detroit but no further. Our prayer had been answered."

Elder Lee believed unquestioningly in the divine origin of the decisions he made by spiritual means and in the harmonious impact of them. In the reorganization of a Salt Lake City stake presidency, for instance, he passed over the first counselor as the new president in preference for another, calling the first counselor as a patriarch. Apparently sensing a feeling of disappointment in him, Elder Lee suggested, on an impulse, that the first counselor review his patriarchal blessing, something he had not done for many years. "He found," wrote Elder Lee, on August 17, 1958, "that this new calling gave him a fulfillment of one part of his blessing which he had previously overlooked." This knowledge cast new light on the significance of the call to the new patriarch, revealing a prophetic pattern. Moreover, in the scale of comparative importance, Elder Lee placed the office of patriarch above that of stake president. To him a patriarch was "the fountainhead of spirituality" in a stake. Stake presidents came and went; patriarchs remained. A stake president was called for years; a patriarch for life.

A role often played by Elder Lee in filling stake conference assignments was to train new General Authorities. He took special delight in playing that role for Elder Thomas S. Monson, who was called to the Twelve in October 1963. Elder Lee viewed Thomas Monson as a protege, a promising young man, reared in the Pioneer Stake, who was called as a bishop at age twenty-two, reportedly the youngest bishop in the Church. He had watched Brother Monson mature as a bishop and as a counselor in a stake presidency while struggling to rear a family and to complete his education. Later, Brother Monson distinguished himself as a mission president in Eastern Canada and as general manager of Deseret Press. This protege looked on Elder Lee as a mentor, who provided crucial counsel on matters of key importance pertaining to his Church callings and his career path. So, by apparent design, Elder Lee was assigned to accompany Elder Monson on his first stake conference assignment after his call to the Twelve. It was a conference in Edmonton, Canada, over the weekend of October 11-13, 1963. "The presence of the newest apostle brought out a near record attendance," wrote Elder Lee of the occasion. The next month, Elder Monson accompanied Elder Lee to Portland, Oregon, where they divided the Columbia River Stake to create the North Columbia River Stake. "Brother Monson was a great help," wrote Elder Lee, a significant compliment given Elder Lee's terse, factual writing style.

His style in making diary entries was also marked by an absence of humor, except in rare cases when someone made comments that amused him. Such an occasion occurred during a conference in the Jacksonville Florida Stake. "At the evening service," wrote Elder Lee on May 23, 1959, "thirteen year old Jinx Jenkins was speaking when she stopped and said 'Brothers and Sisters, I am very scared standing here before you all. If you all will say a prayer for me, I will be able to give my talk.' She bowed her head, as did the whole audience, then she said: 'Now I will start all over again.' This time she did perfectly."

The day before Jinx Jenkins gave her talk, Elder Lee attended funeral services for President Stephen L. Richards, who died unexpectedly on May 19, 1959. Elder Lee was in New York City on business when he learned of President Richards's death. He cut short his stay in the city to return home for the funeral and then left immediately for Jacksonville. Following the stake conference, Elder Lee went to Deer Park, Florida, to confer about affairs on the ranch, flew to New York for the monthly Union Pacific board meeting, and returned to Salt Lake City in time to attend the quarterly conference of the Cottonwood Stake on May 30 and 31, where James E. Faust presided. Fourteen years later, Brother Lee, then the president of the Church, would call James E. Faust as an Assistant to the Twelve. Meanwhile, Elder Faust would play a key role in the leadership training program as it developed in the 1960s and eventually would be called to the Twelve.

On June 12, 1959, President McKay convened a special meeting of the apostles, where he announced he had selected President J. Reuben Clark as his first counselor and Elder Henry D. Moyle as the second counselor. "It seemed almost too good to be true," wrote Elder Lee of these actions. Perhaps his elation was prompted by the assumption that another favorable voice within the First Presidency would bolster the welfare program. While that was an evident result of these changes, another was the need to restructure the welfare organization as Brother Moyle's new duties would prevent him from continuing to serve as the chairman of the general welfare committee. Moreover, the increasing burden upon Elder Lee, both from his church and outside responsibilities, militated against his appointment as the chairman of the committee, or against his continuing to serve as the managing director. Accordingly, it was decided after consultation that Elder Marion G. Romney would become the chairman of the general welfare committee and that Elder Henry D. Taylor, who had been called as an Assistant to the Twelve the year before, would become the managing director of welfare.

Among Elder Lee's major nonecclesiastical responsibilities was a new one that had come to him during 1958. On June 26 of that year, while he was in New York City for his monthly Union Pacific board meeting, he received a call from James F. Oates, Jr., president of Equitable Life, requesting an interview. When they met, Mr. Oates asked Elder Lee to become a member of Equitable's board of directors, filling the vacancy to be created by President Clark's retirement from the board. Elder Lee accepted, reflecting perhaps on the occasion a few months before when President Clark, unaccountably, had gone out of his way to introduce him to some of Equitable's chief executives. Elder Lee's appointment was ratified by the Equitable Life Board of Directors at their meeting held in New York on July 17, 1958.

This began a thirteen-year association with the Equitable Life board, on which sat some of America's most able and influential business and professional leaders. These men came from different parts of the country and were connected with other influential companies or organizations whose impact extended into most of the vital aspects of American society. Regular association with these men opened a new window of understanding for Elder Lee, broadening his perceptions of society in general, increasing his knowledge of management strategies and skills, and enlarging his network of influence, both personally and for the Church. As with his appointment to the Union Pacific board, Elder Lee considered the Equitable Life appointment to be a recognition of the Church as much as a recognition for himself personally. Moreover, he endorsed the concept of insurance and therefore approved the aims of Equitable Life, aims that paralleled those of Church welfare—to help provide security and independence for the individual.

As a director of Equitable Life, Elder Lee was required to obtain a large life insurance policy with the company, something he was pleased to do. Indeed, this coincided with action he had taken several months before to provide added security for Fern. "Spent time studying the question of taking steps to be covered by social security under the category of a self-employed minister," he wrote on March 4, 1958. "This, it appears, will offer some additional security and insurance for Fern after I am gone." Aside from revealing the anxious concern he had for his wife's welfare, this entry also reveals a shift in Elder Lee's thinking about the comparative roles of social security and Church welfare.

Apparent feelings of lassitude caused Elder Lee to seek medical help a week after he was invited to join the Equitable Life board. It is possible, but only conjectural, that this explains his earlier steps to obtain protection for Fern under social security. "I spent the morning at the Memorial Clinic," he wrote on July 3, "being examined to discover the cause of internal bleeding. . . . They came to the conclusion that I had hemorrhoids in my lower colon causing intermittent bleeding, and an ulcer in the duodenal canal. Doctor Jos. F. Orme has placed me on an ulcer diet for a month." This diet seems to have been effective as Elder Lee was free from illness during the ensuing year. This was fortunate because of a heavy assignment he received the next month. On August 15, President David O. McKay informed Elder Lee he was to tour the South African Mission with Sister Lee "as soon as arrangements can be made." Two trips to New York, several stake conferences, headquarter assignments, and a series of shots delayed the Lees' departure until September 16. Before leaving for the airport, Elder Lee was able to talk by phone with President McKay, who had just returned home from dedicating the London Temple. President Clark, who had given them blessings of health, protection, and discernment two days before, accompanied the Lees to the airport, suppressing for the moment his repugnance toward flying. "President Clark's legs were shaky," Elder Lee noted. "He said he was glad he didn't have to think with his legs."

In a sense, this was a false start since the Lees would spend ten days in New York and Washington, D.C., before finally getting under way. During that time, Elder Lee attended Equitable Life and Union Pacific meetings, held a stake conference in Washington, and visited various officials to obtain letters of reference to be used while they travelled abroad.

Elder Ezra Taft Benson and his son Reed met the Lees at the Washington, D.C., airport with a chauffeured limousine. With the help of Elder Benson and his staff, the required visas were obtained for the Lees and their flight schedules were confirmed. Back in New York after the stake conference in Washington, Elder Lee met President Joseph Fielding Smith and Elder Henry D. Moyle, who were on their way to Salt Lake City following the dedication of the London Temple. They were unable to return with President McKay and his party because of a crisis in the French mission, which had resulted in the excommunication of several missionaries. "Henry seemed almost obsessed" with this matter, reported Elder Lee. While they were together, Elder Lee took Elder Moyle with him to the Manhattan Ward where they ordained and set apart John Q. Cannon as the bishop. Bishop Cannon was the secretary of the Radio Corporation of America and a long-time associate of General Sarnoff, one of the founders of this communications giant.

A final chore for Elder Lee in New York was to visit Abba S. Eban, Israeli ambassador to the United Nations. "He and his chief aide," reported Elder Lee, "gave me the names of Jewish officials to contact when we arrive in Israel next month on our way home."

The following day, September 27, 1958, Elder and Sister Lee boarded a London flight at La Guardia airport, which, following a refueling stop at Shannon, Ireland, arrived at Heathrow on the twenty-eighth. There they were met by the mission president and his wife, President and Sister Woodley, helped through customs, and driven to the mission home where lunch awaited them. After checking into their hotel, the Grosvenor House, and freshening up, they returned to the mission home to spend the afternoon and evening with missionaries who had been invited there from nearby districts. Also present were Brother and Sister T. Bowring Woodbury, who had arrived to preside over their assigned mission, and President and Sister Kerr, who had completed their mission and were on the way home. "We had many fine testimonies," Elder Lee wrote of this gathering.

During the next two days, the travellers visited the London Temple, which was just beginning to function efficiently following its recent dedication, and various historical sites in and around London. Westminster Abbey, Buckingham Palace with its flashy, tradition laden changing of the guard, and the Parliament Building were special targets of interest.

The Lees flew to Brussels on the afternoon of the thirtieth where they were met by Mission President Milton Christensen and his wife, who skillfully shepherded them through customs and chauffeured them to the Palace Hotel, where fortunately they had confirmed reservations. Accommodations were scarce in Brussels at the time because of the World Fair, which was then in progress. Elder and Sister Lee attended the fair the next day, where they were especially interested in the contrasting pavilions of the Soviet Union and the United States, which had attracted much attention. "The first displayed the power and might of the Russians and ours depicted the life of the American people, including the culture, dress, technical equipment, social life, etc."

The Lees flew to Rome via Amsterdam on October 2. While waiting for clearance of their flight reservations, they spent a few hours visiting some of Rome's ruins and antiquities. However, a more detailed sampling of the historic treasures this ancient city has to offer would have to await their return.

Leaving Rome's International Airport, they flew to Johannesburg, South Africa, almost the full length of the continent, with intermediate stops in North Africa, Nairobi in Kenya, and Salisbury in Rhodesia. In South Africa, the Lees were in a country with perhaps the most complex racial structures of any country in the world. Before leaving Salt Lake City, President Clark, the skilled international lawyer, had briefed Elder Lee about racial and political problems that beset South Africa and had counselled him to use wisdom in discussing them. He also cautioned him about making any direct or implied statements about a temple in that country. Later, during the course of the tour, Elder Lee spent several hours with Dr. Helm, a professor at the University of Rhodesia, who sketched South Africa's cultural, political, and racial history, explaining issues that were essential for him to understand in formulating strategies for proselyting in that country and in directing missionary work. The issues of race, language, and religious preference predominated. Native Africans, people of mixed blood, and Asiatics outnumbered whites four to one. But, restrictive policies of apartheid helped enforce political control by the white minority. This had aroused bitter enmities within the country and international pressures for change from without it. As to language, the majority of whites spoke Afrikaans and the remainder spoke English. The natives spoke several different Bantu languages. Afrikaans, a derivative of Dutch with some French and German overtones, was adopted as South Africa's official language in 1924. As to religious preference, most whites were Dutch Reformed or Episcopalians, although other Christian sects were represented, as were Hindu and Muslim among the Asiatics. There was a small Jewish population.

By the time Elder Lee arrived in October 1958, the Latter-day Saints had been proselyting in South Africa for many decades with good results. There were active districts and branches throughout the mission, the strongest being in Johannesburg and Cape Town. All were directed by President Fisher, who, with his wife and a group of Saints, met Elder and Sister Lee at the airport after dark on October 4. Anxious to get a running start on the mission tour, President Fisher had scheduled a gala Gold and Green Ball that night, which was to double as a welcoming reception for the visitors. Because of a delay in the arrival of their flight, Elder and Sister Lee did not arrive at the dance until 11:00 P.M. With introductions, welcoming and acknowledging remarks, and handshaking afterward, they did not reach the hotel until well after midnight. The long flight, interrupted by the several landings, the disorientation caused by the change in time zones, and the excitement of the ball had given Sister Lee a throbbing sinus headache. A blessing given by Elder Lee and President Fisher brought relief and a few hours of peaceful rest before the full schedule of Sunday meetings the next day.

Like most successful mission presidents, President Fisher wanted to utilize the visitors to the maximum extent in bolstering his work. So, on Sunday, the first full day of the tour, there were two general sessions for the members, an instruction and testimony meeting for the missionaries, and a ceremony to dedicate a new chapel. Monday morning, the party drove to Pretoria, the administrative capital of the Republic of South Africa, and the provincial capital of Transvaal, which is one of four provinces in the Republic, the other three being Cape of Good Hope (called the Cape province), Orange Free State, and Natal. This was Elder Lee's introduction to the complexities of the government of South Africa and the inertia of its bureaucracy. While Pretoria is the country's administrative capital, its legislative capital is in Cape Town, some eight hundred miles southwest, and its judicial capital is at Bloemfontein, which is also the provincial capital of the Orange Free State. The main purpose in visiting Pretoria was to attempt to obtain an increase in the quota of American missionaries. The secretary of the interior, whom Elder Lee visited for this purpose, greeted the request with icy disdain. Not only did he suggest that the request be abandoned but seemed to hint that pressing it might even result in a reduction of the quota. Knowing that any future approval for an increase must come from this office, and grasping, perhaps for the first time, the vast distances involved in administering the affairs of the mission, Elder Lee became more sympathetic to President Fisher's recommendation that the mission headquarters be moved from Cape Town to either Johannesburg or Pretoria.

Given the crowded schedule President Fisher had arranged for the first day of the tour, it must have surprised the Lees when, at this point, he suggested that they take off for three days to visit Kruger Park, the world's largest wildlife sanctuary. The reason for this timing became apparent when it was learned that the park would close for the season on October 15. The party drove there on the seventh, a distance of over two hundred miles northeast of Pretoria. We gain some insight into Elder Lee's excitement in visiting the park from this graphic diary entry: "As we drove slowly through the area," he wrote, "we saw animals of great variety and took many pictures, the most exciting of which was the great African bull elephant whom we surprised. He turned quickly as I took his picture, and for a moment seemed ready to charge us as intruders." Being two hundred miles long and forty miles wide with some one thousand miles of roads and numerous rest camps, the park is readily accessible by automobile from which visitors can see great numbers of animals living in a natural state.

On October 10, five days before the park closed, the party drove south three hundred miles to Durban on the coast of the Indian Ocean, which is the commercial center and the largest city of Natal and the third largest city and chief eastern seaport of the Republic. Here Elder Lee found the largest concentration of Asiatics in South Africa, mostly Indians, whose ancestors had migrated as indentured labor beginning almost a century before Elder Lee's visit and continuing for many decades thereafter. It was here in Durban that Mahatma Gandhi had laid the groundwork for his mass, nonviolent civil disobedience campaign, which advanced the cause of racial equality in South Africa.

In Durban, Elder Lee found "unrest" among the members "because of uncertainty about the political situation." Gandhi's legacy, which was inherited only by the Asiatic population, and which, at best, was but a minor victory, had practically no effect upon the overwhelming numbers of African blacks among the population. And these, who were agitated by outside communistic influences and by the indigenous stirrings for equality, were becoming more and more vocal and sometimes violent in their opposition to apartheid. So, the members here who were already living in stressful turmoil and who could see nothing but increased turmoil ahead, were understandably stressed and anxious about their future. It is likely that these attitudes contributed heavily to an unusual incident that occurred at the evening session held in Durban on October 12. When Elder Lee had finished speaking, and the meeting had ended with song and prayer, the audience sat motionless and quiet, showing no intention of stirring, let alone of leaving. After an awkward pause, the branch president arose and asked if they wanted to hear more. They answered "yes" in unison. "I arose again," wrote Elder Lee, "and bore my testimony and gave them my blessing. It was a most impressive demonstration of a people seemingly overcome by the spirit. Some came later to confess their sins and to declare their determination to live more perfectly."

In four days, beginning on October 13, Elder Lee and his party travelled a thousand miles and more paralleling the coast of South Africa, extending from Durban on the Indian Ocean to Cape Town at the southwestern tip of the continent, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean. In between, they stayed at East London, Port Elizabeth, and George, coastal cities whose names signify South Africa's colonial past. At East London, a meeting was held with a small group of members and nonmembers numbering less than fifty, and at Port Elizabeth, Elder Lee dedicated a new chapel and counselled with eight missionaries and with local leaders.

It was the Portuguese navigator Bartholemeu Dias who discovered the cape in 1488, five years before Columbus made his first landing in the new world. Originally it was called O Cabo Tormentoso, the Cape of Storms, but was later named O Cabo da Boa Esperanca, the Cape of Good Hope, by King John II of Portugal. Arriving at the cape more than four hundred and fifty years after Dias's discovery, and three hundred years after its founding as a ship-victualing station by the Dutch as part of their trade route to the Dutch East Indies, Elder Lee found Cape Town to be a modern city of several hundred thousand population, situated on Table Bay at the foot of Table Mountain. This was the leading export point for South African diamond and gold fields and for a rich agricultural region producing fruit, grain, wine, wool, and flowers. Here was found a thriving Latter-day Saint colony and a corps of able and successful missionaries. During his three-day stay in Cape Town, Elder Lee participated in a musical program, a Gold and Green Ball, two general sessions of a district conference, and a training and testimony session with the missionaries. After the morning general session on Sunday, Mr. Jacob Coopman, a diamond merchant, came to Elder Lee to say "I was so filled when you spoke that I could hardly keep from crying." Also, several came to discuss the problem of mixed blood. "I gave them assurance," wrote he, "of their eternal blessings if they would live up to all they are permitted in their present state."

During a break in their schedule at Cape Town, the Lees visited a diamond cutting plant where Elder Lee purchased a diamond ring for Fern, having the diamond in the old ring she had worn for years made into an earring. Unknown to Elder Lee at the time, Fern had mixed emotions about this transaction, being grateful for the new gem, while regretting the loss of the old diamond setting on her finger to which she attached such sentimental significance.

The party flew to Salisbury, Rhodesia, on October 20, with an intermediate stop in Johannesburg. Here in the midst of the southern hemisphere's spring, with its brilliant show of flowers, a "delightful meeting" was held in a small chapel where sixty were in attendance. The next day found the party across the border into northern Rhodesia, now Zambia, where in Ndola another meeting was held.

On the way back to Johannesburg, they stopped in Livingstone from where they drove seven miles south to the Victoria Falls on the Zambesi River at the border of Rhodesia and Zambia. Elder Lee's words seemed inadequate to describe the impact of the sight of the falls, over a mile wide, and the roaring sounds they produced as the cascading water fell over three hundred and fifty feet into the chasm below. That inadequacy was compensated for by the many pictures he took of the falls, one of which later graced the cover of an issue of the Ensign.

Elder Lee ended his tour of the South African Mission with a public meeting at Springs, near Johannesburg, where 261 were in attendance, and a series of personal interviews with the missionaries who were laboring in that part of the mission. He and Sister Lee bid good-bye to President and Sister Fisher at the Johannesburg airport on October 15, boarding a plane whose ultimate destination was Cairo, Egypt. It landed in Nairobi briefly to drop off some passengers and board others, before taking off for another intermediate stop at Khartoum in the Sudan, which lies at the confluence of the White Nile and the Blue Nile rivers. Some time after it was airborne, the passengers received the disquieting news that the plane had engine trouble, which would require a return to Nairobi. Here they put up at the Spread Eagle Hotel and the next morning boarded their plane again, which arrived safely in Cairo on the twenty-sixth.

They registered at the Shepherds Hotel, fronting on the Nile, from where they could see the almost constant procession of crafts of different sizes and shapes, plying the waters of this fabled river, whose story is bound up with the earliest chapters of recorded history. It was in Cairo that Elder Lee's New York connections first came into play to smooth the way for him and Fern. Here Bill Landry of the United Press and his wife, Luby, made themselves available to host a trip into the desert to see the Sphinx and the Pyramids, two of Egypt's most famous attractions. Back in Cairo, the Lees coincidentally met young Elder Gardner, from Cedar City, Utah, who was on his way home after having served as a missionary in New Zealand. On Sunday, they invited the grateful and astonished young man to join them for a sacrament service in the privacy of their hotel room. They would encounter Elder Gardner again.

At Beirut the next day, the Lees were shepherded through customs by representatives of American Express, though they did not have passport clearance, and were taken to the St. George Hotel where they had a room fronting on the Mediterranean. In this place, reminiscent of the "Cedars of Lebanon" mentioned in the Old Testament, Elder Lee seems to have begun to feel the biblical influences that would surround him during his stay in the Middle East. These feelings were heightened the next day when they flew over ancient Damascus and arrived in Jerusalem. Here, with the aid of other American Express representatives, they were registered at the National Hotel and put in touch with a guide who had a good automobile and who was fluent in English.

Then began a memorable tour that brought to life scenes and events of biblical history that the Lees had read and heard about since infancy. They visited Bethany, the Tomb of Lazarus, Jericho, the Dead Sea, the place of the Ascension, Gethsemane, the supposed location of King Solomon's Temple, the supposed location of the judgment before Pilate, the Via Dolorosa, the Garden Tomb, Golgotha, and the places of the Nativity and Shepherds' Field at Bethlehem. They realized that many of the places shown them may not have been the actual places where the historic events occurred. In this they were sometimes governed by their own feelings rather than by what their guide told them. The place identified by the guide as Golgotha "seemed right" to the Lees, while another supposed location "did not at all satisfy" them.

After seeing Tel Aviv and some of the surrounding areas, Elder Lee noted: "The Jews are making the desert blossom as a rose." Flying from Tel Aviv to Athens, Greece, the travellers were met by a representative of Pan American Airlines, ushered through customs, and driven to their hotel. After freshening up, Elder Lee went to the American Embassy where he met with Mr. Riddleburger, the U.S. Ambassador to Greece, to discuss the problems of establishing a proselyting mission of the Church in Greece. The Ambassador did not hold out much hope of that happening within the near future. Elder Lee then rented a car to enable him and Fern to visit the Pantheon, the Acropolis, and Mars Hill where the Apostle Paul delivered his famous speech to the people of Athens. At one stop, Elder Lee opened his car door to get out and an inattentive driver struck the door from behind, shearing it off. This somewhat took the edge off the visit to Athens.

Arriving at Rome on November 1, Elder and Sister Lee made their headquarters at the Excelsior Hotel. During three days, they visited museums, shops, and historic sites in the city. They also visited the Vatican on Sunday the second, where preparations were under way for the coronation of the new Pope, which was scheduled the following Wednesday. They were struck by the beauty of the ornate chapel. Having encountered him earlier, the Lees spent most of this Sunday with Elder Gardner and invited him to their hotel room for another sacrament service.

After leaving Rome, Elder and Sister Lee travelled to Switzerland, where they visited the temple at Bern; to Frankfurt, Germany, where they were impressed with the "splendid work" of Theodore M. Burton as the president of the West German Mission; to Paris where they toured the city and saw La Traviata at the Paris Opera House; to Glasgow and Edinburgh, Scotland, where Fern made arrangements to obtain genealogical information about some of her Scottish ancestors; to London where Elder Lee visited Sir Oliver Franks, the head of Lloyds of London, and Mr. Ogburn, the head actuary of Equitable in London; and to Southampton where, on November 15, they boarded the Queen Elizabeth bound for New York City. During the four-day voyage, they enjoyed a belated celebration of their thirty-fifth wedding anniversary and of Fern's sixty-third birthday, when Elder Lee gave his bride the diamond earring he had had reset in Cape Town and one to match.

An absence of fifty-four days from her shores had enriched the Lees' allurement for America. Though still two thousand miles from Salt Lake City, busy, bustling New York was "home" to the travellers. They were met at the pier by an agent of the Plaza Hotel, who took charge of their luggage, steered them adroitly through customs without delay, and led them to a waiting limousine. A restful night at the Plaza restored the travellers' land legs. While Fern busied herself at the hotel checking and readjusting their luggage, now encumbered with mounds of mementoes and gifts for the family, calling friends and making notes and lists of things to do in Salt Lake, Elder Lee attended a meeting of the Equitable Board where he briefed them on his trip, especially his contacts with Sir Oliver Franks and their London actuary. Returning to the hotel early, he and Fern enjoyed another good night's rest before travelling home the next day. President and Sister Jacobsen picked them up early at the Plaza on the twenty-first and drove them across the river to Newark, New Jersey, where they caught their flight home.

We now discern a pattern in Elder Lee's travels, whether accidental or designed, which had taken him throughout the United States, the Pacific, the Far East, the Middle East, Great Britain, Europe, Mexico, and Africa. Its effect was to acquaint him with the Church and its people around the world, providing knowledge and insight, invaluable were he to become the head of the Church with global responsibilities. Returning from the African trip, the only major areas he had not visited, where the Church was actively proselyting, were South America and the South Pacific. This lack would be remedied within the next two and a half years.
