Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Twenty-two

Family and Personal Trauma—South America

Meanwhile, the regular rhythms of the work and his personal affairs continued unabated. During February 1959, while in New York for his board meetings, he and President Jacobsen flew to Bermuda, where they spent several days meeting with members and with servicemen and military leaders at the air base. In mid-May, accompanied by Gerald G. Smith, who had replaced T. C. Jacobsen as the president of the Eastern States Mission, Elder Lee spoke at services in Harmony, Pennsylvania, commemorating the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood. Here Elder Lee bore convincing testimony about the reality of the unusual event that had occurred there when John the Baptist appeared in resurrected form to confer the Aaronic Priesthood on Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery.

During the summer, as he planned the South America trip, Elder Lee suffered serious physical setbacks. In late June, en route to New York for his board meeting, he became "deathly sick" from abdominal upset. He recuperated enough to attend the Union Pacific board meeting by resting in his room at the Waldorf all the next day. It was an important meeting where the board, constituted as the trustees of the Union Pacific Foundation, approved guidelines for making annual grants to deserving institutions. BYU would later be a recipient of some of these grants.

President Gerald Smith, look-alike son of Elder Lee's special friend Nicholas G. Smith, picked him up after the meeting, took him to the mission home for lunch, then drove him to La Guardia where he enplaned for Chicago. There Elder Lee caught a Pullman sleeper for Salt Lake. "My whole digestive system seemed out of order," he wrote aboard the train, "and I suffered constantly from a headache." While the intensity of this attack subsided, it did not disappear entirely but lingered like a vague, gnawing presence, which interrupted his sleep and shadowed his working hours. Meanwhile, there was work to do, a stake conference in Holladay and a speech to summer school students at the University in Logan, Utah. Amidst these, the already mentioned shake-up in the welfare department took place, changes which prompted Elder Lee's mother to ask him confidentially what it all meant and why he had been "demoted."

On July 8, the illness, which had been relatively dormant for twelve days, flared up, this time producing nauseous vertigo that prevented him from standing alone and, while he was lying prone, caused everything to turn and tumble in a whirl. Tests conducted in the hospital revealed Elder Lee suffered from a bleeding ulcer in the duodenal canal. The doctors gave him a transfusion of three pints of blood, prescribed medication, and decreed a lengthy convalescence.

Then came his close associates Henry D. Moyle and Marion G. Romney to bless him. Brother Moyle, newly called to the First Presidency, who served as voice, promised Elder Lee that his "ministry would not be interrupted." After a few days in the hospital, he returned home to convalesce. There he received several more visits from President Moyle, who shared insights about new initiatives being considered by the First Presidency—about a restructuring of missionary work and about plans to appoint members of the Twelve to the executive committees of the Church's financial and business institutions. After digesting these revelations and the manner in which they were presented, Elder Lee wrote: "It is becoming increasingly clear that Brother Moyle is going to become an aggressive mover of plans representing the First Presidency." Time would confirm this.

Elder Lee was strong enough to attend Equitable's centennial celebration in late July. Fern accompanied him to New York for this purpose. The centennial program included attendance at an athletic competition in Madison Square Garden the evening of July 28. During the event, an announcement came over the public address system that Harold B. Lee had an emergency call. Salt Lake was on the line to advise that his mother had suffered a heart attack. She died that night. The mother had lived a long, exemplary, and fruitful life and had slipped away quietly without undue pain.

Members of the family and President Moyle met the Lees at the Salt Lake airport on the twenty-ninth. The funeral, low-key but impressive, was held the next day. President Moyle and Lee Palmer were the speakers. "Afterward at the home," wrote Elder Lee, "Verda said she had a heavenly peace, more wonderful than she had ever known before."

A final family trauma for the summer occurred on August 7 when Perry Lee was hospitalized with an apparent heart attack. The next day, Elder Lee and President Moyle administered to him, a service they repeated a few days later. Perry, buoyed up by the blessings, soon recovered.

When Perry's illness first arose, Elder and Sister Lee had only eleven days to complete preparations for the tour of South America. Meanwhile, there was a stake conference in Bountiful, Utah, a meeting with Elder Henry D. Taylor, who, overwhelmed by his new appointment in Church welfare, sought counsel, a blessing, and a conference with President J. Reuben Clark, who wanted to give fatherly advice and to share important information "for the future."

Elder Lee left the Salt Lake airport alone on Monday, August 17, 1959. Fern would join him later in New York. There to see him off were President David O. McKay and President Henry D. Moyle. After extending his love and blessing, the prophet reminded Elder Lee that his main responsibility during the tour was to create the new Brazil South and Andes missions. As to the latter, President McKay said that while Elder Lee had discretion in the matter, he hoped he would "get the inspiration of the spirit to have Lima, Peru as the headquarters." Elder Lee responded that "as far as [he] was concerned, that the spirit had already spoken." Later, Elder Lee confided to his diary that "it was, indeed, an unlooked for thrill to have the president come to see me off."

Elder Lee's arrival at the Idlewild Airport in New York was his most dramatic ever. One of the motors on his plane caught fire on landing, which brought "the whole fire department." The passengers were hurriedly evacuated to prevent injury or death should the fire ignite the plane's highly flammable fuel. Elder Lee was unscathed.

He would remain in New York City eleven days. During that time, he presided at a conference of the New York stake; attended Union Pacific and Equitable board meetings; met with President Gerald G. Smith and Elder Delbert L. Stapley, who were in the midst of a mission tour; and counselled with Elder Ezra Taft Benson, who flew up from Washington, D.C., for this purpose. Only a little more than a year remained of Elder Benson's service as the secretary of agriculture, and he wanted counsel about invitations he had received from three different corporations to join their boards of directors once his government service had ended.

Fern arrived on August 22 in company with Helen and with Brent, who, the next day, was inducted into the college of hospital administrators at services held in the Metropolitan Opera House. It was a significant recognition for their son-in-law, in celebration of which the Lees treated him and Helen to some of the sights and excitement of Manhattan during the next several days. There was the customary tour of the city and attendance at the current Broadway hits, Music Man and My Fair Lady. They also attended a show at Radio City, which "was alright" according to Elder Lee, "despite the usual overtones and undertones of immorality which are usually dramatized in the shows of today." This was a trend Elder Lee spoke out against pointedly, a trend, he felt, that cheapened and vulgarized society.

Elder and Sister Lee boarded their ship, the SS Brazil, on Saturday, August 29, 1959. They were joined there by Asael Sorenson and his wife and their six children. Brother Sorenson, who had been released as the president of the Brazil mission only a few months before, had been called as the president of the new Brazil South Mission, whose headquarters would be in Curitiba. Since the travellers did not board their ship until 5:00 P.M., dark had begun to fall by the time it maneuvered slowly away from its pier, out into the river, past the battery at the tip of Manhattan Island, past the Statute of Liberty, which guards the entrance to New York Harbor, and out into the open sea. Except for a brief stop at "steamy" Bridgetown on Barbados Island, the travellers would be at sea for nine days.

Since the SS Brazil, which had accommodations for four hundred, had only two hundred passengers, the travellers had free run of the ship. On the first day at sea, a Sunday, the Lees and Sorensons joined for their own worship service. They did the same thing a week later. The other days followed the usual, relaxed shipboard routine, with plenty of time for reading, writing, walking the decks and visiting, and, perhaps, with too much food. Elder Lee also spent many hours with Brother Sorenson, being briefed about Brazil and the status of the members and the missionaries.

As their ship crossed the equator and moved further into the Southern Hemisphere, the travellers could detect a marked change in the weather. Here winter was merging into spring. There was that sense in the air as their ship docked at Rio de Janeiro on September 7, Brazil's national holiday. Because the dock workers were off duty celebrating, the travellers were unable to check their large bags through customs until the next day.

At dockside to greet the Lees were Mission President W. Grant Bangerter, a future General Authority of the Church, his wife, Geraldine, several missionaries, and about fifty members of the Church. Here the visitors had their first exposure to the exuberant and loving nature of the Brazilian people. And here Sister Lee was introduced to the charming Brazilian custom of abracos, as the sisters among the welcoming party each gave her a hug and a kiss on the cheek. During the three weeks she would spend among these warm and affectionate people, she probably got more hugs and kisses than she had received over a period of years among her more restrained sisters in the United States.

Elder Lee began his work in South America the day after arriving in Rio de Janeiro when he ferried across the bay to Niteroi. There he met with seventeen missionaries with whom he held an instructional and testimony meeting. Afterward, he conducted personal interviews with each one. This set a pattern he would follow in meeting with missionaries throughout Brazil and the other South American countries he visited.

The next day, Elder Lee held a public meeting in his hotel in Rio where two hundred members and investigators had assembled. "They were a brilliant and intelligent congregation," wrote he, "and wholly responsive to all that was said." Then, looking to the future, he added, "Here, surely, is the seedbed for great future possibilities."

At Rio, President Sorenson left the party to go south to lay the groundwork for the new mission. Accompanied by President and Sister Bangerter, the Lees then travelled to Juiz de Fora by way of Petropolis, known as the "Summer Capital" when Brazil was part of the Portuguese Empire. After holding a public meeting in Juiz de Fora, the party went on to Sao Paulo. Here, in the commercial capital of Brazil, Elder Lee found a strong district, comprised of six branches, which formed the nucleus of the stake created there in 1966, the first stake in South America.

Among the promising new leaders Elder Lee met in Sao Paulo were "three Methodist ministers" who had been baptized recently, Helio da Rocha Camargo, Walter Queroz, and Saul Messias. These converts were part of the harvest of a special proselyting effort President Asael Sorenson undertook before his release. During that special effort, President Sorenson and his missionaries, through fasting and fervent prayer, focused on the conversion of Brazilians who could provide leadership in the future. All three of these converts later served as stake presidents and mission presidents, while Elder Camargo became the first native Brazilian to serve as a General Authority of the Church.

Elder Lee spent six days in Sao Paulo, holding missionary and member meetings, including a district conference where five hundred were in attendance at the Sunday morning session. One of the features of the conference was an MIA festival titled "Praise Ye the Lord," which, Elder Lee noted, was presented "in a masterful way." Also, on Sunday afternoon following the conference, he presided at a ground-breaking ceremony for the first LDS chapel to be built in Sao Paulo.

During most of three days, Elder Lee closeted with President Bangerter, working out the details for the division of the mission. It was decided that forty missionaries would be assigned to the Brazil South Mission, plus members of the office staff. Districts and branches were divided on a geographical basis.

Leaving the city of Sao Paulo, Elder Lee and President Bangerter held meetings in Rio Claro and Bauru, cities located in the interior of the state of Sao Paulo, and then flew to Londrina in the state of Parana where they met President Sorenson. After holding a public meeting in Londrina, where 115 were in attendance, the party travelled to Curitiba. There, on Sunday, September 20, 1959, the Brazil South Mission was formally organized, the forty-ninth mission in the Church.

Elder and Sister Lee spent nine days touring in the new Brazil South Mission with President and Sister Sorenson. Meetings were held in the states of Parana, Santa Catarina, and Rio Grande do Sul. In addition to the already mentioned meetings in Londrina and Curitiba, Parana, meetings were also held in Ponta Grossa, Parana. The main center of strength in Santa Catarina was at Joinville and in Rio Grande do Sul, at Porto Alegre. Successful meetings were held in both cities.

In Ponta Grossa, Elder Lee was impressed by the way in which one family, the Gaertners, could "leaven" an entire community. Comprised of the parents, six sons, and a daughter, the influence of this family had been the chief impetus for the growth of the Church in this city. Elder Lee learned that when Elder Henry D. Moyle had visited Brazil several years before, he found that the father in the Gaertner family had not been advanced in the priesthood because he smoked. "Henry took him in a room," wrote Elder Lee, "and after exacting a promise to keep the word of wisdom, ordained him an elder. He has not smoked since."

Of German extraction, the Gaertners were part of a significant migration of Germanic people to Brazil, beginning in the 1870s. Elder Lee found the largest concentration of members of German descent in Joinville, a city whose architecture gives it the appearance of having been lifted from its native locale on the Rhine and transported to Brazil intact. The German tongue was heard on the streets of Joinville almost as often as Portuguese. Elder Lee learned that the Church had begun proselyting in Brazil, here in Joinville, in September 1928, when Reinhold Stoof, president of the South American Mission, headquartered in Buenos Aires, Argentina, brought with him two elders who spoke German, Elders William F. Heinz and Emil A. J. Schindler, and set them to work. President Stoof had visited Joinville the year before, and, impressed with the reception he had received, had decided to begin the work there. For several years afterward, LDS missionaries worked exclusively among the German-speaking people in Brazil. Only later did they begin to proselyte Brazilians who spoke Portuguese.

At a meeting held in Porto Alegre on September 26, 1959, Elder Lee had an experience that was repeated several times during his South American tour. A young Brazilian sister who was present reported that "suddenly" during Elder Lee's sermon, "she was understanding without translation." The experience was but one more incident, in a long line of others, when the gift of tongues was manifested.

After finishing the mission tour at Porto Alegre, the Lees and Sorensons flew to Curitiba and then drove to Uguacu Falls near the border of Argentina and Paraguay. Here they were met by President and Sister Bangerter, President and Sister Arthur Jensen of the Uruguayan Mission, and Brother Robert E. Wells. Brother Wells, who also would become a General Authority in the years ahead, was an American banker and businessman then living in Asuncion, Paraguay.

While here, Elder Lee counselled with the three mission presidents about their work, also finding time to visit the massive falls that compared favorably with the Victoria Falls he had seen in Africa the previous year. During this time, Sister Lee suffered severe hemorrhaging in one of her eyes, which inflamed it a fiery red and interfered with her sight. Assisted by the brethren, Elder Lee gave her a blessing, "asking for miraculous intervention."

The Lees and Jensens, accompanied by Brother Wells, travelled to Asuncion by bus on September 30, a distance of two hundred miles "over red dirt roads, through jungle country." They arrived in time for Elder Lee to counsel with and to interview the missionaries. That night, a general meeting was held in the branch chapel where 163 assembled to hear the apostle. The following night, "Bob Wells had arranged for some natives with harps and guitars and singers and dancers to serenade us while we ate a late supper under the patio trees for a touch of Paraguayan culture." Many years later, one of the Wells's daughters, Sharlene, became Miss America, playing the Paraguayan harp in the talent competition.

The next day, the Lees and Jensens flew to Montevideo, Uruguay, the headquarters of the Uruguay Mission. They were met by officials from the U.S. Embassy staff and several elders, among whom was Elder Douglas McKay, one of President David O. McKay's grandsons. Here in Montevideo, Elder Lee found another thriving LDS community. The following weekend, the members of the Church assembled for a conference in their own chapel where crowds of six hundred and seven hundred fifty, respectively, attended the morning and afternoon sessions. At the last session, the gift of tongues was again manifested.

Elder Lee spent a week touring in Uruguay. Meetings were held in Treinta Tres, Paysandu, Salto, and Rivera. At Paysandu, Elder Lee was startled to see how thin Richard Moyle was. He was concerned enough about the health of this missionary, who was a son of President Henry D. Moyle, that he sent him to another city for a check up. Later, he arranged to have him transferred to Lima, Peru. Much of the travel in Uruguay was by bus, which enabled the Lees to see the countryside, made picturesque by the many gauchos on horseback with their ponchos to protect them from the intermittent rains.

Elder and Sister Lee flew to Buenos Aires, Argentina, on October 13, where they were met by Mission President Lorin Pace and over two hundred members of the Church. The twelve-day tour of the mission began the same day with a zone conference at Rio Cuarto. There followed missionary and member meetings at Mendoza, at the foot of the Andes, La Plata, Rosario (where son-in-law Ernest Wilkins had served as a young missionary and where he was remembered by some of the members), Bahia Blanca, Tres Arroyos, and Mar del Plata. At this last city, Elder Lee gave the missionaries a three-step formula for approaching the Lord for his blessings: First, keep the commandments. Second, do everything possible to solve one's own personal problems. Third, "pray to the Lord with real intent and desire."

Elder Lee received more media attention in Argentina than in any other South American country. At a press conference held in Buenos Aires, representatives of the four leading newspapers were present to question the apostle from the north. It was only thirty-four years before that when another apostle from the north, Elder Melvin J. Ballard, had come to Buenos Aires to dedicate South America for the preaching of the gospel. Unknown and unnoticed, he and his companions, Rulon S. Wells and Rey L. Pratt, went to the Tres de Febrero Park near the banks of the La Plata River on Christmas Day, 1925, when Elder Ballard dedicated the continent of South America for the preaching of the gospel. After serving for nine months, during which there were only six conversions, Elder Ballard predicted, "The work will go forth slowly for a time just as the oak grows slowly from an acorn," but, ultimately, "thousands will join here." (From Acorn to Oak Tree, p. 30.) From what he had seen in Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, and Argentina, and from what he would see later in the tour, Elder Lee could attest to the accuracy of Elder Ballard's prediction as there were then almost twenty thousand members in South America.

Elder and Sister Lee flew over the towering Andes to Santiago, Chile, on October 26 where they were met by J. Vernon Sharp, who had been called as the president of the new Andes Mission, whose headquarters would be in Lima, Peru. Elder Lee found several branches of the Church in Santiago, Chile, the first of which had been organized by President Henry D. Moyle when he toured South America in 1956. While in Chile, Elder Lee travelled south to Concepcion, paralleling all the way the Andes, which loom up to the east like enormous sky caps. He also travelled west to the coastal cities of Valparaiso and Vina del Mar, the area in which Elder Parley P. Pratt spent several months during the early 1850s. Here, in an unidentified grave, lie the remains of one of Elder Pratt's daughters, to whom his wife gave birth after the Pratts arrived in Chile, the first child of Latter-day Saint parents to be buried in South America.

On October 29, Elder Lee presided at a meeting in Santiago where the organization of the Andes Mission was presented for sustaining vote. After holding an eight-hour instruction and testimony meeting with the missionaries the next day, Elder Lee and his party flew north to Lima, Peru, where, on November 1, the Andes Mission was formally organized. At the time, there were several branches of the Church in Peru, including the one at Lima, which President Moyle also organized in 1956.

Elder Lee's translator at these services in Lima was Frederick S. Williams, one of the first missionaries in South America in the 1920s, a former president of two missions in South America and the first president of the first Lima branch. At the time of Elder Lee's visit to Lima in November 1959, Brother Williams was the general manager of TAPSA, a Peruvian airline. He reported that during his address to the Lima Saints on this occasion, Elder Lee alluded to Elder Ballard's prophecy. "Standing at his side as interpreter," reported Brother Williams, "I felt the deep spiritual context of his words. He stated that the time would soon come when Father Lehi's children would be inspired to accept the Book of Mormon and enter the Church in great numbers. "Soon," he quoted Elder Lee as saying, "the Pacific coast of the Americas will become the most fertile proselyting field of the church." (Ibid., p. 303.) A Church membership of 571,000 by 1989 in the countries of Chile, Peru, Ecuador, and Colombia; 570,000 in Mexico; and 191,000 in Central America demonstrates the accuracy of this prediction. No other area of the world came near to matching the explosive Church growth in these countries that front on "the Pacific coast of the Americas."

Before leaving Peru, the Lees flew to Cuzco in an unpressurized plane, receiving supplements of oxygen through tubes held between their teeth. The high altitude at Cuzco—11,300 feet—temporarily gave them the soroche, an altitude sickness, which gradually left as they became acclimated. Here on the upper reaches of the Amazon River system, the visitors were treated to the novel combination of Inca and Spanish architecture. The foundations of most buildings are Incan, constructed before 1200 A.D. But above the first floor are the Spanish constructions of masonry and adobe, featuring carved woodwork that is most prominently displayed in the Spanish style balconies that overhang Cuzco's narrow, winding streets. From Cuzco, they travelled fifty miles northwest on a narrow gauge railroad to Machu Picchu, an Incan fortress city constructed on a narrow ridge between two mountain heights. Known as the last citadel of the Incas after the Spanish conquest, Machu Picchu's massive buildings are constructed of mortarless white granite. The city is said to have been abandoned after the death of the last Incan monarch. Retracing their route, the travellers returned to "mist covered Lima" on November 5; and during the two following days, travelled into southern Peru, holding meetings at Tacna and at Toquepala, the latter being the headquarters of a copper mining company that, according to Elder Lee, was an affiliate of the American Smelting and Refining Company.

During the following week, Elder and Sister Lee, in quick succession, touched down, and, in some instances, held meetings in Panama City, San Juan, Costa Rica, Managua, Nicaragua, Tegucigalpa, Honduras, San Salvador, and Guatemala City.

On November 15, sixteen hundred members of the Church from the five districts in Guatemala met in Guatemala City, the largest congregation during the three-month tour. "This is among the most distinctive Lamanite people I have yet been among," Elder Lee wrote of the occasion. Moreover, he had "a strong feeling that this place is without question the Lamanite capital of North America and that a temple for the Latin American people should be built here." That impression saw fruition on December 14, 1984, when a beautiful temple was dedicated in Guatemala City.

Elder Lee's last stop was in Mexico City where he and Sister Lee arrived on the seventeenth. After holding meetings with missionaries and members, he wrote: "The remarkable improvement in the appearance and performance of our Mexican Saints never ceases to amaze me."

The Lees arrived home on November 19 after an absence of three months. It took several days for them to unpack their things, to distribute gifts to the members of the family, and to reset their inner clocks, which had been scrambled by their frequent movement into different time zones. Elder Lee was then on his way to New York for board meetings. He ended the year with conferences in the Mount Logan and Temple View stakes, a quiet Christmas with his family, still another trip to New York for more board meetings, and, on the last day of December, with a funeral honoring his friend Charles S. Hyde. "Charlie's passing," Elder Lee wrote, "recalled [the] delightful but strenuous seven years . . . presiding over the Pioneer stake, along with Paul C. Child."
