Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Twenty-four

The Ultimate Trauma Followed by Healing

Though they did not know it at the time, when the Lees moved into their new home on Penrose Drive in October 1961, Sister Lee had less than a year to live. Fern was happy in this new environment. Her home, equipped with every modern convenience, beautifully decorated and furnished, and with treasured mementoes of her worldwide travels, was a place of culture, refinement, and comfort. Among her treasured keepsakes were those obtained during the tour of New Zealand and Australia she had undertaken with her husband the previous May and June. It was the last international tour they would take together.

They had spent five weeks in the South Pacific, holding stake conferences in Hamilton and Hawkes Bay, New Zealand, and Melbourne and Sydney, Australia. Also, at Hamilton, Elder Lee installed Wendell H. Weiser as the new head of the Church college, replacing Clifton D. Boyack. Along the way, other meetings had been held with members and missionaries. Like the other tours she had taken with her husband, this one was both tiring and exciting. She had enjoyed mingling with the Saints and speaking in many of the meetings. But, it was so good to be home, and once the move had been made to their new place, Fern had a supreme sense of peace and contentment that was enhanced by the nearness of her daughters and their families. We gain an insight into the love and joy that pervaded this home from the diary entry Elder Lee made the day after Christmas 1961. "Marlee [Wilkins] came home to spend a few days with us and Jane [Goates]," wrote he on that day. "It was like having our own two little girls of 'yesterday.'"

Only eleven days after this sweet experience, Sister Lee's frail health took a startling turn for the worse. On Saturday, January 6, 1962, she fainted three times during the night. Understandably alarmed, Elder Lee arranged to have his stake conference assignment cancelled. With medication to help neutralize her high blood pressure and solicitous care from Elder Lee and the family, she seemed to bounce back. But three months later, she had a recurrence of the fainting spells, suffering a slight concussion when she fell. Hospitalized for ten days, she was released with the doctor's warning that it could happen again because of the persistent high blood pressure she had suffered over the years. Her condition was such that Sister Lee was able to attend the ground-breaking ceremonies for the Oakland Temple the last week in May, and on the Fourth of July, she hosted a dinner on her lovely patio, honoring the Lees' Hawaiian friends Jay and Virginia Quealy, who had been called to preside over the Southern Far East Mission.

By now, Fern was living on raw nerve. Later diagnosis revealed that her fainting spells were caused by small, intermittent blood clots in the brain. It was likely true that in some instances, this clotting occurred without causing her to lose consciousness but was severe enough to cause pain, nausea, and feelings of despondency.

By September, her condition had deteriorated to the point that hospitalization was again necessary. On the fourteenth, she suffered "intense nausea and vomiting," accompanied by severe pain. Medication prescribed by her doctors and injections for the pain provided little relief. Elder Lee and Fern's sister, Emily, spent the night near her bedside. When an episode during the night almost took her off, special duty nurses around the clock were arranged for, and two of her former physicians were brought back on the case to provide consultation and more comfort for the patient.

Surprisingly, she made a strong recovery in the days which followed until, by the twentieth, there was talk about releasing her from the hospital. It was in these circumstances that Elder Lee, with the concurrence of the doctors and the encouragement of his wife, went to Nevada to attend the conference of the Lake Mead Stake. However, on Saturday night, she suffered a massive cerebral hemorrhage. Notified at 12:30 A.M., Elder Lee was able to return home on a chartered flight, arriving in Salt Lake on Sunday at 4:00 A.M. Then, with solicitous care, he watched over her sick bed for thirty hours, only leaving at intervals to care for personal needs. At first, he prayed for her recovery; then, sensing her precarious physical state, he yielded to God's will, foregoing his own. Kneeling at her bedside, he whispered words of love and testimony, the funeral sermon she had asked him to give, but which he could not bring himself to speak in public. Then, she slipped away, quietly. It was mid-morning, Monday, September 24, 1962.

The funeral, held three days later, was preceded by a public viewing in the mortuary and a private viewing in the home for family and close associates. The spoken word by members of the First Presidency, the music by friends from the Tabernacle Choir, and the prayers by family members were appropriate and impressive, calculated to honor the deceased and to bring solace to family and friends. Yet, at day's end, when all had gone, and Elder Lee was left alone, the full impact of his loss struck home. No conviction of a reunion in the afterlife, nor glowing memories of past joys, could erase the sense of present loss and deprivation. Aware of this, Elder Lee's sister, Verda, and her husband, Charles Ross, now stepped forward, offering to move into the home, there to assume the responsibility of maintaining it while providing some semblance of family life for him. Avidly accepting this unexpected offer, Elder Lee, to his death, could never adequately express his gratitude for this loving gesture. With the Rosses in the home and with his daughters and their families nearby, he had all the support one could hope for to adjust to life without Fern.

It still was not easy. One does not sever a loving relationship of forty years without major trauma. He mechanically went about to pick up the threads of his shattered life, performing, as if by rote, his daily tasks at headquarters and in the field. Thinking, perhaps, a change of scene would speed the adjustment, President McKay assigned Elder Lee to attend conferences in Europe. Walter Stover, a member of the priesthood welfare committee, who was fluent in the Germanic languages, accompanied him. They left Salt Lake November 9, 1962, and during the following two weeks, held a series of meetings in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland. On balance, the trip helped Elder Lee to refocus his life. But it had a down side. November 14, Fern's birthday and their wedding anniversary, far from home, in a foreign land, was "a most difficult day of memories." Later, he suffered spells of nervous tension and depression, sometimes accompanied by tears. At Berlin, he was unable to attend a large public meeting because of his emotional state.

Back home, he endeavored to recreate the atmosphere that had always brought joy at Christmas time, clearing the yards, trimming the shrubs, and putting up lights. He added a new touch by having an artificial gas log installed in the fireplace. It didn't work. The celebration was cold and meaningless without his companion. Nor could he find peace in public gatherings. It was necessary for him to leave a testimonial dinner honoring President McKay because of an agitation in his "nervous system," which, he wrote, increased when he was "too long confined and in an idle mood." For the same reason, he refrained from attending Sunday School in his own ward over the holidays.

These feelings dominated Elder Lee's waking hours and troubled his dreams until mid-January 1963, when help came from an unexpected source. Following an Equitable meeting in New York, board member John A. Sibley, Atlanta banker, took him aside to share his experience in losing his own wife. "This is the most severe test you will ever be confronted with in your life," said his friend. "If you can meet and surmount this test, there will be nothing else in life you cannot meet and surmount." This thought seemed to infuse him with a new vitality and sense of purpose. It also seemed to bring into focus counsel given by Fern before she died and events of the past two weeks. When death seemed imminent for her, Fern, ever sensitive to his needs, had urged Harold to remarry when she passed on, and not to delay unduly. She also shared this advice with Helen and Maurine. For three months after Fern's death, Elder Lee, caught up in mourning, had given no apparent thought to his wife's counsel. But during the Christmas season in 1962, conscious of the loneliness of single life and the potential hazards of remaining unmarried, he began to take Fern's advice to heart. He then formulated general criteria of what to look for in a second companion. Preferably, she should be near his own age; someone whom Fern had known and admired; and someone who had not been sealed to another. The one who fit these criteria perfectly was Freda Joan Jensen, a well-known educator, who for years had been the supervisor of primary education in the Jordan School District. She was well known to the Lees as she had served on the general boards of both the Primary and the YWMIA and, being about their age, had been involved in social and other activities with that age group. She had never married, although Elder Lee learned later she had been engaged to be married to a widower who died unexpectedly two weeks before the planned nuptials. Given these circumstances, there remained the delicate task of how to open up a dialogue with her, to determine her feelings and whether the personal chemistry between them was such as to give hope of a happy and successful marriage. Elder Lee's task was simplified when Sister Jensen was among those who called at the Lee home during the holidays to pay their respects. Following up on that fortuitous contact, he chose a means of furthering their acquaintance that was ideal for two professional teachers. He gave her a book. It was a copy of President J. Reuben Clark's most recent book to which Elder Lee had written the foreword. Calling in advance, he went to her home on January 2, 1963, to deliver it in person. From the beginning of their relationship, both seemed to know intuitively that they were destined to be man and wife. There was the circumstance of Joan's (the name she preferred Elder Lee to use instead of Freda, which was used by most others) aborted marriage. There was the special blessing she had received years before in Alberta, Canada, from temple President Edward James Wood, who told her that in the future she would occupy a place of high distinction, such that she could then hardly imagine. As for Elder Lee, his prophetic sense whispered that this was the woman whom the Lord had raised up to stand by his side in matrimony and to help assuage the grief caused by Fern's death.

Over a period of months, Elder Lee and Joan Jensen became better acquainted through personal and telephone contact, and by correspondence when Elder Lee was away on assignment. As their courtship progressed, they realized the need to smooth Joan's entrance into the family so as to preserve the unity that existed there. So, Elder Lee met privately with Maurine and Helen to explain his relationship with Joan Jensen and their plans to marry. As expected, he found both of them to be wholly supportive and in favor. Meanwhile, Joan wrote personal letters to the girls, expressing the love she had for both of their parents. Then on March 25, 1963, the entire family was brought together for the first time to meet Joan and to have Elder Lee explain the coming marriage. A month later, he invited Joan to carefully inspect the home to decide what changes, if any, she wanted to make in it and what items of furniture she wanted to bring from her own home. Later, when all his personal and family arrangements for the marriage had been completed, Elder Lee went to President McKay to consult with him about his plans. The prophet heartily approved them, citing the scripture that "it is not good for man to be alone." Then, at his request, Elder Lee took Joan to meet President McKay. Sister McKay was present. Both were impressed with Joan's dignified but friendly charm and gave their unqualified endorsement of the marriage.

The ceremony was performed in the Salt Lake Temple by President McKay on June 17, 1963, in the presence of members of the families, a few choice friends, and the two official witnesses, President Henry D. Moyle and Elder Marion G. Romney. Afterward, a wedding breakfast arranged by friends Lou and Geraldine Callister was held in the Hotel Utah, and at 2:00 P.M., the newlyweds boarded a plane for New York. There they checked into the "palatial" bridal suite of the Waldorf Astoria. They remained in the city four days. Except for a meeting with the Equitable board and checking on preliminary plans for the Church's World Fair pavilion, Elder Lee spent the time with Joan, acquainting her with the city that had almost become his second home. In the months ahead, he would visit there even more often because of his assignment as the chairman of the committee planning the Church's World Fair exhibit. "My days with Joan were glorious," he wrote of this abbreviated honeymoon. "Each night we sat up talking, sometimes until 1-2 A.M., talking about things we had little opportunity before to say."

Later, in Chicago, the private car of Union Pacific's president was made available to them. "This was travel deluxe," Elder Lee wrote of the trip from Chicago to Salt Lake City. Still later, they took the private car on a trip to California. With them were Verda and Charlie Ross and Lou and Geraldine Callister, "for a little diversion and as an expression of our gratitude for all they have done."

Thus, at age sixty-six, Joan Jensen Lee was fully launched on her career as the wife of the man who was destined to become the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. She never ceased to marvel at the extraordinary turn of events that had brought this about, nor at the spiritual sensitivity of President E. J. Wood who had predicted it, even though in veiled terms. And both she and Elder Lee were struck by the way in which Joan, over the years, had slowly and faithfully acquired the talents, the qualities of character, and the spirituality that equipped her to fill this niche. Later, she would become a role model for many Latter-day Saint women who, deprived of the opportunity to marry worthy men in their youth, were encouraged to continue to grow and mature as individuals, to develop professional and other skills, and to live happy, productive lives, not with any idea of marrying a great man like Elder Lee later in life, but with the idea of making the most of the circumstances and opportunities that each life affords.

During the remainder of 1963, Joan was introduced to the somewhat nomadic life she would live during the next ten years. In September she and Elder Lee took their first overseas trip together when they spent ten days in Hawaii. They flew to Honolulu on the seventh, where they were met by local leaders and members and were treated to the customary Polynesian welcome with song and dance and flowers in profusion. It was an eye-opener to Joan, who had not before been exposed to the unfeigned love of the Polynesian Saints. That night, they were dinner guests at the luxurious home of the Wong family, prominent and wealthy members of the Church.

During the following week, the visitors went to Maui. There they visited the old church where missionary work began in the islands more than a century before. They then flew to Hilo on the big island of Hawaii, from where they drove to the Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. Here the visitors saw the driving mechanism that had built up these volcanic islands in the Pacific.

Back in Oahu over the weekend, Elder Lee presided at a stake conference in Laie. Joining him in giving instructions were D. Arthur Haycock of the missionary committee and Harry Brooks of the home teaching committee. Joan was called on to bear her testimony at the general sessions in which she focused her remarks, as she usually did, on the children in the audience, with whom she had a great rapport.

The plan to hold a stake conference the following weekend in Honolulu was cancelled when, on the eighteenth, Elder Lee received word that President Henry D. Moyle had died earlier in the day at Deer Park, Florida, while visiting the Church ranch. The Lees returned to Salt Lake City immediately, where Elder Lee was appointed to the committee to arrange for the funeral, which was held on the twenty-first. He was one of the speakers, lauding his friend for his fine qualities of character and for his years of effective service in the Church, his profession, and his businesses.

Following the October 1963 general conference, when N. Eldon Tanner was sustained as second counselor in the First Presidency and Hugh B. Brown as the first counselor, Elder and Sister Lee travelled to Washington and New York and then to England and Europe. They were gone for twenty-four days, leaving the Salt Lake City airport on October 25. They travelled first to Washington, D.C., where Elder Lee attended a meeting of the board of governors of the American Red Cross. Elder Lee had been appointed to this board some time before, an appointment that further expanded his ability to serve and enlarged his sphere of influence among business, professional, educational, and political leaders throughout the country.

After spending a day as the guests of J. Willard Marriott and his wife at their ranch near the capital, the Lees travelled to New York where Elder Lee attended Equitable board meetings. They also spent a day with Alberta Moyle, President Moyle's widow, who was staying with her son-in-law and daughter, Mr. and Mrs. Frank Wangeman. Still in deep mourning over the death of her husband, Elder and Sister Lee tried to persuade her to accompany them abroad, thinking this might speed the process of healing. But, she did not feel up to going with them.

The Lees flew out of New York on the morning of November 1. Waiting to meet them at Heathrow, outside London, were Elder Marion D. Hanks and his wife, Maxine, who were directing the mission. They checked into the Grosvenor Hotel, which they made headquarters during their three-day stay. It being Joan's first trip to London, the Hankses arranged for her to see the usual places of historic interest. Elder Lee counselled with Elder Hanks, who was then a member of the First Council of Seventy, and with Selvoy J. Boyer, the president of the London Temple. Elder Lee also inspected the temple, its grounds, and the church-owned buildings nearby.

The travellers flew to Munich, Germany, on November 4. The following day Elder Lee attended a conference for servicemen and their dependents at a site near Munich, after which, in turn, he and Joan went to Zurich and Bern, Switzerland. At Bern, Elder Lee inspected the temple and counselled with the temple president. After a hurried trip to the Alps, the Lees returned to Zurich from where, on November 12, they flew to Paris, checking in at the Grand Hotel, which was their headquarters during a three-day stay in the French capital. Here Elder Lee treated his new bride to some of the cultural riches of this renowned city. They attended the ballet at the Royal Opera House, visited the Louvre, had lunch in the Eiffel Tower, and visited government buildings and monuments, including Napoleon's tomb. He then accompanied Joan on a shopping tour, buying her some French perfume, a pair of fine leather gloves, and a dainty handkerchief for which Paris is famous.

The travellers went from Paris to Amsterdam, where Elder Lee held a meeting with the missionaries working there, then to The Hague, where they attended Sunday School on the seventeenth, and, finally, to Rotterdam, from where they caught a flight to New York City, arriving in time to enable Elder Lee to attend his monthly Equitable meetings. During that time, Joan visited with Sister Moyle. "Alberta seems lonely," Elder Lee noted later, "and so much alone. How well I know her hurt and the intensity of her loss." So, despite the happy adjustment Elder Lee had made in his marriage to Joan, and despite the love and the gratitude he had for her, he could never forget, nor could he cease to love and to long for, his first love, the mother of his children.
