Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Twenty-five

A Family in Transition

For years before her death, Fern had been frail and fragile in health. The high blood pressure had limited her activities and had interfered with her enjoyment of everyday life. In later years, the many operations, falls, and confinements she experienced had cast doubt on her ability to survive to an old age. So, while her passing created a great sadness and and sense of loss in the family, it did not come unexpectedly or with violent shock. Such was not the case with the sudden, unexpected death of Maurine Lee Wilkins on August 27, 1965, at age forty. This bright, vivacious, friendly woman, whom her father called "Sunshine," was carrying her fifth child when she died. At the time, Elder Lee was in Hawaii with Elder Paul H. Dunn for some meetings they had planned to hold in the Pacific. He returned home immediately. "My heart is broken as I contemplate the passing of my darling 'Sunshine,'" wrote he, "and the great need of Ernie and her little family." After the sadness of the funeral, he wrote disconsolately, "Somehow, I seem unable to shake off this latest, shattering blow. Only God can help me."

In time, the shock and sadness subsided as Elder Lee picked up his burden and moved on. But, now and again, memories of the loss of his loved ones evoked poignant feelings, as they did on November 14, 1965, Fern's birthday and their wedding anniversary, when he had a bad day. On the fourth anniversary of her death, in September 1966, he was "yearning" for his departed mate. Meanwhile, in December 1965, four months after Maurine's death, he became concerned about Joan, who had lost twenty pounds and who occasionally was heard to cry out in her sleep as Fern had sometimes done in the months before she died. "The horror of having the possibility of a similar loss," wrote he, "has shaken me to the limit." Fortunately, Joan regained her strength and retained it throughout the remainder of Elder Lee's life and beyond, providing comfort and encouragement during the infirmities and trials he was yet to endure. The only physical impediment she suffered before her husband passed on was reduced vision, which was corrected by cataract surgery.

Meanwhile, the third generation was reaching maturity. In 1967, Elder Lee's two oldest grandsons were called into the mission field, David Goates and Alan Wilkins. David was called to serve in England, and when his grandfather was there during November of that year, they spent a day together in Leeds. The next day, when Elder Lee and the mission president drove to Sunderland to hold missionary meetings, Elder David Goates was at the wheel of the mission car. No doubt, the grandparent was neither irritated nor annoyed when the mission president told him that David was the "most outstanding of his missionaries," and that he was "thinking of him as an assistant."

Three months before Elder Lee saw David in England, he attended Alan's missionary farewell in Provo. Ironically, it was on August 27, the second anniversary of Maurine's death. On this account, Alan was very tender in his feelings, and as he sat on the stand beside Elder Lee, he whispered to him: "Oh, Grandfather, Mother would have wanted so much to be here. I have prayed constantly that the Lord would permit her to come."

The third grandson to enter the mission field was Elder Lee's namesake, Harold Lee Goates, who was called to the South Africa Mission in March 1968. Elder Lee accompanied Hal Goates to the temple when he received his endowment on March 19, 1968, commenting that, "Perhaps heaven was very close; a proud grandmother and Auntie Marr." The grandfather was no less proud of this grandson, and his other grandchildren, than was Fern, although on attending David's homecoming, he was quick to explain that he was "righteously" proud. On December 19, 1969, when he performed David's temple marriage to Patsy Hewlett, he referred to it as "a historic occasion for our family."

With ten grandchildren, four of Maurine's (Alan, Marlee, Larry, and Jay Wilkins) and six of Helen's (David, Jane, Hal, Drew, Jonathon, and Timothy), Elder Lee felt rich indeed. The aspirations he had for them were succinctly stated in a diary entry he made after seeing a group of them together at Aspen Grove during a family vacation in July 1965. "As the older ones reach their maturity," wrote he, "we are prayerfully hoping that we can [help them to be] clean, get their schooling, and fill missions, and marry in the temple." In aid of these objectives, Elder Lee set up trust funds for his grandchildren on January 5, 1968.

During this period of vibrant growth and activity of his family, Elder Lee passed through a series of illnesses that tested his patience and his staying power. During the first week in January 1966, he was hospitalized. There he underwent extensive tests of his intestinal tract and received a blood transfusion. The following week, he had to be excused from a stake conference assignment in Rexburg, Idaho, and returned to the hospital to see if the doctors could give him some relief from the "persistent headaches" he suffered. Nothing they prescribed was of lasting benefit. He entered the hospital again in March 1967 for more tests to try to determine the cause of his headaches and feelings of inertia. The only outcome was another blood transfusion, some iron shots, and an admonition to guard his health and to slow down. Elder Lee's response was to leave the next day for Jacksonville, Florida, where on March 17, 1967, he began a mission tour with his friend Glen Rudd. During a whirlwind week, Elder Lee dedicated chapels in Live Oak, Tilton, DeFuniak Springs, and Tallahassee, Florida, and Mobile, Alabama. Missionary meetings were held along the way. At Pensacola, Florida, where another public meeting was held, he commented on the "exhausting pace." The tour ended in Orlando, Florida, the mission headquarters, where he held an instruction and testimony meeting with forty missionaries, followed by personal interviews.

Elder Lee flew from Orlando to New York on Friday, March 24, where, over the weekend, he and Elder Franklin D. Richards were scheduled to divide the New Jersey Stake. He spent a miserable night Saturday, "in a cold sweat," and Sunday morning, while in the shower, he became faint. Joan called Mission President Jay Eldredge, who came with two elders to administer to him. "They blessed me to be able to attend the conference, which I did, and participated in the division of the New Jersey stake and the creation of the New Jersey Central stake." When on Monday morning he again felt faint, Elder Lee cancelled plans to remain in New York until Thursday and returned home immediately. There, the next day, he entered the hospital where he was given a massive blood transfusion, iron shots, and gamma globulin shots. Then, over a period of several days, a team of four doctors conducted extensive tests, which resulted in the decision to operate. The surgery was performed April 11, 1967, in a marathon operation from 8:00 A.M. to 11:30 P.M. The doctors later explained that the source of the bleeding was "from a large ulcer in the duodenal bulb where it had not been possible to x-ray." They also told him they had removed about a half to two thirds of his stomach "in that portion most susceptible to over-acidity." They found no malignancy. Elder Lee seemed to feel that his life had been miraculously preserved for a purpose. "One can only suppose," wrote he, "that the Almighty has it in hand to give or to take, and He alone keeps the time table. To the thoroughness and the skill of the doctors I owe much; but I am not unmindful of the spiritual power which has been in evidence in the events leading up to the operation, as well as the circumstances resulting."

By April 27, the patient had recovered from the surgery and was ready to return to work. "I am amazed," he recorded, "at no pain in my digestive system and my headaches [have been] reduced to a minimum. The Lord, indeed, has been good to me." As he prepared to gear up again, Dr. Orme gave Elder Lee parting instructions "to do only half a man's work rather than the work of ten men," instructions that, as we shall see, he did not follow with exactitude.

This surgery seemed to solve Elder Lee's current physical problems. He was in good health during the next year. However, following the April 1968 general conference, he became ill again and was unable to attend a stake conference in Boston. In the hospital, x-rays "showed signs of infection" in his lower right lung, which was later diagnosed as pleural pneumonia. After recovering from this ailment, there followed another year during which Elder Lee was in comparatively good health. Like a good juggler, he was able to keep all the balls in the air without dropping them. It was a continual round of headquarters duties, chiefly correlation matters at the moment, stake conferences, mission tours, and board meetings, always more board meetings. Following the April 1969 general conference, however, he was overcome with "extreme weariness." Consulting his lead doctor, Joseph F. Orme, he underwent a three-hour examination. "Seemingly, he found nothing irregular," noted Elder Lee, and, so saying, he boarded a plane for New York for some more board meetings.

But, like the ghost of Banquo, Elder Lee's sense of weariness would not down merely by a doctor's finding that there was nothing irregular about him. "Went to the LDS Hospital x-ray laboratory," he noted on September 2, 1969, "for further exploration of some possible causes for my digestive problems and weariness." The following weekend, Elder Lee's assignment to attend the Norfolk stake conference was cancelled. Instead, he entered the LDS Hospital, exhausted, where he underwent another extensive series of tests over a period of three days. They revealed nothing, so he returned home and for a week worked there, holding committee meetings and dictating to his secretary. Elder Thomas S. Monson and his leadership team came one day to discuss plans for the coming Regional Representatives seminar. Before leaving, the brethren administered to him. Elder Monson, who was to leave for Germany that night, pronounced the blessing to seal the anointing. "I awoke in the early morning hours," Elder Lee wrote the next day, "feeling that somehow I was being 'cleansed,' as nearly I could describe the feeling."

After the week at home, he reentered the hospital for more x-rays and tests. These revealed a large stone in the left kidney. At this point a specialist, Dr. Hal Bourne, was brought into the picture to help determine what to do. This led to the decision to remove the stone by surgery, it being too large to remove by other means. At 5:00 A.M., September 22, an orderly came to Elder Lee's room to prepare him for the operation. Always on duty, he responded to the orderly, who plied him "with many questions and particularly as to how he could keep himself free from the temptations of Satan." Following the surgery, which proved to be successful, the patient was in intensive care for two days. During that time, he was visited by President N. Eldon Tanner and Elders Spencer W. Kimball, Marion G. Romney, and Thomas S. Monson, who wanted counsel about work he had shifted to them. "While somewhat tiring," noted he, "I felt mentally alive as I tried to respond with such counsel and direction as I was able to give." We gain understanding about his interior world at this time from a diary entry made September 25, 1969, a Thursday. Elder Lee remembered those attending the temple meeting who had prayed for him "as [he] struggled to rise above pain and discomfort and worrisome anxieties as to the ultimate results of this surgery."

During the next three weeks, these "worrisome anxieties" subsided as he convalesced and regained his strength. He was uplifted when on October 2 Elders Spencer W. Kimball and Thomas S. Monson came to report on the successful outcome of the Regional Representatives seminar.

It took more than a month for Elder Lee to recover from this surgery and its aftermath. By November 9, 1969, he seems to have regained his strength and was prepared to move forward. "I am now about ready," he wrote on that date, "to take my first steps into a full scale activity if I have not already achieved that in fact." Elder Lee then resumed his duties with a vigor and enthusiasm he had not shown for some time. The deadening weariness he had suffered for so long was gone, so were the splitting headaches. His renewed health at this time was fortuitous, for in two months a burden heavier than any he had borne before would be thrust upon him when, in January 1970, President Joseph Fielding Smith called him as the first counselor in the First Presidency.
