Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Twenty-six

The Church in Transition

Transitions in the Church during the years from 1965 to 1970 matched those in the personal and family life of Elder Lee. In October 1965, President David O. McKay, faced with diminished physical strength and increased administrative burdens as the Church grew worldwide, called two additional counselors to help shoulder the load, Joseph Fielding Smith and Thorpe B. Isaacson. Since President Smith was not released from his duties in the Twelve, he had to share more of them with Elder Lee because of the new demands on his time that service in the First Presidency entailed. President Isaacson, whose wide and varied experience qualified him to counsel the prophet in business and educational matters, served effectively for only three months. On February 7, 1966, he suffered a massive stroke that severely impaired his speech and his ability to move about and to care for himself. From then until President McKay's death in January 1970, he was unable to render the service for which he had been called. Later, President McKay began to look to Elder Alvin R. Dyer for counsel as to the matters President Isaacson had handled, first unofficially and then officially when he was sustained as a counselor in the First Presidency at the April 1968 general conference. At that same conference, Elder Marion D. Hanks was sustained as an Assistant to the Twelve, and Elders Hartman Rector, Jr., and Loren C. Dunn were sustained as members of the First Council of the Seventy. Eighteen months later, Elder Marvin J. Ashton was sustained as an Assistant to the Twelve. There would be no other changes among the General Authorities of the Church until January 1970 following President McKay's death.

Meanwhile, there were significant changes among headquarters personnel below the General Authority level. These had to do mainly with staffing the three correlation committees and the four priesthood committees, and developing and implementing the concepts of Regional Representatives and the training committee. The first major change in the composition of the correlation committees occurred on March 13, 1965, when Elder Thomas S. Monson was appointed as the chairman of the adult correlation committee, replacing Elder Marion G. Romney, who continued as the chairman of the priesthood home teaching committee, assisted by Elder Boyd K. Packer.

The organization of the three correlation committees and the four priesthood committees effected major, farreaching, changes in the administration of the Church. They were not implemented overnight. It took time and patience to put them into effect. So long had the auxiliaries been accustomed to preparing their own instructional materials that it was difficult and sometimes frustrating for them to go through the correlation process to get a new manual written and approved. And, if a General Authority, for instance, wanted a particular lesson included in a manual, he also had to go through correlation in the usual way and could no longer go directly to the auxiliary involved and request that it be inserted. This issue was joined in December 1965 when a ranking General Authority sought and obtained permission directly from President McKay to have a special set of lessons prepared, bypassing the correlation process. Elder Lee protested vigorously, stating that were this procedure to be allowed, "We might as well close out correlation." The new and somewhat revolutionary procedure survived, of course, and in time became firmly established, accepted by all, and immune from indirect attack, as in this case.

As the correlation program was rolled out, with representatives of the four priesthood committees accompanying General Authorities to stake conferences to give instructions, there developed a perceived need to have a corps of teachers and trainers in the field, constantly on duty, to see that the policies and procedures adopted by the General Authorities were fully understood and implemented. The role of the Regional Representatives of the Twelve arose out of this perceived need. As the Brethren prayerfully considered the creation of such an office, they were careful to define the scope of the authority of a Regional Representative. He was not to be an officer in the priesthood line but was to serve merely in a staff capacity, teaching and training local leaders in matters as directed by the Twelve. Regional Representatives were to serve without compensation for a period of years. Concurrent with this development emerged the need for a training committee whose role would be to help structure training seminars for the Regional Representatives and instructional programs to be taken into the field as part of stake or regional conferences.

By July 1967, final decisions had been made about the role of the Regional Representatives and steps were being taken to identify, call, and train them. "Spent today reviewing brethren to be appointed as regional representatives," wrote Elder Lee on July 7. "This is a laborious task, but of vital importance to see, if possible, that the most qualified are put in their positions to teach other leaders to be effective to the utmost of their ability. I was delighted as I became aware of the splendid leadership available to us now." As the process of identifying the Regional Representatives went forward, Elder Lee was working behind the scenes with Elder Thomas S. Monson about plans for the training committee. On August 9, they and other members of the correlation executive committee met with the First Presidency in President McKay's Hotel Utah apartment, where the plans for training the Regional Representatives were approved. Also, "the names of proposed regional representatives were approved, with few exceptions." Afterward, Neal A. Maxwell, a future member of the Twelve, and Wendell J. Ashton, a future publisher of the Deseret News and mission president in England, were appointed to work with Elder Monson on the training committee.

Between this date and September 27, 1967, when the first meetings with Regional Representatives were held, all those identified and approved were called to serve and detailed plans for their training had been developed by Elder Monson and his committee. The day before these first meetings with the Regional Representatives were held, Elder Lee met with Elder Monson and his committee to make certain everything was in readiness. Wrote Elder Lee of this meeting: "Thomas S. Monson and his associates, Neal A. Maxwell and Wendell Ashton, have done a tremendous job in expediting and planning for all the details."

The first training sessions for Regional Representatives on the twenty-seventh were held in the Seventeenth Ward chapel located on First North near West Temple. Elder Lee spoke for an hour and a half, presenting an overview of the correlation program and outlining the duties of the Regional Representatives. Afterward, he introduced the sixty-nine men who had been selected to serve in this new office. During the next two days, additional meetings were held with these men, including a devotional session in the temple under the direction of the First Presidency where all the other General Authorities were also present. "Our meetings in the Seventeenth Ward," wrote Elder Lee, "were wonderfully developed according to an outlined plan. I was particularly blessed in closing instructions on the subject 'How to use the Scriptures in our Teaching.'" Friday night, the twenty-ninth, a dinner was held for the General Authorities, Regional Representatives, and correlation workers and their companions. At the general priesthood meeting Saturday evening, Elder Lee presented "the new regional representatives program" in a forty-five minute address, and the day after the conference ended, a final question-and-answer session was held with these new leaders.

Thus was formally launched one of the most significant changes in Church administration during the twentieth century. It provided an effective means for training and supervising local leaders as the Church expanded and intensified its global operations. It demonstrated the flexible yet unchangeable nature of the Church organization with these new officers being engrafted on the basic Church structure to help the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles to discharge its responsibility of supervising and setting in order the affairs of the Church around the world. While many people were involved in formulating and launching this far-reaching initiative, and while it all was done under the authority and the direction of the prophet, it is clear that the most conspicuous contributor to the event was Elder Harold B. Lee. It was something he had anticipated and sought for since almost the inception of his apostolic career. His intricate knowledge of Church administration at the ward, stake, and mission level soon made it apparent, after his induction into the Twelve, that an organizational change such as this would be essential as the Church expanded worldwide. That vision became a reality because of his inherent skills in organizing and motivating people, skills which were honed by his world travels in the interests of the Church, by his association with distinguished business and professional leaders, and because of his tenacity and discipline. Given the numerous delays, setbacks, and reversals that occurred along the road leading to a correlated church, the role played by Elder Lee was not for one of faint heart or weak will. Nor was it for one easily deterred by opposition or criticism. As one reflects on what occurred in bringing correlation into being, the conclusion seems inescapable that the key player, Elder Harold B. Lee, was raised up by the Lord and placed in circumstances where his character, skill, and intelligence coalesced to produce this extraordinary result.

A year after the Regional Representatives were put in place, the training committee was enlarged by the addition of James E. Faust and Hugh W. Pinnock. At the same time, Antone Romney, J. Thomas Fyans, and Doyle L. Green were called on by Elder Lee to consider and to make recommendations about the mechanics of preparing and distributing instructional materials.

It is interesting and significant how several of those who worked closely with Elder Lee in correlation during this period later became General Authorities of the Church: James E. Faust and Neal A. Maxwell were ultimately inducted into the Twelve, and J. Thomas Fyans and Hugh W. Pinnock became presidents of the Seventy. Also, during the period correlation became established, Elder Lee was exposed to other leaders who, in the years ahead, were added to the ranks of the General Authorities. So, in June 1965, when Elder Lee reorganized the presidency of the Los Angeles Stake, a promising young attorney, John Carmack, who later became a Seventy, was sustained as a counselor in the stake presidency. During a period of nine months, in 1968 and 1969, Elder Lee installed three men as stake presidents who also later became members of the Seventy: Waldo Pratt Call, installed as the president of the Juarez Stake in November 1968; Devere Harris, installed as the president of the Malad Idaho Stake in June 1969; and J. Ballard Washburn, installed as the president of the Kanab Utah Stake in August 1969. Three months after installing J. Ballard Washburn in Kanab, Elder Lee attended the conference of the Midvale Stake in company with Regional Representative Rex C. Reeve, Sr., of whom he wrote: "Rex added a great spiritual tone to the meeting." A few years later, Elder Reeve also was called as a member of the Seventy.

A week after the Midvale stake conference, Elder Lee and Elder Marion D. Hanks met with a group of young adults packed into the Salt Lake Tabernacle. "This was one of the most responsive audiences I have ever faced," he reported. Two weeks later, Elder Lee and Elder Hanks met with student association leaders from all over the United States. The meeting was held at the institute of religion near the campus of the University of Utah. Elder Lee spoke for forty-five minutes at the end of the meeting, bearing his testimony and sharing some choice spiritual experiences. From the report of the meeting, there was an almost electric feeling among the audience as he finished speaking. The closing song was "I Walked Today Where Jesus Walked," followed by a benediction. "As the meeting closed," Elder Lee wrote, "no one moved to leave, so great was the spirit, until after several minutes. When we arose to leave the chapel, someone commenced to sing 'The Spirit of God Like a Fire is Burning.' Many were in tears. Marion D. Hanks said 'This is a night those present will never forget. Nor will I.' It has been the greatest spiritual experience I have ever had, also." Some of those present were heard to say that the mantle of the prophet fell on Elder Lee at the time. That would not actually occur for two and a half years. But, the following month, he would be called into the First Presidency, which would be an important prelude to his call as the president of the Church.

This meeting was held during a time of considerable upset in the Church. Not long before, the administration of Stanford University had announced that it would no longer schedule athletic events with Brigham Young University because of the Church's policy against conferring the priesthood on blacks. This touched off another round of debates as to whether this policy was based on principle or was merely a practice. This was really nothing new because that issue had been debated for many years. The debate heated up following President McKay's visit to South America in 1954 when it was reported he had said that the policy was based on a practice. This doubtless arose from a misinterpretation of a change made at that time in the procedure for issuing temple recommends. Under the changed procedure, an applicant was deemed qualified to receive a temple recommend if he met the worthiness standards and if there was no positive evidence of disqualification due to lineage. Moreover, in the early 1960s when pressures were exerted by blacks in West Africa that the Church proselyte there, President McKay affirmed that the policy as to priesthood would change only if it were based on revelation from God. In this posture, the flap within the Church, which followed the announcement of Stanford's policy, would have died soon had it not been for an article that appeared in the San Francisco Chronicle a few days before Christmas 1969. That article quoted President Hugh B. Brown as saying that the Church policy on priesthood would "change in the not too distant future." The Salt Lake Tribune picked the story up and published it on Christmas Day. Because the news accounts were garbled and incomplete, a letter was sent to priesthood leaders, reaffirming the Church policy on priesthood. Again, that ordinarily would have ended the matter as to the Church's position had not the Tribune reported in its January 1, 1970, issue that this statement to Church leaders had been "sent out by Elder Harold B. Lee." Because of the thoroughly confused status of the record at this point, the Brethren decided that the statement to priesthood leaders, reaffirming the Church policy on priesthood, signed by the First Presidency, be published in its entirety in the Deseret News. This was done on January 10, 1970. The publication of this letter settled the question about the Church's current position on blacks and the priesthood. Unsettled, however, was the external turmoil that had been stirred up by the Stanford policy. And, as we shall see, that turmoil, with all its ramifications, would snowball in the weeks ahead, creating one of the major problems to face the administration of President Joseph Fielding Smith.
