Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Twenty-seven

Counselor in the First Presidency

The publication of the statement on priesthood occurred only eight days before President David O. McKay passed away on Sunday, January 18, 1970, at age ninety-six. He had been ailing for some time, having suffered a series of mild strokes in recent years. However, with the assistance of the additional counselors he had called, the members of the Twelve, his staff, members of his family, and others, he had been able to carry on effectively despite his advanced age. He died in the early morning hours of that day. "At 6:00 A.M., I had a call from the wife of Joseph Fielding Smith," Elder Lee wrote on that day, "to tell me that President David O. McKay had just passed away and that the president wanted me to meet him at the Hotel Utah [where the prophet had died in his apartment] as soon as possible." Arriving there soon after, Elder Lee found President Smith and all of President McKay's family, except son Llewelyn, who had recently suffered a stroke, and daughter Lou Jean, who was in Chicago. After counselling with the family for two hours, it was decided to hold the funeral the following Thursday, and the general outline of the services was agreed upon. The next day, the Twelve met when Elder Lee was appointed to chair the committee on arrangements for the funeral with Elders Spencer W. Kimball, Ezra Taft Benson, and N. Eldon Tanner as members.

On the day before President McKay's funeral, President Smith visited Elder Lee in his office. He said that if, in the natural course of events, he became the head of the Church, he wanted Elder Lee "by his side."

When the Smiths left his office, Elder Lee realized that if what President Smith had proposed materialized, he would become both a counselor in the First Presidency and the president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. These reflections "brought an overwhelming sense of obligation and responsibility," wrote Elder Lee, "which could not be assumed, except by the Lord's help."

Before the funeral, President McKay's body lay in state in the main foyer of the Church Administration Building as thousands, both members and friends of the Church, filed by his casket. Elder Lee was amazed by this show of respect for the great man. "As I look out of my windows," wrote he, "I see thousands lined up all the way down to Main Street, all the way around the block, in order to get a glimpse of the president."

Because of the worldwide commitments and holdings of the Church, it was important that there be no unnecessary delay in reorganizing the First Presidency. So, the members of the Twelve, which at this point also included President McKay's former counselors, Hugh B. Brown and N. Eldon Tanner, met in the upper room of the Salt Lake Temple on January 23, 1970, for this purpose. "There was an air of expectancy and some tension," wrote Elder Lee, "as each spoke, beginning with the junior member of the Twelve," who at the time was Elder Thomas S. Monson. When it was his turn, Elder Lee, conscious of the rumors Joseph Fielding Smith's wife Jessie had heard, read a letter Wilford Woodruff had written to Heber J. Grant following the death of President John Taylor. The letter was prompted by "rumors" that an effort might be made to bypass Wilford Woodruff, who was then the president of the Quorum of the Twelve, in favor of a younger man. The letter merely affirmed the principle, already mentioned, that at the death of a president of the Church, the president of the Twelve simultaneously becomes the "acting" president of the Church and that under well established principles of priesthood leadership, nothing would be done without his approval and authorization. After reading this letter, Elder Lee moved that Joseph Fielding Smith be named as the president of the Church. Elder Spencer W. Kimball seconded the motion, which was carried unanimously. With all the apostles present joining, and with Elder Lee acting as voice, Joseph Fielding Smith was then ordained and set apart as the president—the prophet, seer, and revelator—and the trustee-in-trust of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. President Smith then named Harold B. Lee and N. Eldon Tanner as his first and second counselors, respectively, who, being approved by the council, were set apart. During the same meeting, Elder Lee was sustained and set apart as the president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and Elder Spencer W. Kimball was sustained and set apart as the acting president of the quorum. "The following day," wrote Elder Lee, "a press conference was conducted in the church [administration] building where about twenty men and one woman representing all the news, radio and TV networks were permitted, for an hour, to record our answers to written questions which had been previously submitted."

With these formalities behind them, the new First Presidency was prepared to move forward toward goals that had not yet been clearly defined. They had entered office with the avowed purpose of being directed by the spiritual promptings that would come to them. In this, they recognized their subordinate role to the one who is the actual head of the Church that bears His name.

At the outset, there were various organizational matters to handle. As among themselves, it was decided that temple and related matters would be directly under President Smith, assisted by President Lee. Other administrative matters at the First Presidency level were delegated to the counselors, subject to overview and to any necessary revisions by the prophet. President Lee's chief responsibilities were to be in education, budgeting, finance (shared with President Tanner), management systems (computer technology), and communications (KSL radio and TV, Bonneville International Corporation, and Deseret News). Also, he was to have executive responsibilities in certain Church-owned or controlled corporations: Zions Securities Corporation, ZCMI, Utah Idaho Sugar Company, Hotel Utah, Beneficial Life, Deseret Book Company, and Deseret Management Corporation, a holding company. In addition, Elder Lee would be the first contact in the First Presidency for the Primary and Relief Society auxiliaries, Church personnel, and Church correlation. These responsibilities were in addition to those in corporations not controlled by the Church: Union Pacific, Equitable Life, and Zions First National Bank.

Because the First Presidency met together several times each week, there was ample opportunity for President Smith to receive the reports of his counselors and to give any necessary advice or direction. Because of the confidence he had in them, the prophet gave his counselors wide latitude to function in the matters over which they had been given responsibility.

At the moment, correlation was the work for which President Lee had the greatest concern. While the mechanism was working satisfactorily, especially since the Regional Representatives had been put in place, there still was a need for constant surveillance and follow through. Elder Thomas S. Monson became the principal one upon whom President Lee depended "for attending to the many details of the total correlation effort." As a means of educating and motivating all the General Authorities in correlation principles and procedures, President Lee soon began to invite various correlation workers to the monthly meetings of all General Authorities in the upper room of the Salt Lake Temple, to explain various aspects of the work. Moreover, President Lee took advantage of every opportunity to explain correlation principles, whether in small, private gatherings or in public meetings, a technique he had learned well during the years Church welfare became established as one of the foundational organizations of the Church.

A major concern that faced the new First Presidency grew out of the Church's policy on priesthood. The Stanford action was only one manifestation of the problems it created. There were others. On February 5, 1970, there was a near riot at a basketball game in Fort Collins, Colorado, between Brigham Young University and Colorado State University. It was triggered by a group of militant black students from CSU who used this means of protesting the Mormon Church's policy on priesthood. These militants were permitted to offer an invocation before the game, which was little more than a broad indictment of the Church. There also was an overt show of protest during the warm-ups when a group of blacks massed beneath the BYU basket, shouting threats at the players. At halftime vulgar insults were made against the BYU Cougarettes and the players, eggs were thrown onto the playing floor, and an iron object and a lighted torch were thrown toward the floor. Finally, fights broke out in the arena. Order was restored only when the city police were called in.

A few days after this incident in Fort Collins, a militant activist named Jerry Rubin, who was then under indictment for rioting in Chicago, spoke on the campus of the University of Utah in Salt Lake City. During his incendiary remarks, the speaker bitterly berated the Latter-day Saints, warning, "We will either integrate the Mormon Church, or we will destroy it." These incidents were symptomatic of broad-based attacks being made on the Church around the country by its enemies and detractors. Adding to the turmoil this created was the upheaval caused by America's involvement in the Vietnam War. At the time, a member of the Church, a Vietnam War veteran, had been speaking in Church meetings, "arousing people to fever pitch," according to President Lee, "with scare stories about impending doom."

In such a hostile environment, the Brethren began taking steps to provide necessary security. On February 14, the First Presidency met with the Presiding Bishopric to discuss "the need to provide sufficient security for the Church headquarters buildings." The next day, President Lee met with Salt Lake City Commissioner James Barker and other officials to discuss the coordination between Church security personnel and the city police in handling any emergencies that might arise.

At this time, the Church was ill-prepared to guard against the kind of assault that the rhetoric of the militants threatened. There was not so much as a receptionist in the outer foyer of the Church Administration Building. Anyone, regardless of his intentions, could enter the building and roam at will. The only physical protection the General Authorities had against an intruder was the shield of their secretaries, most of whom were women. The Church's security force at the time consisted of a few men, practically all of whom lacked professional security training, and some of whom were little more than night watchmen. The unsettled times demanded more than this. So, beginning with the meeting on February 14, the Presiding Bishopric, who had the main responsibility for security, began to take positive steps to make the headquarters secure and to provide necessary protection for the Brethren, especially the president. It was the philosophy of the First Presidency that if they did all within their power to provide adequate security, the Lord would intervene to provide any protection, the need for which their ingenuity did not foresee. "If ye are prepared, ye shall not fear," was a scripture President Lee was heard to quote occasionally during this period.

The preparations made were extensive. Many meetings were held with the Presiding Bishopric to review and to discuss their proposals. Two weeks after the Presiding Bishopric were first charged with the responsibility, they met with the First Presidency "about plans for improved security against possible riots from enemies from the outside and from Judases within the church." Soon, the size of the security force was augmented with men who had had professional training in law enforcement work. Television scanners were placed in strategic places in the Church headquarters buildings, and security personnel were equipped with communication devices. Also, a male receptionist, who was part of the security force, was positioned in the front foyer of the Church Administration Building to screen out those who did not have a legitimate reason for being there. In not too long a time, riot-proof glass was installed in the windows on the main floor of the administration building to guard against the kind of violence that had flared up in Fort Collins and in the civil upheavals spawned by opposition to the Vietnam War.

Meanwhile, President Lee took steps to try to forestall, or to minimize, opposition to the Church arising from a misunderstanding of its teachings or objectives. In a word, he sought to put the Church on the offensive in the arena of public opinion. He felt that for too long the Church had merely reacted to news events, or had silently watched emerging groundswells of anti-Mormon sentiment, without any effort to stop or to mitigate them. In this effort, one of the most significant of his long and distinguished career, President Lee brought into play all of the skills and know-how he had accumulated over the years as a Church leader at the local and general levels, as a teacher, as a politician, as a strategist in developing and executing plans for Church welfare and correlation, and as a high official in charting the course of major corporations.

He launched this initiative on February 18, 1970, a month after President McKay's death, while he was in New York City to attend an Equitable Life board meeting. His diary entry of that date best explains what happened and why. "We had a two and a half hour meeting in a committee room at the Waldorf with Spencer W. Kimball, Ezra Taft Benson, Richard L. Evans, Gordon B. Hinckley, Bob Barker, Lee Bickmore, George Mortimer, G. Stanley McAlister, Bob Sears, DeWitt Paul, Howard Wilkinson, and George Watkins. The purpose of the meeting was to seek counsel as to how the church could get the offensive position in public relations which, because of the negro priesthood issue, are at a low ebb." As we shall see, this meeting in the Waldorf was the formal genesis of the Church's department of public communications. Out of this also grew the idea of a department of internal communications, which was organized to simplify, expedite, and economize in the process of preparing and distributing Church instructional and other materials. This meeting also sheds important light on some of the special leadership qualities of Harold B. Lee. In the first place, he was never a one-man show. Rather, he served as a catalyst to bring together many people of talent and ability and to mold them into a team in which each played his essential role. In this process, he was meticulous in gathering the facts and in obtaining advice from the people most qualified to give it. All this was aimed toward the solution of a specific problem or the fulfillment of a vision he held. Finally, the objective, as refined by the team, was pursued with single-minded purpose, sometimes awesome in its intensity.

As noted, the objective sought in bringing this group together was to put the Church on the offensive as to public issues affecting it, rather than to react defensively. The composition of the group shows the care with which its members were selected, having in mind the objective sought. Elder Kimball, of course, was the acting president of the Twelve, and Elder Benson, who was next in seniority to him, had had vast experience in the nation's capital, first as the executive secretary of a national farm cooperative and then as a cabinet member. Elders Evans and Hinckley were members of the Church information committee. Perhaps more important, Elder Evans had been the voice of the Church on the weekly national Tabernacle Choir broadcasts for over forty years, and Elder Hinckley, as far back as the 1930s, had been heavily involved in directing radio and other media publicity for the Church. Robert Barker was an attorney from the prominent Washington law firm that represented the Church and Bonneville International Corporation on television, radio, and other media matters. Lee Bickmore was the chairman of the board of directors of the National Biscuit Company (Nabisco), a powerful international corporation. Robert Sears was the chief executive officer of Phillips Petroleum Company, and the other members of the group were prominent Latter-day Saint business and Church leaders. Out of this meeting came important suggestions, many of which would be incorporated in the final plans for the Church department of public communications, originally called the department of external communications and later called the department of public affairs.

The day after this historic meeting, President Lee accompanied President and Sister Kimball to a consultation with the cancer specialist, Dr. Martin, to discuss the need for further surgery or cobalt treatments for President Kimball. All were surprised and pleased when the doctor advised that neither would be necessary. As reported by President Lee, the doctor said that it was "just possible that Spencer could live out his years without any further surgery. He admitted that this decision defied all the rules of medical practice, but after considering all phases of the case, he was modifying his previous diagnosis and recommendations." As if to affirm the accuracy of the doctor's decision, President Kimball lived more than fifteen years afterward without the need for additional surgery or treatment on his throat, although he later underwent openheart surgery and other surgeries.

While in New York on this occasion, President Lee also conferred with Lee Bickmore about the need for the Church to restructure its system in handling the translation and distribution of instructional and other materials around the world. It was felt that his involvement in the direction of a major international corporation better qualified Lee Bickmore for such a task. Moreover, he was nearing retirement from Nabisco, and it was believed he might be available to help the Church in this matter on a continuing basis in the future. He called President Lee on March 17 to advise that he was coming to Salt Lake City soon, as President Lee explained it, "to confer with our publicity and communications team to see if we can take the next step in moving to a coordination of public relations, communications, [and] publicity [with] translations, distribution, etc." He arrived on March 26, spending the day closeted with President Lee, members of the Church information committee, and others. Armed with organizational charts and data gleaned from his interviews, Lee Bickmore spent several months analyzing the organization of the Church at headquarters as it related to the matters discussed with President Lee on March 26. All recognized that an undertaking of this magnitude could not be accomplished overnight and that it would take time and prayerful consideration. After a year, during which he was in frequent contact with President Lee and others to obtain additional information, Lee Bickmore believed that a more in-depth analysis of the operation of the Church in these areas was necessary before meaningful recommendations could be made about organizational changes. He therefore suggested that the management consulting firm of Cresap, McCormick, and Paget Inc. be employed to make a detailed study. This suggestion was approved on March 14, 1971, when, according to President Lee, the firm was employed "to study several areas of the church to find the most accurate answers as to 'where we are now' in order to determine where 'we want to go from [here].'"

This decision posed an interesting question because the employees of the consulting firm were not members of the Church. This was not considered to be a serious problem, however, because the main focus of their study would be on the mechanical operation of the Church in the above-mentioned areas of interest and would have no real relevance to its strictly ecclesiastical or doctrinal aspects. In order to provide the members of the consulting team with some insight into the doctrinal foundation and the terminology of the Church, they were asked to study the Doctrine and Covenants before beginning their work.

The consulting team was at work for five months. During that time, its members were authorized to confer with anyone at Church headquarters, including the General Authorities. Their reports were submitted on August 11, 1971. "These reports," President Lee noted on that day, "will now be placed in the hands of Lee Bickmore and his committee to come back with recommendations."

Meanwhile, three key new members had been added to the Bickmore committee: James Conkling, an executive with Columbia Records; Roy Fugal, an executive with General Electric; and Ren Hoopes, an executive with Safeway Stores, whose expertise was in industrial engineering, know-how that would be vital in restructuring the Church's worldwide distribution system. As the members of the Bickmore committee analyzed the reports of the consulting firm in the light of their own intimate knowledge of Church doctrine and procedure, they recommended the creation of the departments of internal communications and external communications, the first to embrace the operations dealing with the translation and distribution of instructional and other materials internationally, and the second to deal with communications of the Church to the outside world through the public media and by other means.

In due course, the First Presidency approved the recommendations of the Bickmore committee, with necessary revisions. Then followed an interesting turn of events when it was decided to put the department of internal communications in place first. It was interesting because the concern about public communications first prompted President Lee to bring Lee Bickmore and the others together in New York in February 1970 to consider how the Church could go on the offensive in public relations matters. Consideration of restructuring the procedure in handling translations and distributions came as an aftermath. The apparent reason for this order of things was the ever-mounting pressure to solve the translation and distribution problem as the Church population grew world-wide, extending into countries with different languages and cultural patterns. On the other hand, the Church information service had already begun to take steps to stem the tide of anti-Mormon rhetoric in the public arena so that the formal organization of the department of external or public communications could be delayed without undue concern.

On November 13, 1971, Lee Bickmore, Ren Hoopes, G. Roy Fugal, and James Conkling spent all day in Salt Lake City interviewing men who might be used in the department of internal communications. They had narrowed the number to seven who were discussed the following day with President Lee and other General Authorities. Out of this and other discussions, J. Thomas Fyans was selected to head this new department. During the following weeks he, in consultation with President Lee and members of the Bickmore committee, selected his team, which was approved on January 4, 1972: James Paramore, administrative services; Daniel Ludlow, instructional materials; Doyle Green, editorial matters; and John Carr, translation. "They were all called," wrote President Lee on that date, "and undertook their duties under the direction of Lee Bickmore and Ren Hoopes." Nine days later, this organization was approved by all the General Authorities, when it was explained that the head of the department "would report through a committee of the Twelve comprised of Gordon B. Hinckley, Thomas S. Monson and Boyd K. Packer."

Six months later, the department of public communications was formally brought into being. On June 3, 1972, Lee Bickmore came to Salt Lake City to discuss candidates for the position of director of public communications. Wendell J. Ashton, executive in a Salt Lake based advertising and public relations firm, was selected to fill this position. "The position," wrote President Lee on June 5, "requires one in whom we can place complete confidence and loyalty and one who has the organizing ability to make his place and also has the natural ability to greatly improve public relations and to communicate appropriately whenever the occasion requires."

Thus, twenty-eight months after President Lee held his historic meeting in New York with Lee Bickmore and the others, the final step had been taken to set in motion the mechanism that would enable the Church to respond affirmatively and promptly to public issues facing it, and to anticipate and to respond to issues detrimental to it. In the meantime, growing out of that initiative had come another organization that would be vital as the Church expanded explosively throughout the world. In the years ahead, there would be changes in the structure, the personnel, and the nomenclature of the departments of internal and external communications, but the basic concepts developed in their inception would continue to apply.

There was an important spin-off from all this. The Cresap report revealed that many members of the Twelve were directly involved in administrative work at Church headquarters, a fact about which President Lee and the Brethren, of course, were already aware. This was inconsistent with their scriptural role, which invests them with broad responsibility on a global basis. So, steps were taken at this time to relieve the Twelve of direct administrative responsibility. "Spent some time," wrote President Lee on November 25, 1971, "in putting together an outline . . . restructuring the work of the Twelve, particularly in defining the staff and administrator roles of the assistants and the seventy." He worked on this during a period of four days, preparing a draft "which could be a beginning of a major overhauling of the administrative functions of the brethren." President Lee went on to explain that "some of this was a composite of ideas and suggestions from some of the brethren and from the Cresap consultants recommendations."

As part of this, Elder Howard W. Hunter was released as the Church historian, and to replace him, Elder Alvin R. Dyer, Assistant to the Twelve, was appointed as the managing director of the historical department. Under Elder Dyer, Leonard Arrington was appointed as historian and Earl Olsen as archivist. Then, establishing the "reporting through" concept, Elder Hunter was designated as the member of the Twelve through whom Elder Dyer was to report the work of his department. In like manner, Elder Theodore M. Burton, Assistant to the Twelve, was appointed as the president and managing director of the genealogical society, with Elder Hunter as the member of the Twelve through whom he would report. Changes such as these relieved the members of the Twelve of the entanglements of headquarters administrative assignments and left them free to discharge their worldwide responsibilities and to counsel with and to assist the First Presidency.

Concurrent with the changes affecting the administrative responsibilities of the Twelve, there were significant changes made in the responsibilities of the First Council of the Seventy. At a meeting of the First Presidency and the Twelve on January 13, 1972, approval was given, in concept, to the creation of a corps of officers to be known as Regional Representatives of the Twelve and the First Council of the Seventy. The matter was turned over to the Twelve for further study and recommendations. The Twelve submitted its report on March 16, 1972. It included these recommendations, which were approved: That these new Regional Representatives be appointed, effective the following June; that they serve chiefly under the direction of the First Council of the Seventy; that their main responsibility would be to give training and motivation in proselyting work in the missions; and that they also would have authority to give counsel in administrative matters in mission districts. The Regional Representatives of the Twelve were also authorized at this time to give counsel in administrative matters in mission districts where circumstances made this necessary or desirable.

At the same time, the work of the First Council of the Seventy was restructured. Elders S. Dilworth Young and Milton R. Hunter were assigned to handle quorum administrative matters; Elders Bruce R. McConkie, A. Theodore Tuttle, and Loren C. Dunn were given responsibility to work with the Regional Representatives of the Twelve and the First Council of the Seventy in training and motivating the full-time missionaries; and Elders Paul Dunn and Hartman Rector, Jr., were appointed to work with stake missionaries.

Along with these matters, other significant changes in organization and procedure took place during this period. In the summer of 1970, a program for teacher training, spearheaded by Rex Skidmore, was initiated. This resulted in a teacher training manual and a procedure followed throughout the Church to implement its instructions. At about the same time, there was a major restructuring of the Church magazines, which consolidated them all into a unified system of only three: the Ensign, the New Era, and the Friend. At the same time, paid advertising in the Church publications was discontinued. And a significant initiative was undertaken in 1970 when, under the direction of Doctor James Mason, a program to enlist LDS doctors and nurses in health services missions to deprived areas was commenced. On January 15, 1971, President Lee reported having heard a "thrilling" report from Doctor Mason about how doctors and nurses were being organized" on a church service basis to provide medical assistance in different countries around the world."

Shortly before Dr. Mason was called into service, Neal A. Maxwell, a future member of the Twelve, was appointed as the church commissioner of education. This initiated a series of major changes in the educational structure of the Church, including the following: In August 1970, Harvey L. Taylor and William E. Berrett retired, having served, respectively, as administrator of Church schools and administrator of seminaries and institutes. The following month, Joe J. Christensen, a future Seventy, who was then serving as a mission president in Mexico, was appointed associate commissioner of education for seminaries and institutes. Four months later, Henry B. Eyring, a future counselor in the Presiding Bishopric, was appointed president of Ricks College, and Steve Brower was appointed president of BYU Hawaii. These appointments were followed, a few weeks later, with the appointment of Dallin H. Oaks as the president of Brigham Young University, replacing Ernest L. Wilkinson. In October of that year, when the J. Reuben Clark Law School was created, Rex E. Lee, a future president of BYU, was appointed as its first dean.

Two other major organizational changes occurred during the time President Lee served as a counselor in the First Presidency. In June 1971, Russell M. Nelson replaced David Lawrence McKay as the general superintendent of the Sunday Schools of the Church. At the time, Doctor Nelson, who, along with Dallin H. Oaks, also later became a member of the Twelve, was then serving as the president of the Salt Lake Bonneville Stake. He was released as stake president the following month, being replaced by Francis M. Gibbons, the secretary to the First Presidency and a future Seventy.

The other major organizational change occurred in January 1972, when the department of church physical facilities was created. This new department combined the functions of the old building, real estate, and maintenance divisions. John H. Vandenberg, who was then the Presiding Bishop of the Church, was appointed as the first head of this new department following his call as an Assistant to the Twelve in April 1972.

Elder Vandenberg's release as the Presiding Bishop, and his simultaneous call as an Assistant to the Twelve, was only one of several changes made in the General Authorities of the Church during President Lee's tenure as a counselor in the First Presidency. At the Solemn Assembly on April 6, 1970, when President Joseph Fielding Smith and his counselors were formally sustained, Elder Boyd K. Packer was sustained as a member of the Twelve. He filled the vacancy created when President Lee was called to the First Presidency. Before this call, Elder Packer had served as an Assistant to the Twelve for eight and a half years, during which time he had also served as a mission president. At the time of his call to the Twelve, Elder Packer, who holds an Ed.D. in educational administration, was the only man among the council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve, other than President Lee, who was a professional educator. He was prophetically chosen for this position by President Smith from a long list of able and qualified men, whose names had been submitted at the prophet's request. Concurrent with Elder Packer's call to the Twelve, Elders Thorpe B. Isaacson and Alvin R. Dyer, who had served as counselors to President David O. McKay, were returned to their previously held positions as Assistants to the Twelve. Although Elder Dyer had been ordained to the apostleship, he had never been inducted into the Twelve, which accounts for his reassignment as an Assistant to the Twelve.

The ranks of Assistants to the Twelve were also augmented at this time by the addition of Elders Joseph Anderson, David B. Haight, and William H. Bennett. Elder Anderson, who was eighty years old at the time, had served for almost fifty years as the secretary to the First Presidency when he was called as a General Authority. In the blessing setting him apart, President Lee, who was voice in the blessing, said, in part: "Joseph is like unto Moses of old; his eye shall never be dimmed nor his natural force abated." Joseph Anderson lived to be a hundred and two years old. He walked daily, weather permitting. His mind was clear and precise. He spoke without repetition. On his hundredth birthday, when he was honored by his brethren of the General Authorities, he said, after he had been praised and lauded: "Brethren, I will remember this day for the rest of my life." He passed away in March 1992.

Elder David B. Haight, who would later be called to the Twelve, had served as a stake president, mission president, Regional Representative, and assistant to the president of the Brigham Young University before his call as a General Authority. He had also been a successful businessman in Palo Alto, California, having once served as the mayor of that city. Elder William H. Bennett was a well-known, admired, and accomplished university professor before his call as an Assistant to the Twelve.

The ranks of the General Authorities remained unchanged, following the Solemn Assembly in April 1970, until October 30, 1971, when Elder Richard L. Evans unexpectedly passed away. His death was a shock as he had been actively engaged in his work until only a few days prior to his passing. His loss was especially felt by President Lee since Elder Evans was playing a key role in structuring the new departments of internal and external communications. As already noted, these departments were put in place only a few months after Elder Evans died. His passing was a grievous loss, not only to his family and his associates among the General Authorities, but to the entire Church and to a host of others who were not members of the Church. Through his weekly sermonettes, given in conjunction with the Tabernacle Choir broadcasts, he had become known to a wide audience, including many who were not members of the Church, some of whom regarded him as their spiritual pastor. He would also be missed by Rotarians around the world whom he had once served as their international president.

The vacancy in the Twelve created by Elder Evans's death was filled on December 2, 1971, by the call and ordination of Elder Marvin J. Ashton, who at the time was serving as an Assistant to the Twelve. A former Utah State Senator and prominent Salt Lake businessman, Elder Ashton was serving as the managing director of the Church social services department at the time of his call to the Twelve.

Elder Ashton was formally sustained as a member of the Twelve at the general conference in April 1972. As already indicated, at that time, John H. Vandenberg was released as the Presiding Bishop and then was sustained as an Assistant to the Twelve. His release as the Presiding Bishop entailed a reorganization of the Presiding Bishopric. Sustained to replace him as the Presiding Bishop was Victor L. Brown, who had served as Bishop Vandenberg's second counselor. Sustained as Bishop Brown's counselors were H. Burke Peterson and Vaughn J. Featherstone. Bishop Robert L. Simpson, who had served as Bishop Vandenberg's first counselor, was also sustained as an Assistant to the Twelve.

Amidst the development of the departments of internal and public communications and the changes among the General Authorities and the general auxiliaries of the Church, there was much else to occupy President Lee during the time he served as a counselor to President Joseph Fielding Smith. While, as a member of the First Presidency, he no longer filled regular stake conference assignments, as he had done for almost thirty years as a member of the Twelve, he found that this slack was more than taken up by other special speaking assignments. He soon was inundated with invitations to speak. "There has been an avalanche of speaking requests," he wrote on April 19, 1970, "[from the] University of Utah, Ricks College, Dixie Junior College, College of Southern Utah, Denver Convocation, Cambridge, Massachusetts fireside, University of Utah stake banquet, etc. etc. Of necessity, I am forced to turn down many of these in order to preserve my strength for the 'must' requirements." Do we detect a sign of bias in the fact that out of these invitations to speak, the only one President Lee accepted took him to Idaho? On May 6, 1970, he delivered the baccalaureate address at Ricks College in Rexburg, where 879 graduates gathered to receive counsel from one of Idaho's most distinguished sons. He and Joan left Salt Lake on the fourth, stopping in Logan, Utah, where, in the evening, he spoke to three hundred workers gathered in the temple. The following day, in the verdure of a burgeoning spring, they drove, in a leisurely way, through the upper Cache Valley, past the little towns so important to President Lee—Franklin, Preston, and of course, Clifton. This was his first trip back "home" since his call to the First Presidency. A few weeks later, President Lee performed a similar service at the Utah State University when he spoke at the baccalaureate services there. While this was not in Idaho, it was pretty close. Moreover, it was in Cache Valley, the northern part of which lay within Idaho. It does not seem to be happenstance that of the many invitations he received to speak at college functions after he became a member of the First Presidency, the first he accepted were at Rexburg, Idaho, and at Utah State University at Logan, Utah, which people from Clifton and Preston naturally consider to be an extension of Idaho.

There is no doubt that President Lee dearly loved and was partial to Idaho and Cache Valley. He never returned there but that he made favorable comments about the visit and mentioned old friends with whom he had renewed acquaintance. His special feelings about Logan centered around the temple there, the place where his parents had been sealed together as man and wife and where he had received his endowment before going into the mission field.

It is interesting, perhaps significant, that the meeting he held with the Logan temple workers en route to the baccalaureate services at Ricks College was the first special meeting he had held in a temple after becoming a member of the First Presidency. And a survey of his service as a counselor in the First Presidency reveals that one of his principal interests and activities during that period related to the temples. Though now a member of the First Presidency, President Lee continued to meet regularly with the newly called missionaries in the Salt Lake Temple as he had done over the years while a member of the Twelve. He would do this until within a few days of his death. He was always uplifted by his contact with these energetic and inquisitive young people, and a session with them was always memorable, especially when one of his own was involved. So, May 3, 1971, was golden because among the outgoing missionaries was President Lee's number-five grandson, Lesley Drew Goates, who had been called to the Australia East Mission.

Soon after the new First Presidency was sustained in April 1970, steps were taken toward the construction of new temples in Ogden and Provo, Utah. In addition to the usual details of site acquisition and preparation and the architectural drawings, special arrangements were necessary to obtain and install the sophisticated equipment necessary to present the endowment on film. These two temples would be the first in the state of Utah to use endowment films. For this purpose, Armis J. Ashby was approved by the First Presidency on August 19, 1970, to work with the architects and builders of these two temples. A few weeks later, fifteen General Authorities and their wives travelled to Ogden for special cornerstone laying ceremonies. Some local members had questioned the location of the site for this temple, which was on the west side of the downtown business district in a neighborhood that was frayed at the edges. These questioners believed the temple should have been constructed on an eminence on the east side of the city where it could be seen from around the valley. The First Presidency, however, promised that the site selected by inspiration would prove to be an even greater blessing to the community by completely changing the ambience of the downtown area and thereby improving the cultural climate of the entire city, a promise which the passing of time has proven to be true. Only a week before the cornerstone laying exercises in Ogden, President Lee had accompanied President Smith to Mesa, Arizona, where the temple presidency was reorganized. Bryant Whiting, a member of a prominent pioneer family in Arizona, was installed as the new temple president, replacing President J. M. Smith. And in early November 1970, the First Presidency travelled to St. George, Utah, where the presidency of that temple also was reorganized. A year later, in November 1971, a special Solemn Assembly was held in the upper room of the St. George Temple. The First Presidency and other General Authorities travelled there by chartered bus, stopping at Provo en route to attend the inauguration of Dallin H. Oaks as the president of the Brigham Young University. A dinner was served to the visiting brethren in a ward cultural hall on Friday, November 12, and the next morning, they met in the temple with more than a thousand local priesthood leaders from the stakes and wards in the St. George Temple district. After the sacrament had been administered to and passed by the General Authorities, several members of the Twelve were called on to discuss topics of current interest and concern, including gambling, racing, liquor by the drink, apostate sects, disciplinary procedures, and the need for family solidarity. President Lee then instructed the Brethren about temple ordinances and procedures, emphasizing the sacred nature of the building and the need to preserve its sanctity by carefully interviewing those seeking temple recommends. President Smith capped the meeting, reviewing salient historical facts about the temple, the first one in the West, which had been dedicated in 1877. He occasionally said, facetiously, that attending the St. George Temple dedication was his first Church "assignment," as he had been taken there as a babe in arms by his parents.

Meanwhile, the Ogden and Provo temples were ready for formal dedication by early 1972, the cornerstone laying ceremony for the Provo Temple having been conducted on May 21, 1971. The first of six dedicatory sessions for the Ogden Temple held over a three-day period was on Tuesday, January 18, 1972, the second anniversary of the death of President David O. McKay. When, after reading two-thirds of his dedicatory prayer, President Smith became weak from standing so long, President Lee finished reading it. President Lee also spoke at this session and led in the Hosanna Shout. A sweet, spiritual feeling pervaded all the sessions, which were attended by members who filled the celestial room of the temple, and all of its other rooms, as well as the nearby stake tabernacle, to which the proceedings were carried by television. The reports of the spiritual impact of the dedication were typified by the one given by President Lee's oldest grandchild, David Goates, who said that "when the First Presidency stood at the pulpit during the last session, he saw a special light surrounding them."

The Provo Temple was dedicated on February 9, 1972. There were only two sessions, both on the same day. The need for additional sessions was avoided by seating the participants in the Marriott Center, the George Albert Smith Fieldhouse, the Joseph Smith building, and the Fine Arts Center, in addition to the temple.

In his main address delivered at the dedication, President Lee related the spiritual experience he had had at the dedication of the Los Angeles Temple when the prayer of President David O. McKay corresponded almost exactly with a vivid dream he had had some time before. In the prayer and in the dream, the prophet admonished his listeners, an admonition President Lee felt was directed pointedly to him, about "the meaning of the love of God, as it relates to the love of our fellow men and of His service." The spirit that attended these dedicatory services at the Provo Temple was quite remarkable. One of the General Authorities later told President Lee that he clearly saw President David O. McKay in vision in the company of several men whom he could not identify. The wife of another General Authority reported that during the services, her mother appeared to her in vision, clear and distinct. "I was watching the strange look on her face," wrote President Lee of the incident, "as she probably witnessed this vision." And still another General Authority reported that during his sermon, there was opened to his mind a vision of young people seated in the Marriott Center and that thereafter he directed his remarks particularly to them. As for President Lee, he was uplifted spiritually by the dedication to a high degree. It provided an important impetus for the heavier duties that would come to him in a few months.

The experience of the wife of the General Authority who saw her mother during the Provo Temple dedication was similar to an experience President Lee had had several months before. It occurred on May 19, 1971, while President Lee sat on the stand at the funeral of Pearl Lambert. "There was a remarkable spirit [present]," wrote he of the occasion, "and I was uplifted thereby. As I was seated on the stand, I seemed to see a congregation facing me. In it was Fern in a black dress. Over her shoulder was someone who, I surmise, was Maurine." The incident kindled anew the love he had for the sweetheart of his youth, the mother of his children, feelings that in no way diminished the love he had for Joan, the noble woman who had come to him as a gift from God in his time of great loneliness and need.

On the day of the Lambert funeral, the First Presidency reviewed plans for an area conference to be held in Manchester, England, the following August, to be attended by Latter-day Saints from all over the British Isles. Since it was the first of a series of area conferences planned for the future, considerable care had been given to the preparations. Elder Boyd K. Packer of the Twelve, who had special apostolic responsibilities in Great Britain at the time, had been appointed to coordinate the preparations with a cadre of local leaders, headed by Regional Representative Derek A. Cuthbert, a future member of the Seventy. Elder Loren C. Dunn, of the First Council of the Seventy, who also had assigned responsibilities in Great Britain, had been appointed to assist Elder Packer.

The site of this first area conference had been selected with prayerful deliberation. Since a main purpose of the area conferences was to stress the international character of the Church and to cause members of the Church worldwide to feel themselves part of a global organization, it seemed appropriate to schedule the first area conference in the locality where the Church's first international proselyting effort had commenced. Near Manchester is Preston, where Elder Heber C. Kimball and his brethren opened the work in England by preaching in the chapel of the Reverend James Fielding, whose brother, Joseph Fielding, was a member of this first group of Mormon missionaries to proselyte in Great Britain. When the first baptisms by these missionaries included some of Reverend James Fielding's flock, he closed his church doors to them. But the message was out, and the work flourished, beginning with these first baptisms in the River Ribble and culminating with a great flood of converts from this area and other areas in Great Britain. Because of President Joseph Fielding Smith's connection with these historic events through his two great uncles, James and Joseph Fielding, brothers of his grandmother, Mary Fielding Smith, he and everyone connected with the coming Manchester conference were excited about it, whether at Church headquarters or in Great Britain. When on August 3, 1971, President Smith announced emphatically that he did not intend to go to Manchester, surprise and confusion reigned at Church headquarters and all plans for the area conference, scheduled to begin three weeks later, were temporarily suspended. The cause of this sudden about-face was the death of President Smith's wife, Jessie Evans Smith. The passing of this vibrant woman, who had brought such joy to him, was a shattering blow to the ninety-five-year-old prophet. She was the third wife taken from him in death. His age, his waning strength, and the bleak prospect of continuing life without her effervescent enthusiasm made the prospect of a long trip to England oppressive to him. And so, he had announced with finality that the area conference in Manchester would have to go on without him. President Lee empathized with the prophet in a way none of the other brethren could do because of the trial he had endured in Fern's passing. Yet, he knew what a shroud of disappointment would descend on the Manchester conference were it announced President Smith would not attend. He knew also that the prophet's attitude likely would change once the immediate shock of Aunt Jessie's death had subsided and once he had begun to view the decision not to go in terms of his prophetic responsibility rather than in terms of his personal feelings. So, a few days after the funeral when the Manchester conference was discussed again, President Smith, recognizing that the interests of the Church and his prophetic office must predominate, said he would go. With that, the previously laid plans rolled out with precision.

It having been decided that only President Smith and President Lee from the First Presidency would go to Manchester, it was also decided, as a matter of precaution, that they would travel separately. For his comfort and protection, arrangements were made for the prophet's son, Douglas A. Smith, to be his travelling companion, accompanied by a physician, Dr. Donald Smith, and by President Smith's personal secretary, D. Arthur Haycock. President Lee and Joan left Salt Lake City on August 30 for London, England, with planned, intermediate stops in Midland, Michigan, and New York City. In Midland, over the weekend of August 21 and 22, President Lee presided at a stake conference, in the course of which he dedicated a new stake center. In transferring from one airline to another in Detroit, Michigan, en route to New York, President Lee lost his briefcase, which contained all the papers for the area conference in Manchester. Distraught, he retraced his steps, and for an hour anxiously and vainly examined every place where he and Joan had stopped in making the transfer. "As I stepped out to get the shuttle bus," he wrote, "there was my brief case. Why I hadn't seen it before, I will never know; and why it was safeguarded for nearly an hour, I will never know. Only the good Lord could explain. It was a miracle."

President and Sister Lee flew from New York to London on August 24, landing at Heathrow airport, where they spent the night in the nearby Excelsior Hotel. The next morning, they flew to Manchester, where they were met at the airport by Elder Boyd K. Packer and J. Thomas Fyans, who would soon be appointed as the managing director of the department of internal communications and who was assisting Elder Packer in arranging for the housing and transportation of the visitors from Salt Lake City. The Lees were driven to the city center where they checked into the Piccadilly Hotel, the headquarters for the official party. President Smith arrived later in the day, Wednesday the twenty-fifth.

President Lee was closeted with the prophet the next day, reviewing the plans for the conference, scheduled to begin officially on Friday the twenty-seventh. That evening, he went to the Manchester stake center where he addressed a group of young people. After returning to the hotel, he and President Smith decided to call the General Authorities together for a special meeting to prepare for the conference. It was held in a conference room in the Piccadilly Hotel. It turned out to be the first ever official meeting of the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve held outside the United States. Present were two members of the First Presidency, Joseph Fielding Smith and Harold B. Lee, and seven members of the Twelve, Spencer W. Kimball, Marion G. Romney, Richard L. Evans, Howard W. Hunter, Gordon B. Hinckley, Thomas S. Monson, and Boyd K. Packer. Joining the brethren of the council were other General Authorities, Henry D. Taylor and Marion D. Hanks, Assistants to the Twelve; Paul H. Dunn and Loren C. Dunn of the First Council of the Seventy; and Bishop Victor L. Brown, along with several who were not General Authorities, Russell M. Nelson, president of the Sunday School, W. Jay Eldredge, president of the YMMIA, Joe J. Christensen, associate commissioner of education, D. Arthur Haycock, and Francis M. Gibbons. Elder Thomas S. Monson, whose arrival late in the evening provided the required number for an official council meeting, had flown in from Europe during bad weather, which had threatened the plane's ability to arrive on time.

Following the handling of matters of business and a review of the meetings scheduled during the conference by President Lee, there was a period of testimony bearing. Frequent references were made to the historic significance of the conference in the city where members of the Twelve established their headquarters during the early 1840s when proselyting in England was established on a firm foundation. During that period, the public meetings of the Twelve were held in Carpenters' Hall, which was destroyed during the German bombing of Manchester during World War II. It was in Manchester during that period that the Twelve held an official quorum meeting, the first one held outside the United States.

This unusual meeting provided a spiritual tone for the conference that commenced at 2:00 P.M. the next day in the Belle Vue Exhibition Center in Manchester, with two sessions held simultaneously: an adult session held in Kings Hall and a youth session held in the nearby Cumberland Suite. The speaker's stand in Kings Hall, a sports and entertainment arena, had been arranged to simulate the stand in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, with red carpeting and red upholstered seats for the General Authorities. At the request of President Smith, President Lee conducted the adult session as he did all the other sessions of the conference, except the youth session, which was conducted by Elder Thomas S. Monson, and the women's session Saturday evening, which was conducted by Sister Belle S. Spafford, general president of the Relief Society. All general sessions of the conference were held at the Belle Vue Exhibition Center, except the Saturday evening priesthood session, which was held at the Free Trade Hall in downtown Manchester.

As a means of tying this first area conference to the beginnings of the Church in Great Britain, the opening song at the adult session was "The Morning Breaks, the Shadows Flee." President Lee explained to the audience that "The words of this hymn, . . . written by Parley P. Pratt, . . . appeared on the front cover of the first issue of The Millennial Star, which was published in May of 1840." Elder Pratt, one of the original members of the Twelve, who was the editor of the Millennial Star, then lived in Manchester. In his keynote address, delivered at this opening session, President Joseph Fielding Smith suggested that the Manchester area conference was, in a sense, a formal recognition that the Church, growing from its struggling beginnings, had become a global organization. "We are coming of age as a church and as a people," said he. "We have attained the stature and strength that are enabling us to fulfill the commission given us by the Lord through the Prophet Joseph Smith that we should carry the glad tidings of the restoration to every nation and to all people. And not only shall we preach the gospel in every nation before the second coming of the Son of Man, but we shall make converts and establish congregations of saints among them." In commenting afterward on the prophet's keynote address, President Lee said: "I am sure that if the Saints will keep their hearts and minds attuned to what the President has said, this will indeed be a great conference." (British Area General Conference Report, Aug. 1971, pp. 5, 7.)

During the three days of the conference, all of the General Authorities spoke, as did some of the visitors and local leaders. In addition to comments he made while conducting the meetings, President Lee delivered major addresses at the Saturday evening priesthood session and the Sunday morning general session and made brief concluding remarks at the last session. At the priesthood session, his main focus was on the need for priesthood bearers to be worthy. "Are you always ready?" he asked rhetorically, after describing the qualities a priesthood bearer ought to possess. "Are you a clean vessel to exercise your priesthood?" In his Sunday morning address, President Lee commented on the growth of the Church from its beginning and on its growth in England since 1960, when he had presided at the conference in Manchester wherein the first stake in the British Isles and Europe was organized. He then sketched the first principles of the gospel and admonished his listeners to keep the commandments. "To all honest seekers after truth," he explained, "the answer has always been the same as declared in our articles of faith: 'We believe that through the atonement of Christ all mankind may be saved by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel.'" In support, he cited the words of earlier prophets who had admonished the people to keep the commandments, words which offended some, but which were a comfort and solace to those who followed them. President Lee also counselled his listeners to heed the words of the living prophet, to guard against the intrusion of Satanic influences in their lives, and to conduct themselves so as always to have the Spirit of God to be with them. He then affirmed that the answers to life's complex problems could be found through adherence to the gospel and cited basic principles and programs of the Church that contributed to individual and group happiness and security—tithing, fast offerings, Church welfare, missionary work, family prayer, and family home evening. At the conclusion of this comprehensive and compelling discourse, President Lee bore a fervent testimony. "As a little boy," he said, "I had my first intimate touch with divinity." He then retold the story of having heard the voice warning him not to go near the broken-down buildings and sheds across the field. "I looked in every direction to see where the speaker was. I wondered if it was my father, but he couldn't see me. There was no one in sight. I realized that someone was warning me of an unseen danger—whether a nest of rattlesnakes or whether the rotting timbers would fall on me and crush me, I don't know. But from that time on, I accepted without question the fact that there were processes not known to man by which we can hear voices from the unseen world, by which we can have brought to us the visions of eternity." President Lee then told of the struggling events that followed his call to the Twelve and their aftermath: "After a long night of searching," he said, "and days of spiritual preparation that followed, I came to know as a witness more powerful than sight, until I could testify with a surety that defied all doubt, that I knew with every fiber of my soul that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God, that he lived, he died, he was resurrected, and today he presides in the heavens, directing the affairs of this church, which bears his name because it preaches his doctrine. I bear that testimony humbly and leave you my witness and my blessing here this morning, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Amen." (British Area General Conference Report, Aug. 1971, pp. 141-42.)

The impact of these words upon the audience was profound. The eloquence, the sincerity, the personal magnetism, and the stance of the speaker conveyed a sense of conviction, comfort, and spiritual confirmation to the listeners. And the spirit engendered by President Lee's talk, augmented by the words and testimonies of the other speakers, built to the climax that occurred following the last session of the conference. After the closing song, "This Is Our Place," composed especially for the occasion, and the benediction, the audience stood and quietly waited while the prophet left the hall. Then, unannounced and without direction or accompaniment, they sang "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet" in its entirety. Then they sang in its entirety "God Be with You till We Meet Again." Then after a pause, the audience, almost as one broke into applause, clapping their hands loudly. As the applause subsided, they began to disperse, slowly and quietly as if they were loath to leave or to break the spell that the conference had cast over them.

President Smith and the other visitors from Salt Lake City, except President Lee, returned home soon after the conference. President Lee had assignments in England and on the continent, which would keep him occupied there for two more weeks. On September 1, he and Joan flew to London. There he met with David Lawrence McKay and an English solicitor, Mark Sharman, to discuss a possible appeal from a decision of a local planning commission, denying permission to build a patron living complex on the temple grounds. After weighing the alternatives and consequences, it was decided not to appeal.

Before leaving England, President Lee and Joan visited Windsor Castle and that evening attended a London musical, The Great Waltz, the story of Johann Strauss. During the next two days, he counselled with the presidency of the London Temple and, with Joan, did some sightseeing in London, visiting, among other places, the Parliament building and Westminster Abbey.

They flew to Frankfurt, Germany, on September 4, where they were met by Kay Schwendiman. Over the weekend, President Lee, assisted by Brother Schwendiman, reorganized the presidency of the Kaiserslautern servicemen's stake. Selected as the new stake president was John Lasater, a future General Authority of whom President Lee wrote, "The new president, John Lasater, has been named as the special assistant to the commanding general who has promised him that he will endeavor to schedule his time so as not to interfere with his family or church responsibilities." President Lee was tremendously impressed with the performance of this stake, noting that it was "unsurpassed for dedication and thoroughness, with complete understanding of all programs."

President Lee spent the following week in Switzerland, conferring with Mission President Edwin J. Cannon in Zurich and with the temple presidency in Bern. At the time, consideration was being given to constructing a "Hospitality Center" near the temple, which could accommodate one hundred fifty guests at a time. Principals in these discussions were two more future General Authorities of the Church, architect Hans B. Ringger and Regional Representative Enzio Busche. Also present in Bern to discuss the installation of more modern projector equipment in the temple was Armis J. Ashby, who had been conferring with President Lee about similar matters affecting several temples.

Over the weekend of September 11 and 12, President Lee held leadership training meetings with Hans Ringger, a stake president, and Enzio Busche and dedicated the Church's first chapel in Lucerne. He and Joan flew to New York and thence home on the fourteenth.

Before the official party left Salt Lake City for the Manchester conference, arrangements had been made for President Smith to live at the home of his daughter, Amelia, and her husband, Bruce R. McConkie. By the time the prophet returned home from England, some of his treasured things had been moved to a private room in the McConkie home, and he was taken directly there from the airport on his arrival. Here amidst members of his family who loved him, President Smith was comfortable and at peace. But there was a sense of loneliness in him because of Jessie's death. And, he was tired. Just how tired is reflected in President Lee's diary entry of September 17, three days after he arrived home from Europe. "President Smith went into a deep sleep," he wrote that day, "the second in two days." Despite this, the prophet continued to go to his office regularly, meeting with his counselors and others as the usual grist was handled and as preparations were made for the general conference, which was only two weeks away.

While he deferred to his counselors in conducting the conference sessions, President Smith participated, as usual, in speaking, delivering the keynote and concluding addresses, and speaking at the general priesthood meeting. During his concluding address, the prophet lauded his counselors. "May I express before you the profound appreciation I have for the faith, devotion and service of the two great men who stand beside me," said he. Then, referring to his first counselor, he said: "President Harold B. Lee is a spiritual giant with faith like that of Enoch. He has the spirit of revelation and magnifies his calling as a prophet, seer and revelator." President Lee never took lightly the confidence and goodwill shown toward him by President Smith and genuinely appreciated these comments and the sentiments that prompted them.

Meanwhile, the ongoing work of the Church required the constant diligence and attention of the Brethren. We have already noted the changes in the Twelve caused by the death of Elder Richard L. Evans and the call of Elder Marvin J. Ashton to replace him. The installation of the new presidents at BYU and Ricks and the Solemn Assembly at the St. George Temple also occurred during this period. And because a presidential election would take place the next year, the First Presidency was contacted by political leaders seeking support for their party or its candidates. While the Brethren remained aloof from partisan politics, they never rejected the request of prominent politicians for an audience, regardless of their political persuasion. So, on November 5, 1971, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts came for a visit, accompanied by local democratic leaders Oscar W. McConkie, Jr., and Wayne Owens. Previously the Brethren had been visited by members of the administration of President Richard M. Nixon, including the president himself, Vice-President Spiro Agnew, and Secretary of Labor Hodgson. Also, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Carl Albert, had come calling.

However, political maneuvering was the least important thing on President Lee's mind as he worked under President Smith's direction to complete the organization of the departments of internal and public communications, the mission representatives of the Twelve and First Council of Seventy, and the arrangements for the dedication of the Ogden and Provo temples. And while these and other stressful and demanding things were going on, President Lee became involved in still another life-and-death decision that faced his friend Spencer W. Kimball. The most recent of President Kimball's compendium of ailments was a grave heart condition. The doctors had advised him that without open-heart surgery, his remaining days would be both drastically reduced and marked by a loss of energy. He and Sister Kimball sought an audience with President Lee on March 13, 1972, to discuss the matter. The Kimballs had already made the tentative decision to go forward with the surgery. First, however, they wanted to know whether President Lee thought President Kimball's "position was important enough to wish for longer life." President Lee, who had been joined by President Tanner and Doctors Russell M. Nelson and Ernest L. Wilkinson, Jr., assured him it was and, indeed, was surprised that he had asked. Yet, knowing his friend as he did, President Lee assumed that the question was but another reflection of his self-deprecating humility, which increased the love he had for him. "We could counsel only," wrote President Lee, "that he follow the direction as given in D&C 9 and receive his answer. Apparently, he had already done this and felt that he would take the 25 percent risk of an operation which could be done following the April conference."

Following the last session of the conference on April 9, the council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve met with President and Sister Kimball in the upper room of the temple, where both of them received special blessings. The surgery was performed three days later, a Wednesday. The night before, Dr. Russell M. Nelson went privately to President Lee and President Tanner for a special blessing. He later reported that the surgery was "technically perfect" and that as the operation was nearly completed it was made known to him that one day President Kimball would become the president of the Church.

Because of conflicts, the weekly council meeting was held in the temple on Wednesday rather than on Thursday. During the meeting, President Lee was called to the phone when he was advised that the operation had been a success. When he returned to the council room to make the announcement, he said with emotion as his voice quavered, "The Lord has heard and answered our prayers." It was one of the few times, if not the only time, President Lee openly showed such great emotion. Following the surgery, he was very solicitous of President Kimball. On April 20, he visited the hospital to give him a blessing. "He was in a highly nervous state," wrote President Lee, "but quieted down after the blessing." Later, President Lee persuaded the patient to go to the cottage at Laguna Beach, California, to convalesce; and in mid-June, Brother Lee travelled there "to give him a feeling of belonging and involvement," and to "brief him in many matters where he needed to be better informed." Sister Kimball later reported that the visit had effected "a marvelous transformation in him by lifting him out of his depression and making him feel that he was wanted and needed."

While President Lee was involved in this way, building up the man who, in less than two years, would succeed him as the president of the Church, he was also involved on a daily basis in working with the man whom he would succeed as the president of the Church in a few weeks. Three days before President Kimball underwent his surgery, President Joseph Fielding Smith delivered his last sermon in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. It occurred on April 9 at the last session of the general conference. The last words of this brief sermon are a fitting benediction to the life and ministry of this faithful man: "O God our Heavenly and Eternal Father," said he, "look down in love and in mercy upon this thy church and upon the members of the church who keep thy commandments. Let thy Spirit dwell in our hearts forever; and when the trials and woes of this life are over, may we return to thy presence, with our loved ones, and dwell in thy house forever, I humbly pray, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen." (Conference Report, Apr. 1972, pp. 163-64.)

President Smith's energy level continued to decline, although he regularly attended his meetings. An occurrence on May 5 signalled the end was near for him. On that day, he blacked out while seated at the dinner table in the McConkie home. Amelia and her husband were able to revive him, using tanked oxygen they kept in the house for such an emergency. The end came at 9:25 P.M. Sunday, July 2, 1972. He was seated in the same chair in which Aunt Jessie died several months before. He had attended sacrament meeting earlier and was chatting with Amelia who was writing letters. She stepped out of the room to get an address and on her return, found him slumped over in the chair. Elder Bruce R. McConkie, whom Amelia summoned from another room, moved him to a nearby couch and administered oxygen. His pulse remained fairly strong for a while, but suddently stopped. He died as he lived, peacefully and with no fanfare. He would have been ninety-six years old in seventeen days.

Members of the family and President Lee were informed and gathered at the McConkie home. President Lee picked up President Tanner to accompany him there. After praying with the family and conferring briefly about funeral arrangements, President Lee and President Tanner returned to their homes after deciding to convene a meeting of the Twelve the next morning. It was held in the First Presidency's council room in the administration building. All fourteen of the Brethren were there, including President Spencer W. Kimball, who was recovering nicely from the heart surgery, but who had added still another ailment, Bell's palsy, to his growing list of infirmities. He sat, uncomfortably, throughout the meeting with a handkerchief held to his face to mask the paralytic effect of the palsy on his features.

President Lee, who presided at this meeting as the president of the Twelve, was calm and subdued, reflecting the burden he carried as the de facto head of the Church. The inference drawn from his appearance was that he had slept little, if at all, the previous night as he wrestled with the intricate problems he now faced.

The agenda of the meeting was brief, but important: The Brethren were remainded of the procedure governing events connected with the death of a prophet when the minutes of a similar meeting held following the death of President David O. McKay were read; a committee was appointed to meet with the Smith family in making the funeral arrangements; it was agreed the Brethren would meet in the upper room of the temple the following Friday to consider the reorganization of the First Presidency; approval was given to issue all checks necessary to carry on the work pending the reorganization; and President Lee, acting as the president of the Twelve, was authorized to sign all correspondence and documents during the interim period, which documents ordinarily would have been signed by the First Presidency.

The next morning, July 4, President Lee awakened with severe pain on his left side. From experience, he knew it was nothing trivial and did not, therefore, resist Joan's pleading entreaty that he check in at the hospital. There a team of medics, headed by his old standby, Doctor Orme, conducted a battery of tests. These revealed several blood clots in the lungs. He remained in the hospital all day and that night, receiving injections and medication aimed at dissolving the clots and thinning his blood. These continued at intervals throughout the fifth and the morning of the sixth, before President Smith's funeral, being administered by a young intern sent to the home from the hospital.

During the period President Lee underwent these treatments, he began to give thought to the choice of counselors in the First Presidency. "I knew who I had in mind," he wrote, "but I wanted the confirmation of the Lord. I spent an hour or more in the temple and [prayed] throughout the night. When the morning came [Thursday the sixth], there was no doubt that N. Eldon Tanner was to be named as the first counselor. . . . I also was certain that Marion G. Romney should be named the other counselor; and that was likewise spiritually confirmed to my satisfaction." During this process, President Lee also decided that the selection of someone to fill the vacancy in the Twelve to be created by the call of Elder Romney to the First Presidency would be deferred until the October general conference.

The physical emergency President Lee had experienced two days before was shielded from the view of all but a few as he conducted President Joseph Fielding Smith's funeral on Thursday, July 6, 1972. The Tabernacle was filled to capacity as the assembled Saints sought to pay tribute to their departed leader. The music was provided by the Tabernacle Choir, which sang some of President Smith's favorite pieces. The speakers were President Lee, President N. Eldon Tanner, and son-in-law Elder Bruce R. McConkie. It was entirely in character when President Lee "spoke more particularly to the spiritual phases of his life," which was the angle from which he habitually viewed the affairs that daily swirled around him.

After the funeral, President Lee acutely felt the need for additional spiritual strength as he faced perhaps the most momentous day of his life. He went alone to the temple for this purpose where he spent several hours praying, planning, and reminiscing. The record he left of this illuminating interlude opens a revealing window into the heart and soul of Harold B. Lee. "As I viewed the paintings of the presidents of the church," he wrote of his visit to the upper room of the temple, "from the Prophet Joseph Smith to the present, I had brought to me the overwhelming responsibility that will rest upon me to follow where these great leaders have led. I also sat for a moment where I was joined in marriage to my darling Fern by President George F. Richards and again in the sealing room where my lovely Joan was sealed to me by President David O. McKay. I poured out my soul in gratitude for these two of the greatest women who have ever walked the earth who have been brought to me through circumstances which attest to the divine guidance of the almighty who knew my need."
