Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Twenty-eight

President of the Church

The Brethren met in the upper room of the temple on Friday, July 7, 1972, at 8:00 A.M. to reorganize the First Presidency of the Church. The early hour was decided on because of plans to hold a press conference afterward and the need to finish in time so the results could be published in the afternoon papers. The procedure already described was followed in effecting the reorganization, with each member of the Twelve expressing himself, following which, on motion of President Kimball, President Lee was sustained, then ordained, and set apart as the eleventh president of the Church, with President Kimball acting as voice. In turn, President Lee named N. Eldon Tanner and Marion G. Romney as his counselors, who, being unanimously approved by the Brethren, were set apart by him. Finally, with similar approval, President Lee set apart Spencer W. Kimball as the president of the Twelve.

The press conference was held in the west board room on the main floor of the administration building where more than fifty representatives of the various news media were present. Flanked by his counselors, and occasionally assisted by them, President Lee fielded a barrage of questions for an hour. His wide experience in dealing with the press, gained as a member of the Twelve, as a politician, and as a high-level business executive enabled him to respond with poise and confidence. The questions focused mainly on his plans for the Church. He responded in essence that he had no plans but that he would lead wherever the Lord, by revelation, prompted him to go. When asked what would be his first message, he replied, "Keep the commandments of God. Therein will be the salvation of individuals and nations during these troublesome times."

A few days later, President Lee granted a private interview to Mr. Thorupp, religion editor of the Los Angeles Times. Mr. Thorupp had two main questions concerning the Church policy on priesthood and why the Church was growing so fast. As to the first question, President Lee explained that the policy traced back to the beginnings of the Church, had been affirmed and supported since by prophetic sanction, and would be changed only by revelation from God. As to the second question, he explained simply that the Church was growing while other churches were not because "of the individual testimonies of the members and the missionaries."

Significantly, the first public discourse President Lee delivered after being ordained as the president of the Church was to the leaders of the youth. On July 16, 1972, he spoke at a meeting of all the officers and teachers of the MIA in the University West Stake. "There was a remarkable spirit which prompted many tears," he wrote of the occasion. This reaction was quite typical of the response to President Lee's preaching from the beginning of his apostolic ministry. The reason seemed to derive from the spiritual intensity and sensitivity of the man and from the spiritual focus he gave to everything he did. His elevation to the prophetic office magnified this reaction. This was affirmed by an experience he had on August 11. "I had my first session in the temple with the missionaries since my present call," he wrote on that day. "This fact seemed to intensify, both in me and in the missionaries, an unusual depth of spirituality. One [missionary] standing and representing the group pledged loyalty, love and support in my new calling." President Lee received spiritual strength from these devoted young missionaries. And despite a crowded schedule, he continued to meet with the groups of new missionaries during the remainder of his life, the last one being just a few days before his death.

Before President Smith passed away, plans had been made to hold an area conference in Mexico City the last of August. It was decided to go forward with these plans. President and Sister Lee flew there on Saturday, August 26, arriving in time for four special meetings held in the evening at four different locations. The women met at the National Auditorium, the young women at the Bosque Theatre, the Melchizedek Priesthood at the Camerones stake center, and the Aaronic Priesthood at another stake center in the city. President Lee spoke at all four of these meetings, the starting times of which were staggered to make this possible. The essence of his message was the same at all four meetings—obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel, which translates into compliance with the first and great commandment to love God.

The conference actually commenced Friday evening with a Folklorico, which featured dance and choral groups from all over Mexico and Central America performing in gaily colored costumes. The following day before President Lee arrived, two general sessions were held at the National Auditorium. The first was conducted by President Marion G. Romney and the second by President N. Eldon Tanner. President Lee delayed travelling to Mexico because of imperative commitments in Salt Lake City and to avoid all three members of the First Presidency travelling on the same flight.

Over fifteen thousand Latter-day Saints, drawn from Mexico and Central America, assembled in the National Auditorium Sunday morning, August 27. As in Manchester the previous year, the place where the general sessions were held had been arranged and decorated to simulate the appearance of the Salt Lake Tabernacle. Moreover, the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir had flown to Mexico City to add another touch to remind the local Saints of the general conferences in Salt Lake City. The choir performed its traditional weekly broadcast shortly before the Sunday morning general session and then sang at the two general sessions that followed.

It was here in Mexico City, at the Sunday morning session, that President Harold B. Lee was first sustained as the president of the Church in a public meeting. President Tanner, who conducted, presented the names of the General Authorities for sustaining vote, following the invocation and a special number by the Tabernacle Choir, "I Know That My Redeemer Lives." The General Authorities present, in addition to the First Presidency, were President Spencer W. Kimball and Elders Ezra Taft Benson, Mark E. Petersen, and Delbert L. Stapley of the Twelve; Elders Franklin D. Richards and David B. Haight, Assistants to the Twelve; Elder Bruce R. McConkie of the First Council of the Seventy; and Bishop Victor L. Brown.

In his keynote address, President Lee briefly traced the growth of the church in Mexico, nothing that the membership there then stood at 115,000. He attributed this vigorous growth to the influence of the Holy Ghost brooding over the land and to the diligence of the missionaries and members. He counselled that investigators be admonished to study and to pray since true conversion comes to an individual only through the power of God. He also blessed the parents with a new resolution to keep their houses in order, to be faithful to their companions, and to promote the teaching of young people. "Teach so many good things to them," he admonished, "that they can't find time to be bad."

President Lee also delivered the concluding address of the conference at the end of the Sunday afternoon session. In it he urged the members to hold family home evening, to look after each other, and to live more perfectly. And he admonished the brethren to magnify their priesthood callings. In conclusion, he bore a fervent testimony and shared with the audience a sweet experience he had the day after he was ordained as the president of the Church. "As my wife and I kneeled in humble prayer," he said, "suddenly it seemed as though my mind and heart went out to all three million members throughout the world. I seemed to love every one of them, regardless of their nationality or their color, whether rich or poor or educated or not. I suddenly felt as though they all belonged to me, as though they were all my own brothers and sisters." In that spirit, the prophet extended his love and blessings to the audience, invoking the Spirit of the Lord to abide with them always.

The depth of feeling this experience and these words evoked are reminiscent of the spirit induced by the remarkable dream President Lee had shortly before the dedication of the Los Angeles Temple. And the overflowing love he felt for all members of the Church, as he kneeled with Sister Lee the morning following his ordination as the president of the Church, seems to have fulfilled the condition for prophetic worthiness defined by President David O. McKay in his prayer dedicating the Los Angeles Temple, which was echoed in President Lee's vivid dream. Herein lies the explanation of the true greatness of Harold B. Lee. What he did or accomplished during his remarkable career does not define or explain that greatness. It is rather what he was or what he became that does so. That he spearheaded the welfare program, nurtured and shepherded the correlation program, and was the moving force behind the restructuring of the headquarters organizations, are extraordinary achievements, not to be disparaged. But they pale in comparison to the quality of genuine, universal love that at last found lodgement in the mind and heart of this prophet. And, unlike the many things he accomplished during his life that required the exercise of his own initiative, diligence, and discipline, this premier attribute came to him as a gift from God, without a conscious act of will or self-determination on his part. This quality of love was evident in every aspect of his short tenure as the president of the Church. Those who associated with him, or who heard him speak, were conscious of it and felt its influence.

Even as the pure love of the Savior did not protect him from the agony of the cross, neither did President Lee's feelings of universal love provide immunity from the hatred and threats of vicious men. Two days after the Mexico City area conference ended, an anonymous call was received at Church headquarters warning that two men, members of an apostate cult in Mexico, were in town to assassinate President Lee. Soon after, it was learned that a week before, the leader of this apostate cult had been murdered by one of the assassins reported to be in Salt Lake City, seeking the life of the prophet. Immediately on learning this, security personnel were assigned to stay constantly with President Lee until the danger had abated. The next day, the Salt Lake City police were called in to help protect him. Such was the uncertainty the threat created that on the first Sunday after returning home from Mexico, President Lee did not attend meetings in his own ward but stayed home. Meanwhile, automatic, electric locks were installed on the door leading to his office and security procedures were tightened up all around Church headquarters. The following Sunday, at the "urgent request" of President Jack Goaslind, "a splendid young leader" and a future General Authority, President Lee attended the conference of the Olympus Stake on the east bench of the Salt Lake Valley. Concerned about the appearance of being closely guarded, President Lee requested that the police and security personnel be as "inconspicuous" as possible. "Despite that," he wrote, "they had gone out the previous day to inspect the stake center," and on the way to the conference session he attended, "they had three or four cars in the lead, behind, and by the side of our car driven by Arthur Haycock." After the session, there was such a crush of people who wanted to see the prophet up close, or to touch or to shake hands with him, that he had great difficulty getting off the stand and to his car, "a circumstance," wrote President Lee, "I have thought must be prevented as much as possible."

Because of the tension and upset caused by the assassination threat, it was fortunate that President Lee had previously planned a three-week tour of Europe and the Middle East. It was hoped things would be settled down by the time he returned.

With his car protected by another cocoon of police vehicles, President Lee was driven to the Salt Lake airport on September 12, where he and Sister Lee boarded a plane for New York City. A friend told the prophet as he waited to board the plane that he "never thought he would live to see the day when the president of the church would come to the airport guarded by the police." Were the truth known, President Lee probably felt the same way. The Lees had dinner that night in New York with Mission President David Lawrence McKay, his wife, Mildred, and the office missionaries. The next morning, the McKays saw the Lees off at the Kennedy International Airport. Waiting for them when they landed at London's Heathrow airport were Elder Gordon B. Hinckley and his wife, Marjorie, who would be the Lees' travelling companions, and Mission President Milan Smith and his wife, Jessica.

The agenda for the three days spent in London was crowded. It included a meeting with U.S. Ambassador Annenberg, a luncheon hosted by British media mogul Lord Thompson of Fleet, a meeting with four hundred missionaries from the England East and England South missions, a visit to the London Temple where the prophet performed important administrative work, a press conference, and meetings connected with the London Stake conference, when the stake presidency was reorganized. Sandwiched in between was a visit to the British Museum and a tour of London in a new, chauffeured Rolls Royce that Lord Thompson made available to President and Sister Lee.

On the eighteenth, the Lees and Hinckleys flew to Athens, Greece, where they were met at the airport by the U.S. Ambassador and his aide and by a group of Latter-day Saints that included Mission President Edwin Cannon, his wife, Janath, some of the missionaries, and a number of military personnel. The main reason for stopping here was to make further inquiry about obtaining official recognition for the Church. Nothing materialized. Later in the day, the prophet held a meeting with a group at the military base. Then, "as the sun set over the mediterranean," wrote President Lee, "we visited the famed Acropolis and Parthenon." During most of the day, the prophet was distracted by "a somewhat severe distress" in his lower right back, similar to the pain he suffered before President Smith's funeral. He concealed the intensity of his pain the following day when he and several others climbed Mars Hill where the Apostle Paul delivered his famous address to the men of Athens. Both the prophet and Elder Hinckley spoke on this occasion, and President Cannon offered a prayer. "It was a glorious experience," President Lee wrote.

The next day, the travellers flew to Tel Aviv, where they were met by David Galbraith, the president of the Jerusalem branch, and a group of Saints. Also present was Mr. Lourie, an assistant to the Israeli foreign minister, Abba Eban, who was then in New York. However, in token of his regret in not being able to greet President Lee in person, Mr. Eban left an inscribed copy of the book My People. Later in the day, the prophet met with Dr. Calbi, the minister of religion, and with Mayor Teddy Kollek, when there was a discussion about the possibility of constructing a monument on the Mount of Olives commemorating the Orson Hyde story. This project came to fruition years after President Lee's death and gave the Church an important presence in the Holy Land. Between meetings this day, President Lee and his party were taken to the Jerusalem Museum, where, among other antiquities, the Dead Sea Scrolls were displayed, along with artifacts from Lehi's Cave, which, according to President Lee, "link the Book of Mormon" to the Middle East. The next day was occupied with a round of visits and contacts, including a meeting with Rabbi Joffe, who was cordial and encouraging.

Meanwhile, the prophet continued to feel twinges of pain and a general sense of tiredness and discomfort in his back. Later he wrote: "These were exhausting days. My physical strength was at a serious low ebb. I knew something was seriously wrong. . . . Joan insisted that I have Brother Hinckley and President Cannon administer to me." Afterward, following severe coughing, he expelled two blood clots. "Immediately, my shortness of breath ceased," he noted, "the weariness was diminished and the back pains began to subside; and twenty four hours later, were entirely gone." In reflecting on this stressful experience, President Lee wrote: "I now realize I was skirting the brink of eternity, and a miracle in this land of even greater miracles was extended by a merciful God who obviously was prolonging my ministry for a longer time. I give to him, in whose service I am, all the strength of my heart, mind and soul, to indicate in some measure my gratitude for his never failing condescension to me and my loved ones."

During the next few days, President Lee saw again many of the things he saw during his first visit to the Holy Land. Now, however, he saw them through new eyes and from a different perspective. He now seemed to have a greater affinity toward the Savior and a more intense sense of the obligation he owed as his earthly representative. With David Galbraith as their guide, President Lee and his party travelled through Jericho to the Sea of Galilee, there "to walk the same shores as did the Master." Then followed visits to Capernaum, where the Savior delivered the Sermon on the Mount, to Nazareth and the valley nearby where he fed the multitude with loaves and fishes, and to Samaria and the well where Jesus requested a drink. On the evening of the twenty-first, the Israeli department of tourism hosted the prophet and his party at a banquet where Rabbi Samuel Nathan was the master of ceremonies. The following day was spent touring the usual places of historic interest in Old Jerusalem and Bethlehem.

The party flew to Rome on the twenty-third, where they visited the Vatican, held a youth conference, and met with missionaries and members of the Rome branch. During the next few days, the prophet travelled to Florence, Pisa, and Milan, intermingling member and missionary meetings with visits to places of historic or cultural importance. The final meeting held in Italy was at the Dow Chemical auditorium in Milan, where the prophet and Elder Hinckley met with Mission President Dan Jorgensen and one hundred forty of his missionaries in a training and testimony meeting.

The party flew to Zurich, Switzerland, on the twenty-sixth, then travelled to Bern by automobile. Here President Lee and Elder Hinckley met with the temple workers, then installed a new temple presidency, releasing President Grob and his counselors and installing President Luschin and his counselors. After a stop in Geneva, where the brethren met briefly with Mission President Charles Didier, a future member of the Seventy, and some of the missionaries, the travellers flew to New York on Swiss Air, where they were met by Mission President David Lawrence McKay.

Although he was weak from his ordeal in Israel and from the stress of travel, and though he was anxious to return home to prepare for the Solemn Assembly, where he would be presented for sustaining vote as the head of the Church, President Lee remained in New York an extra day to attend two special meetings. The first was a luncheon at the Marco Polo Club attended by the newscaster Lowell Thomas, the noted minister Norman Vincent Peale, Lee Bickmore, and other prominent people from the eastern United States. This was followed by a press conference where, for an hour, President Lee responded to "searching questions" put to him by twenty-two newsmen from the major newspapers and magazines in the East. At this press conference, President Lee announced the appointment of Lee Bickmore as a "special consultant" to the First Presidency. The impact of this announcement on the sophisticated business and professional community in New York City was significant. As the chairman of the board of Nabisco, Lee Bickmore stood almost at the pinnacle of business eminence there. His new role as a special consultant to the First Presidency undoubtedly altered the perceptions many of his peers had previously held toward the Church, changes that could open doors, cultivate tolerance, and foster understanding toward the Church and its message. Though he never sought to conceal it, Lee Bickmore's polished urbanity effectively masked his rural origin in a small, nondescript Mormon town in northern Utah, located only a few miles from Clifton, Idaho, where President Lee was born.

Before leaving for the Mexico City area conference, President Lee had asked the Twelve to submit the names of men they considered to be qualified to fill the vacancy created by the call of Elder Marion G. Romney as a counselor in the First Presidency. Since then, he had given the matter prayerful consideration and had decided on Elder Bruce R. McConkie. However, he wanted spiritual confirmation of that decision. To that end, he engaged in a special fast, then went to the "most sacred room in the temple" on Sunday, October 1, 1972. "There, for an hour," he wrote, "I prayerfully considered the appointment of a new apostle. All seemed clear that Bruce R. McConkie should be the man." When the prophet shared this with his counselors, "both said that from the first they seemed to know also it was he." At the time President Lee extended the call to Elder McConkie, he learned about another spiritual confirmation of his selection. Elder McConkie told the prophet that when the General Authorities' names were read for sustaining vote in Mexico City, he heard his name spoken as the last member of the Twelve. Troubled by the experience, he "wrestled" with it in the temple for a long time when "he seemed to see a council of the brethren on the other side and they were advocating his name."

Elder McConkie was the only man President Lee called to the Twelve during his short prophetic tenure. Yet, two men whom he called as Assistants to the Twelve, James E. Faust and L. Tom Perry, were later called to the quorum. Elder McConkie and these two brethren, along with O. Leslie Stone, another new Assistant to the Twelve, and Rex D. Pinegar, a new member of the First Council of the Seventy, were presented for sustaining vote at the solemn assembly where President Lee and his counselors were sustained.

This meeting, and the others connected with the October 1972 general conference, represented a high water mark in the life of President Lee. During the conference, he delivered four major addresses, which paint a striking picture of an introspective man who was fully conscious of the magnitude of his new role and of the qualifying steps necessary to attain it, yet who seemed mildly surprised it had happened to him. They also defined the chief criterion by which he felt the success or failure of his ministry should be judged and included a comprehensive review of the essential doctrines and aims of the Church.

The deep introspections in which he had indulged were suggested in his keynote address, delivered immediately after he and the others had been sustained. He recounted how, the previous July when he was ordained, he had gone to the upper room of the temple to meditate and to pray. There he had gazed reflectively at the portraits of those who had preceded him, whose lives and characteristics he then briefly outlined for the audience. After referring to President Joseph Fielding Smith, he said, "As 'the finger of God touched him and he slept,' he seemed in that brief moment to be passing to me, as it were, a sceptre of righteousness as though to say to me, 'Go thou and do likewise.'" Then followed the prophet's own criterion by which to judge whether he had measured up to this mandate. "Now, I stood alone with my thoughts," said he. "Somehow the impressions that came to me were, simply, that the only true record that will ever be made of my service in my new calling will be the record that I may have written in the hearts and lives of those with whom I have served and labored, within and without the church." (Conference Report, Oct. 1972, p. 19.) He then shared with the audience insights into his feelings as he undertook his new duties. He prefaced this by quoting from a sermon of Orson Hyde, which described the "tribulations and trials" through which a prophet must pass to prove himself worthy of the office. He also quoted from the statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith in which he likened himself to a rough stone being polished by the buffeting experiences of his life. President Lee then added: "These thoughts now running through my mind begin to give greater meaning to some of the experiences in my own life, things that have happened which have been difficult for me to understand. At times it seemed as though I too was like a rough stone rolling down from a high mountainside, being buffeted and polished, I suppose, by experiences that I too might overcome and become a polished shaft in the quiver of the Almighty. Maybe it was necessary that I too must learn obedience by the things I might have suffered—to give me experiences that were for my good, to see if I could pass some of the various tests of mortality." (Ibid., p. 20.)

The sermons President Lee delivered at the third session Saturday morning and the general priesthood meeting Saturday evening sketched in some detail the beginnings and the purposes of the restored Church, its basic doctrines, the responsibilities of its members, especially the priesthood, the special problems facing the Church, and the blessings held out to those who will remain faithful.

It was in his concluding address at the last session of the conference, Sunday afternoon, that President Lee expressed a sense of disbelief at what had happened. "I come now to the closing moments of this session," said he, "when I have time for some sobered reflections. Somehow I have had the feeling that during the expressions here, whenever my name has been mentioned, they were talking of somebody other than myself. And I really think that is so, because one cannot go through the experiences that I have gone through these last three days and be the same as before. I am different than I was before Friday morning. I cannot go back to where I was because of the love and faith and confidence that you, the people of the Lord, have reposed in me. So you have been talking of somebody that you want me to become, which I hopefully pray God I may, with his help, become." (Ibid., pp. 175-76.)

With the close of this conference, President Harold B. Lee had been officially and finally ushered into the select company of ten other men who also had served as the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Of these, he would serve a shorter period of time than any of them, less than eighteen months. And of these, he would die at a younger age than any of them, with the exception of the Prophet Joseph Smith. But, despite the shortness of his prophetic tenure, his influence upon the Church ranks among the highest because of his key involvement in welfare, correlation, leadership training, headquarters organization, and because of his personal influence. It is the latter, perhaps, which in the end will be the most lasting and significant of all. A man of my acquaintance once defined the three levels of leadership: First, the leader who does the job with reasonable competence. Second, the leader who not only does the job well, but does it with flair and originality. And, third, the leader who inspires discipleship. The most noteworthy examples of the third level are the Savior and Joseph Smith. Their fame and notoriety rest largely on the efforts of disciples who made certain that knowledge of their lives and teachings was perpetuated. L. Brent Goates, who has written a fine biography of President Lee, has also compiled and has had published a collection of tributes to the prophet under the title He Changed My Life. These, added to numerous other testimonials expressed personally to the author about him, suggest that President Harold B. Lee was not only an incredibly competent and creative administrator and leader, but that he may well have qualified to be included within the small circle of those who inspire discipleship.

Soon after the Solemn Assembly, President Lee was inundated with messages of congratulation. "There began an avalanche of letters," he wrote on October 9, "not only from our faithful leaders and members, but from those not in the church. One of the choicest was a letter from my dear old friend, John A. Sibley, a great southerner and a former director of Equitable Life." He also made special mention of a letter from Governor Calvin L. Rampton and one from his cousin Sterling W. McMurrin, a gifted though somewhat unorthodox member of the Church, who "extended the prayers and blessings of the McMurrin family."

Predictably, President Lee was also inundated with invitations to speak at various events. The first one he accepted after the conference was from the presidency of the Oakland Temple. He and Joan travelled there over October 14 and 15, where the prophet spoke at a meeting of all the temple workers. They returned in time to attend a court of honor where grandson Jonathon Goates received his Eagle Scout award.

These pleasant, mountaintop experiences were alloyed with incidents that echoed ominous tones. On October 17, President Lee received a visit from Mr. Gray, head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in Salt Lake City, who offered the cooperation of his office in protecting against the assassination threats made by the cult from Mexico. President Lee put him in touch with the Church security personnel who, for some time, had been working cooperatively with the Salt Lake City police force. The FBI had become involved because those making the threats were from out of state and out of the country, which involved them in violations of federal law.

On October 23, President Lee went to the hospital, where for three hours he underwent a series of tests and had x-rays taken of his lungs. The doctors were baffled by the prophet's respiratory problems and seemed unable to prescribe any treatment or medication that provided permanent relief. On November 24, 1972, he consulted Dr. Orme about a severe case of hoarseness. On the same day, he received a health blessing from his counselors. In early January 1973, President Lee's hoarseness was such that Dr. Orme strongly recommended that he not attend the inauguration of President Richard M. Nixon in Washington, D.C., out of concern that the cold, moist air would seriously aggravate his condition. During the following three months, President Lee received intermittent treatment from Dr. Orme and from Dr. Richard Snow, who treated him for a sinus condition. By mid-March, when there had been no improvement in his health, specialists, Doctors Dwayne Schmidt and Stephen L. Richards, were brought into the case. On March 19, this resulted in Dr. Richards conducting a bronchoscopy, which entailed inserting instruments down the prophet's windpipe with an attached lighting mechanism that made it possible to take pictures. "This was an ordeal," wrote President Lee, "which left me with a very sore neck." Afterward, over a period of a week, there followed a series of daily "percussion" treatments, accompanied by medications and later by visits from a physical therapist. "Naturally," wrote the patient, "this demanding schedule began to take its toll, not only on my physical, but on my nervous system." However, these extraordinary treatments proved to be beneficial, and except for a routine checkup by Dr. Orme a month later, and a temporary problem with a sciatic nerve during the summer, President Lee had no further contact with doctors until shortly before he passed away the following December.

Meanwhile, President Lee was busy with another major initiative intended to improve the ability of the Church to better serve the best interests of its single members. This contemplated the merging of the activities of the young people under the Presiding Bishopric and the creation of an organization to supervise the activities of the single adults over the age of eighteen. Formal action to implement these changes was taken by the council of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve on Thursday, October 26, 1972. At that time, the activity program for the youth was designated as the Aaronic Priesthood MIA, and the activity program for the single adults was designated as the Melchizedek Priesthood MIA. While it was provided that the activities of the youth would be under the overall direction of the Presiding Bishopric, this direction would be exercised through the presidencies of the YMMIA and YWMIA, which would continue to exist. At the same time, approval was given to call Robert L. Backman and Ruth Hardy Funk as the new presidents of these youth organizations.

The supervision of the MPMIA at the general level was placed under a managing director, Elder James E. Faust, and two associate directors, Elders Marion D. Hanks and L. Tom Perry. Later, several members, both men and women, were called to serve on an MPMIA board. For purposes of more effective administration, the single adults were divided into two groups, the young adults ages nineteen to twenty-six; and the special interests, ages twenty-seven and older. In administering the MPMIA at the local level, a member of the elders quorum presidency and a member of the Relief Society presidency were appointed in each ward to work with the ward activity director to implement the program.

As President Lee explained at the June conference in 1973, when this new program was formally presented to the Church, it did not represent a change in substance or in doctrine, but was only a change in form made necessary by special circumstances. The whole thrust of this program was to use the full facilities of the Church to reach "the one," that is, the one who had special needs.

President Lee felt keenly about these changes. As with any other step he took affecting the organization and operation of the Church, he acted only after gathering all relevant facts, analyzing them carefully, and praying fervently for spiritual confirmation of the steps he proposed to take. This was the pattern he followed here. And he made it plain that this initiative was heaven inspired and represented revelation through him as the prophet.

Confirming the experiences President Lee had had with welfare, correlation, and the previous headquarters restructuring, these changes also met with some opposition. It came mainly from those who feared that the subordination of the youth organizations to the Presiding Bishopric would stifle their creativity to the detriment of the youth. Even Sister Lee, long an exponent and leader of youth, both inside and outside the Church, shared these concerns. Forgetting for a moment the extraordinary role her husband played, Joan mildly remonstrated with him about the changes. His equally mild, yet unqualified, response made it clear that prophetic action taken in accordance with patterns set by the scriptures would not be overturned by dissent, even the dissent of his beloved companion.

We see at work here two elements that helped move President Lee toward the decision he ultimately made. The first was a desire to strengthen the Presiding Bishopric in their role in leading the Aaronic Priesthood. For many years, the activity programs of the MIA had overshadowed the priesthood functions of the Aaronic Priesthood quorums. Placing these activities and the activities of the girls under the Presiding Bishopric would strengthen their hand in leading the youth of the Church. The second was a need to focus on the plight of one of the largest, yet most neglected, groups in the Church—the single adults. The death of his wife Fern had made President Lee acutely aware of the lonely and often neglected status of this group. After her death and prior to his remarriage, he felt awkward and alone, even in the presence of married couples with whom he had been acquainted all his adult life. His later relationships with Joan and her unmarried friends gave him special insights into the thinking and the needs of these members who had never married or were divorced. As he reflected on this group and their special status, President Lee realized that every member of the Church who grows to maturity will, at some time, and for varying periods of time, be a single adult. Moreover, this is true even as to those who marry, except in the rare instance where marriage partners die at the same time. Although bishops, home teachers, Relief Society sisters, and priesthood quorums have shepherding responsibilities for the single adults, President Lee knew, because of the Church's strong emphasis on marriage and family life, and other factors, that, as a practical matter, the needs of the single adults were being largely neglected. So, as these factors provided impetus for change, President Lee gave long, prayerful thought to the steps to be taken to help solve these problems. When the changes had been effected, he said they were as far-reaching and significant as any organizational changes made in his lifetime.

It is assumed President Lee had the MPMIA chiefly in mind when he made this statement. This is so because the structuring of the APMIA merely involved the shifting of existing organizations, while the MPMIA involved the creation of an entirely new entity. The men chosen to head this new organization had been selected with great care. Two of them, Elders Faust and Perry, were called as General Authorities at the October 1972 general conference, only weeks before the creation of the MPMIA was formally approved by the Brethren. Elder Faust, who had proven himself to be a skilled administrator when he served as the president of a large stake in the Salt Lake Valley, was also one of the pioneers in correlation and leadership training. After his call as an Assistant to the Twelve, Elder Faust told President Lee of a profound spiritual experience he had had shortly before, which revealed he was to be called.

A few months before Elder Perry's call as an Assistant to the Twelve, President Lee visited the stake in the Boston area where Elder Perry served as stake president and came away greatly impressed with the way in which Elder Perry had organized to shepherd the single adults. And Elder Hanks, who had served for almost twenty years as a General Authority, had a detailed knowledge of headquarters organization and procedure and enjoyed a special rapport with single adults around the Church as a popular speaker and a sensitive counselor.

Once these men had been called, set apart, and instructed, they ably pursued their duties assisted by a new general board and by their executive secretary, Jeffrey R. Holland. In like manner, the Presiding Bishopric, assisted by the presidencies of the YMMIA and YWMIA, energetically filled their role as leaders of the youth.

There was one other organizational change made by President Lee when on December 7, 1972, a new music department was created with Elder O. Leslie Stone as the managing director. And a year later, shortly before he died, President Lee met with Lee Bickmore when they discussed a proposed study of the health services organization, looking toward the possibility of some changes in its structure and procedure.

The many changes in organization made by President Lee have caused some to call him a great innovator. To the extent he advocated and, when he had the authority, effected changes necessary to facilitate the work, the title seems justified. However, insofar as it implies a quality of freewheeling change, it is inaccurate. From the beginning of his involvement with Church organization at the general level, President Lee was anxious to tie all organizations of the Church securely to the priesthood. This tendency was clearly shown when he struggled to devise a welfare plan for the entire Church. It was revealed then that the answer lay in using the mechanisms of the priesthood, defined in the revelations. As the welfare program evolved over the years, there were many changes in organization, designed to solve immediate problems. But, these never compromised the basic priesthood structure. So, the MPMIA was a necessary, but temporary, mechanism designed to help solve an existing problem, which was tied to the priesthood, its executive heads being Assistants to the Twelve.

Once he became the head of the Church, President Lee was free to choose among the Church assignments he would fill, without supervision, except as he might be spiritually prompted otherwise. Given that latitude, the assignments he accepted reveal a pattern of preference for youth meetings. Mention has already been made of his regular meetings with the new missionaries. In addition, he regularly accepted invitations to meet with other groups of young people. Indeed, it is not known he ever declined an invitation to speak to such a group.

A month after the Solemn Assembly, President Lee travelled to Mesa, Arizona, to address thirty-two hundred young people assembled in a youth conference. Joining him were Elder Marion D. Hanks and Bishop Vaughn J. Featherstone. The response to the prophet was typical. "The spiritual fervor generated," he wrote, "was almost frightening in its intensity, as to adopt, in some cases, an almost worshipful attitude which I am trying earnestly to play down to a respectful and appropriate loyalty to their leaders."

Later, President Lee went to Pocatello, Idaho, to speak to the students of the Idaho State University Stake. "It was something of a homecoming for me," he wrote, "an Idaho native now coming home." A month later found President Lee in Long Beach, California, where he addressed fourteen thousand young people, assembled in another youth conference. He spoke for an hour. The reaction was the same as at Mesa. There was little President Lee could do to prevent this, except to discontinue speaking to them. This he was unwilling to do.

The prophet took advantage of the trip to Long Beach to spend a few days in the Laguna Beach cottage. D. Arthur Haycock had accompanied President and Sister Lee there so as to be available to assist the prophet as needed. "I spent most of the day dictating to Arthur Haycock," he wrote the day after the youth meeting in Long Beach, "trying to release and be free from worries which had been troubling me." A main concern of President Lee at the time was his health. It was only a few weeks before that he had undergone the stressful percussion treatments to try to clear his lungs. While he was feeling better, his health still was not robust.

The next youth gathering the prophet attended was at Billings, Montana, a few weeks later. The young people assembled there may have lacked some of the polish among those who attended the Long Beach meeting, but President Lee seemingly felt a greater rapport with them because of a shared rural background. Despite the eminence he had gained and the cosmopolitan air his extensive international travel had given him, President Lee never lost touch with his beginnings, was proud to call Clifton his home, and always felt a special kinship with those who shared a similar background.

Not long after the Billings meeting, President Lee met with over three thousand LDS students at the Church's institute of religion near the University of Utah campus. Here he found the same support and acceptance as at other similar gatherings and the same desire for self-improvement among those in attendance. Later in the day, President Lee dedicated a new institute building for the LDS students attending the Salt Lake Valley Technical College.

A few weeks before the October 1973 general conference, the prophet spoke to the largest gathering of young people during his tenure as Church president. The occasion was a devotional held September 11 on the BYU campus, where 23,304 students filled the Marriott Center to the brim. The occasion was doubly important because President Lee was given the Exemplary Manhood Award as a token of the love and respect the young people had for him. After the October 1973 general conference, President Lee had two other opportunities to address special gatherings of young people. The first was on October 23 when he dedicated a new stake center for the LDS students at the University of Utah. Three days later found him in Rexburg, Idaho, where he addressed five thousand students gathered in a special assembly. A feature of the meeting was the rendition of a musical number composed for the occasion entitled, "Listen to a Wondrous Voice." The high point of the meeting came when the prophet was presented with a beautiful plaque from the Associated Students of Ricks College, which bore a lengthy inscription signifying the love and admiration the students had for him. "Called from the simplicity of farm and field," it said in part, "to stand in the upper rooms of the temple, where the veil is thinnest, comes such a man, whose life is a testimony that speaks the praises of God. This is a man who is more than a man, a man bearing Israel's prophetic inheritance, one of God's choicest sons. Thanks be to God that we live in a prophet's time, when his inspired leadership draws us closer to stand in those holy places where we prayerfully await Christ's second coming."

It is gatherings such as these that help inspire a spirit of discipleship. The students at Ricks came mainly from a rural environment, not unlike that of Clifton. Therefore, they had a proprietary attitude toward President Lee. He was one of them. He belonged to them. This son of Idaho had risen to the pinnacle of Church leadership and to national business prominence from a status of isolated anonymity like their own. Yet, the eminence he had achieved did not create a gulf between him and them. They were his friends. He did not shun them because of the vast differences in their status. Instead, he beckoned them to high achievement, encouraged them, expressed confidence in them, and assured them of God's loving concern for their well-being and success. Yet, young people who did not share President Lee's rural roots responded to him in the same way as did those at Billings or Rexburg. His appeal to young people was universal. There was something about the man—his stance, his attitude, his visage, and his demeanor—which naturally drew them to him. It was so from the earliest days of his teaching career.

This magnetism was not limited to the youth. Mature adults reacted to him in the same way. Marion G. Romney, for instance, who was a mature adult when he first met President Lee, said when they first shook hands, he was "captivated by his magnetic presence." (Marion G. Romney sermon at funeral of Harold B. Lee.) "He was not only a prophet," wrote President Romney, "but also a great seer and revelator. I have never been associated with a man who drew more heavily upon the powers of heaven than Harold B. Lee." And, he added later, "We who sat with him daily were frequently amazed at the breadth of his vision and the depth of his understanding."

Many others who were first exposed to President Lee as adults had reactions similar to those of President Romney. But, as suggested, it was the youth who were especially attracted to him and who, as the reactions at the youth gathering in Mesa imply, had an almost worshipful attitude toward him. The special emphasis he gave to youth gatherings and the fact his main literary offering consists of a compilation of talks he delivered to the youth, demonstrate the reciprocal feelings of love he had for them.

Several days before the meeting at Ricks College where feelings of love prevailed, President Lee became aware once more of malignant influences that sought to do him harm. Water poured from his office pitcher had a bitter taste. Samples of the water, which were tested in laboratories in Provo, Utah, and Denver, Colorado, were shown to contain a toxic material that, when injected into mice, produced either convulsions or death, depending on the quantity injected. Given the previous death threats from the cult in Mexico, the incident produced great consternation at Church headquarters and increased concern about the prophet's safety. An extensive investigation produced no clues about the identity of the person responsible for poisoning the water in his pitcher. It was apparent, however, that there had been a serious breach of the security net that had been created to protect him. An effort was made to plug any gaps in that net when, shortly afterward, President Lee's trusted friend Gordon Affleck was appointed to supervise security for the Church Administration Building and a special office was provided for him near President Lee's office on the main floor. This, with continued cooperation from the city police and the FBI, minimized concerns about the prophet's safety.

During his short tenure as the President of the Church, President Lee retained his avid interest in the temples and temple work. In addition to the regular instruction he gave to missionaries in the temple, he also taught temple workers whenever possible. On February 11, 1973, he spoke to over thirteen hundred of them assembled in the fifth floor auditorium of the Salt Lake Temple. There he emphasized the need for the workers to be well trained and clean and to reflect, through their reverent behavior, the sanctity of the holy ordinances they were to administer. On November 18, 1973, he gave similar instructions to workers in the Manti Temple in connection with the installation of June B. Black as the new temple president.

Earlier in the year, President Lee began an initiative that was to have a profound effect on the future temple building activities of the Church. On May 3, 1973, tentative approval was given to a proposal to construct "stake center sized" temples. This was part of the plan to establish the Church on a firm international footing by making the blessings of the temple more readily available to members around the world. With the rapid expansion of the Church and the attendant ballooning of costs, it became clear the size and the cost of temples would have to be radically scaled down as the number of smaller temples was multiplied. Later in the month, the first step was taken to implement this plan when approval was given to construct a small temple in Sao Paulo, Brazil, the first temple in South America.

Meanwhile, President Lee and his brethren were moving forward with other plans to advance the work of the Church. Consistent with the aim to economize while increasing the efficiency of administration, President Lee began soon after his ordination to study the feasibility of using training videos to reduce the amount of travel by members of the general boards. This concept would flourish in the years ahead, leading ultimately to the installation of TV satellite receiving dishes near many stake centers, by means of which instructions could be given to many thousands from a single teaching station. He also initiated plans to construct a "meditation park" on the Mount of Olives, which later led to the construction there of a park that included a monument recognizing Orson Hyde, who had dedicated the Holy Land for the gathering of Israel.

A milestone in headquarters administration was passed in June 1973 when a three-day open house was held to commemorate the opening of the new Church Office Building. On the first evening of the open house, held June 20, President Lee and his counselors and their wives stood in a receiving line to greet business, professional, and community leaders and the official representatives of other Church denominations. With this twenty-eight story modern high rise available, it became possible to consolidate most Church staff personnel in offices on the block east of Temple Square, many of whom previously had been housed in various buildings around the city.

As the new Church Office Building neared completion, attention was focused on the condition of the Church Administration Building, which was then more than fifty years old. During its life, the building had received normal maintenance care but had now reached the point where major renovations were necessary to bring its heating, air conditioning, wiring, and plumbing equipment up to modern standards. On February 13, 1973, Emil Fetzer, the church architect, and Fred Baker, the managing director of the building department, met with the First Presidency to review the matter. "It seems imperative that we go forward as outlined," wrote President Lee of the meeting. These renovations, which were completed after President Lee passed away, took two years. During that time, the occupants of the administration building were housed temporarily in the new office building.

While the plans for the construction or renovation of these headquarters buildings progressed, President Lee was harassed by a controversy over the proposed demolition of the Eighteenth Ward chapel in Salt Lake City and an adjacent building, Whitney Hall, named after Orson F. Whitney, a longtime bishop of this ward. Because the buildings were old and disfunctional, the local leaders, and most of the members, approved of their demolition and the construction of a modern facility. A vocal minority was opposed, however, even to the point of seeking a restraining order. This was essentially a matter to be decided by the local members in accordance with established building guidelines. Because this particular chapel, out of the hundreds in the Church, was near the Church administrative complex, and was the chapel where many prominent leaders of the Church had worshipped over the years, the First Presidency unavoidably became involved. At length, the controversy was resolved, although not without some bruised feelings, when Whitney Hall was demolished, the chapel was moved to a site just south of the Utah State Capitol, and a new chapel was constructed on the old site located on A Street between Second and Third Avenues. In an effort to smooth the ruffled feathers, President Lee spoke at the dedication of the new chapel on August 14, 1973.

The day before this dedication ceremony, President Lee spoke at the funeral services of Willis J. Woodbury, which evoked nostalgic memories of the mission field. "He was a cello player," wrote the prophet of his first missionary companion, "and while I was his companion, I accompanied him many times on the piano, before church and civic groups and in many homes we had tracted." Little did the prophet know that before the year ended, he would follow his companion into another field of labor.

Before that time came, however, President Lee still had important things to do. Throughout the summer, he had worked intermittently on the plans for an area conference in Munich, Germany, in late August. President and Sister Lee, accompanied by D. Arthur Haycock and his wife, Maurine, left Salt Lake City on August 22, destined for Munich. With intermediate stops in New York and London, they arrived there on the twenty-fourth. All of the events of the conference were held in Olympia Hall, which had been specially constructed for the 1972 Olympic Summer Games held in Munich. These included a combined dance-music festival Friday evening, the twenty-fourth, featuring groups from Germany, Italy, France, and Holland, two general sessions both Saturday and Sunday, and a priesthood session Saturday evening. President Lee keynoted the opening general session, concluded the priesthood and the Sunday afternoon sessions, and conducted all sessions. The Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir performed at the Sunday morning session. The addresses were translated into German, English, Italian, Spanish, French, and Dutch. Headsets were provided, which enabled the audience to tune to the language they understood. President Lee bore a powerful testimony to conclude the conference, which, with the closing song "God Be with You till We Meet Again," produced an almost Pentecostal outpouring of emotion. Wrote President Lee of the conference: "Never have I experienced such a response from an audience as here where all animosities of past wars were forgotten in a brotherhood which made everyone a 'kin' in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

On Monday the twenty-seventh, President and Sister Lee flew to Vienna in company with Elder and Sister Gordon B. Hinckley. This began an eight-day tour during which many meetings were held on the continent and in England. President Lee asked Elder Hinckley to join him on this his last tour because of the special rapport that existed between them. Their close acquaintance dated back to the 1930s before either of them had been called as a General Authority. At that time, President Lee was the managing director of the welfare department and Elder Hinckley was the executive secretary of the Church radio and publicity committee. Their relationship during this tour, as it had been earlier when they travelled to the Holy Land together, was that of missionary companions. Elder Hinckley, the junior companion, assumed the responsibility of arranging the itinerary and the meetings and then joined with the prophet in sharing the pulpit. In many cases Sister Lee and Sister Hinckley joined their husbands in speaking.

In Vienna, meetings were held with Mission President Neil Schaerrer and some of his missionaries. The party then flew to London, where they counselled with several mission presidents and their wives. At the London Temple, Joseph W. Darling was installed as the new president replacing Dougald McKeown. While at the temple, the brethren instructed the officiators, then, with their wives, had lunch at the Manor House, an ancient domicile near the temple. During the next two days, the travellers held meetings with Mission Presidents Reed Reeve and Arnold Knapp and their missionaries. And afterward, they held a series of meetings with the members of the Birmingham, Bristol, and Loughborough stakes. "The spiritual response was overwhelming," wrote President Lee following the last meeting, "and many tears were shed as we bade farewell to those in attendance, after giving our testimonies and our blessings upon those assembled. Sister Hinckley and Joan both spoke, as did Gordon B. Hinckley and myself."

The area conference in Munich and the special meetings held afterward marked a high point in President Lee's ministry. The prophetic mantle he wore, and the inspired talks he delivered, enriched by the depth of his scriptural knowledge and the scope of his spiritual insight, had produced the unusual responses referred to in his diary. While these doubtless were inspiring to his listeners, they were equally uplifting to him, providing new strength and motivation to continue the course.

President Lee returned home to face a full agenda of work. High on the list was preparation for the coming general conference. Beginning with September 15, he spent many long hours outlining the several major talks he was scheduled to give, including his traditional keynote message at the Regional Representatives seminar. Because of reports that some Regional Representatives misconceived their role, thinking of themselves as a sort of super stake president, he outlined remarks that clearly defined their role as teachers and trainers, functioning only in a staff capacity.

President Lee interrupted these preparations to speak at the funeral services for Sister Gladys Condie Monson, the mother of Elder Thomas S. Monson of the Twelve. President Lee had known the Monson family for many years from his service as the president of the Pioneer Stake. Young Tom Monson had been a special favorite of his, whom he had encouraged and counselled as he watched him develop under the discipline of heavy Church assignments while still young. So, he was both honored and pleased to respond to the family's request that he speak at Sister Monson's funeral.

On September 26, President Lee recorded with satisfaction an organizational change that had been under consideration for some time. "Dee Anderson was introduced as the executive secretary of the budget committee," he wrote on that day. "This will provide a constant watch over the expenditures of the church and will see to it that no new programs are launched without a full disclosure of costs, personnel and office needs. This will provide a long needed control which we have not had in the past." This device, as much as any other, would help to put a brake on the growth of bureaucracy at Church headquarters, a problem that had troubled President Lee for many years.

The first session of the 143rd semiannual conference of the Church convened in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on Friday morning, October 5, 1973. President Harold B. Lee conducted this and all other general sessions of the conference, held over a period of three days. His voice was strong. He acted with vigor. He conveyed the impression to those watching and listening that he was prepared to serve energetically for many years as the head of the Church. That his two immediate predecessors, Presidents Joseph Fielding Smith and David O. McKay, had served into their mid-nineties held the prospect this seventy-four-year-old prophet might well lead the Church for two decades. Only the prophet's doctors, a few members of his family, and a smaller number of his associates knew of the precarious condition of his health. It was only this small circle who would not have been unduly shocked had they been told that as he stood at the Tabernacle pulpit that morning, President Harold B. Lee had opened the last general conference he would be privileged to attend in life. But, such was the reality.

Following an invocation by Elder Hugh B. Brown of the Twelve, and the rendition by the Tabernacle Choir of the hymn "Lord Accept Our True Devotion," President Lee launched into the keynote address of the conference. In it, he emphasized the need for self-respect. This comes chiefly, he indicated, from a recognition that we are the offspring of God and, therefore, have the seeds of Godhood and perfection within us. These comments were prompted, in part, by "the shocking lack of self respect by so many individuals as is evidenced by their dress, their manner, and engulfing waves of permissiveness which seem to be moving over the world like an avalanche." (Conference Report, Oct. 1973, p. 3.) These conditions had been created, in large part, by the controversies stirred up by the war in Vietnam. They seemed to be tearing at the fabric of modern society and, therefore, were deserving of the special attention of a prophet. His remedy for these ills was the remedy that all prophets of God have prescribed: To honor and obey God, who has given us life, while honoring the sanctity of the bodies He has given us by keeping them pure and unsullied.

President Lee underscored the key points of his address to the priesthood brethren through this diary entry: "Saturday night at priesthood meeting," wrote he, "I spoke plainly to men who are over the usual marriage age and have neglected to find a wife. I also urged local leaders to give sanction and leadership to the new Melchizedek Priesthood MIA."

President Lee's concluding address at the last general session, Sunday afternoon, was an appropriate benediction to the numerous conference addresses he had delivered during almost thirty-three years of apostolic service. He expressed loving concern for the members of the Church, especially those in places of peril—the Middle East, where war raged, and in Chile, where there was serious political turmoil. He also cautioned about enemies within, mentioning those who had written disparagingly about the Church and its leaders. Referring specifically to the Prophet Joseph Smith, he quoted President George Albert Smith as saying that those who belittle the prophet "will be forgotten in the remains of mother earth, and the odor of their infamy will ever be with them, but honor, majesty and fidelity to God, exemplified by Joseph Smith, and attached to his name, will never die." He then quoted several verses from the seventy-first section of the Doctrine and Covenants, laying special emphasis upon the warnings directed to those who attempt to tear down the Church. Of these he said, "No weapon formed against the work of the Lord will ever prosper." There followed statements about the foundational importance of the Book of Mormon to the Church and lengthy quotations from the eighteenth and eighty-eighth sections of the Doctrine and Covenants about the sources and channels of revelation and from the book of Joseph Smith in the Pearl of Great Price about the signs of the second coming. As to the latter, he said: "Brothers and sisters, this is the day the Lord is speaking of. You see the signs are here. Be ye therefore ready. The Brethren have told you in this conference how to prepare to be ready. We have never had a conference when there has been so much direct instruction, so much admonition, when the problems have been defined and also the solutions to the problems have been suggested."

He ended by affirming the nearness of the Lord and His willingness to lead and protect us in times of testing and strife, by expressing thanks for the unity and the support of his brethren, by extending his love and blessings to all, and by adding this final testimony: "I know with a certainty that defies all doubt that this is His work, and that He is guiding us and directing us today, as He has done in every dispensation of the gospel." (Ibid., p. 171.)

This sermon assumes special significance because it was the last one delivered to the entire Church by this prophet, because most of it was delivered extemporaneously as President Lee was moved to speak, and because of the powerful, confirming spirit that accompanied its delivery. By way of affirmance, President Lee wrote afterward: "The afterglow of the general conference was most impressive. From the Twelve in our temple meeting there came the unanimous expression that it was something unusual. . . . There seemed to be something in my closing remarks, which came spontaneously, that seemed to some to be prophetic of the times, [stressing] the need for our people to stand in holy places and be not moved, as the Master had counselled, when the signs of His second coming were drawing near."

The day after the conference ended, the General Authorities and their wives joined in their traditional postconference dinner and social. It was held on the twenty-sixth floor of the new Church Office Building. The entertainment featured the portrayal of a meeting of the Polysophical Society. Originated by Lorenzo Snow before he became the president of the Church, this society featured gatherings where those present recited, sang, performed, or spoke at the invitation of the one presiding, who controlled the order of participation by sending written notes through a young messenger. This night, the messenger was the grandson of Francis Urry, the director of the program, who brought President Lee a note asking that he leave his blessing, and who then led the prophet to the podium. The boy's conduct was so gracious and deferential, yet so self-confident, that President Lee was instinctively drawn to him, congratulated him at the time, and later wrote a letter inviting him for a visit in the prophet's office. President Lee told the parents of this seven-year-old boy, whose name was Michael Van Harris, that he had seldom seen such an engaging spirit in one so young and said the lad had a special mission to perform. For his part, Michael expressed deep love for President Lee, while saying he knew the prophet loved him too. Michael mourned President Lee's death, then, two years later, suddenly and unaccountably took ill and quietly passed away. Michael's parents felt the deaths of President Lee and their son were spiritually linked and that the boy was called to the other side to serve a special purpose at the side of the prophet.

This touching incident seems to show the special quality of character revealed in President Harold B. Lee at the end. It was the characteristic of unfeigned love shown toward all. It was a characteristic that was an integral and dominant part of his makeup, but which, at times, was dimmed, if not obscured, by his enormous talents for organization, delegation, and motivation and by a lively temper that sometimes, though not often, led him to make critical comments. A few had felt the effect of President Lee's temper over the years. Those who did so never forgot it. What worsened the experience was the distressing sense that Brother Lee was displeased or that one had failed or disappointed him and had lost his confidence. Such was his stance and air, his personal magnetism and prophetic stature that his associates sought instinctively to please him and to obey him. Thus, any sign in the form of criticism or rebuke that one's conduct did not measure up, or was unacceptable, was cause for self-reproach. Routinely, however, the few incidents when President Lee's temper flared were invariably followed, whether immediately or in time, by a showing of increased love toward the one chastised, as the 121st section of the Doctrine and Covenants requires. In the end, as suggested, President Lee's conduct was free from any hint of harshness or any trace of temper and was marked only by a genuine, uniform attitude of love and approval shown toward all. This represented a major triumph of self-discipline over a characteristic that President Lee had struggled against all his life.

Several events President Lee attended during the last few weeks of his life illustrated the dominance of this loving quality in his makeup. On December 5, he and Sister Lee joined several hundred Deseret Industries workers for a Christmas celebration and to dedicate a new DI building in Murray, a suburb south of Salt Lake City. The prophet believed this organization was the best example of applied welfare principles of any agency within the system. Most of the workers were handicapped or aged and unable to compete in the commercial market. Here they worked to the limit of their capacity, performing important service for which they were adequately compensated in cash or commodities. Grateful to be useful and independent, they showed genuine happiness, an attitude that gave a special spark to the evening. President Lee felt uplifted, sensing among these people a spirit in full harmony with the Christmas theme.

Later that week, the prophet and Sister Lee were breakfast guests of the Cannon Stake high priests and their wives. There were fifteen hundred present. S. Perry Lee, the prophet's brother, presided over this stake, which included many of the Church units that were once in the Pioneer Stake. It was like a homecoming for the prophet. "It was a most satisfying experience," wrote he, "to recall the years gone by when I was the stake president." Then, two days later, he spoke to a group of 255 missionaries in the temple, where, for the last time, he taught some of those who would be tomorrow's leaders. He was challenged, as always, to answer their searching questions. These usually pertained to the special clothing worn during the ceremony and the sacred covenants they were asked to make. He took care to emphasize the symbolic nature of the ceremony, the need to show integrity in honoring their covenants, and the elevating effect doing this would have on their lives. He sought, also, to eliminate any false or fanciful ideas his young friends had about the endowment or the temple. He adroitly turned away questions about reported appearances of the Savior in the temple by saying that because it is His house, it would not be unusual for him to visit there, nor should one be surprised to find him there. While President Lee was aware of reliable reports of such visitations, he minimized them out of concern the missionaries would unduly focus on them to the exclusion of the vital meaning of the temple experience in their own lives.

There remained three other institutional Christmas parties President and Sister Lee would attend. The first was a dinner they shared with the employees of the Beehive Clothing Mills and their companions on December 12. The following evening, the prophet and his counselors hosted a gathering of Church employees and their families in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. A medley of Christmas carols sung by the Tabernacle Choir and a congregational hymn added a quiet, spiritual tone. President Lee's remarks celebrated the wondrous effect of the Savior's birth and His willing submission to death by crucifixion. And because December also marks the birth of the Prophet Joseph Smith, he traced similarities in their lives. The tense confrontation between Israel and Egypt, which then existed in the Middle East and which had produced shortages of food and fuel and threatened more, also prompted him to remind the audience of the counsel given since the inception of the welfare program to conserve their resources, and he pointedly asked if they had heeded it. Then, in token of the kind of charitable spirit the Christmas season engenders, he said: "I wish I could be a thousand times more understanding, to deal a thousand times more kindly, and with a thousand times more wisdom and foresight. . . . And I only want to be what you, the faithful members of the church, would wish me to be."

The last Christmas party the prophet and Sister Lee attended was one held in the LaFayette Ballroom of the Hotel Utah on December 18. It was hosted by Douglas H. Smith, the president of the Beneficial Life Insurance Company. In the brief comments President Lee made at the dinner, he referred to the violence in the Middle East and to the efforts being made by the United States to negotiate a settlement. He then asked the guests to join him in a prayer for peace. The impact of what President Lee said was described by Douglas H. Smith, who later became a member of the Seventy: "After he finished, there was total silence. Most of us were extremely hesitant to open our eyes, because we knew he was talking with the Lord. His deep, compassionate love for all of the children of the Lord—Arab, Jew and Gentile—was appealingly expressed." And as he left the auditorium, one of the senior members of the Twelve said he had never been more deeply touched by a prayer. President Lee's brief remarks were a fitting benediction not only to the evening's festivities, but to his apostolic career. He never spoke in public again.
