Francis M. Gibbons, Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God ( 1993)

Chapter Twenty-nine

The Prophet Passes On

When he arrived late at the Beneficial Life Christmas party, President Lee told Douglas Smith he was exhausted and would not have come were it not for the special affection he had for him. The prophet's store of energy was almost used up. He seemed to know that, although he also seemed to push the idea aside deliberately. While a few in his inner circle knew President Lee's health was fragile, they had no conception he was so near the end.

During the week before Christmas, President and Sister Lee were free from formal gatherings but had many things to do in preparation. There were gifts to be purchased not only for their large family but also for many close friends and associates. While Sister Lee assumed responsibility for most of these arrangements, the prophet inevitably was involved in some of them. Meanwhile, he had a few matters to take care of at his office. During this time, no one detected anything in his demeanor that suggested he thought the end was near. He was looking forward to the duties ahead.

President and Sister Lee spent Christmas morning quietly at home. They planned to join the family for dinner at Helen and Brent's. They were delayed in arriving until midafternoon because a young family had come to the house unannounced, seeking counsel and comfort for the wife and mother who had terminal cancer. The prophet's advice, which has universal application, was to live for the day, without concern or fear, confidently prepared to remain, or to pass on, as the Lord wills.

After several joyous hours with their family, President and Sister Lee returned home, where they spent a relaxed evening, visiting companionably, reflecting on the true significance of Christmas, and intermittently calling special friends and associates to extend season's greetings.

The prophet slept soundly that night, but awoke the next morning feeling tired and listless. And, during a coughing spell, there was a showing of blood. Concerned about him, Sister Lee called Doctor James Orme, who, after a cursory examination at the home, recommended that President Lee go to the hospital for further diagnosis and quiet rest. There appeared to be no cause for real concern. He was driven to the LDS Hospital, where he checked in at 3:00 P.M. Reflecting the casual circumstances surrounding his hospitalization, President Lee had asked his personal secretary, Arthur Haycock, who had come to the home, to bring along some papers he wanted to study and some letters he wanted to sign. He obviously did not regard the situation as critical and intended to go on working.

After a while, following examinations by the medical staff, Arthur called President Marion G. Romney and Brent Goates to advise them President Lee was in the hospital. They came immediately. President N. Eldon Tanner was out of the city. At the prophet's request, these three administered to him. He thanked and commended them and said he felt better. Meanwhile, a team of hospital technicians, directed by Doctor Alan H. Morris, a lung specialist, had been attending President Lee, carefully examining him and taking specimens for lab analysis. These revealed that he was anemic and, surprisingly, that he was suffering heart distress. This last diagnosis was a surprise because it had never been made before during the many examinations he had undergone. The doctor ordered that oxygen be administered, hoping this would help normalize the heart condition.

After President and Sister Lee ate a light supper together, served in the room, and there appearing to be no present emergency, she was persuaded to return home. Brent drove her there. Arthur remained in the room, reading the newspaper, while the patient rested. Suddenly, President Lee sat up in bed and removed the oxygen mask while coughing heavily. After laying him back down in bed, Arthur, concerned about the prophet's ashen color and the glazed, bulging appearance of his eyes, summoned the nurse. As there was no apparent tone of urgency in Arthur's voice, the nurse, Mrs. Nola Black, thought that since the patient was awake, it would be a good time to take him for x-rays, which the doctor had ordered. Asking for someone from inhalation therapy to accompany her and the patient to x-ray, the nurse pushed a wheelchair to President Lee's room. On entering, she saw him rise up in bed, his eyes open wide in a trancelike stare, while temporarily resting his weight on both elbows. Then he slipped back on to his pillow at about the time a resident doctor, whom Arthur also had summoned, entered the room. It required only one glance at the patient for the resident to shout "cardiac arrest." There followed an hour of the most frantic activity in room 819 in a fruitless effort to save the life of President Harold B. Lee. At the height of the drama, as many as twelve people—doctors, interns, and nurses—were crowded into the small room, along with their sophisticated and bulky equipment. Under the direction of Dr. Morris, everything within the limits of modern technology and skill was done to save this life. The effort was unavailing.

During the hour the professionals labored over the prophet, calls were made to Presidents Marion G. Romney and Spencer W. Kimball in Salt Lake City, who immediately came to the hospital. President N. Eldon Tanner was notified of the emergency in Arizona, where he had gone to spend the holidays with members of his family. Meanwhile, Brent, who had returned about the time the cardiac arrest alert was given, arranged to have Sister Lee and Helen brought to the hospital. As they waited anxiously in a nearby room, there was nothing for them to do but to pray. President Kimball, who arrived first, was asked to lead the family in prayer. Stunned by this shocking turn of events, he was hardly able to speak. Later when President Romney arrived, he also was asked to lead in prayer.

The prophet passed away shortly before 9:00 P.M. Wednesday, December 26, 1973. Word of his death was given to the family by a saddened Doctor James Orme, who had just come from room 819. Within an hour, the news had been announced over local television and radio. Everywhere it was met with a sense of incredulity. How could it be? The longevity of Mormon church presidents had become legendary. They were expected to live a very long time, at least until they were eighty years old, or older. And the public was accustomed to hearing reports of a prophet's infirmities long in advance of his death, or because of advanced age, as in the case of President Joseph Fielding Smith, the public was conditioned to the idea that he might go at any time. Neither circumstance existed here. Harold B. Lee, age seventy-four, who, as far as the public knew, was in robust health, was gone after having served less than eighteen months. No other Church president had a shorter tenure. No other Church president died so young, except the Prophet Joseph Smith, who was martyred at age thirty-eight. This would take some getting used to.

A sense of sadness and disbelief pervaded the council room when the Twelve assembled in the administration building the next morning. There, under the direction of President Spencer W. Kimball, the customary actions were taken necessary to insure the uninterrupted flow of business at Church headquarters. Also, President N. Eldon Tanner and Elders Gordon B. Hinckley and Marvin J. Ashton were appointed to work with the family in making funeral arrangements. It was decided the services would be held in the Tabernacle Saturday, December 29, with a public viewing the day before.

More than twelve thousand filed past President Lee's casket on Friday between 8:00 A.M. and 8:00 P.M. as his body lay in state in the inner foyer of the administration building. Some of the prophet's grandsons were present during all this time. Many of the mourners were not members of the Church. Meanwhile, the family and the Church offices were flooded with messages of love and condolence.

The family and the General Authorities assembled in the foyers of the administration building Saturday morning, where the family prayer was offered by the prophet's brother, S. Perry Lee. The cortege left for the temple grounds about 11:30. The Tabernacle was crowded to capacity with overflow seating in the Assembly Hall.

President Spencer W. Kimball conducted the impressive services and delivered the main address. In it he traced the major achievements of President Lee's life and his salient characteristics. The other speakers, Presidents N. Eldon Tanner and Marion G. Romney and Elder Gordon B. Hinckley, elaborated on these, focusing on their personal relationship with the prophet. President Tanner, who seemed to look on him as a mentor from the time President Lee called him as a stake president, showed considerable emotion as he spoke, which was unusual considering his normally stoical conduct in the pulpit. President Romney, while lauding President Lee's prophetic qualities, said, "We do not mourn today for President Lee but for ourselves." Elder Hinckley, among other things, expressed the conviction that while President Lee's passing was unexpected, it was not untimely. "No righteous man dies before his time," said he. The prayers were offered by Elder Marvin J. Ashton and D. Arthur Haycock, and the music was provided by the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir with Alexander Schreiner at the organ.

Outside the weather was wet and dreary. The General Authorities stood in parallel lines north of the Tabernacle, providing a lane through which the casket was carried to the waiting hearse. It then led the way to the Salt Lake Cemetery on the north bench, followed by the family, the General Authorities and their companions, and other friends.

By the time of the interment, the drizzle had increased to a light rain, which contained some splotches of snow. This brought out the umbrellas of those who had the foresight to bring them. The mourners stood around the open grave, which was next to Fern's, while son-in-law L. Brent Goates offered the dedicatory prayer. In it he observed the propriety of the heavens weeping while a prophet was laid to rest. He also noted that President Lee's propensity of always being "ahead of schedule" was seen even in his comparatively early death.

This rung down the curtain on an extraordinary life whose salient happenings have been recorded here. But the narrative does not begin to tell the story of the impact President Harold B. Lee had on his times and his contemporaries, nor upon the organization to which he had devoted his life, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. As he had said when he came to the prophetic office, the true measure of his achievements will be found only in the hearts and the minds of those touched by his ministry.
