On 1 August 2020, the Africa Southeast Area officially will be divided into the Africa South Area and the Africa Central Area. The work leading up to this division has been a revelatory process—and one that will bless the lives of many on the African continent.

Let’s place this historic change into the organizational context: The Church is organized into 22 areas in different geographic locations around the world. Areas are administered by Area Presidencies, which are composed of three members of the Seventy. These leaders serve under the direction of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles—and oversee all Church affairs in the area on their behalf. Counseling together, these Church leaders guide the spiritual and temporal affairs of Church units and their respective leaders: stakes, missions, districts, wards, and branches.

As one who has accompanied this division process from its inception—throughout the proposal and acceptance by the senior leaders of the Church—I can testify that the process has been inspired and guided by the Lord in all its stages.

Just like the division of a stake, a ward, or a mission, this area split is much more than an administrative measure. It is designed to bring priesthood leadership—in this case, Area Presidencies—and the Church’s temporal resources closer to the members. It is a manifestation of the Lord that He is especially interested in hastening His work on the African continent.

The Lord said in Doctrine and Covenants 88:73: “Behold, I will hasten my work in its time”. Certainly, we are now watching this acceleration taking place in more than 30 African countries.

Perhaps this is also time to appreciate and show gratitude for and to all those who planted the seeds, worked so hard, and valiantly served for us to enjoy this historic moment. This is a time, above all, to praise the Lord for His benevolence. As the Apostle Paul said to the Corinthians: “I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase” (1 Corinthians 3:6). Therefore, the achievement of this important milestone of the Church in Africa is the product of the efforts of many within and without the continent but, mainly, proof that the Lord Himself is preparing the earth for the Second Coming.

Having lived in Africa for the last five years, ministered in many countries multiple times, visited dignitaries in palaces—but also entered the most humble habitations—I can bear witness of the following: Heavenly Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, love every soul in this part of the world and Their attention is being manifested to the elect here more than any other time in the history of humanity.

All are invited to recognize God’s hand over this land, express appreciation and gratitude and hold fast to the iron rod more strongly than ever as we all witness the Lord advancing His kingdom in all its glory in Africa.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="143912365" id="aside1_p1"><strong>Editor’s note:</strong> After serving in Africa for five years—two years as the mission president of the Mozambique Maputo Mission and then three years as Second Counselor in the Africa Southeast Area Presidency, Elder Joni L. Koch—along with his wife, Michele, will be leaving Africa for Sao Paulo, Brazil. Elder Koch has been called to serve as Second Counselor in the Brazil Area Presidency, effective 1 August 2020. On behalf of all whose lives have been touched by Elder and Sister Koch, we offer heartfelt gratitude to them for their commitment and for sharing their love and deep testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ with us on this great continent of Africa.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

Elder Joni L. Koch was named a General Authority Seventy in April 2017. He is married to Liliane Michele Ludwig; they are the parents of two children.
