For Latter-day Saints throughout the world, the Liahona magazine is an important source of spiritual guidance and gospel learning. It is like “the voice of the Lord … unto all nations; … he doth sound these glad tidings among all his people, yea, even to them that are scattered abroad upon the face of the earth” (Alma 13:22).

The Liahona is an official magazine of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, currently published in 50 languages (publication frequency varies by language). The word Liahona is a Book of Mormon term meaning “compass” or “director” (see Alma 37:38). The magazine contains faith-promoting messages from General Authorities and other members of the Church. It has articles for adults, youth, and children.

The Liahona is one way we receive important counsel from our latter-day prophets. The First Presidency said: “As members of the Church, we have marvelous resources to help us cling to our values and walk in obedience to the Lord. Among these resources are the magazines produced by the Church. Through the pages of the Church magazines, the words of the living prophets and apostles can come into our homes on a regular basis to guide and inspire us and our families.

“We urge all members throughout the world to subscribe to and read the Church magazines. We encourage priesthood leaders to see to it that every Latter-day Saint home has this opportunity.”

Each issue of the Liahona has an index called Topics in This Issue to help you find articles on specific topics (see p. 1). In addition, the magazine offers teaching ideas for family home evening (see p. 1), home and visiting teaching (see p. 2 and p. 25), and Primary sharing time (see p. F4). These ideas and other articles can easily be adapted and used in teaching any Church class.

Also, the Liahona is a powerful resource you can use to share the gospel with people of other faiths.

Church headquarters receives many letters from people around the world testifying that the Spirit of the Lord touches lives through the Liahona. Consider the following: “The Liahona has helped me set and achieve goals. It has helped me strengthen my own testimony, and it helps my family members who still don’t belong to the Church. It brings joy and love to my home and helps me in my calling. … The Liahona is a light for me in moments of darkness.”

As we study the Liahona and apply the principles taught in it, our gospel understanding will increase and our testimonies and relationship with the Savior will be strengthened.

Liahona subscriptions and information are available through ward and branch clerks and magazine representatives and through local Church distribution centers. Within the United States and Canada, subscriptions may be ordered online at ldscatalog.com or by calling 1-800-537-5971. (Frequency of publication varies by language.)
