There are many ways that Heavenly Father can talk to you. He can speak to you through the Holy Ghost. He can speak to you through the scriptures. One very important way that Heavenly Father talks to His children is through His living prophets. When the prophet speaks, he tells us things that Heavenly Father wants us to know.

In the Book of Mormon the people of King Noah were very wicked. Heavenly Father sent His prophet Abinadi to preach to them. King Noah’s wicked priests were angry and tried to kill him. But Abinadi said, “Touch me not, … for I have not delivered the message which the Lord sent me to deliver” (Mosiah 13:3). Alma, one of the priests, believed Abinadi’s words and learned the way to obtain God’s promised blessings.

In the Bible we read of God’s promises to the children of Israel. Through Moses, His prophet, the Lord delivered them from Egypt. Moses taught the children of Israel the way to obtain God’s promises and blessings.

There was not a prophet on the earth when Joseph Smith prayed to find out which church to join. Joseph Smith became God’s prophet and restored the true Church of Jesus Christ. Joseph Smith taught the people what they needed to do to obtain God’s promises and blessings.

Today President Gordon B. Hinckley tells us what God wants us to know and do. When we listen to general conference, it is as if God Himself is speaking to us. We can learn the way to obtain God’s promised blessings when we listen to our prophet.

Above are pictures of the First Presidency and some members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. There are also pictures of the same men when they were children. Match the picture of the child with the picture of the man. Fill in the lettered lines with what these General Authorities speak about in general conference.

Answers:

1.  Help the children memorize D&C 1:38. Ask the children to think of things that the prophet spoke about in recent general conferences. Write their ideas down the middle of the blackboard. Then write the words Present and Future on either side of the list. Tell them that we can do some of the things that the prophet asks us to do right now (pay tithing, be honest, attend church). We will need to be older to do other things the prophet counsels us to do (have a temple marriage, receive the priesthood, magnify our Church callings). Have the children point to either “Present” or “Future” when you read one of the items on the list. Explain that although we cannot do everything right now, we can do many things. Bear testimony of the blessings you have received from following the living prophet. Sing “We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet” (Hymns, no. 19).

2.  Display a copy of “The Family: A Proclamation to the World” (Liahona, Oct. 2004, 49; Ensign, Nov. 1995, 102; or item no. 35602). Ask a child to read the following sentence from the proclamation: “Successful marriages and families are established and maintained on principles of faith, prayer, repentance, forgiveness, respect, love, compassion, work, and wholesome recreational activities.” Tell the children they can strengthen their families. Divide the children into nine “families.” Remember that families are all different sizes. Write the principles (faith, prayer, and so on) on small pieces of paper, and place them in a basket. Have each family draw a word. Instruct the families to act out the principle. Give the children time to prepare. For example, to demonstrate faith, the children could pretend to plant a seed and wait for it to grow. Post wordstrips of the principles listed. Write a song that relates to the principle on the back of the corresponding wordstrip. Invite the groups to act out their word for the rest of the Primary. When the correct principle is guessed, remove the wordstrip from the board, and sing the song listed on the back.
