Faith of America’s Founders BENJAMIN RUSH (Signer of the Declaration

Today people talk about the separation of church and state and keeping of Independence, founder

of fi rst anti-slavery society

Christianity and prayer out of schools, but few people realize that many of in America) “I have alternately been called an Aristocrat and a America’s founders were devoutly Christian. People such as George Washington,

Abigail and John Adams, and Patrick Henry knew that God was important

Democrat. I am neither. I am a Christocrat.”

to the founding of the country and to its future. Not only did they base their

(Quoted in Rush’s eulogy, 1813)

decisions on biblical principles, but they staked the future of the United States

Rather than rule by the elite (aristocracy) or rule by the many (democracy),

of America on its citizens’ ability to govern themselves under the kingship of many of the fi rst Americans preferred rule by Christ. Jesus Christ.

WILLIAM BRADFORD

Here are best-loved quotes from some of the brave and noble people who (Governor of the Plymouth Colony)

gave their lives to building a great country. 2

“Last and not least they cherished a great

BENJAMIN FRANKLIN

foundations, hope and inward zeal of laying good

or at least making some ways

(Statesman, author, scientist, and printer)

toward it, for the propagation and advance of

When the Constitutional Convention was deadlocked

the gospel of the Kingdom of Christ

and it looked like it might be dissolved by disagreements,

in the remote parts of the world, even though

Franklin called the delegates to prayer with these words:

they should be but stepping stones to others in

the performance of so great a work.”

“I have lived, Sir, a long time, and the longer I live,

the more convincing proofs I see of this truth—that

God governs in the affairs of men, and if a

Christians whose aims included

OHN ADAMS

sparrow cannot fall to the ground without His notice, is it

(Second president) J (Plymouth Plantation, 1647) 2 America was colonized by the spread of the Gospel.

probable that an empire can rise without His aid?”

Long before the Revolutionary War made America an independent nation,

(Constitutional Convention, June 28, 1787)

John Adams wondered what kind of land might be built if the Bible were

America’s founders recognized God’s guidance throughout every aspect of taken seriously and its principles honestly practiced.

the nation’s formation. 2 G EORGE W ASHINGTON

“Suppose a nation in some distant region should take the

Bible for their only law book, and every member

(First president)

should regulate his conduct by the precepts there exhibited!

Every member would be obliged in conscience, to justice ,

Washington commented on the course of the Revolutionary War.

temperance, frugality, and industry; to

The instances of divine intervention were seen and noted on in the

American press as well as the British papers.

piety kindness, and charity towards his fellow men; and to

, love, and reverence toward Almighty God....

“The hand of Providence has been so conspicuous

What a Eutopia, what a Paradise would this region be.”

in all this that he must be worse than an infi del that

(Diary, Feb. 22, 1756)

lacks faith, and more wicked that has not gratitude to

Many leaders at the time of the American Revolution

acknowledge his obligations....”

saw America as an opportunity to set up a better country—

(Letter to Brigadier General Thomas Nelson, Aug. 20, 1778)

one based on biblical values.

Publishing Inc. © 2009 Rose This e-chart shows a sampling of the quotes from America’s Founders on God and Country, and is taken from a beautiful full-color pamphlet Click here to receive FREE Rose

www.rose-publishing.com showing more than 30 inspirational quotes: Faith of America’s Founders (ISBN: 9781596360877). America’s founders warned that the Bible e-Charts via email.

country would lose its liberty if it did not honor God. They recognized the connections between Christianity and good government. www.rose-publishing.com/echarts/

with CD-ROM Deluxe Then and Now Bible Map Book

Deluxe Then and Now Bible Map Book includes

full-color Bible maps with clear-plastic overlays that

show modern cities and countries. This is the deluxe

version of the #1 bestselling Bible Atlas in the U.S. in

version, plus a CD-ROM of all the maps. The

bestselling Deluxe Then and Now Bible Map Book

brings new relevance to your studies and teaching,

and to compare Bible times and modern-day maps.

Click Here ISBN 13: 9781596361638

For the complete catalog of Rose products, visit us at www.rose-publishing.com

Rose Book of Bible Charts, Vol. 2

Time Lines, Vol. 1 Rose Book of Bible Charts, Maps,

More than 230 pages of reproducible Bible charts

in one book! Topics include • Bible Translations

The bestselling Rose Book Of Bible Charts, Maps &

comparison chart • Why Trust the Bible? • Heroes

Time Lines was the 2007 & 2008 #1 Bible Reference

of the Old Testament • Women of the Bible • Life

book sold in Christian bookstores! Spiral bound

of Paul • Christ in the Old Testament • Christ in the

for ease of use, this is a must-have for every pastor,

Passover • Names of Jesus • Beatitudes • Lord’s

teacher, and Bible study leader. It offers 180 pages

Prayer • Where to Find Favorite Bible Verses •

of full-color Bible charts, maps, and time lines all

Christianity and Eastern Religions • Worldviews

reproducible. A $250 value when items are purchased

Comparison Chart • 10 Q & A on Mormonism/

separately.

Jehovah’s Witnesses/Magic/Atheism • Pursuing Jesus

ISBN 13: 9781596360228

Click Here

Click Here • and many others! Buying these charts separately

would cost $130.

ISBN 13: 9781596362758

Rose Publishing, Inc. publishes full-color easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including Bible charts, Bible maps, Bible timelines

and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes, and small groups. Rose Publishing specializes Share in graphics-rich Bible teaching aids. Its mission is to make Bible and Christian topics easy to understand and more interesting.

Rose Bible

© 2010 Rose Publishing, Inc.

e-Charts with a

friend,

www.rose-publishing.com

E-mail: info@rose-publishing.com Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible e-Charts via email: Click Here Click Here or call (310) 353-2100
