# 12: The Australia Years 1961 to 1964

### 
 12: The Australia Years 1961 to 1964 

Joseph Fielding McConkie, Bruce R. McConkie Story: Reflections of a Son (Salt Lake City 2003)
 
 

 12: The Australia Years 1961 to 1964 

 Being a mission president is the best job in the world. 

 —Bruce R. McConkie 

 We were a one-car family, and that car was temperamental, choosing for itself when it would and would not work. Bruce's normal practice was to take the bus to work or, if he got an early start, to walk the nearly eight miles to his office so Amelia could have the car for the myriad things necessary in running a household. At day's end, when he was ready to come home, Bruce would call and give her the route he intended to walk so that she could meet him and pick him up. He loved the fresh air and exercise. 

 On February 9, 1961, he called as usual: "I will go up South Temple to Thirteenth East then head out to Twenty-Seventh South . . ." Having passed the point at which she normally expected to find him, Amelia started to worry. She was convinced she had missed him by the time she was driving along South Temple. To her relief she finally spotted him just a little over a block from the Church offices. 

 She pulled over to the side of the road, put the car in park, and slid over. He climbed in behind the wheel and continued west to the first intersection, made a right turn, and headed up State Street toward the capitol. He said nothing. Passing the capitol, he continued up toward Ensign Peak. Finally reaching the trail that leads to the top of the mountain, he stopped the car and said, "It's a beautiful evening. Wouldn't you like to climb the peak and look over the city as the sun goes down?" 

 It was obvious something had happened, and it looked like it would require climbing Ensign Peak—mud, patches of snow, and all—to find out what it was. When they reached the top, they sat together on a rock near the flag pole. It felt good just to be together. For a while they looked out over the valley. The moment etched itself into Amelia's memory: "Fluffy white clouds catching the reddish glow of the setting sun were floating lazily over the shimmering lake. We were captivated by the city lights as they began to twinkle like fireflies in the darkening sky," she noted in her journal. 

 Bruce pointed out landmarks as they soaked in the scene. Then he pulled an envelope out of his pocket and handed it to her. "Just after I called you, I got a call from President Moyle," he explained. "He wanted me to come down to his office and see him." 

 From the envelope Amelia took out a one-page letter, noting first the Church letterhead at the top of the page. It was addressed to her husband. The first line read: "We are pleased to extend to you a call to preside over the Southern Australian Mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." The letter consisted of four paragraphs of instruction and was signed by David O. McKay, J. Reuben Clark Jr., and Henry D. Moyle. 

 "Australia," she thought. "Why, I have never so much as been on an airplane, and we have six children still at home." Vivian was married, and I was in Scotland on my mission. Then perhaps Amelia remembered the promise of her patriarchal blessing, given years before, that she would have opportunity to bear her testimony throughout the nations of the earth. 

 Bruce said, "A couple came out of President Moyle's office just before I went in. Finn and Sara [Paulsen] are going to Brazil." While a hundred questions raced through Amelia's mind, Bruce reminded her that they were to say nothing, not even to family members, until the public announcement had been made. 

 The Journey Begins 

 At 5:15 on the morning of their departure, Thursday, July 20, the phone rang. It was Bruce's father. He asked his son to come down to his home so that he could give him a father's blessing. When Bruce had asked President Henry D. Moyle if he was to be set apart, he was told no. The explanation was that he held the office of seventy, which embraced all the necessary authority for him to preside as a mission president. So that morning, Oscar W. McConkie—with the same faith and the same spirit of prophecy that had been his twenty-eight years before when he gave his son a blessing prior to his departure to the Eastern States Mission—laid his hands on Bruce's head once again to give him a father's blessing. In the earlier blessing he had said to him, "You will lead your brethren in the fight for righteousness against the enemies of truth," and they will "flee before you, and shall tremble and quake in your presence." Now he assured his son that "the time has come to enlarge the foundations for a great work in Australia. Your readiness was primed beforehand. Some will say in amazement: 'He is a friend of God,' and they will thank God 'upon every remembrance' of you." Bruce was admonished to keep first things first and not to concern himself with problems that might develop at home. "The Lord is here also," he was told, "and we know how to reach him." The parting of father and son was very emotional, for Oscar had been in poor health for some time and did not expect to see his son again in this life. 

 Later that morning Bruce and Amelia and six of their children were "waved on their way" by a host of friends and relatives at the Salt Lake Airport as they boarded a plane for San Francisco. An hour and fifteen minutes later they touched down at the San Francisco International Airport, claimed their luggage, and took a bus downtown, where they hailed two taxies to take them to Pier 32 to board the S.S. Canberra, which was to take them to Australia. 

 At the pier, porters immediately took their bags on board, but when they attempted to board themselves, they were met by a harbor guard with "a little authority" who would not allow them to pass. Because this was the maiden voyage of the Canberra, special security precautions were being taken. The fact that their tickets were in order did not matter to him, nor did their letter from the Peninsular and Orient Steamship Company affirming their passage. Providentially, Ed Burgoyne of Murdock Travel Agency, who had booked their accommodations, happened by at just that moment. He and his wife had boarded the Canberra in Vancouver, British Columbia, and were on their way to Long Beach, California. He went on board and got each one a visitor's pass. Thus all were able to board the ship, which was not leaving until Saturday, as visitors. They could stay both nights as long as they didn't do so as passengers. The logic of this experience would serve them well. 

 The Canberra, which was to be their home for the next three weeks, was a floating palace. The McConkie children counted fourteen decks, or stories, in their exploration. They discovered lounges, a cinema, bars, stores, four swimming pools, deck space for games, two libraries, reading rooms, two ballrooms, and special rooms for private parties. The ship was nearly a city block in length and weighed forty-five thousand tons. It had a crew of nearly a thousand and accommodated twenty-three hundred passengers, along with enough liquor to float the ship. A carnival atmosphere was maintained day and night. 

 The McConkies spent Friday, July 21, in San Francisco, visiting the zoo, the planetarium, and the aquarium. On Saturday, Amelia's sister Lois and her husband, Bill Fife, drove in from Sacramento to bid them farewell. At 4:00 P.M. they were on their way, sailing under the Golden Gate Bridge and heading toward Long Beach Harbor. They spent Sunday in Long Beach, where they attended church, and Bruce spoke in sacrament meeting. Monday they relaxed and played on the beach. Friends stopped by to bid them farewell. 

 From Long Beach they sailed to Hawaii, arriving on July 28. They spent a day touring Oahu and then sailed to Wellington, New Zealand, where they arrived fifty-three hours late on account of a storm at sea. Winds between ninety and a hundred miles an hour had created waves like mountains. Their view from the ship's fourteenth deck was spectacular, giving them the feeling of watching scenes in a movie. "It seemed like the whole sea was pouring down on a small ship." 

 At Wellington, they visited the mission home, having arrived at the same time as Fred Schwendiman, the new mission president there, and his wife, Lillian. A program that evening welcomed the new mission president and bade farewell to the president being released. Elder McConkie endorsed President Schwendiman's call and the new missionary program that was being instituted. 

 Their next stop was Sydney, where they arrived on August 10. There, too, they visited the mission home. At this point Elder McConkie, eager to be in the harness, left the family and flew to Melbourne. The Canberra would not arrive in Melbourne until noon on Saturday, August 12. 

 Great plans had been laid by the mission staff to welcome their new president with a steak dinner. Unfortunately, they forgot to tend the steaks and so greeted their new president with a billow of smoke instead. President McConkie observed that they really didn't need to "offer burnt sacrifices just for him." 

 The Other Side of the World 

 To Bruce and Amelia, visiting Wellington and Sydney and arriving in Melbourne made it seem that they were stepping back fifty years in time. Melbourne, a metropolitan area made up of a number of smaller municipalities, had the appearance of a single city. The mission home was in a suburb called Toorak, in the city of Prahran. Across the street was the city of Malvern. Kooyong Road, on which the mission home was located, was surfaced on the Toorak side of the street but not on the Malvern side. Toorak was posh, with large homes and even mansions, but the mission home was not large enough to accommodate the McConkie family, and a lot of doubling up had to be done. Twenty months later they moved into a new mission home on 1216 Burke Road in the same city. 

 In Melbourne, milk was still delivered by horse and buggy, and it came only in pint bottles. The Australian (or imperial) pint, however, is about 20 percent larger than the American pint. Cars were driven on the left side of the road. Supermarkets were unknown in Australia at that time, so Amelia shopped at a fruiterer for fruit, a grocery store for other foods, a fish market for fish, and so forth. Central heating was unknown, even in church buildings. If you got cold, you put on a sweater; if you were still cold, you put on a coat. Tradespeople felt free to walk into your home unannounced and make themselves comfortable. In a letter home Amelia noted, "Our baker came in once and had a shave and on another occasion asked to use the toilet. A truck driver in the dirtiest clothes you ever saw came in and made the same request. We had guests at the time. If we don't keep the front door locked we have people walk in and wander about at any time. A few mornings ago the Elders came to see if I knew we had someone sleeping in the sick room. I was greatly surprised and a little suspicious that they were playing a joke on me because they had such silly grins on their faces. Believe it or not we had a real live 'Goldilocks' who had crept in during the night and decided that 'this bed was just right.' 

 "I asked Bruce why she would come here and he told me she probably had a revelation and the voice of God had told her to come. He said he would take care of her because after all a lone woman, or for that matter any woman, had no business in the Elders' living quarters. So he took care of it by having me get her up and out. But sure enough when I asked her what she was doing in our house she revealed that God had told her to come as she had no accommodations for the night. We understand that she now has some for quite some time in the Park Royal Mental Hospital." 

 The New President 

 The missionaries felt a measurable sense of anticipation as they waited to see what life would be like under the direction of a general authority with a reputation for sternness and discipline. Their previous president had taught them to work hard—they led all missions in the Church in proselytizing hours per week—while he kept them at arm's length. Collectively they were holding their breath. Could a normal mortal survive under the leadership of Bruce R. McConkie? 

 Elder Jay R. Eastley wrote: "President McConkie, his imposing height and low voice notwithstanding, soon proved to be love personified. Yes, he expected consistent dedication to the work, and he requested diligent study and effective application of the 'new' proselytizing lessons. But the tone of our missionary efforts began to change. We worked 'smarter' and with increased love, under his direction. We began to see that President McConkie was as approachable as he was brilliant, that he genuinely cared about each missionary, that he not only tolerated occasional mistakes, but expected them in the spirit of innovative finding and teaching." 

 When Elder Eastley was transferred to the mission home, where he would serve for eight months as an assistant to President McConkie, he met the president in the living room, sitting on the floor playing with his children. He was to observe that his mission president consistently took time for his wife and family. 

 Once, when the McConkies "were quite new in the mission and missionaries were still unsure as to how to read them," wrote Elder Eastley, "an enterprising elder named Sam Hales ordered several dozen kangaroo skins from an Aussie wholesaler. He laid them out side-by-side near the sidewalk surrounding one of the chapels on a morning when President McConkie had scheduled a zone conference there. Elder Hales had anticipated selling the 'roo skins to attending missionaries at a tidy profit, I suppose. To his surprise, President and Sister McConkie came out of the building without warning and began to view the merchandise. They said nothing, just walked around 'inspecting' the skins. Elder Hales got very nervous, assuming that he was in deep trouble, and that the President would certainly reprimand him and shut down his operation. After what seemed an interminable time to everyone present, President McConkie in his deepest bass voice boomed out, 'Elder Hales . . . ?' 

 "'Y-y-yes, president?' replied Hales, expecting the worst. 

 "'How much is this one right here?' 

 "All the missionaries gasped with relief. I think President and Sister McConkie purchased several, thereby giving the green light to others to do likewise. It simply was one example of the down-to-earth attitude manifested by President McConkie. He felt that missionary work and enjoying life were not mutually exclusive pursuits." 

 Getting Things Going 

 One of the first things that the new mission president did was to establish what were called "Share the Gospel Nights." These were held in the districts for which he was responsible. Members were encouraged to bring their nonmember friends and acquaintances. These meetings followed the format of a general session of stake conference: one or two short talks or testimonies, a musical number, and then President McConkie would take the balance of the time. Typically he would speak for forty-five minutes or an hour. At first these talks were something of a shock to the Australian Saints. He did not entertain them; he taught them. They were not used to hearing the gospel preached without stories or faith-promoting rumors, nor had they ever heard anyone speak for that length of time on a gospel subject. As the Saints' understanding of the gospel grew, so did their love to hear it preached. With that, their love for the man who preached it grew also. 

 About a month after their arrival in Australia, President McConkie was invited to be part of a television program called "At Random," an Australian version of "Meet the Press." This program featured "men of the cloth" discussing the question "Can the Christian churches unite as one?" 

 When Bruce arrived at the television station, he learned that the other panelists would be a Catholic priest, a Methodist minister, and a Jehovah's Witness. The producer and his assistant screened him for an hour and a half. He told them about the Eleventh Article of Faith, agency, and how all men are our Father's children. The TV people feared that he was too mellow and would not provide the conflict necessary for good ratings. Right up to airtime they prodded him not to be too agreeable. 

 They soon discovered that their fears were unfounded. The Catholic and Methodist quickly united in desiring to distance themselves from the Jehovah's Witness and the Mormon. They suggested that the discussion center on the historical basis for unity. Bruce captured the moment and refused to let it go. "Now, gentlemen," he said, "everyone believes in Christian unity in principle, but let's talk about how to bring it about and upon what we shall unite. Instead of agreeing we should unite organizationally, let's talk about what the truth is and then of course everyone will want to unite on principles of truth. Let's talk about what kind of a being God is, about the principle of revelation, about visions and miracles, about whether God speaks today through living prophets, about priesthood, and the necessary ordinances of salvation." He identified virtually every distinctive doctrine of Mormonism before he was interrupted by the Methodist minister, who said, "Anyone could come here and proselyte for his particular belief. I suppose you would even want us all to unite on the Book of Mormon?" 

 The Book of Mormon being about the only thing he had not mentioned, Bruce thanked the Methodist for bringing it up and explained what it was and how it went hand in hand with the Bible. Unable to counter his well-reasoned statements, the Catholic and the Methodist tried to steer the program away from his challenges by attacking the Jehovah's Witness. The best they could do, however, was to ridicule him for the way the Jehovah's Witnesses annoyed people as they went from door to door and, in doing so, they ended up praising the Mormon missionary system. 

 Bruce concluded by pointing to the Catholic priest on one side of him and the Methodist on the other, saying, "Now, on this side we have a representative of the fallen apostolic faith and on the other side we have one who represents those who rebelled against them but lacked priesthood authority. And here [pointing to himself], in the middle, we have the restored gospel of Christ in all of its magnificent glory, having the Lord's legal administrators who are authorized to baptize the faithful." 

 After the program ended, the participants retired to a room to remove the make-up that had been applied for the telecast. As Bruce was leaving this room, his new Catholic and Methodist friends came into the room arm in arm. Bruce simply said, "Well, brethren, until we meet in the unity of the faith, cheerio," and walked out. 

 The program sparked the zeal of the members, who were gaining greater confidence in the message that was theirs. They realized their new mission president was going to leave his mark on Australia. 

 Baptizing 

 The commission of a missionary is to teach, testify, and baptize. Common to missionary work is people's resistance to being baptized. Satan simply doesn't want people baptized, and virtually every time missionaries commit an investigator to take this step, all hell breaks loose. Thus it was no great surprise to President McConkie that dotting the landscape of his mission were an unusually large number of "dry-land Mormons," that is, people who attended church regularly and participated in other activities but who had not been baptized. So he commenced a campaign to immerse these people in the waters of salvation. He knew that the first thing he had to do was to get his missionaries over any squeamishness they had about challenging people to be baptized. To that end he introduced a "Testify and Challenge" program in which the missionaries would approach the fence-sitters, testify of the truthfulness of the gospel, and state that they knew the person they were testifying to also knew the gospel was true. The missionaries then announced that a baptismal service had been planned and that the person they were addressing should be baptized at that service. Bruce knew that it was important for him as the mission president to set the example, and he had no hesitancy whatever in doing so. Whether it was over the pulpit or in personal conversation, he never missed the chance to extend to those to whom he spoke the invitation to be baptized. 

 One challenge that the missionaries faced was the negative attitude of priesthood leaders toward their proselyting methods. It seemed that some bishops viewed every convert as a potential less-active member and then labored to prove themselves right. There were those who constantly told the missionaries to "go slow." Some even advocated meetings in which no mention of the gospel would be made at all. 

 President McConkie observed that one of the prideful boasts of Australians was that they did not live under pressure, as did the Americans. Their way of life, as a matter of pride and national tradition, was to take things easy—not to rush, not to work hard or long, and not to make any great personal sacrifices. 

 In an epistle to family members at home, he reported on a district conference held at Perth. Sunday morning, he said, a youth testimony meeting was scheduled. None of the district presidency showed up. The meeting was marvelous with more than one hundred youth in attendance, many of whom bore sweet and good testimonies. After the ten o'clock session, President McConkie talked to a twenty-year-old nurse who knew the Church was true but was holding off being baptized in the hope of influencing her mother. Two sister missionaries had taken her to visit with him, hoping he could influence her to be baptized right away rather than postponing indefinitely. After a fifteen-minute conversation, she agreed to be baptized the following Saturday. 

 Of that experience he wrote: "The minute I said, 'next Saturday,' I knew perfectly well I had made a mistake and should have said, 'today.' The missionaries were perplexed. They had had her scheduled to be baptized Monday, and I had set it up for Saturday." He overheard their conversation and told them, "I made a mistake. Her baptism is to be today and not Monday." Then, turning to the nurse, he said, "We are baptizing you at 4:45, just 15 minutes after this session ends." 

 She said, "Oh, I can't. I want my friend to be here." 

 "That's all right; we'll send for your friend and bring her here to see it." She agreed. Then President McConkie turned to the elders and said, "We have a mission rule requiring us to baptize even numbers. You go and get someone else for this afternoon's service." The elders did just that with a young man they had spoken to earlier that day. 

 In the afternoon session of the same conference, just before getting up to speak, President McConkie leaned over to the district president and asked, "Are there any people here who have been investigating for a long time and who know the Church is true but who won't be baptized because of tithing or the Word of Wisdom or some other prejudice?" He answered, "There are two: 'Brother' Bancroft and 'Brother' Thurnbur." 

 "I talked for 50 minutes on baptism, and told why it was necessary. For texts I took the account of Paul and Silas baptizing the jailer and his family; the account of Peter on the day of Pentecost; and what the Lord said about baptism to the Nephites in the 27th chapter of Third Nephi. I also read what Amulek had to say about procrastinating the day of your repentance until the end as it is found in the 34th chapter of Alma. I talked with greater plainness than is my wont and with considerably more emphasis, telling just exactly what was wrong with people who would not respond to the call, 'Who's on the Lord's side,' who would not take Joshua's pledge, 'As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord,' and many other things. I could see a man who was there for the first time, a guest of a member of the district presidency, who had every right to be driven away by the kinds of things I was saying; and I could read the thoughts of the district president and one of the counselors and knew they thought I was tearing the district apart and driving people from the Church and from baptism, which only made me take a more affirmative stand. 

 "Finally, I decided that if Wilford Woodruff could preach a sermon and then have people come up for baptism, I could too, if the Lord would take over for me like I knew he had done for Wilford Woodruff. So I announced there would be a baptismal service as soon as the meeting was over and that there were a number of people in the congregation who should be baptized and that I expected them and the Lord expected them to respond and come into the Church. The Spirit was present and people's hearts were touched. 

 "I sat down and the choir sang and the prayer was said. I turned to the district president and said: 'Who is there in the congregation I can talk to and get baptized?' He answered: 'There on the second row is "Brother" Bancroft and his daughter.' I had watched Sister Bancroft keep her head buried with her hands and had supposed she was thinking that I was driving her husband finally away. 

 "There was room for one person on the bench by where the Bancrofts were sitting. I went down and took it, put my arms around the girl, leaned over to her father, and said: 'I guess you know that you two are the ones I have been talking about.' He said: 'Yes, and my daughter is ready to be baptized.' I had seen them whisper together as I came down. I said: 'Fine, you come with me.' I took her by the arm and led her out to the room where the baptismal clothes are stored, got one of my lady missionaries, and escorted her over to the dressing room. She was shaking and visibly upset, scarcely able to control herself. 

 "I went back in to her father and said: 'You're next. Come on.' He refused. His wife walked away and with tears in her eyes said to me: 'John's ready, I know he is. He has been attending church for years, keeps all the standards of the Church, and has been a dry-land Mormon.' I said: 'Brother Bancroft, your wife just told me with tears in her eyes that you are ready for baptism.' He bristled: 'Oh, she did. Well, I'm not.' I said: 'And furthermore, I say you are and that you are going to be baptized. Now you come with me peaceably or I'll get one of these elders to help me carry you out.' He refused. I put my arm under his, lifted him slightly off the floor and marched him down the aisle of the chapel, across the amusement hall, out through the patio, and into the room where the baptismal clothes are stored. All the way out he kept saying, 'I am not joining the Church; I won't be baptized; you can't force me; it doesn't matter what my wife thinks; I'm not joining the Church.' I simply assured him verbally and physically that he was. When we got into the room with the clothing, someone was already handing items to the other young man, and I asked 'Brother' Bancroft what size pants he wore. He did not respond. I held a pair up to him and said, 'These will fit you,' and put them over his arm, and then asked for his shirt size. He said: 'Sixteen,' and with that single word agreed to join the Church. With his clothes, I marched him across the foyer to the dressing room. Since he had been around the Church for years, people began flocking around to shake his hand. I said: 'You folks please leave us alone and do not interfere.' 

 "By this time a couple of hundred people were aware of what was going on and so they congregated in the outside patio to watch. I marched Brother Bancroft over to the dressing room, took him in, and said: 'Get dressed.' He had given up and began taking his shirt off. I said: 'I've got someone else, but I'm posting a guard at the door.' 

 "Well, by this time the stage was set and so the elders who had contacts at the conference who they thought should join the Church began taking me from one to the other, and in each instance after five or ten minutes' conversation and a little gentle persuasion, one after another agreed to join the Church, until we ended up with nine baptisms—not one of whom had come with the slightest intention of being baptized. 

 "What we did may seem strange, but it was the right thing under the circumstances, and the Spirit was with us. The missionaries were amazed and so were the members; these things just couldn't happen, so they thought, among Australians, who everybody keeps saying cannot be pushed or told what to do. . . . 

 "One of the striking things was how grateful all who were baptized were after the event. Any hesitancy beforehand was forgotten. All expressed appreciation and were pleased beyond measure to be in the Church and to have the decision behind them. They just needed the right setting, the outpouring of the Spirit, and someone with enough foolhardiness to tell them this was it and there was no turning back." 

 Thirteen people were baptized by the end of that district conference. The week before, the same thing had taken place in a conference at Hobart, with eight being baptized there. 

 Some years ago when I was in Alberta, Canada, speaking on a Know Your Religion program, a young man came up after one of my talks and introduced himself to me. He was Bruce Bancroft, son of the man whom Dad had urged to be baptized. His father was sufficiently grateful that he named his son Bruce after Dad. He thanked me for my father having baptized his father. 

 Sister Bancroft later acknowledged that as President McConkie concluded his talk, she prayed in her heart, "Heavenly Father, if this is your only true church, let President McConkie come down right now and tell my daughter so." 

 At another youth missionary testimony meeting in Tasmania, five nonmembers spoke; four of them committed themselves to baptism. The fifth badly wanted to join but could not get permission from his parents. Some easily obtained their parents' or spouse's consent to their baptisms, but for most it was not so easy. In Adelaide the missionaries baptized a young woman who, though of legal age, acted against her parents' wishes. When the missionaries had gone to visit the father, he told them to get out. The district fasted and prayed for the Lord to soften his heart, and then the elders went back to talk to him. He blew his top, as expected, but within forty-five minutes they had him on his knees, praying. Sister McConkie met the man and his wife at the chapel and said, "They seemed very friendly." 

 For others, even the prayer of the righteous was of no avail. Amelia recalled coming home one evening, after dropping the older kids off at Mutual, to the smell of tobacco in the mission home. Though the door to the living room was closed, she had no difficulty hearing what was going on. A woman was screaming at President McConkie, accusing him of a host of vile and unspeakable things. Then she heard the woman's daughter calmly apologize for her parents' behavior. The girl explained that all she could remember about her home life was drunken brawls and fights. She told her mother that if she would study and pray, she'd guarantee that she would join the Church in three weeks. 

 When the family finally left—threatening to sue the Church as they did so—Bruce turned to Amelia and said, "I entertained the devil tonight." Much that these people had said and done, including the smoking, had been planned before they came. He was, however, very proud of the young woman, and not long after her baptism he called her to serve as a missionary. 

 Bruce took great delight in sending Australian youth on missions within his mission. Many of them were terrific, and these missions developed and strengthened leadership. Consequently, many young converts eventually found themselves serving in the mission field. One young man who was a chain smoker and on his way to becoming an alcoholic was converted and called by the mission president to labor as a missionary. The change in his life was nothing short of miraculous. His family members, who were willing to attend his missionary farewell, were totally amazed by the change in his life. This young man was also possessed of a delightful sense of humor. Amelia recalled, "When I saw him in Adelaide during a light rainstorm he could not help but comment on the 'Catholic Rains.' This puzzled me until he explained it was just sprinkling. He also revealed that "the largest church in Australia is me-own church." That was the polite refusal the elders frequently got on the doorstep: "I've got me own church, thanks." 

 His Mission Companion 

 About four months after their arrival in Australia, Amelia suggested to her husband that just because he had not been set apart was no reason she should not be. Dad was in full agreement and gave her a wonderful blessing. He blessed her as "a helpmeet, a guide, a comfort, and a light" to him. He also set her apart to serve as the president of the Relief Society of the Southern Australia Mission and conferred upon her every gift and grace appertaining to that office. He blessed her with the gift of testimony, by which, she was promised, many souls would be brought into the kingdom. She was also granted the assurance of health, peace of mind—freedom from anxiety and uncertainty—and the spirit of love for all with whom she would be called to labor. She was promised that she would be a recipient of the choicest blessings of an Eternal Father. 

 On December 23, 1961, her husband wrote the following letter to her: 

 "Amelia darling— 

 "It seems to me it has been longer than usual since I wrote you a letter to remind you of my feelings toward you. If there has been a single day of our married life on which I have failed to tell you I loved you—such was not intended. There has been no day on which I have not had a feeling of deep appreciation and thanksgiving that you are mine. 

 "You have made this life a foretaste of what our association will be together forever. I preach and believe that the concept of eternal continuance for the family unit is the noblest view of life and its purpose that ever entered the heart of man. To think that you are mine now and will continue so to be endlessly with an increasing bond of love and affection between us, is something that overwhelms me with gratitude. 

 "I love you for yourself and all the attributes and characteristics you have. I love you because of Bruce Jr., Vivian, Joseph, Stanford, Mary, Mark, Rebecca, Stephen, and Sara. I love you for your faith and devotion to the truth, for the fact that you love the Lord and keep his commandments, for the example you set for me, for the good and bettering influence you have been and are in my life, and for all the reasons I have told you over and over again. 

 "Before we came to Australia, I told you we would be closer here in the mission field than we had ever been before. That prediction is now and yet shall be fulfilled. I enjoy being with you; want to have you around me all the time; and find your companionship both delightful and satisfying. Thanks for everything. 

 "As Ever— 

 "Your husband 

 "P.S. I love you." 

 Teaching the People 

 President McConkie rarely made formal preparation for the talks he gave. He would honor a request to speak but felt no obligation to confine the Spirit to someone else's topic. He did, however, prepare himself to speak specifically in response to the falsehoods being perpetuated by a Protestant radio ministry in Perth. In his talk one night he told of the time two ministers of one of the largest and most powerful Protestant denominations came to a stake conference to hear him preach. Recounting that experience he said: 

 "After the meeting I had a private conversation with them, in which I said they could each gain a testimony that Joseph Smith was the prophet through whom the Lord had restored the fulness of the gospel for our day and for our time. 

 "My message was the same. Taking the Book of Mormon as their guide, they must read, ponder, and pray in order to gain a witness from the Spirit as to the truth and divinity of this great latter-day work. 

 "I told them of my prior experience with their two colleagues and how one of them had refused to read the Book of Mormon, saying that they had experts who had read the book and he had read what the experts had said. 

 "I then said, 'What is it going to take to get you gentlemen to read the Book of Mormon and find out for yourselves what is involved, rather than relying on the views of your experts?' 

 "One of these ministers, holding my copy of the Book of Mormon in his hands, let the pages flip past his eyes in a matter of seconds. As he did so, he said, 'Oh, I've read the Book of Mormon.' 

 "I had a momentary flash of spiritual insight that let me know that his reading had been about as extensive as the way he had just flipped the pages. In his reading he had done no more than scan a few of the headings and read an isolated verse or two. 

 "A lovely young lady, a convert to the Church, whose father was a minister of the same denomination as my four Protestant friends, was listening to my conversation with the second two. At this point she spoke up and said, 'But Reverend, you have to pray about it.' 

 "He replied, 'Oh, I prayed about it. I said, "God, if the Book of Mormon is true, strike me dead"; and here I am.' 

 To this Bruce responded, "But you have to have faith." 

 Spirit of the Mission 

 Monthly training meetings for the missionaries usually lasted eight to ten hours with President McConkie using most of the time for gospel instruction. He also communicated with his missionaries in a monthly publication entitled The Harvester. The publication always began with a letter from the president and was followed with instruction on the how or why of missionary work. It was for The Harvester that he wrote the "Missionaries' Commission," which has been memorized by missionaries throughout the world. 

 My Commission 

 I am called of God. 

 My authority is above that of the kings of the earth. 

 By revelation I have been selected as the personal 

 representative of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

 He is my Master and he has chosen me to represent him; to stand in his place; to say and do what he himself would say and do if he personally were ministering among the very people to whom he has sent me. 

 My voice is his voice, and my acts are his acts; my words are his words, and my doctrine is his doctrine—for I am his agent. 

 My commission is to do what he wants done, to say what he wants said, to be a living, modern witness—in word and in deed—of the divinity of his great and marvelous latter-day work. 

 And he that receiveth me, receiveth him, while he that rejecteth me, rejecteth him that sent me. 

 How great is my calling! 

 Along with the "Missionaries' Commission," President McConkie also wrote what he entitled "My Mission," which is as follows: 

 My Mission 

 I am a missionary. 

 My blessings are above those of the kings of the earth. 

 In my hands I hold the pearl of great price. 

 Mine is the same gospel taught by Paul, the same plan of salvation preached by Peter, the same saving truths which sanctified Enoch and Elijah. 

 I rejoice in the same priesthood held by Abraham and Melchizedek. 

 It is my right to see visions as did Nephi; to teach and testify as did Alma; to entertain angels and work miracles as did Nephi the Disciple; to receive revelations as did Joseph the Seer; to walk daily in the light of the Spirit as did Wilford Woodruff; to enjoy all of the gifts and graces which that Holy Being, who is no respecter of persons, always pours out upon those who love and serve him. 

 How great are my blessings! 

 Both statements are vintage Bruce McConkie. The compelling desire to live so that he might see visions, entertain angels, work miracles, receive revelations, walk by the Spirit, and enjoy all spiritual gifts was very real with him. He believed it a mission president's responsibility to teach his missionaries that such experiences were possible and that they were to live for them, and he believed it was for him as their leader to do precisely that as well. His life evidenced that he did so. 

 Special Visitors 

 The McConkies shared their experience in Australia with a surprising number of special visitors—surprising because of the distance of their mission from Church headquarters. Among them were four apostles who would yet preside over the Church, sisters who were members of general boards of the Church and for whom President and Sister McConkie had great regard, and some of their dearest friends. These visitors both contributed to the mission and were enriched by it. Hulda Parker, a general board visitor, was sufficiently impressed with the "Testify and Challenge" program that she took its spirit and its principles home with her. She described her experience as follows: 

 "I remember our conversations at the dinner table, and I think it was probably the McConkie style. It was definitely a gospel discussion, and the one thing that he was emphasizing at that time in his mission—and they were getting a lot of baptisms from it—was to have his missionaries seek out people on their records who always wanted to continue to be friends with the missionaries but never seemed to be ready for baptism. 'You have been acquainted with the Church and you have had the missionaries calling on you, some of them for as much as ten years; it is time for you to be baptized. We are going to have a baptism on such and such a day, and we will expect you to be there to be baptized.' 

 "Anyway," Hulda continued, "he so impressed me with that. At the time I was substituting part-time at home for the investigator class in our ward, where I had just had an experience with a nonmember Dutchman who had immigrated with his wife some forty years earlier. His wife and three children had joined the Church and were all active in it. This man was a good man, but he had never quite got to the point of joining. Just before I left to go on this trip to Melbourne, I had challenged him to read the Book of Mormon and pray about it and ask the Lord if it was true. Much to his amazement, and to mine, he told me he would do it. 

 "I explained this to Elder McConkie, and he said, 'When you get back, you challenge him to baptism.' I said, 'The way you have been doing it down here?' 

 "He said, 'Yes, that man should be baptized!' 

 "When I got back, I went to my bishop and explained to him what Brother McConkie had told me. He said, 'All right, Sister Parker, go ahead and do it. I'll back you.' He checked ahead of time to see when the next stake baptism was, and he told me to challenge him and to tell him the bishop was in his office and to come and talk to him and they would do all the paperwork. 

 "I went to the investigator class that morning, and there was Brother ________. As he went out of the class, I said, 'Brother ________, the bishop is upstairs in his office waiting for you. There is a stake baptism on such and such a night, and we feel that you are now at the point you need to be baptized.' 

 "He just about died. I thought he was going to have a stroke. But he had read the Book of Mormon like he'd promised, and he had prayed about it. I asked him how he felt about it. He said, 'I know it is true. I now know the Prophet Joseph Smith is indeed a prophet.' 

 "I went ahead with that. That poor man was shaking. I took hold of his elbow and said, 'Come on, let's just go right on up here.' We had to go upstairs and wind around to where the bishop's office was. I didn't know whether that man was going to get up the stairs or not. But we got there and knocked on the door. I said, 'Bishop, here is Brother _________.' 

 "He said, 'Fine. Have him come right in.' We went in and shook hands, I stepped out and waited about 20 minutes, and then he came out and said, 'Sister Parker, I am going to be baptized on such and such a date. I can hardly wait to go home and tell my wife. She really won't believe me after all these 40 years. She really won't believe me.' 

 "I said, 'She will probably collapse in tears,' and that was just exactly what she did. He called me back in about three or four days and said, 'My family would like me to be baptized on my birthday, and that is about a week sooner than the date we had set.' His baptism was pretty exciting to me." 

 One of the first general authorities to visit the mission was Sterling W. Sill. He was a consummate businessman. In fact, when I graduated from the Y, he called my father twice in an effort to get him to talk me out of teaching seminary and instead to sell insurance for the New York Life Insurance Company. While in Australia he gave Dad a lecture on how to approach people for donations. At the conclusion of his visit, when Mom and Dad were taking him back to the airport, he quizzed Dad to see what he had learned. Dad said, 'Well, let me see,' and immediately applied all the techniques on Elder Sill that Elder Sill had taught him. Dad concluded by saying he wanted him to get out his checkbook right there and write a check—and he didn't want it to be for anything less than four figures. The fifteen-hundred-dollar check he received as a contribution to the mission suggested that Dad had been a pretty good student. 

 When Glen Rudd visited as part of his assignment with the Missionary Committee, he was delighted to see how his old friend had learned to handle what Elder Neal A. Maxwell has called "administrative awkwardness."1 He was delighted with the way Bruce had solved a problem involving his branch clerks, each of whom needed an adding machine. "I decided to buy ten adding machines," Bruce explained. "I then discovered that they were $100 each and that was $1,000. As a mission president, I didn't have the authority to spend $1,000 without going through Salt Lake and all manner of red tape. I got hold of the man who was going to sell me these ten machines and told him I couldn't buy them because I didn't have full approval from Salt Lake." 

 The man said, "Well, I'll help you any way I can." When Bruce got back to the mission office, he realized that he had authority to spend up to a hundred dollars. So he "got hold of the salesman and said, 'Can you sell me those machines at $99?' 

 "He said, 'Yes,' so I made ten separate purchases at $99 each. I got my machines without troubling Salt Lake." 

 If it needed to be done, Bruce McConkie found a way to do it—and without bothering Salt Lake. He must have been something of a legend, because twenty-five years later, when I attended the orientation for new mission presidents, Thomas S. Monson told us we did not need to call Salt Lake every time we had a problem. "Why," he said, "when Bruce McConkie was in Australia, he called Salt Lake only three times the entire time he was there." 

 Bruce had a situation in one of the districts he was responsible for in which he found it necessary to call a high priest to serve as an elders quorum president. When Elder Ezra Taft Benson toured the mission, a conference was held in this district. Elder Benson was fielding questions in a leadership meeting when a disgruntled soul in the back of the room asked, "Elder Benson, did you know that President McConkie made a high priest the president of an elders quorum?" Elder Benson said, "I'm sorry. I can't hear the question." The question was repeated. Again Elder Benson said, "I'm sorry. I can't hear the question." When the man repeated his question for the third time and for the third time President Benson said, "I'm sorry. For the life of me, I can't hear that question," the man, finally getting the message, quietly sat down. 

 Two other visitors were Sister Belle S. Spafford, general president of the Relief Society, and Sister Eileen Dunyon, counselor in the general presidency of the Primary. When Bruce got the word that they were coming to Australia, he received permission from Church headquarters to have these two women visit with people in the mission as well as in the stakes. Just before Sister Spafford was to leave Salt Lake, her husband passed away, and it looked for a time as if her visit would be cancelled. The First Presidency encouraged her to go ahead with her plans, however, because they felt that doing so would help her adjust to her loss. 

 The day they arrived, Bruce and Amelia met them at the airport. After a welcome by local members of the Church, the McConkies took them to the mission home, where they would stay. Bruce sensed that Sister Spafford was weighed down with some troubling concerns, so he sat up and talked with her for some time. Amelia said, "When morning came and we had breakfast, Sister Spafford came down looking greatly refreshed and at peace. 

 "She thanked Bruce for talking with her and listening to her the night before and explained that because of his counsel, she had seen her husband in a dream and he had told her how she was to solve the problem that had been troubling her. From then on as we toured the mission she seemed perfectly at peace and was able to give valuable instruction and counsel to the various stake and branch people in the mission areas." 

 Amelia also recalled that Sister Spafford was not only very effective with Relief Society women but also set an example worthy of emulation. "I watched and listened to her speak with awe and admiration. Repeatedly she managed to give the sisters exactly what they needed as well as discerning needs they did not express. 

 "On one occasion I was sitting by her on the stand before a meeting began. She looked out over the congregation and noticed a very faithful and good woman sitting near the front of the room. She turned to the stake president and informed him that this sister had a very serious problem in her life and she needed help. This turned out to be true, and the stake president was able to give the needed help. 

 "When the stake Relief Society president in the Perth Area asked Sister Spafford if she would like to do some sightseeing while she was there, her answer was a quick, 'No, but if you have any sisters in the hospital or with some other health problem I would like to visit them.' This resulted in a special treat for some of the handicapped women in the Church in that area. Her perceptive insights and loving example were an inspiration to me as well as the people of Australia." 

 When Bruce received word that Elder Gordon B. Hinckley would be traveling to Melbourne, the members were greatly excited about the prospects of having an apostle visit them. Bruce worked through the multitudinous details that planning such a visit requires and rearranged schedules so he could include all the meetings Elder Hinckley had requested. 

 "It was not long before he received word that Elder Hinckley's plans were changed and he would be coming on a later weekend. Accordingly, Bruce notified all the parties involved with the conferences and began making new plans. The ramifications of changing plans in Melbourne spilled over into Adelaide, causing him to make changes there, too. "We are now on plan B," he announced. 

 All seemed to be going well and the time was drawing near for the big event in Melbourne when Bruce got another call, saying that Elder Hinckley had to change his plans back to the original date. "This means that we are back to plan A and I will not be able to attend the Melbourne Stake conference," Bruce informed Amelia. "It's too late to change the Adelaide schedule again, so I'll go there and you will need to stay here." 

 At the last moment, they were notified of yet another change in Elder Hinckley's plans, and this time it meant there would be no priesthood leaders available to pick him up at the airport. So Sister McConkie and Sister Davis (the wife of the stake president) set out on that rainy Sunday morning with plenty of time to get to the Melbourne Airport. 

 The scheduled flight was to arrive at 9:15, but the sisters learned it would be delayed until 10:05, which meant they would be late for the morning conference session. At about 9:10 the thought occurred to Amelia to check the other airline's schedule and see when it would arrive from the city Elder Hinckley was traveling from. The two women raced down to the other end of the airport on the chance that Elder Hinckley would be on that plane instead of the one scheduled to arrive at 9:15. He was. 

 Amelia recalled, "We did manage to get Elder Hinckley to the church moments after they had started the meeting, only to discover someone else had taken our reserved parking spot in front of the chapel. We let him out, found another parking space, and then Sister Davis and I dashed into the women's rest room to take advantage of it before proceeding into the meeting since we were already late—and another few moments would not make much difference. A seat was reserved for us down in the front where some of my children were already sitting, and I quickly made my way down there. As I sat down and crossed my legs at the ankles, I discovered I had walked the length of the chapel with about two feet of bathroom tissue trailing behind me, stuck firmly to the heel of my shoe. What a grand entrance that had been. 

 "In the afternoon session Elder Hinckley unexpectedly called on me to say a few words, and I felt more than a little unprepared and nervous. After the meeting was over, one of the good sisters in attendance consolingly told me, 'You sounded as confused as I would have been if I had been in your place.' Not exactly the confidence booster I might have chosen, but it was the next intended compliment that really made me chuckle: 'You have a way of touching people's hearts even if you are not as intelligent as your husband.'" 

 To those at home Amelia wrote: "It isn't surprising that Bro. Hinckley is ill, the way he tears around on jam-packed, tight schedules, with little rest." He was the junior member of the Quorum of the Twelve at this time. She added, "People here really did enjoy him." Neither the schedule he keeps nor the love people have for him has changed. 

 The Melbourne Saints were also thrilled to have Elder Joseph Fielding Smith as a conference visitor. In addition to his conference assignment, he met with missionaries, local members, and investigators and presided over a special program to dedicate the new mission home. The home had already proven to be a great blessing to the mission with its separate missionary quarters, family quarters, office space, kitchens, entertaining areas, and guest rooms. 

 Amelia recorded, "No sooner had we returned from the airport with our guests than a female reporter and a photographer arrived from the Melbourne Herald daily newspaper to interview Dad and Aunt Jessie. The reporter made it clear that Aunt Jessie was the only one she wanted to interview because of her reputation as a vocalist. She completely ignored the men. The rest of us discreetly kept our distance. 

 "We had a memorable family home evening in which Dad taught us a lesson and let everyone ask questions. Aunt Jessie sang, and then Dad joined her in singing their famous duet, or do-it, as he called it. Then Dad set Mary apart for her mission, and ordained Stephen a deacon, though he was a couple weeks shy of his 12th birthday." 

 Teaching the Missionaries 

 President McConkie loved to teach his missionaries, he loved to be outside, and he loved climbing mountains. He found these three loves to be quite compatible. For instance, one day in Hobart, Tasmania, he told the missionaries, "We will hold our meeting on the top of Mount Wellington," a tremendous mountain that overlooks the city and the bay. "They did not realize I was serious, at first, but after I told them that all great men—Moses, the brother of Jared, Nephi, and so on—climbed mountains; they consented. So while it was scarcely dawn we assembled at the foot of the mountain and spent a good many weary hours climbing to the top. Much good gospel instruction was given to the missionaries on that mountaintop." 

 In another setting, he drew upon that experience to teach the principle of revelation. "On the top we found some television relay stations. Since we were there, we gained permission to be shown through. There was a very bright young man who, using language that we did not understand, but speaking with a tone of authority, explained in detail the things that were involved in relaying television broadcasts. I was totally unable to comprehend or understand what was involved, but I knew that the thing did take place. 

 "That night, down in the valley again—two of my young sons were with me—we stayed in a room where there was a television set. They tuned the wave band of that set to the broadcast that came from the top of the mountain. We saw and heard and experienced what had been described to us in words. 

 "The same thing applies in radio. If we had a radio here today and tuned it to the proper wave band, we would hear the symphonies that are being broadcast into this building. Or if we looked on television we would see in effect the visions that are coming forth in a similar way. Now in the same sense, if at any time we manage to tune our souls to the eternal wave band upon which the Holy Ghost is broadcasting, since he is a Revelator, we could receive the revelations of the Spirit. If we could attune our souls to the band on which he is sending forth the visions of eternity, we could see what the Prophet saw in Section 76, or anything else that it was expedient for us to see. It would all happen by compliance with law, by conformity to the eternal principles that God has ordained. 

 "Now I am not able to explain how this takes place. I know that the laws exist; and like the young man who explained the television broadcast without really knowing how the pictures go through space, I also can state, as one having authority, that these things do take place in the spiritual realm, and that it is possible to receive revelation and direction and guidance in our personal affairs. 

 "This, I think, is the sort of thing that we ought to desire above all else. If we are spiritually inclined, I think that we want to know what the Lord would have us do—we would like to have the direction that would enable us to govern and control properly in all the affairs of our lives." 

 A Time of Rejoicing and Sorrow 

 May 13, 1962, was Mother's Day in the United States. President and Sister McConkie were in Perth holding a missionary training meeting. That afternoon, they joined the Saints and the missionaries of the Perth Branch for what turned out to be a highly spiritual testimony meeting. Forty-four people, including themselves, bore witness of Jesus Christ and his gospel. After the meeting, fourteen people were baptized. It was, they felt, a grand way to celebrate Mother's Day. 

 Before the baptismal service ended, someone handed Bruce a note. He read it and then silently left the room. "Afterwards when I saw him," Amelia said, "I could tell by the look on his face that there was something seriously wrong. 'What is the problem?' I quietly asked. In response he simply handed me the note and I read, 'Elders Johnson and Denney killed in train car accident, 6:30 pm, near Ballarat.' 

 "I was stunned, and unable to control the tears. Elders Johnson and Denney were two of our finest elders and were the district leaders where they were assigned to labor in the Victoria area. Bruce thought it best not to say anything at that time for fear of dampening the spirit that was present at the meeting. With heavy hearts we tried to appear normal as we joined those eating the food so graciously prepared for those who had been at the chapel most of the day. As the final meeting resumed, Bruce was not able to get his mind and feelings off the tragedy. He spoke with great feeling and power, telling those assembled that since none of us know when our time would come, we should get on the Lord's side of the line now. Many, touched by the spirit there and their love for these two Elders, wept." 

 At the conclusion of that meeting, a young investigator asked to be baptized. Her mother, who was not a member of the Church, thanked Bruce for what he had taught. 

 A Visit to the Bush 

 Australia was an adventure, and Bruce and Amelia thrived on it. Amelia's description of a visit to Kalgoorlie illustrates her enthusiasm. They arrived by plane, a Cessna with four seats. From the air, the town "reminded me of a good old Western cowboy scene," Amelia said, "with its one hotel, and several bars, a few homes, and perhaps a place or two where one could eat." President and Sister McConkie had come to meet with the small branch of Saints there. 

 The elders met them as they got off the plane. Since they had three hours before their meeting was to start, they toured the town. As one would imagine, this didn't take long, so a "tourist special" was suggested—a visit to the Bush to see how the primitive Aborigines lived. 

 Amelia wrote, "Drink, apparently easily available, had more than one native sprawled out on the side of the road covered with the stickiest horde of flies I have ever seen. One cannot imagine the dreadful plague flies can be until they have met the sticky, determined little pests this country breeds. They seem to prefer going for your nostrils, mouth, or eyes, and it isn't unusual to see someone with their back completely covered with them. You simply could not brush them away." 

 Such a visit required a souvenir or two, so the group stopped while the mission president dickered with an Aborigine over a few handmade boomerangs. All of a sudden, the fellow he was talking to got a very agitated look on his face. He was looking past Bruce at another Aborigine, who was hollering as he ran toward them with his spear raised, ready to throw. The natives quickly scampered out of the way. The elders, in much alarm, were anxious to get their mission parents back into the car. Bruce, camera in hand, was snapping pictures as fast as he could. He even got a good shot of the tall, thin, black man readying himself to throw a long spear in his direction. "Just as we got into the car I turned my head back to see the angry man let an arrow fly into the tents right where we had been standing," Amelia said. The group left with some dispatch. 

 A little farther down the road, they saw a group of about ten Aborigines and stopped to see if they could get some pictures. "Four of them were drinking, flies so thickly encrusted on their faces that you could not see their eyes. Another three were curled in awkward positions on the gravelly ground fast asleep. The others were just happy enough to be friendly. Elder Clawson paid them a few shillings, and Bruce got his pictures." 

 The Australian Experience 

 When President McConkie received word that his fellow Seventy Marion D. Hanks had received a call to serve as a mission president, he sent him a telegram: "Congratulations on receiving the choicest assignment in the Kingdom!" Bruce repeatedly said, "Being a mission president is the best job in the world." He loved it. As a mission president, he could make decisions and exert leadership. He could make a difference. 

 At the same time he felt pressure to succeed. The office he held brought with it a high level of expectation. At that time, there were only sixty-four missions in the Church, and their numbers in baptizing were published, compared, and talked about. Some missions were posting remarkable numbers of baptisms. Where this was the case, the numbers being posted generally consisted of youth baptisms or, as their critics called them, "infant baptisms." Many of those baptized disappeared faster than the morning dew. Still, baptisms were the standard by which the success of a mission president was measured in many quarters. Bruce's challenge was not simply to baptize more people but to convert and baptize more people. He did this successfully, and baptisms increased markedly each year, so that when he left the mission, four times as many people were being baptized as when he came. But, he said, "Our greatest achievement was the saving of delinquent missionaries, and our next greatest the delegation of authority to local leaders so as to prepare Adelaide and Perth (and Hobart in due course) to become stakes." 

 Australia is a big place, and big suited Bruce McConkie just fine. He loved the country, and he loved its people. He was up consistently at 5 or 5:30 in the morning—field glasses in hand—out bird-watching with his wife or leading his missionaries to the top of mountains where their zone conferences would be held. And he memorized the 104 lines of the poem "The Man from Snowy River" so he could quote it to his missionaries as he drove them to the airport after they had completed their missions. 

 Notes Chapter 12: The Australia Years, 1961 to 1964 

 1. Bruce C. Hafen, A Disciple's Life: The Biography of Neal A. Maxwell (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 2002), 433. 
 
 
© 2003 Joseph F. McConkie 

Printed from Gospelink.com
