From the time of Adam, righteous people looked forward to the birth of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. The prophets taught that through the Atonement of Jesus Christ, people could be forgiven of their sins and return to Heavenly Father. Many of the prophets told of the birth of the Savior long before it happened.

Isaiah, a mighty prophet in the Old Testament, spoke of the Savior’s birth: “For unto us a child [Jesus Christ] is born, unto us a son [the Son of God] is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace” (Isa. 9:6).

Lehi, a prophet of the Book of Mormon, fled Jerusalem with his family and wandered for many years in the wilderness. He prophesied, as his son Nephi recorded, that “six hundred years from the time that my father left Jerusalem, a prophet would the Lord God raise up among the Jews—even a Messiah, or, in other words, a Savior of the world” (1 Ne. 10:4).

Nephi prayed to understand the vision his father, Lehi, had received. In answer to his prayer, an angel of the Lord showed Nephi the birth, ministry, and Crucifixion of the Savior. Nephi said: “I looked and beheld the virgin [Mary] again, bearing a child in her arms.

“And the angel said unto me: Behold the Lamb of God [Jesus Christ], yea, even the Son of the Eternal Father!” (1 Ne. 11:20–21).

Samuel the Lamanite, another prophet of the Book of Mormon, stood boldly upon the wall at Zarahemla. He called the wicked Nephites to repentance and foretold the Savior’s birth. He said, “Five years more cometh, and behold, then cometh the Son of God to redeem all those who shall believe on his name” (Hel. 14:2).

When Jesus Christ was born, all the prophecies were fulfilled.

Each horizontal row on the next page will make a Christmas ornament depicting the fulfillment of one of the prophecies described in this lesson. To make these ornaments, mount page 9 on heavy paper, then (1) cut out the circles, one row at a time, and fold each circle in half (with the picture or scripture inside), as shown; (2) glue the backs of two of the half-circles together, making sure both tops are together; (3) cover the entire back of the third circle with glue and place a loop of yarn or string on the center fold; (4) place the exposed backs of the other two circles on the third circle; (5) hang the ornament in a window or on a tree.

1.  Read and discuss Matthew 25:40 [Matt. 25:40]. Help the children understand that when they love and serve others, they are loving and serving the Savior. Supply strips of paper for each child to make a paper-chain Advent calendar for the remaining days before Christmas. Have them write different good deeds they will do, one on each piece of paper. Have them add a link to their chains each day after they do one of their good deeds.

2.  On small slips of paper, write some of the gifts Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ have given the children. Place these pieces of paper in small boxes and wrap them. Have the children open the wrapped boxes. Discuss the gifts Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ have given them, as identified on the pieces of paper in the boxes. Sing appropriate Christmas hymns as you open the gifts.

3.  Invite two adult ward/branch members to tell the story of the Savior’s birth from the Bible (Luke 2; Matt. 2) and from the Book of Mormon (Hel. 14:1–5; 3 Ne. 1:4–15, 21).

For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given (Isa. 9:6).

A prophet would the Lord God raise up among the Jews—even a Messiah (1 Ne. 10:4).

I looked and beheld the virgin again, bearing a child in her arms (1 Ne. 11:20).

Behold, then cometh the Son of God to redeem all those who shall believe on his name (Hel. 14:2).
