Neal A. Maxwell, Wonderful Flood of Light (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990)

Chapter One

"A Fresh View"

If people in what are referred to as Christian nations were asked what they think of Christ, for most of them the question would prove puzzling amid the secular din of our times. As life has grown more complex, the cares and perplexities and anxieties about things of the world have grown steadily more intrusive, demanding more and more of our resources, time, worry, and energy. Spiritual considerations come later, if at all. Yet faith is more than ever needed in what is at best a simmering disquiet as wars, terrorism, natural disasters, injustices, changing mores, aggressive materialism, political turbulence, and widespread human suffering all combine to produce an unprecedented uncertainty. To appreciate how relevant and responsive the Restoration is, it is necessary first to take at least a superficial measure of the consequences of the spiritual famine that preceded it (see Amos 8:11-12).

We are nearing a prophesied point in human history:

And he answered them, and said, In the generation in which the times of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled, there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity, like the sea and the waves roaring. The earth also shall be troubled, and the waters of the great deep. (JST, Luke 21:25.)

As if the oppressive combination of the above factors, "like the sea and the waves roaring," were not enough distraction, real commitment to the gospel of Jesus Christ is made more difficult for many good people by certain stumbling blocks that obscure the view of spiritual reality. These stumbling blocks can prevent not only initial belief but also deeper belief. Even those on the strait and narrow path, if they are not carefully renewed and refreshed, can become "wearied and faint in [their] minds" (Hebrews 12:3).

Some sincerely ask hard questions that reflect the blocking impediments. "If there is a God, and He is good, why does He permit human suffering in the world?" Disciples may offer their own variation of this question, as was expressed to Brigham Young: "Why are [men] left alone and often sad?" (Brigham Young's Secretary's Journal, January 28, 1857.)

Others, having at best only a partial view of the Fall, question the mercy and justice of God: "I cannot accept a Being who would punish all mortals because of a mistake made by their ancient ancestors in a garden thousands of years ago for which their descendants obviously are not responsible."

In the face of such questions, those who want to believe in a literal and resurrected Christ are often sincerely perturbed because of what seems to them to be a paucity of first-hand, witnessing data thereto. One commentator wrote:

The Gospel accounts, of course, offer clues about Jesus, but the Gospels are highly imperfect historical documents. They did not take final shape until the late first century, a full generation (or two) after the death of Jesus. ... The Gospels were the work of people who already believed in Jesus as the risen Lord. ... The Gospels almost certainly were not by any of the twelve apostles and may or may not have been written by men named Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, who may or may not have been alive at the time of Jesus, and who may or may not represent composites of many individual chroniclers. (Cullen Murphy, "Who Do Men Say That I Am?" Atlantic Monthly, December 1986, p. 38.)

This particular stone of stumbling is reminiscent of that which impeded some in an earlier period: "It is not reasonable that such a being as a Christ shall come... why will he not show himself unto us?... but in a land which is far distant... for we cannot witness with our own eyes...." (Helaman 16:18-20). Thus as people ponder the human scene the fallout as to faith is considerable and varied.

Many contemporaries have concluded, just as did some anciently, that "when a man was dead, that was the end thereof" (Alma 30:18). Parallels in modern utterances include "No deity will save us; we must save ourselves" ("Humanist Manifesto II," The Encyclopedia of American Religions: Religious Creeds, J. Gordon Melton, ed. [Detroit: Gale Research Company, 1988], p. 641).

Not only have the cares and anxieties of the world had their impact, but special stumbling blocks exist because certain wrong and long traditions have taken their terrible toll on humankind.

Stephen Robinson has described an especially critical period in the history of Christianity out of which emerged serious doctrinal deficiencies that have plagued man ever since:

The second half of the first century... [to] the middle of the second century. ... might be called the blind spot in Christian history, for it is here that the fewest primary historical sources have been preserved. We have good sources for New Testament Christianity; then the lights go out, so to speak, and we hear the muffled sounds of a great struggle. When the lights come on again a hundred or so years later, we find that someone has rearranged all the furniture and Christianity has become something very different from what it was in the beginning. That different entity can accurately be described as hellenized Christianity.

. . . Hellenization refers to the imposition of Greek culture and philosophy upon the cultures of the East. The result was a synthesis of East and West, a melting pot of popular culture that was virtually worldwide. In the realm of religion, however, synthesis means compromise, and when we speak in terms of the gospel, compromise with popular beliefs means apostasy from the truth.

. . . The Greeks' world-view eventually won, and Jewish Christianity was revised to make it more attractive and appealing to a Greek audience.

. . . In order to satisfy the Gentiles steeped in Greek philosophy, Christianity had to throw out the doctrines of an anthropomorphic God and the resurrection of the dead, or reinterpret them drastically. Denying or altering the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead is precisely what some Greek Christians at Corinth had done, and Paul responded against them forcefully in 1 Corinthians 15....

In Doctrine and Covenants 86:3, the Lord identifies the whore, Babylon, as the apostate church: "After they [the Apostles] have fallen asleep the great persecutor of the church, the apostate, the whore, even Babylon, that maketh all nations to drink of her cup, in whose hearts the enemy, even Satan, sitteth to reign—behold he soweth the tares; wherefore, the tares choke the wheat and drive the church into the wilderness."

. . . It [the earliest apostate church] dethroned God in the church and replaced him with man by denying the principle of revelation and turning instead to human intellect. (Stephen E. Robinson, "Warring Against the Saints of God," Ensign, January 1988, pp. 38, 39.)

These and other serious errors of perception and assumption set in motion enormous theological and behavioral consequences which now wash over societies like eroding surf. Indeed there is much hindering history!

Religion has likewise been challenged by the emergence of certain scientific concepts, in some instances prompting needless rejection of religion in favor of secularism. One episode illustrates what can happen when, bereft of a fulness of scripture, a narrow mindset prevails over the viewing of "things as they really are" (Jacob 4:13).

After Galileo had turned his homemade telescope on the heavens for the first time in 1610, he wrote: "All the disputes which have tormented philosophers through so many ages are exploded at once by the irrefragable evidence of our eyes, and we are freed from wordy disputes upon this subject, for the Galaxy is nothing else but a mass of innumerable stars planted together in clusters. Upon whatever part of it you direct the telescope straightway a vast crowd of stars presents itself to

Yet Galileo, in June of 1633, was condemned to renounce, in the presence of a tribunal, the truths he had maintained as a result of his discoveries. The Christian "astronomy" that then triumphed, however, proved as unreliable as some of what then passed for "theology. " As to the latter, for example, the Renaissance with its skeptical scholarship produced the argument, now generally accepted, that the Apostles' Creed "could not have been composed by the Twelve Apostles." (Daniel J. Boorstin, The Discoverers [New York: Random House, 1983], pp. 320,577.)

Over the centuries as well as in recent decades, Christianity has suffered from a peculiar apostasy, an internal dilution. Speaking as of the year A. D. 101, one nineteenth-century historian even lamented, "The age of inspiration is over. . . . The last gleam of inspired wisdom and truth vanished from the earth with the beloved apostle's [John] gentle farewell" (Islay Burns, The First Three Christian Centuries [London: T. Nelson and Sons, 1884], p. 49).

Even fundamental, crucial concepts are in question. Today many, including some clerics, say "that the resurrection [of Jesus] was achieved not in the person of Jesus but only in the believing disciples, as it were. 'Resurrection' is then more a symbolic expression for the renewal of life for the disciples." (Quoted in Michael Harrington, The Politics at God's Funeral [New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1983], p. 164.) Thus, in the foregoing pages, we see the urgency and relevance of the Restoration.

The restored gospel's answers to such vexing man-made problems are more than adequate even for those who "can no more than desire to believe" but who are at least willing to "give place" in their lives for God's words to grow there (Alma 32:27). Yet because of Christianity's dilution, even when God performs "a marvelous work and a wonder" (Isaiah 29:14; D&C 4:1) it is greeted with disdain and sometimes with hostility.

Flowing through the human condition too are many paradoxes and adverse linkages. As an example, the scriptures observe that, even among believers, "hearts are set so much upon the things of this world" that they have neither time nor disposition to learn vital lessons (D&C 121:35). Jesus foretold that in the latter days the love of many would wax cold (see Matthew 24:12; D&C 45:27). That condition of less love means that there is more fear (see 1 John 4:17; Moroni 8:16). And the more iniquity—another feature of our love-lessened age—the more human despair (see Moroni 10:22), which is a close associate of fear.

Yet another cyclic irony likewise emerges: The less faith among mortals, the less God works in certain ways among them (see 2 Nephi 27:23; Mormon 9:20). Moreover, where there is less faith there is also less repentance, for a true disciple always has "faith unto repentance" (Alma 34:15-17). An ironic and interactive combination has thus taken hold.

It is no wonder that responding to the rectifying, restored gospel, which requires a transformation of one's life, seems especially difficult in such an age. Words that are harsh-sounding and uninviting to moderns are woven into the fabric of the gospel—words such as repentance and obedience. In his "careful" conditioning process (see 2 Nephi 28:21) the adversary has seen to it that words like these give religion a bad name. In a world with a marketplace orientation such words have no soothing or appealing "marketing" dimension to them.

Practicing the concept of repentance involves a real wrenching: not only a "turning away" from sin and the world but also a "turning toward" God. It should be noted, however, that in the Greek repentance also means "a change of mind, i. e., a fresh view about God, about oneself, and about the world" (LDS Bible Dictionary, p. 760, italics added). [^1] Given this latter affirmative connotation, it is easier to see why the Lord has said what He has said:

Say nothing but repentance unto this generation (D&C 6:9).

The thing which will be of the most worth unto you will be to declare repentance unto this people, that you may bring souls unto me, that you may rest with them in the kingdom of my Father (D&C 16:6).

When initiated by a realistic and fresh view of reality—of "things as they really are"—repentance can be embraced and hastened. This very process of personal progress was utilized by certain spiritual noblemen of antiquity: "Many... were ordained and became high priests of God; and it was on account of their exceeding faith and repentance, and their righteousness before God, they choosing to repent and work righteousness" (Alma 13:10).

In one degree or another, all of us need this precious process. We sorely need the spiritual stimulus of a "fresh view" of the great realities of the universe, a perspective persuasive and powerful enough to change and improve our lives. Otherwise, as Dom Pedro de Alcantara observed, we go on trying to change others instead of ourselves, so things do not improve but remain the same.

Powerful and persuasive reasons for the repentance of a fresh view are exactly what the Restoration provides through its wonderful flood of light. The restitution of all things brought with it a fresh view (the very one Adam had at the beginning) about God, oneself, and the world. (Here we might note that divine disclosure often emphasizes the expansive; for example, certain ancient records were actually prepared precisely to "throw greater views on [the] gospel" [D&C 10:45].) Again, it is precisely what the world needs.

It is a sad fact that, lacking this fresh view, many fail to understand the true nature of full repentance. The Nephites at their worst provide an example of this failure: "But behold this my joy was vain, for their sorrowing was not unto repentance, because of the goodness of God; but it was rather the sorrowing of the damned, because the Lord would not always suffer them to take happiness in sin" (Mormon 2:13).

Repentance is a joy-producing process. In fact, it is impossible to find genuine happiness without it, because it is integral to that quality. Alma explained this to his son Corianton: "Men... have gone contrary to the nature of God; therefore, they are in a state contrary to the nature of happiness" (Alma 41:11). And in his impassioned speech to the unrepentant Nephites, the Lamanite prophet Samuel stressed the same theme: "Ye have sought all the days of your lives for that which ye could not obtain;... happiness in doing iniquity, which thing is contrary to the nature of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head" (Helaman 13:38).

It follows that iniquity is perspective—shrinking, since it increasingly diminishes one's perception of redemptive reality. "If ye have no hope," Moroni wrote, "ye must needs be in despair; and despair cometh because of iniquity" (Moroni 10:22).

Historically and scripturally the Lord's prophets have preached this kind of message. One ancient and anxious prophet in particular yearned to help his fellowmen have the emancipating gospel view of things: "O that I were an angel," Alma exclaimed, "and could have the wish of mine heart, that I might go forth and speak with the trump of God, with a voice to shake the earth, and cry repentance unto every people!" (Alma 29:1.)

We can be sure that this prophet wanted to cry repentance, but to do so in the broadest and most liberating definition of that word. In his subsequent words, Alma speaks about the plan of redemption and the global nature of God's work.

A fresh view is not always welcomed, however; it can be jarring to those who are intensely set in their ways (see Isaiah 28:21). Even the remarkable Enoch was not welcomed by many of his contemporaries. Of him and his labors it was said anciently, "There is a strange thing in the land" (Moses 6:38). Isaiah's phrase "strange work" is amplified in Restoration scriptures. Fresh and striking truths were necessary so that mortals could "hear and know that which they have never considered" (D&C 101:94). Without such vision, people perish (see Proverbs 29:18).

Having described the Restoration as his "Strange act," and "my strange work," the Lord indicated that it would go against the grain of much of society. Yet restitution of the unfamiliar, the uncommon, the unusual, and the unique would actually aid mortals by providing fresh, divine standards and help them in discerning between righteousness and wickedness, as God "poured out [His] Spirit upon all flesh." (D&C 95:4; 101:95.) With values otherwise shorn of true perspective, the inversions of certain of them become almost inevitable. Finally, evil can end up being called good, and good evil. (See Isaiah 5:20; 2 Nephi 15:20; Moroni 7:14.)

Even with the gospel's precious perspective and its provision of much-needed remedies, because of stumbling blocks and because of the cares and anxieties of the world comparatively few individuals will hear, and fewer still will accept, the unique message of the Restoration. This is not unlike the situation in which some of Galileo's friends reportedly refused to look through his telescope; they did not want to gain a fresh view of things. But the present spiritual case is an especially sad situation, for the restored gospel is composed of truths of the highest order of significance and of relevance. Its truths are about "things as they really are" (Jacob 4:13), providing just what is needed amid the boring hedonism or the "humdrum nihilism of everyday life" (The Politics at God's Funeral, p. 11). Most of all, however, the Restoration provides the vital doctrines, ordinances, authority, and organization essential to salvation and exaltation. No wonder the Lord desires "that all that will hear may hear" (D&C 1:11).

How we view ourselves, others, and the universe really does shape everything else! Our view of such strategic matters determines, among many other things, whether while on this planet we will act as concerned stewards or merely as transient pleasure-seekers and alien exploiters. A genuine world religion requires a world (not worldly) view—better still, a gospel with a galactic view!

Therefore, far from being no more than another collection of unusual theological points, the restored gospel is the key to human happiness! The fresh view is essential if one is to have a changed or new heart (see 1 Samuel 10:9; Alma 5:12-14, 26).

But God does not change our hearts against our wills. Change happens as a result of an inward awakening and of being stirred enough by a fresh view to "give place" and to change willingly (Alma 5:7; 32:27). Then a person can come to have sufficient faith to put his "trust in the true and living God." Moreover, it is to be a "mighty" and not merely a cosmetic change. The more "mighty" the change, the more clearly we see reality and the less we desire to do evil. (Mosiah 5:2, 7; Alma 5:13; 19:33.)

A fresh view both derives from and leads to an increasing belief in all the holy scriptures (see Helaman 15:7). As we progressively see by that light, our "minds become single to God" (D&C 88:68).

To go against the grain of society and to undergo such a mighty change requires a miracle. A special, spiritual stimulus was needed to provide the requisite fresh and powerful perspectives—something that would lift mankind (or at least lift the view of those with eyes to see) above the humdrum of the human condition. But the fresh view not only had to orient us in order to get us going in the right direction; it also had to provide sufficiently persuasive content to keep our gaze and our progress steady:

And now, my beloved brethren, after ye have gotten into this straight and narrow path, I would ask if all is done? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for ye have not come thus far save it were by the word of Christ with unshaken faith in him, relying wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save.

Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life. (2 Nephi 31:19-20.)

Since feasting on the word of God has a "more powerful effect upon the minds of the people than... anything else" (Alma 31:5), the more of the word of God we have and act upon, the more we will press forward. Much spiritual energy is necessary for the marathon of discipleship.

As a great blessing, the word of God has been richly given to us in the Restoration. It provides a full and firm basis for real faith, especially in a world in which many are struggling to believe, and still others, bereft of a fresh view, have simply quit struggling! (See Alma 32:14; 2 Nephi 27:23.) Some still "run to and fro" in search of the word of the Lord (Amos 8:11-12), but others have quit running altogether. Such souls include disappointed idealists, resigned skeptics, and those driven to despair by the "old view."

To reemphasize, certain trends have "set the stage" for the Restoration, ensuring both its relevancy and its urgency, as shown in these observations:

Among the advanced races, the decline and ultimately the collapse of the religious impulse would leave a huge vacuum. The history of modern times is in great part the history of how that vacuum had been filled. . . . In place of religious belief, there would be secular ideology. (Paul Johnson, Modern Times [New York: Harper and Row, 1983], p. 48.)

Christianity would have to struggle for a hearing in a world where most would regard it not as untrue or even as unthinkable, but simply irrelevant. (Penelope Fitzgerald, The Knox Brothers [New York: Coward, McCann & Geoghegan, 1977], pp. 106-7.)

Some intelligent people, like much of mankind, find the way of faith difficult. Naturally, their ponderings and responses to mortality are varied, ranging from disbelief through tentativeness and hope and on to faith. In 1988 Life magazine asked some prominent people for their views on the meaning of life and why we are here, the results of which were published in the December 1988 issue. Selected answers follow below, showing the spread along the spectrum, with samples of the relevant responses the Restoration makes to the points under discussion.

Supreme Court Justice Harry Blackmun

But here we are. Not one of us asked to be here or had very much to do with his arrival. With our finite minds we cannot presume to know if there is a Purpose. We sense, however, the presence of something greater than we can comprehend, a force as yet unknown to us—perhaps ever to be unknown.

Restoration's Response

We will make an earth whereon these may dwell; and we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them; and they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever. (Abraham 3:24-26.)

When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy (Job 38:7).

For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man (Moses 1:39).

And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent John 17:3).

Astronomer Frank Drake There is no doubt that life will have developed in many places in our universe. Our own significance, our ultimate potential and our ensemble of possible destinies will be understood by finding and studying the other intelligent creatures of space. Thus a prime task is to seek out other intelligent civilizations and to share knowledge with them.

Restoration's Response That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God (D&C 76:24).

And thus there shall be the reckoning of the time of one planet above another, until thou come nigh unto Kolob,... which Kolob is set nigh unto the throne of God, to govern all those planets which belong to the same order as that upon which thou standest (Abraham 3:9).

And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten....

But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you. For behold, there are many worlds that have passed away by the word of my power. And there are many that now stand, and innumerable are they unto man; but all things are numbered unto me, for they are mine and I know them. ...

And as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works, neither to my words. (Moses 1:33, 35, 38, italics added.)

Writer Charles Bukowski For those who believe in God, most of the big questions are answered. But for those of us who can't readily accept the God formula, the big answers don't remain stone-written. We adjust to new conditions and discoveries. We are pliable. Love need not be a command or faith a dictum. I am my own God. We are here to unlearn the teachings of the church, state and our educational system. We are here to drink beer. We are here to kill war. We are here to laugh at the odds and live our lives so well that Death will tremble to take us.

Restoration's Response They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god, whose image is in the likeness of the world (D&C 1:16).

Writer D. M. Thomas Astronomer Fred Hoyle observed that it was no more likely that our world has evolved out of chaos than that a hurricane, blowing through a junkyard, should create a Boeing.

Looking at certain people who have or had strong religious feeling, I am often impressed by a depth of spirituality that "the good atheist" very rarely has. I am thinking of people like Mother Teresa, Carl Jung, Anna Akhmatova, Boris Pasternak. The last two are great poets; and it is not easy to find poets who have no religious concept. If in doubt, I have always felt, trust the poets.

Restoration's Response Poets truly can inspire and inform, but they do not presume to declare doctrine. Even William Wordsworth's evocative imagery about our coming here "trailing clouds of glory" has those limitations. Wordsworth explained his use of this pre-existent imagery thus: "A pre-existent state has entered into the popular creeds of many nations. ... I took hold of the notion of pre-existence as having sufficient foundation in humanity for authorizing me to make for my purpose the best use of it I could as a poet." Wordsworth said such a belief "is far too shadowy a notion to be recommended to faith. ... Though the idea is not advanced in revelation, there is nothing there to contradict it, and the fall of man presents an analogy in its favour." (Alfred Noyes, ed., English Romantic Poetry and Prose [New York: Oxford University Press, 1956], pp. 327-28.)

A revelation of which Wordsworth was unaware came through the Prophet Joseph while the poet was still alive. "Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be." (D&C 93:29.)

Into such a setting as the above comments represent, with mortals spread across a spectrum, the wonderful flood of light from heaven has come with the fresh view. The glorious and much-needed perspectives of the Restoration mean that "faith also might increase in the earth" (D&C 1:21). It was so miraculous and so urgently needed. Divinely given revelation thus provides a basis for the changing of minds. Thus the gospel of repentance leads not only to the forgiveness of sins but also to becoming converted to the Lord's plan, with the comprehensiveness, uniqueness, and brightness of its perspective. Otherwise the great realities concerning mankind would go unseen, unbelieved, and unheeded.

1990 Bookcraft
