Neal A. Maxwell, Wonderful Flood of Light (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990)

Chapter Two

"A Miraculous Miracle"

The prophetic words of Isaiah 29:14 concerning the remarkable Restoration are fully justified. It was and is a "marvellous work and a wonder," or, as those words read when rendered in Hebrew, "a miraculous miracle"! God, who is not given to exaggeration, reflected upon the creation of this beautiful and spectacular earth as "very good." Yet through Isaiah and in revelations given to Joseph Smith in February 1829, and repeatedly thereafter, He announced the coming of the "marvelous work." (See Genesis 1:31; D&C 4:1; 6:1; 11:1; 12:1; 18:44.) The phrases "marvellous work and a wonder" and the "miraculous miracle" are deliberately redundant. And the restored gospel, including the Book of Mormon, is the prophesied "miraculous miracle."

The perspective-yielding truths of the Restoration did not come by research, debate, or discussion, nor by communiques from councils. Direct, divine revelation was required, and precisely for the reasons Jacob gave: "Behold, great and marvelous are the works of the Lord. How unsearchable are the depths of the mysteries of him; and it is impossible that man should find out all his ways. And no man knoweth of his ways save it be revealed unto him; wherefore, brethren, despise not the revelations of God." (Jacob 4:8.)

We cannot determine by using radio telescopes, for instance, that there is a plan of salvation operating in the universe, helpful as radio telescopes are for astrophysical purposes. Salvational truths are obtainable only by revelation.

The faith-yielding truths flowing from the "miraculous miracle" have come in rich abundance, in "good measure," like a harvest basket whose contents are "pressed down, and shaken together, and running over" (Luke 6:38). In fact, as Elder Jeffrey R. Holland has pointed out, more books or pages of scripture have come to us through Joseph Smith than from any other prophet—more even than from Moses, Luke, Paul, and Mormon combined! (Letter to author from Jeffrey R. Holland, February 18, 1986.)

Many more scriptural writings will yet come to us, including those of Enoch (see D&C 107:57), all of the writings of the Apostle John (see Ether 4:16), the records of the lost tribes of Israel (see 2 Nephi 29:13), and the approximately two-thirds of the Book of Mormon plates that were sealed: "And the day cometh that the words of the book which were sealed shall be read upon the house tops; and they shall be read by the power of Christ; and all things shall be revealed unto the children of men which ever have been among the children of men, and which ever will be even unto the end of the earth" (2 Nephi 27:11). Today we carry convenient quadruple combinations of the scriptures, but one day, since more scriptures are coming, we may need to pull little red wagons brimful with books.

Speaking of our feelings in mortality about life beyond the veil, C. S. Lewis observed: "We cannot mingle with the splendours we see. But all the leaves of the New Testament are rustling with the rumour that it will not always be so." How much more is it the case when, through the Restoration, the New Testament is joined by hundreds more leaves which are rustling resoundingly! If, as was said of great secular literature, "My own eyes are not enough for me; I will see through those of others.... I will become a thousand men and yet remain myself"—how much more true this ought to be as regards holy literature! (James T. Como, ed., C. S. Lewis at the Breakfast Table, and Other Reminiscences [New York: Macmillan, 1979], pp. 34, xxxiii.) Better still, let us, like the servant of Elisha, have our eyes opened (see 2 Kings 6:15-17).

Prophecies have been fulfilled by the Restoration, a season in human history in which there would be a "restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began" (Acts 3:21). An essential part of that restitution was the restoration of priesthood keys. This made it possible for the Lord's Church to be "established in the last days for the restoration of his people, as he has spoken by the mouth of his prophets" (D&C 84:2). As this scripture shows, the concept of restitution or restoration was well understood and expressed by ancient prophets. Though initially Joseph Smith would not have been keenly conscious of this theme, as the great prophet of the last dispensation he certainly was later in his ministry.

As to that word dispensation, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is in the unique position of knowing that there were various gospel dispensations prior to that of Jesus in the meridian of time, and that they linked all past prophets with Jesus and with the latter-day restoration. The coming forth of revelation and ancient records, in fact, teaches us that the gospel and its ordinances were upon the earth at the time of Adam. "And thus the Gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost. And thus all things were confirmed unto Adam, by an holy ordinance, and the Gospel preached, and a decree sent forth, that it should be in the world, until the end thereof; and thus it was." (Moses 5:58-59.)

Consistent with man's agency, down through the centuries since Adam's day God has done all he could to make available to his children the gospel of salvation, with its focus on the power of the Savior's atonement. The Prophet Joseph Smith commented: "We may conclude, that though there were different dispensations, yet all things which God communicated to His people were calculated to draw their minds to the great object, and to teach them to rely upon God alone as the author of their salvation, as contained in His law." (Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976], p. 61. Hereafter cited as Teachings.)

Ideas taught in the restored gospel are often reflected in other cultures—in the literature, philosophy, folklore, and religion of peoples and places around the globe. Elder Joseph F. Smith at once explained this situation and underscored the uniqueness of Latter-day Saint understanding and of our position in the world of religion:

Undoubtedly the knowledge of this law [of sacrifice] and of other rites and ceremonies was carried by the posterity of Adam into all lands, and continued with them, more or less pure, to the flood, and through Noah, who was a "preacher of righteousness," to those who succeeded him, spreading out into all nations and countries, Adam and Noah being the first of their dispensations to receive them from God. What wonder, then, that we should find relics of Christianity, so to speak, among the heathens and nations who know not Christ, and whose histories date back beyond the days of Moses, and even beyond the flood, independent of and apart from the records of the Bible. (Joseph F. Smith, in Journal of Discourses 15: 325.)

It is clear that the dispersion, diffusion, and distortion of gospel truths has left fragments of the faith in various religions and cultures throughout the world. Many see in this an attempt by man to make his own god and religion in the absence of real ones. Rather than such similarities being evidence against the existence of God, however, these refracted truths bear witness of the initial wholeness which existed in the beginning with Adam. Besides the diffusion of gospel teachings, there developed also some imitation of them: "Pharaoh, being a righteous man, established his kingdom and judged his people wisely and justly all his days, seeking earnestly to imitate that order established by the fathers in the first generations, in the days of the first patriarchal reign, even in the reign of Adam" (Abraham 1:26).

Being either unaware or unaccepting of truths revealed through the Restoration, many think that Christianity had no existence prior to Jesus' mortal messiahship in the meridian of time. If that were so, how would we explain Christian teachings found in documents predating the earthly ministry of Jesus? Was Jesus simply a charismatic eclectic who incorporated earlier ideas into His "new" religion? Was He something less than the sole originator of Christianity? Was he a mere collector and reproducer of other men's ideas?

Without the Restoration we would be left with a Jesus reduced in perceived significance by skepticism and pushed from full view by the sheer weight of human history. As it is, through the renewing Restoration scriptures we learn that over the sweep of the centuries divine dispensing has occurred as circumstances and faith have allowed: "And they began from that time forth [Adam's day] to call on his name; therefore God conversed with men, and made known unto them the plan of redemption, which had been prepared from the foundation of the world; and this he made known unto them according to their faith and repentance and their holy works" (Alma 12:30).

The phrases "plan of redemption" (as in the above verse), "plan of salvation," and "plan of happiness" appear multiple times in the Restoration scriptures. Knowledge of God's plan was clearly one of the "plain and precious things" which needed to be restored in a disbelieving and skeptical world, a world in which apostasy had taken its toll (see 1 Nephi 13:39-40). A specific instance is seen in the history of ancient Israel: "And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two other tables of stone, like unto the first, and I will write upon them also, the words of the law, according as they were written at the first on the tables which thou brakest; but it shall not be according to the first, for I will take away the priesthood out of their midst; therefore my holy order, and the ordinances thereof, shall not go before them" JST, Exodus 34:1).

As an offset to some of the effects of apostasy, throughout history the Lord has given as much light to various nations and people as their spiritual condition permitted (see Alma 29:8; 12:9; John 16:12; 3 Nephi 26:10; Ether 4:7). In this connection Joseph Smith observed:

It is reasonable to suppose that man departed from the first teachings, or instructions which he received from heaven in the first age, and refused by his disobedience to be governed by them. Consequently, he formed such laws as best suited his own mind, or as he supposed, were best adapted to his situation. But that God has influenced man more or less since that time in the formation of law for his benefit we have no hesitancy in believing; for, ... being the source of all good, every just and equitable law was in a greater or less degree influenced by Him. (Teachings, p. 57.)

All the failings away in the various dispensations had been taken into account beforehand in the Lord's plans. Those plans pointed to the time of full reestablishment, "strange" as that latter-day act would seem to those by then steeped in other traditions (see Isaiah 28:21; D&C 101:94-95; 95:4). To quote the Prophet again: "The great Jehovah contemplated the whole of the events connected with the earth, pertaining to the plan of salvation, before it rolled into existence, or ever "the morning stars sang together" for joy; the past, the present, and the future were and are, with Kim, one eternal "now"; He knew... the depth of iniquity that would be connected with the human family,... and has made ample provision for their redemption" (Teachings, p. 220).

The "ample provision" God has made for the human family surely includes "the miraculous miracle" spoken of by all the holy prophets since the world began!

Among the transcendent things restored as a part of the "restitution of all things" were the following:

The holy priesthood and its keys The initiatory ordinances The holy endowment The true order of prayer Baptism for the dead The sealing power

Most striking to contemplate is this fact: When the lad Joseph Smith went into the Sacred Grove he did not go seeking these transcendent things, for he knew not of them. He went merely to learn which church to join!

One of the things achieved by the Restoration is a fresh view of the most transcendent being—Jesus Christ. This view, this flood of light, magnifies Jesus in a doubting world. There are those who regard Jesus as a "great moral teacher." He surely was that—history's greatest moral teacher, in fact—but He was much more! He was and is not just "one of the prophets" but Lord of all the prophets (see Matthew 16:14; John 7:40). Moreover, he was the preeminent Shepherd to all the Old Testament prophets. John recorded: "Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am" (John 8:58). The Savior also said: "For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me." John 5:46; see also 1 Corinthians 10:4; Hebrews 1:1-3; Colossians 1:15-18.)

Jesus links all the prophets together, just as was indicated on the Mount of Transfiguration when Moses and Elias were there to join Jesus and Peter, James, and John (see Matthew 17:1-8). A similar linkage occurred later too, in the Kirtland temple, when Jesus was there with His modern prophet, Joseph Smith, and Moses, Elias, and Elijah (see D&C 110).

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that Moses received the holy endowment on a mountain top. President Joseph Fielding Smith expressed the further opinion that when sacred priesthood keys were passed on the Mount of Transfiguration (see Teachings, p. 158), the holy endowment was given to Peter, James, and John (see Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56], 2:165).

This participation of prophets and dispensations, as noted earlier, is one of the unique features of the Restoration. Jesus even calls the Old Testament prophets "my prophets" (see 3 Nephi 1:13). It is all part of the "miraculous miracle" which magnifies Jesus:

We knew of Christ, and we had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his coming; and not only we ourselves had a hope of his glory, but also all the holy prophets which were before us (Jacob 4:4).

And now behold, Moses did not only testify of these things, but also all the holy prophets, from his days even to the days of Abraham. ... It [was] shown unto the people, a great many thousand years before his coming, that even redemption should come unto them. (Helaman 8:16, 18.)

Evidence for this linkage of prophets and dispensations is not abundantly present in the Bible, because some of the "plain and precious things" were "kept back" or "taken away" from what became that book (1 Nephi 13:34, 39, 40). Part of the flood of light that accompanied the Restoration was the return of these lost truths. Naturally, many of them concern the central figure in the life of mankind.

In Restoration scriptures, in fact, Jesus Christ is clearly and definitively revealed to be the Lord of the universe, the creator of myriad worlds, a fact that is sparsely noted in the Bible (only three verses—John 1:3; Hebrews 1:2; 11:3):

By him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God (D&C 76:24).

And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten (Moses 1:33).

The worlds were made by him; men were made by him; all things were made by him, and through him, and of him (D&C 93:10).

Clearly, then, Latter-day Saints cannot regard Jesus as merely a "great moral teacher," or merely a "minor prophet," or even as only a "major prophet," significant to humans as each of these functions is. Rather, because of the Restoration, we understand Jesus' role in which, under the direction of the Father, He was the creator of this and other worlds. We worship a multi-planet God!

We cannot comprehend it all, of course. We do not know how many inhabited worlds there are, or where they are. But certainly we are not alone. This is a universe of spiritual order, in which "Kolob is set nigh unto the throne of God, to govern all those planets which belong to the same order as that upon which thou standest" (Abraham 3:9).

Our planet-home, we are told, is not impressive as to its size or location: "The earth is a medium-sized planet orbiting around an average star in the outer suburbs of an ordinary spiral galaxy, which is itself only one of about a million million galaxies in the observable universe" (Stephen W. Hawking, A Brief History of Time [New York: Bantam Books, 1988] p. 126). Lacking the concept of the divine design which abounds in the fresh view made possible by the Restoration's wonderful flood of light, some say we live in "an unsponsored universe," in an "empire of chance" (Bertrand Russell, "A Free Man's Worship," in Mysticism and Logic and Other Essays [London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1951], p. 57).

Looking back to the time of Galileo we note that some biblical scriptures support his view as based on his discoveries. Isaiah, for example, wrote that the Lord created this earth not in vain, but to be inhabited (see Isaiah 45:18). Paul twice noted that Christ created other worlds as well as this one (see Hebrews 1:2; 11:3). John declared that Christ, under the Father's direction, created "all things" (John 1:3). Presumably these scriptural declarations were available at least to the educated in Galileo's day. Yet many, having not seen and/or having not believed these few scriptures, followed the philosophies of men and wrongly assumed that this earth was a solitary thing—even the center of the universe.

In the restored gospel, however, we are blessed with a richness of understanding—both confirmation of and much elaboration concerning what John and Paul wrote. Restoration revelations tell us much more about "things as they really are" (Jacob 4:13; see also Moses 1:32-35; D&C 76:24).

The restored gospel of Jesus Christ thus brings a greater illumination that corrects fundamental errors of assumption and perception about man and the universe. But only for those who will entertain the light which makes it clear that we live amid divine design in the enveloping empire of Elohim!

Hyrum Smith, who was part of the unfolding of the Restoration, had this precious perspective:

The God of the armies of Israel is a wise God, He comprehended the end from the beginning, and adapted his plans, his designs and teachings to the peculiar wants, the local situation, the exigencies of mankind, and the present and future good of the human family; and everything that He has designed to notice by way of instruction to the children of men is given by infinite wisdom... beyond the comprehension of man in his present state. (Hyrum Smith, in Joseph E. Cardon and Samuel O. Bennion, Testimonies of the Divinity of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints [Independence: Zion's Printing and Publishing, 1930], p. 34. Hereafter cited as Book of Testimonies.)

Lack of such perspective about such great realities has led to confusion about man and the universe in many minds and hearts. Without access to a fulness of scriptures, people substituted deliberation for revelation. It was as the Savior said in denouncing the hypocritical lawyers: "For ye have taken away the key of knowledge, the fulness of the scriptures" (JST, Luke 11:53).

In the meridian of time, the misreading of the nature and role of Jesus Christ caused severe problems for some. Jesus had invited his hearers to come to him and satisfy their spiritual thirst. "Many of the people therefore, when they heard this saying, said, Of a truth this is the Prophet. Others said, This is the Christ. But some said, Shall Christ come out of Galilee? Hath not the scripture said, That Christ cometh of the seed of David, and out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was? So there was a division among the people because of him." (John 7:40-43.)

Where the Messiah was to be born was clear in Micah's prophecy (Micah 5:2), but what of where He would be reared? "And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene" (Matthew 2:23). In fact, it was foretold that his mother would be a Nazarene: "And it came to pass that I looked and beheld the great city of Jerusalem, and also other cities. And I beheld the city of Nazareth; and in the city of Nazareth I beheld a virgin, and she was exceedingly fair and white." (1 Nephi 11:13.)

Jesus was born in Bethlehem just as Micah had prophesied, but he was also reared in a city called Nazareth that he might be a Nazarene. The "stumbling" of his contemporaries over Jesus' identity occurred because people lacked the fulness of the scriptures and twisted the scriptures they did possess!

In later centuries, in debates between various factions, similar stumbling was caused by the same lack of fulness. These deliberations produced creeds which demonstrated the lack of a completeness that can be supplied only by revelation.

Some time after the deaths of the Apostles, confusion arose concerning the nature of the Father and the Son. To settle the issues and compose a creed, the Emperor Constantine convened the great Council of Nicaea (A. D. 325). Here is a scholar's description of a portion of that council:

The closing speech of the mightiest of councils. ... was delivered, fittingly, by the emperor, "who was first to bear witness to the correctness of the creed," according to Eusebius in a letter to his own flock, "... and he urged everyone to come to the same opinion and sign the statement of dogmas and to agree with each other by signing a statement to which but a single term had been added—the word, homoousion." The emperor then proceeded to explain with much technical language that word (which had been agreed on in committee) and the final verdict that the thing was really incomprehensible. "So in such a manner," Eusebius concludes, "our most wise and most devout (eusebes, blessed) Emperor philosophized; and the Bishops by way of explaining the homoousios prepared the following statement." (Hugh Nibley, The World and the Prophets [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1987], pp. 46-47.)

Here we see the bankruptcy of beliefs which are a blend of philosophy and scripture instead of being derived from revelation. It is instructive to compare the above methods and results with those of the Nephite Twelve when the latter were perplexed on an important matter (see 3 Nephi 27:1-8).

Clearly Latter-day Saints need not be concerned about their Christianity being judged by conformity with the blended creeds. What we should prefer, of course, is to be judged by how we live and by what we believe concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, who is a Savior magnified mightily because of the added truths about Him that flow from the miraculous miracle.

Significantly, the miraculous miracle opened with a vision of the Father and the Son, when Joseph Smith "saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above [him] in the air. " (Joseph Smith-History 1:17.) The vision Joseph Smith had of "two Personages," one of whom introduced the other as His Son, provided the truth needed to end creedal confusion as to the nature of the Father and the Son.

It is a very important fact that knowing the truth about Deity helps us to understand our own identity. "If men do not comprehend the character of God," the Prophet said, "they do not comprehend themselves" (Teachings, p. 343).

Comprehending God's character and Jesus' can be a needed spur to our own spiritual achievement; this understanding can help to increase faith in the earth (D&C 1:21). By way of example, the doctrines of premortality and foreordination overturn other false doctrines or traditions that suggest our spirits were created out of nothing.

Confirmation, elaboration, and clarification of key biblical scriptures also come through the Restoration. Compare, for instance, two accounts of some of the Lord's words at His second coming:

And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands? Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. (Zechariah 13:6.)

And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?

Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God.

And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king. (D&C 45:51-53.)

Zechariah may have been constrained from saying more; or alternatively, some of what he said may have become lost from the biblical record. In any case, the miraculous miracle has brought us more about the marvelous events surrounding the second coming of the Savior.

We can make the same comparison as regards how we should live and what we should strive to become: "And [Jesus] said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven" (Matthew 18:3).

What specifically is meant by this crucial quality of becoming "as little children"? We get some information in the New Testament, but we get a fulness in the Restoration, as in these words from King Benjamin's mighty sermon: ..... and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father" (Mosiah 3:19).

In contrast to the skepticism and disbelief of our times, the Restoration brings rich reassurance, including vital truths about the purposes of mortal life and the meaning of human existence. Isaiah wrote: "For thus saith the Lord that created the heavens; God himself that formed the earth and made it; he hath established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited" (Isaiah 45:18).

Isaiah thus tells us that this earth was purposefully formed to be inhabited. But why? The Book of Mormon confirms: "Behold, the Lord hath created the earth that it should be inhabited; and he hath created his children that they should possess it" (1 Nephi 17:36).

But the modern restoration of words from ancient revelations goes much further. The Lord summarized his purpose as follows: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). And much of Abraham's vision of premortality, restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith, focused sharply on God's purpose for the created earth of Isaiah's and Nephi's expressions—the proving ground for His spirit children: "And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them" (Abraham 3:25).

Yes, this mortal existence had definite tutorial purposes, as Mormon perceived in commenting on the trials of a group of faithful disciples: "Nevertheless the Lord seeth fit to chasten his people; yea, he trieth their patience and their faith" (Mosiah 23:21). The directions concerning the need to understand life as a proving and tutoring experience are in the Holy Bible but are less than fully affirmed. A similar lack of fulness is there as to the fall of Adam, the infinite atonement, the Council in Heaven, and Lucifer's fall. These essential doctrines, only partially described in the Bible, are therefore sometimes either discounted or ignored. Latter-day Saints are greatly blessed to have these critical truths amplified in Restoration scriptures. Restored too is the Old Testament's theme of remembrance, as the ancient view becomes part of the fresh view we now have. "Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee. When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel." (Deuteronomy 32:7-8.)

Enoch, about whom there are only seven verses in the Bible, becomes a major figure in Restoration scripture. There are eighteen times as many column inches about Enoch in the Restoration scriptures than we have in the few verses on him in the Bible. Those scriptures not only contain greater quantity but also greater quality—dozens of verses containing new material about Enoch on which the Bible is silent. (Robert J. Matthews, letter to author dated August 12, 1988.) We would not even know about the city of Enoch were it not for the richness of the Restoration scriptures about him and his outstanding ministry.

Much more fully revealed by the Restoration, too, is the eventual return of the lost tribes of Israel with their scriptures (see 2 Nephi 29:12-14; D&C 110:11). It is the same regarding the gathering of the Jews and their return to the Holy Land (see 2 Nephi 9:2; 25:15-18; D&C 133:13, 35).

Although we have here touched on many matters that are illumined by the Restoration, actually as a church we are still "inventorying" the contents of its overflowing harvest basket. Clearly, other possibilities await a more full assessment and a careful pondering.

Mankind needs the truth about the things we have been discussing, in order to have faith in God. The Restoration ushered in truths highly essential to the increase of faith (see Acts 3:19). No wonder, therefore, that we are urged to move forward "in so great a cause" (D&C 128:20).

We believe the Book of Mormon because of the witness of the Spirit and because of the book's impressive internal evidences. We do not rely overly much on external evidences, but still it is good to be aware of it as corroborating information comes along.

The Book of Mormon, indeed a marvelous work and a wonder, is rich beyond our present appreciation. Examples are the apparent presence of Jewish festivals in the Book of Mormon, and extensive and precise chiasmus. When Joseph was translating the record, he could not have known of such things. Once he even inquired of Emma as to whether there were walls around Jerusalem! He simply did not know.

The demographic impact of the Restoration was very small in the beginning, but it is crescendoing in the last decade of the twentieth century and will soon flow and spread into the twenty-first century. Increasingly we shall see the Lord's words being fulfilled: "Righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood" (Moses 7:62). And again, "But first let my army become very great, and let it be sanctified before me" (D&C 105:31). The kingdom will also be constrained by conditions. Looking ahead two and a half millennia in vision, Nephi wrote: "I beheld that the church of the Lamb,... the saints of God were also upon all the face of the earth; and their dominions upon all the face of the earth were small, because of the wickedness" (1 Nephi 14:12). Regrettably, Satan's power would expand as the Lord's kingdom grew. Said Brigham Young: "It was revealed to me in the commencement of this Church, that the Church would spread, prosper, grow and extend, and that in proportion to the spread of the Gospel among the nations of the earth, so would the power of Satan rise (in Journal of Discourses 13:280).

And it all began with a lad who simply wanted to know which church to join!

There is a rhythm to the Restoration not unlike the sequence portrayed in the Lord's parable of the great supper. All nations are to be invited. The comparatively rich come first, and then, in a special demonstration of the Lord's power, the poor (see D&C 58:9-11). Just dawning on most Church members is the demanding reality that we must finally take the gospel to the multitudes of poor and the otherwise deprived upon the earth. The challenges will be many and vexing. Yet it will be as during His mortal messiahship, when "the common people heard [Jesus] gladly" (Mark 12:37).

We will see prophecies fulfilled, some of which cannot be fulfilled without accompanying dissonance. For instance, President Brigham Young observed of constraining political conditions in certain nations that "the Lord will yet revolutionize those nations until the door will be opened and the gospel will be preached to all" (in Journal of Discourses 12:256).

God will bring to pass his purposes in His own natural ways, while for us as a people and as individuals it remains to be wise as serpents and harmless as doves (Matthew 10:16).

There are many ways in which the freshening miraculous miracle can be appreciated. One of the most important ways, however, is by examining the precious and illuminating doctrine of premortal existence. Few truths are so vital for mortals to know in order to increase faith. Few truths push aside so many stumbling blocks and are so personalized in their significance. As we struggle through this otherwise perplexing existence amid the cares and anxieties of the world, the perspective brought by this doctrine is precious and personal indeed.

In a world starved for a sense of human identity and purpose, the light of the restored gospel shines especially brightly through this deep doctrine which tells us of things "in the beginning."

1990 Bookcraft
