Neal A. Maxwell, Wonderful Flood of Light (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990)

Chapter Three

"A Wonderful Flood of Light"

Describing our coming to earth "trailing clouds of glory," as Wordsworth does in his poem "Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of Early Childhood," is certainly evocative imagery. Another writer, though uninstructed by true doctrine, mused insightfully that "everything is arranged in this life as though we entered it carrying the burden of obligations contracted in a former life. . . . obligations which . . . seem to belong to a different world, founded upon kindness . . . which we leave in order to be born into this world" (Marcel Proust, The Captive, trans. C. K. Scott Moncrieff [New York: Albert and Charles Boni, 1929], pp. 250-51). Similarly, J. R. R. Tolkien perceptively declared:

Disgraced [man] may be, yet is not dethroned, and keeps the rags of lordship once he owned. (In William Griffin, Clive Staples Lewis: A Dramatic Life [San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1986], p. 79.)

However, so much more illuminating than the faint glow of truth emanating from such expressions is the striking brightness of the Restoration's revealed truths. It could not be otherwise, for as Jacob declared, "no man knoweth of [God's] ways save it be revealed unto him" (Jacob 4:8).

The phrase "a wonderful flood of light" is taken from a 1909 First Presidency statement on the origin of man. At that time the First Presidency stated: "The doctrine of the pre-existence,—revealed so plainly, particularly in latter days,—pours a wonderful flood of light upon the otherwise mysterious problem of man's origin" (Improvement Era, November 1909, p. 80).

The doctrine of premortality declares that, before his mortal birth, "man was also in the beginning with God" (D&C 93:29). Therefore, as an identifiable individual, you have been you for a long, long time. Furthermore, though some important details are as yet unrevealed, certain spirit elements of man "are eternal" and "have no beginning," since "intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed, can be." (D&C 93:29, 33.) Joseph Smith added, "it existed from eternity and will exist to eternity" (Teachings, p. 158).

Whether as a spirit son or a spirit daughter of our Heavenly Father, each of us was sent here from our first estate to undergo this joyful yet stressful mortal second estate. Being the literal, premortal spirit children of the Father, each of us can, by going from grace to grace, eventually receive of the fulness of the Father, as did Jesus (see D&C 93:20). In addition to being resurrected, we can become "perfect"—or, in one set of meanings from the Greek, "finished," "completed," and "fully developed"—but only if we worship God and truly follow the example of our Redeemer, Jesus Christ. The ultimate adoration is emulation, which helps us to become like those we worship.

As we noted earlier, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "if men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not comprehend themselves!" (Teachings, p. 343.) However, such comprehending clearly requires an understanding of the doctrine of premortality; we must know that we really are God's spirit children, trailing clouds of glory that contain dimmed flakes of fire still pulsating with the borrowed light from our eternal home!

In some form or degree the vital concept of premortal existence is found in the Bible, in early Christian documents, in Greek and Jewish literature, and in other sources as well. Only from the Restoration, however—the "miraculous miracle," with its confirming and clarifying and its elaborating revelations—do we get the clear and definitive truths about man's origins.

The plain and precious doctrine of premortality, in President Harold B. Lee's words, can provide "an awakened realization of who [we] are" (Ensign, January 1974, p. 6). In a similar vein, President Joseph F. Smith said, "Through obedience, we often catch a spark from the awakened memories of the immortal soul, which lights up our whole being as with the glory of our former home" (Gospel Doctrine [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1966], p. 14). He further instructed us:

Notwithstanding this fact that our recollection of former things was taken away, the character of our lives in the spirit world has much to do with our disposition, desires and mentality here in mortal life. This spirit influences the body to a great extent, just as the body in its desires and cravings has an influence on the spirit.... Environment and many other causes, however, have great influence on the progress and destiny of man, but we must not lose sight of the fact that the characteristics of the spirit which were developed through many ages of a former existence play a very important part in our progression through mortal life. (Improvement Era, March 1916, p. 426.)

In the light of these stimulating concepts, clearly we should think of ourselves not only for what we are but also for what we have the possibility to become!

Prophets in all dispensations have understood these things. Someday, when the obscuring dust of mortal history finally settles, we shall see much more clearly that gospel fulness existed even in Adam's time, including the doctrine of premortality.

In developing and increasing real faith, the doctrine of premortality is a fundamental building block, just as is the doctrine of postmortality. This doctrine of premortality represents a fresh view of ourselves, even a profound response to man's search for meaning in life. It is easy to see how, lacking an understanding of premortality, some find this life puzzling and some regard the human predicament as inexplicable.

Premortality, mortality, and postmortality have been compared to a three-act play, of which we are witnessing the second act. Not having seen (remembered) the first act, we have to rely on reports from those who have received revelation. Those who are without these reports have inadequate knowledge concerning the preceding "there and then," and hence the injustice and unevenness of the "here and now" have caused some to call God's justice into question along with His capacity to achieve His purposes.

Without an understanding of premortality, it is no wonder that mortals often fail to take account of what is perhaps mortality's most prominent feature—its stern proving and tutoring dimensions. Some then use life's trials as an argument against God, instead of accepting these trials as being something "common to man," or as the needed tutorials which, though rigorous, last "but for a small moment" (1 Corinthians 10:13; D&C 122:4).

Mortality is properly designed to permit us only limited vision. Without the perspective of premortality, instead of understanding that "all these things shall give thee experience" (D&C 122:7), we can become drenched in doubt and be wrenched by adversity and irony, lamenting, "Why me? Why this? Why now?"

Without the perspective of a purposeful mortality and also of long-standing, even premortal, covenants, Israel's wanderings make of Sinai a senseless sojourn. However, Israel's wandering is actually a type for our mortal state and God's plans for us: "And thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep his commandments, or no" (Deuteronomy 8:2). Just as Israel was proved in the wilderness, God's divine designs for mortality include to "prove [us] herewith" (Abraham 3:25).

Those who are not informed of our pre-earth state are doctrinally deprived mortals and, in Nephi's words, can and will "stumble exceedingly" (1 Nephi 13:34). For instance, a severe stumbling—a major misreading of reality—is evident in the attitude of hopelessness on the part of those who say mankind is "destined to extinction.... There is nothing we can do." In one poet's words: "We have no personal life beyond the grave. There is no God. Fate knows nor wrath nor ruth [compassion]." James Thomson, The City of Dreadful Night and Other Poems [London: Bertram Dobell, 1910], p. 35.)

These mortal lamentations bring to mind the great and reassuring lines of Jacob concerning the precious perspective of divine truth: "[The Spirit] ... speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be" Jacob 4:13, italics added). Truth likewise includes "knowledge of things... as they were" (D&C 93:24). Thus truth is the "sum of existence" ("Oh Say, What Is Truth?" Hymns, no. 272).

Gaining "life eternal" requires our coming to know "God, and Jesus Christ" John 17:3). Then, so knowing and so worshipping them, we will genuinely strive to become more like them and seek to partake of their fulness.

For now, however, we mortals merely possess certain underdeveloped possibilities and qualities, qualities such as love, mercy, patience, meekness, and spiritual submissiveness. But though we are enormously less spiritually developed than Jesus, the potential is there, for we too were with the Father "in the beginning."

Many of our religious friends sincerely hold with the tradition that each individual is actually created out of nothing—either at conception or at birth. This is significantly different from knowing that, as differentiated individuals, we were with God "in the beginning" in the premortal world (D&C 93:29). Thus there is contained in the simple LDS hymn "I Am a Child of God" or in the anthem "O My Father" more true doctrine than in the communiques from various synods and councils of centuries past! Discussion is not a substitute for revelation!

President John Taylor rejoiced that the restored gospel and restored Church helped him "to know... by revelation for myself. . . . I want something that is calculated to satisfy the capacious desires of that eternal mind." Otherwise, left uninstructed, said President Taylor "I would worship God the best way I knew how, and act justly and honorably with my neighbor; which I believe thousands of that class of men called infidels do at the present day." (John Taylor, in Book of Testimonies, p. 48.)

How and when did this precious doctrine of premortality become lost or distorted? We do not know precisely and completely, even though we recognize that some things were "kept back" and others "taken away" from that which, much later, became our treasured Bible (1 Nephi 13:34, 40). Stephen Robinson of Brigham Young University has written: "One needs to realize that by the time the dispute arose. . . over the origin of souls, the scriptures that answered the question had already been excised, therefore those who deliberated were left to sift through their conflicting traditions without benefit of scripture on this point" (letter to author dated November 29, 1988).

Whatever the particulars, the impact of this "plain and precious" doctrine was stilled for centuries.

It seems that the more spiritually significant the doctrine, the more quickly it comes under attack from the devil, hence the more quickly it is discarded when apostasy occurs. Furthermore, one false doctrine usually leads to another. By way of example, premortality, the reality of a physical resurrection, and the concept that man can become god-like were early casualties in the attack by false doctrines.

Another feature of false doctrines is that almost always they seem to cause a lessened sense of personal identity, of personal accountability, or of personal joy. Mistaken beliefs often lead to a heightened sense of hopelessness about the human circumstance! Thus the doctrinally deprived really do "stumble exceedingly" (1 Nephi 13:34).

Another example of a severe stumbling occurred because of the false doctrine of predestination. Why worship a capricious, unjust God such as this doctrine implies? Before predestination's grip loosened, it helped to set the stage for pervasive irreligion.

Other mutant, secular beliefs postulate their own forms of determinism—economic and historical. Whatever the form, false doctrines diminish human understanding of the reality that we mortals are "free to choose" (2 Nephi 2:27).

Historically, too, a general lack of understanding about God's plan of salvation gave impetus to the ebbing sea of Christian faith, about which Matthew Arnold wrote in his poem "Dover Beach":

Its melancholy, long, withdrawing roar, Retreating, to the breath Of the night wind down the vast edges drear And naked shingles of the world.

Thus came the Restoration, with this "plain and precious" doctrine, "that faith also might increase in the earth" (D&C 1:21).

Though the absence of vital gospel truths began to be remedied by the Restoration, appreciation and understanding were neither widespread nor immediate among all Church members. Sequentially, though it was not then fully recognized by all, the precious truths concerning premortality were unfolded in accordance with the line-upon-line pattern of revelation. These came first in April or May 1829 (Alma 13), and then with much more clarity and detail in 1830, while Joseph was translating Genesis and received the book of Moses by revelation. More came in 1832 (D&C 76:11-13), in 1833 (D&C 93), and so on. Still more came in 1842 when the book of Abraham was published. Joseph Smith publicly preached a portion of the doctrine of premortality in 1839 (see Teachings, p. 158). Later, just prior to his martyrdom, there came the soaring King Follett funeral sermon in April 1844 (see Teachings, beginning p. 343). Most recently, in 1918, we received what is now section 138 of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Whether this gap between early revelation and later articulation reflected imperfect record-keeping, the Lord's timing, Joseph's degree of disclosure (for he did not tell all he knew), the people's readiness to receive, or all of the above, we do not know. In any case, the revelations came incrementally, and Joseph's understanding and articulating apparently came in the same manner.

Presently we may puzzle over those occasions wherein we sense that we belong to another place which is somehow imprinted upon us. In pondering these emotions, we can only speak "the smallest part which [we] feel" (Alma 26:16). There is certainly no sustained surf of recall, but only brief freshening by the delicate mists of memory. These evaporate quickly enough under the baking heat of the mortal day, but only after evoking, however fleetingly, an unmistakable longing in us. Though estranged, we hunger for reunion, for return even though we know not where.

Only a few come to this mortal experience with substantial saintliness already developed. Rather, our individual best is presently but the bud of possibility. Even so, these buds of possibility—the early stages of divine attributes—are unmistakably there. While unfolding and enlarging over time, these key qualities should also "grow together," producing full felicity.

When we experience the celestial qualities in others, even though not fully developed, we rejoice. We rightly associate these traits with greatness—whether in neighbors, friends, or those of high station. The selflessness of Mother Teresa speaks for itself. So did the meekness of that remarkable George Washington.

Since our individual identities and personalities did not begin here in mortality, there emerges a more glorious appreciation of the atonement of Jesus, our Redeemer. As inwardly and reverently we conjoin the scriptures pertaining to the Atonement with the things of the holy temple, the impending real reunion with the Father and real reconciliation to Kim have so much greater meaning. In theological fact, the more complete our understanding of the great atonement, the more it is linked to the premortal world, as Hugh Nibley has so often and so thoughtfully expressed. If, as some mistakenly aver, we had been created here and out of nothing—whether at conception or at birth—how could we, as individuals, really be going home to a place that we, as individuals, never knew? How could there be genuine, individual reconciliation with a Father whom we, as individuals, did not know before our birth?

Actually we were "nurtured" near God's side and then came here for a "wise and glorious purpose" ("O My Father," Hymns, no. 292). This all points toward a time when the faithful shall "regain [God's] presence' in resplendent reunion. No wonder Joseph Smith could speak of the "gospel of reconciliation" (Teachings, p. 192).

We know almost nothing about ourselves or about conditions before our spirit birth. But whatever existed or whatever we were before that birth, this was incorporated into Father's merciful plans. We became his literal spirit sons and daughters, thereby being ushered into our first estate. Even in the premortal there and then, Father left His children free to choose. Hence the ideological "war in heaven." (See Luke 10:18; JST, Revelation 12:6-8; 2 Nephi 2:17; D&C 29:36.)

During the stressful sojourn on this earth we should make no mistake about who we and others really are. Amid our budding possibilities, in the words of C. S. Lewis, we are "in a society of possible gods and goddesses, ... [in which] there are no ordinary people. [We] have never talked to a mere mortal. Nations, cultures, arts, civilisations—these are mortal, and their life is to ours as the life of a gnat. But it is immortals whom we joke with, work with, marry, snub, and exploit." (C. S. Lewis, The Weight of Glory and Other Addresses [New York: Macmillan, 1980], pp. 18-19.)

When we know who we are, then we know also much more clearly what we might become—and also how and when. The gospel thereby emancipates us from uncertainty as to our identity. But this precious perspective also brings with it an intensification of our personal accountability, since we know who we are and why we are here. Actually, several scriptures indicate that the Spirit of the Lord, through conscience, instructs between good and bad all those who will heed it, thereby giving us an accountability which, though we may not appreciate it, is nevertheless there. (See Moroni 7:16-18; 2 Nephi 2:5; John 1:9; D&C 84:46; 88:7; 93:2.)

While "men are, that they might have joy" (2 Nephi 2:25), scriptures repeatedly tell us that the "natural man" clearly prefers perishable pleasure. But with the heightened accountability we have mentioned, how is it, for instance, that an eternal entity, on leave from the royal courts on high, can treat another individual as merely an object of sexual pleasure? Do child abusers realize whose child they have abused? And—at a lower but still significant level of wrongdoing—since Jesus has descended below all things (see D&C 88:6) in order to lift us all up (3 Nephi 27:14), how can we so frequently engage in putting others down?

With regard to poverty and disease, even if people have actually "brought upon [themselves their] misery" (Mosiah 4:17), how can we withhold our assistance, since we know who they really are?

Inasmuch as restored knowledge teaches us we all were "in the beginning" with God and have the potential to be with Him throughout eternity, how childish it is to take advantage of another human—whether in dating, in business, in politics, or in any other area of life! Since God is "lending [us] breath... from one moment to another" (Mosiah 2:21), how wrong it is to use any of that precious breath to lie or to bear false witness, or to use that vital energy to "dig a pit for [one's] neighbor"! (2 Nephi 28:8.)

Knowing that we live in eternity, how can we conclude that, because of the fleeting pleasures and pressures of the world, we have no time for children? Furthermore, may not the many wounded strewn along life's way justifiably expect us eternals not to be in too much of a hurry?

Even after all the premortal tutorials, including those for the noble souls "called and prepared from the foundation of the world" (Alma 13:3), we were all placed in a mortal environment amid real challenges that would tame the raw self further. President Lorenzo Snow has suggested that in prospect we may have perceived some of the difficulties we would have to face:

I dare say that in the spirit world, when it was proposed to us to come into this probation, and pass through the experience that we are now receiving, it was not altogether pleasant and agreeable; the prospects were not so delightful in all respects as might have been desired. Yet there is no doubt that we saw and understood clearly there that, in order to accomplish our exaltation and glory, this was a necessary experience; and however disagreeable it might have appeared to us, we were willing to conform to the will of God, and consequently we are here. (The Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, Clyde Williams, comp. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984], pp. 92-93.)

"Free to choose" between liberty and life on the one hand and captivity and death on the other (see 2 Nephi 2:27), we now experience firsthand the bitter and the sweet. Even for those souls who were already significantly spiritually submissive, it is a process of polishing. If we are unwilling to participate in the requisite learning experiences, our performance cannot be consecrated for our own good (see 2 Nephi 32:9). Yet "the power is in [us]" to do much good, if we but will (D&C 58:27-28). God's work will truly become our own only as we strive to be more like Him by gaining access to the powers of heaven through increased personal righteousness (see D&C 121:36). But it is no use craving more of God's power without first having more of His love in us. This is what much of our mortal training is all about—coming to an understanding, through experience, of how crucial the cardinal, Christian virtues are.

Since we have come into mortality "not in entire forgetfulness," ironical as it may seem our present drives for status, power, and ascendancy may involve twisted, muted memories of glories and dominions we witnessed before we came here. But how can one wisely exercise any extensive dominion without first developing dominion over oneself? We may desire to have spiritual glory and power, but we cannot obtain it without emulating God's qualities and attributes—including humility, a prerequisite to real glory. Moreover, larger, future glory finally involves larger, future service to others. This is obvious in the declared purpose of God's own work and glory (see Moses 1:39). Regal repose and idle indifference clearly are out of place in the celestial kingdom.

During all of our protracted developmental process we are very dependent on God's long-suffering, which provides us with the much-needed time and space in which to repent and to grow (see Alma 12:24; 42:5).

If we fail to learn who we are, however much other information we acquire here, we shall be "ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth" (2 Timothy 3:7). Without the key spiritual truths, such as premortality, learning will be a Sisyphus-like process in which

All ignorance toboggans into know and trudges up to ignorance again. (Edward Estlin Cummings, "One Times One.")

With the acceptance of knowledge about premortality comes a greater realization of what it means to be true to ourselves and to our possibilities. We can even understand better the role of life's disappointments and of opposition, the full shock of which we will still feel, despite that understanding, but now within the absorptive framework of faith.

Having that knowledge, no longer can we regard other people as mere ciphers, functions, or even as temporary friends—because in spiritual fact they were, are, and will continue to be our eternal brothers and sisters. One first weeps for joy because of such stunning perspectives, and weeps next because of what is among mortals as compared to what should be.

Does such doctrinal knowledge automatically produce love for others? No. But the doctrines create a climate in which the development of sustained love is possible. We have added reasons to try to love. We have reasons to endure any lack of love for us by mortals, knowing who it is that loves us perfectly. We have reasons to think of ourselves not only for what we are but also for what we have the possibilities to become.

Having the true doctrines, not only are we made aware of many more things in our lives which need to be put right but also there are now powerful and persuasive reasons to put them right!

By the light of the Restoration we see that, with us, other mortals are members of an eternal community. Our obligations and ethics in that community transcend those that are merely mutually agreed upon for the moment. One devastating weakness of "situational" ethics is their provincial failure to take into account man's real and full situation—his eternal history and possibilities.

When illuminated by true doctrine, it is no wonder that life's process must be so relentless! There is so much to be done in so little time. Thus a blessing is often quickly succeeded by a soul-stretching. Spiritual exhilaration is soon followed by frustration or temptation. Reveries are followed by adversities, since, left too long in extended spiritual musings, we would quickly forget others in need. We must get on with the next challenge.

Blessed with our knowledge of premortal experience, life is largely what we choose to make of it and of our inborn talents. The same musical scale was available to Beethoven for composing his Fifth Symphony as to the composer of "Chopsticks." These compositions even share several opening notes of melody. But what an enormous difference in substance and effect!

So here we are in Eden, an Eden become Babylon! Perhaps we have grown too accustomed to the place. Even if we decide to leave Babylon, some of us endeavor to keep a second residence there, or we commute on weekends. To quote President Marion G. Romney, some go on "trying to serve the Lord without offending the devil" ("The Price of Peace," in Speeches of the Year [Provo: Brigham Young University, March 1, 1955], p. 7).

Furthermore, Babylon does not give exit permits gladly—an ironic implementation of that ancient boast, "one soul shall not be lost" (Moses 4:1). Babylon is also a noisy, distracting place. No wonder some therein are "called many times and... would not hear" (Alma 10:6). No wonder Jesus' open invitation to leave Babylon's slums and to join Him in the stunning, spiritual highlands goes largely unheeded. There, however, redeeming Jesus waits "with open arms to receive [us]" (Mormon 6:17).

With an understanding of the fulness of the gospel that embraces the remote past, we can see our lives here as part of a continuum rather than being deceived by the philosophy of "eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die" (2 Nephi 28:7). Gospel fulness likewise replaces the algebra of agnosticism with its one "known" factor, all others being unknown; the Restoration also refutes humanism's statement quoted in chapter 1: "No deity will save us; we must save ourselves."

Eliza R. Snow lyricized about our yearnings for the heavenly home we left and for our return to it, saying that it was not "until the key of knowledge was restored" that she knew "why" ("O My Father," Hymns, no. 292). That key of knowledge is "the fulness of [the Lord's] scriptures" (JST, Luke 11:53). The religious establishment of Jesus' time not only twisted what scriptures they had but they also lacked "the key of knowledge," the "plain and precious things" (Luke 11:52; 1 Nephi 13:40).

The very preciousness of the Restoration, with its knowledge of eternal principles and foreordained assignments, makes it unwise for us to tamper with its truths, to attempt to dilute its doctrines, or to misuse its authority. Why in any case would one want to belong to a church which he could remake in his own image? Rather, it is the Lord's image we should come to have in our countenances (see Alma 5:19). The doctrines are His—not ours. The power is His to delegate, not ours to manipulate. Those who want to shape and remake things to their own liking have ample and legitimate opportunities to do so in political parties and mortal organizations. Our spiritual task, however, as previously commissioned, is to make God's work our own, not the other way around.

There are also those in this second estate, whether consciously or otherwise, who try running away from God. Running away from God, no less! God who has created worlds without number and yet notices the fall of every sparrow! Such runaways cannot even make it unnoticed off the porch, let alone into the suburbs.

Besides, returning prodigals—those who have been all over the world and even some parts of their hometown—soberly but gladly confirm that it is impossible to run away from God's love or beyond His redemptive reach. How He persists, for His "arm is lengthened out all the day long"! (2 Nephi 28:32.)

What we know of the premortal past indicates that God's love for us is of even greater duration than we can comprehend. Should we not suppose, given any ancient or inherent individuality on our part and given our opportunity to choose, that our Father is doing with us the best that even He can do? The marvel is that He persists and pursues His plan of happiness for us while preserving our freedom to choose! God is truly an organizing as well as a loving Father. Back of the beyond He saw what was, but He also saw what could be! Recognizing the great distance we had to travel from where we were, seeing our flaws, and nevertheless being willing to commence His work with whatever was before our spirit birth, God loved us enough to initiate and sustain this divine process over measureless periods. There appears to have been "no other way" for Him to increase our happiness and our joy. What long-suffering love! What true fatherhood!

As He made clear to us back in those premortal times, all of God's works are designed so that we might be "added upon," thereby enjoying greater happiness and pointing to the eventual day, when, if faithful, we might partake of all that the Father has (see D&C 84:38).

Indeed we should daily stand even more amazed at the love God proffers us. As we learned when His plan was unfolded to us in heaven, He was willing to allow the sacrifice of his first-born spirit Son, His Only Begotten in the flesh, in order to be the example for us and to redeem us. As unfathomable as are our Father's intelligence and power, even more staggering is the felicitous fact of His eternal, perfect love. Even as we come to love Him, as the Apostle reminded us, God loved us first (see 1 John 4:19).

For our own benefit God wants things to "be done in [His] own way" (D&C 104:16). Yet all the while, He endures our ingratitude, our insensitivity, and our relapses. All the while, too, He honors our individuality.

When our premortal memories are restored, this will give us even more reasons to praise God forever! When judgment day arrives and all mortals kneel and confess before Him, each will openly acknowledge that God's love, His justice, and His mercy are perfect (see Alma 12:15). In my opinion, this grateful acknowledgment will pertain not only to this second estate but to all of our remarkable relationship with Him! He does nothing save it be for our benefit (see 2 Nephi 26:24).

"Oh, it is wonderful!" the hymn says ("I Stand All Amazed," Hymns, no. 193). God was redemptively at work long before mortal time began on this earth—and He will still be at work even after mortal time is no more (see D&C 88:110; Alma 40:8).

The Restoration enlarges our collective memory (see Alma 37:8) beyond present imagination, through the coming forth of more scripture—along with the promise of much, much more to come. The doctrine of premortality is among what Paul called "the deep things of God," which God has revealed to us afresh in the latter days (1 Corinthians 2: 10; Jacob 4:8, 13). For that divinely dispatched "wonderful flood of light" which illuminates this deep doctrine and by which we can see "things as they really are" let us "live in thanksgiving daily" (Alma 34:38).

1990 Bookcraft
