Neal A. Maxwell, Wonderful Flood of Light (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990)

Chapter Four

"O Remember, Remember" . . . "Murmur Not"

Remembering and counting our many blessings can humble us by reminding us of all the reasons we have to be thankful to God—not just today's reasons, but those relating to all our yesterdays. Each week a sincere partaking of the sacrament can become part of this very process. We partake "in remembrance," so that we may "always remember" what Jesus has done for us (3 Nephi 18:11; Moroni 4, 5).

If we fail to stir remembrance of blessings received, the human tendency is to say, in effect, whether to one's God or to one's fellows, "What have you done for me lately?" Indeed, prophets of the Lord have asked directly whether their people had "sufficiently retained in remembrance" His deliverances and blessings (Alma 5:6-7). It is best to cultivate our "remembering" capacity now and to be guided accordingly, since at judgment day we will have "perfect remembrance" (Alma 5:18). The important theme of remembrance occurs in one form or another in the Old Testament well over two hundred times. It appears in the Book of Mormon dozens of times, too. This parallelism is to be expected, since the Israelites in Palestine observed the law of Moses and the Nephites kept it "strictly" for many years (see Mosiah 13:30; Alma 30:3). Wherever the gospel is, there too is the call to remembrance.

If we are not living "in thanksgiving daily" (Alma 34:38), remembering "sufficiently" sometimes requires severe stimulation: "And thus we see that except the Lord doth chasten his people with many afflictions, yea, except he doth visit them with death and with terror, and with famine and with all manner of pestilence, they will not remember him" (Helaman 12:3).

It is much better to be humble "because of the word" and because of our many blessings (Alma 32:14). Without such meekness, we may let a present deprivation or affliction blot out our remembrance of past blessings. Even the very best people sometimes receive stern reminders: "Thou art not yet as Job" (D&C 121:10). "The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?" (D&C 122:8.) The impressive brother of Jared was chastened because for a season he had been forgetful of his prayers (see Ether 2:14).

The sheer weight of our cumulative reasons to be grateful can help us to live in thanksgiving daily. If so disposed, we can feel sufficiently grateful to "sing the song of redeeming love" about both now and days past! (Alma 5:26; 34:38.) Not only have we "proved him in days that are past" but also we have been proven, which should encourage us amid present challenges.

The Lord's blessings are of differing kinds, of course, a fact of which we should be conscious as we tally and inventory. Each and every blessing is to be remembered. But the Lord wants us to remember certain blessings most of all.

For instance, Jesus miraculously provided loaves and fishes for the hungry multitude of several thousand (see John 6:1-14). Within minutes the loaves and fishes (of which there were "enough and to spare") were gone. The next morning some of the beneficiaries of that remarkable blessing were hungry again. Jesus Himself observed, "Your fathers did eat [the miraculous] manna in the wilderness, and are dead." They would have remained forever dead, too, except for the blessing of the Atonement, a blessing which in its effects is infinite and endless, not temporary. In contrast to the daily-dissolving manna, Jesus is the "true bread from heaven," filling us forever so that we will "never hunger." (See John 6:31-58.)

Even so, we rightly pray for our daily bread. It would be much more difficult to read the scriptures if we were hungry, or to serve neighbors if we ourselves were starving. Having supplied the daily bread, then, the Lord generously provides us with the nourishment of the holy scriptures upon which we are invited to feast daily (see 2 Nephi 31:20; John 5:39). If we fail to attend the feast, if we do not search the scriptures, we will miss the needed and reminding truths that God has sent among us for that purpose. That would be analogous to the situation that produced Jesus’ heartfelt lamentation, "Oh, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how oft . . . ," demonstrating that His contemporaries did not recognize who had come among them.

Those of us in the United States are rightly concerned with preserving our precious constitutional liberties, including freedom of religion, speech, and press. Events in the world often remind us of our need for thanksgiving over the liberties we enjoy. Throughout history most mortals have not had any such constitutional liberties, yet they were still blessed in other ways. For instance, mortal property rights have often been either non-existent, revoked, or easily lost, but this is not so with regard to a partly earned, partly grace-provided title to one of the many mansions in Heavenly Father's abode.

At night, two millennia ago, the celebration of the great Feast of Tabernacles featured illuminated candelabra in the courtyard of the temple at Jerusalem. Fresh from that experience the Master Teacher went on to declare that He was the Light of the world, that His followers, regardless of time or season, need never walk in darkness (see John 8:12).

In this age we are blessed daily by electrical light. It takes a power failure to remind us how much we take that blessing for granted. As Jesus told his followers in the above passage, how ever, there is never a spiritual power failure when the gospel "casts away the veil of unbelief" and dispels "the cloud of darkness," thus producing an endless daytime of understanding and rejoicing. The gospel can "light up [our] minds," so that we can function as illuminated individuals—without interruption. (See Alma 19:6.)

As we continue to remember our blessings, we note that we can, and in fact do, receive wonderful blessings which end searing pain or which extend our lives productively. How deeply and justifiably grateful we are for such blessings! More important, however, we need to remember that the Lord gives us transcendent immortality—unconditionally! Additionally, He offers us the abundance of eternal life. If we keep our covenants, a million years from now it will not matter in one sense whether we died in 1990, 1993, or 2010. How we live in any seemingly "extra" years does matter, of course, insofar as our use of time bears upon our qualifying for eternal life and assists others in that same process. And it is worth remembering that covenant keepers perform similar duties and services on either side of the veil of death, since the second estate continues until the resurrection.

There are important gradations as between types of blessings. One type—very real and much appreciated—is tied to temporal conditions. We might call these operational revelations—how to build an ark, or how to illuminate barges, for example. These are remarkable blessings which respond to urgent needs, but they cannot compare to the illuminating revelations from Jesus concerning what we must do to be more like Him. That type of blessing is tied to the eternal conditions. Both types are needed. Both are to be remembered.

No wonder the Lord reminded ancient Israel so many times of the need to remember both types of blessings. He often rehearsed their need to remember how they had been rescued so dramatically from Egypt. They even sang a special song to celebrate the miraculous parting and hovering of the Red Sea (see Exodus 15). But it is so much more important that all humans, including ancient Israel, have been rescued from enveloping, endless death. There will be no extinction and no annihilation, and that is precisely because of the marvelous "infinite atonement" (2 Nephi 9:7; Alma 34:10).

Our own memories are not the only things available to us. One purpose of holy scripture is, in fact, to "enlarge" our perspectives and our collective memory (Alma 37:8). It gives us an enhanced "recall." The title page to the Book of Mormon even indicates that the book was written partly "to show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers." From the title page on throughout the book, and even in the very close of the Book of Mormon, the theme of remembrance is apparent: "Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall read these things, if it be wisdom in God that ye should read them, that ye would remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the time that ye shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts" (Moroni 10:3).

Forgetfulness can be so very expensive: "And also all that generation were gathered unto their fathers: and there arose another generation after them, which knew not the Lord, nor yet the works which he had done for Israel" (Judges 2:10).

How far back should our memories be rolled back? As a beginning, certainly the rollback should cover the length of our personal lives. It requires energy and intellectual honesty to make such an introspective inventory and to keep it before us. Amulek reflected honestly, correcting an initial perception with remembrance:

And behold, I am also a man of no small reputation among all those who know me; yea, and behold, I have many kindreds and friends, and I have also acquired much riches by the hand of my industry.

Nevertheless, after all this, I never have known much of the ways of the Lord, and his mysteries and marvelous power. I said I never had known much of these things; but behold, I mistake, for I have seen much of his mysteries and his marvelous power; yea, even in the preservation of the lives of this people.

Nevertheless, I did harden my heart, for I was called many times and I would not hear; therefore I knew concerning these things, yet I would not know; therefore I went on rebelling against God, in the wickedness of my heart. (Alma 10:4-6.)

We should likewise journey as far back as the light of scriptures can inform us concerning our collective "memory." The human family has been much blessed from Adam on down:

And thus the Gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost.

And thus all things were confirmed unto Adam, by an holy ordinance, and the Gospel preached, and a decree sent forth, that it should be in the world, until the end thereof; and thus it was. (Moses 5:58-59.)

And they began from that time forth to call on his name; therefore God conversed with men, and made known unto them the plan of redemption, which had been prepared from the foundation of the world; and this he made known unto them according to their faith and repentance and their holy works (Alma 12:30).

No wonder the Lord asks us to extend our remembrance all the way back:

Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee.

When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel. (Deuteronomy 32:7-8.)

Yet there have been still other blessings from God, blessings bestowed even longer ago. The Prophet Joseph declared of an ancient scene that brought forth subsequent divine bestowals:

The great Jehovah contemplated the whole of the events connected with the earth, pertaining to the plan of salvation, before it rolled into existence, or ever "the morning stars sang together" for joy; the past, the present, and the future were and are, with Him, one eternal "now;" He knew of . . . the depth of iniquity that would be connected with the human family, . . . and has made ample provision for their redemption (Teachings, p. 220).

How thankful we should be that God is not only a loving God but also a God of marvelous capacity who has declared, "I am able to do mine own work" (2 Nephi 27:20, 21). What a great reassurance this is to us, for there are many mortals who acknowledge God but nevertheless doubt that His purposes for humankind will prevail.

Each individual is also blessed with the "light of Christ" (John 1:9; D&C 84:46). One function of this light is to help us to remember—if we do not live so as to dim that light.

When we get our premortal memories back, these will give us further cause to be even more grateful to God—deepening in us the spirit of a perpetual Thanksgiving; for then we will acknowledge that God's justice and mercy have been perfect throughout the total span of our remarkable relationship with Him (see Mosiah 16:1; Alma 12:15). While for the moment we cannot recall our first estate, we can anticipate our third estate and its promised blessings.

We were with God "in the beginning," and all His works have been done so that we might be "added upon" and might have greater happiness—pointing to the eventual day when, if faithful, we might partake of His fulness, even, as Jesus has said, "all that my Father hath" (D&C 84:38, 93:19). This is eternal life, the greatest of all God's gifts (see D&C 14:7), and we should be most thankful for it.

God's love, patience, and long-suffering saw us through our first estate and will do likewise now, through our second estate, as part of His work "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39).

Eternal life is so much more than endless existence. Its fulness, presently inconceivable to us, will involve music and scenery and perspectives which have not "entered into the heart of man" (1 Corinthians 2:9), things we "never had supposed" (Moses 1:10). This blessing will come in the Malachi Measure—so much "that there shall not be room enough to receive it" (Malachi 3:10). Cups running over and without ceasing! Included will be the inestimable and crowning blessings of living in God's presence and of eternal increase!

Upon receiving eternal life, whatever the deprivations of the faithful will have been in mortality, fulness will follow. Mortal deprivations will give way to God's celestial benefactions. And He does not give grudgingly. Being a perfect Father, He delights to honor those who serve Him (see D&C 76:5).

What sort of individuals will receive eternal life? Among others, the few rich who sought the kingdom first and wanted riches only in order to do good (see Jacob 2:18-19); those few who learned not to cease hearkening to the counsels of God (see 2 Nephi 9:29); those few whose hearts were not set upon the praise and things of this world; those few who did not abuse power and authority; the few who learned to obtain and handle the very powers of heaven through significant personal righteousness (see D&C 121:35, 36, 39).

Missing from that glorious scene will be those who remained too concerned with keeping their places in the society's establishments and with receiving the honors and praise of men; those who neglected the poor and needy; those who gained the world but lost their souls in the process; those who could not stop murmuring; those who were not valiant in their testimony of Jesus. (See John 12:42-43; D&C 104:17-18; Matthew 16:26; D&C 76:79.)

Mercifully, things then will "be done in [God's] own way," not ours (D&C 104:16). Then God's purposes, His patience, His power, and His profound love, which were at work long before time was, will also be at work even after time will be no more (see D&C 84:100; Alma 40:8). These and other truths are among what Paul called "the deep things of God" (1 Corinthians 2:10), for which we should be deeply grateful. Deep truths are for remembering especially when we are in deep difficulty. Even so, "no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby" (Hebrews 12:11). Meanwhile such calisthenics—spiritual equivalents of push-ups and deep knee bends—will still hurt and sorely stretch us. With our gospel knowledge, however, we can understand what the vexing, unceasing "drill" is all about and will recognize that such basic training will not go on forever.

No wonder we have abundant causes to live "in thanksgiving daily" (Alma 34:38)—for all that we have received in the first estate, for all we have received in the second estate, and also in anticipation of the great blessings which we shall receive in our third and final estate!

For now, we pray for various blessings, sometimes for nothing more than a needed night's sleep, or importuningly and justifiably for a grandchild's greater happiness, or for a friend to be healed, or to be better able to endure present affliction. When we receive such blessings—"Praise be to God!" But transcending all such praise should be our everlasting praise to God for His plan of happiness—for making us the very center of His work and purposes! (See 2 Nephi 26:24.)

Meanwhile, too, we are to "take up the cross daily" (Luke 9:23), and again, we will carry it better if we also "live in thanksgiving daily." Granted, even a strong sense of past blessings cannot completely rout present pain or loneliness. After all, we are here to experience (see Genesis 30:27; D&C 122:7). However, memories can become the vigilant sentries needed to challenge our marauding moods, moods which otherwise would carry the day and especially the night! Those sentries can both prod us and point us to the strait and narrow path.

Wise King Benjamin urged us to consider "the blessed and happy state of those that keep the commandments of God," for they will "dwell with God in a state of never-ending happiness. O remember, remember that these things are true." (Mosiah 2:41.)

God never forgets us, even those who turn away from or deny Him. If they repent and come unto Him, He will be merciful to them, "for [His] arm is lengthened out all the day long" (2 Nephi 28:32).

The directness and specificity Jesus employed with the rich and righteous young man who "went away grieved" (Mark 10:22) provided the man with the basis of later remembrance. Could there have been some second thoughts? We do not know whether the good young man subsequently changed his mind after having gone away sorrowing. But Jesus’ instructions were pointed enough to make such poignant remembering possible.

We do know that there were those in the religious establishment in the time of Jesus’ mortal messiahship who believed on Him in secret but who would not confess Him publicly (John 12:42-43). Later on, after His crucifixion, "a great company" of priests joined the Church, and perhaps among that company were some who earlier had been reluctant to go public and now remembered Jesus (see Acts 6:7).

Without remembrance, the tendency, individual and collective, is to be selfish:

Yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph, but forgat him (Genesis 40:23).

Only take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life: but teach them thy sons, and thy sons’ sons (Deuteronomy 4:9).

Yea, and we may see at the very time when he doth prosper his people, yea, in the increase of their fields, their flocks and their herds, and in gold, and in silver, and in all manner of precious things of every kind and art; sparing their lives, and delivering them out of the hands of their enemies; softening the hearts of their enemies that they should not declare wars against them; yea, and in fine, doing all things for the welfare and happiness of his people; yea, then is the time that they do harden their hearts, and do forget the Lord their God, and do trample under their feet the Holy One—yea, and this because of their ease, and their exceedingly great prosperity (Helaman 12:2).

While all of the five senses feed memory, they are not memory itself. This is one reason why we must deliberately cultivate memory, especially of the things that matter most.

Another great blessing flowing from remembering is that without remembrance of past blessings we are much more likely to murmur. Murmuring is sometimes defined as a half-suppressed or muttered complaint, like Tevye's frequent verbal asides to God in Fiddler on the Roof.

Today's crowding concerns bump aside thoughts of yesterday's blessings. Being so alert to the needs of "now" tends to dull us as to yesterday. Moreover, if we do not ponder the past, the future also comes to mean less and less. A worse possibility is that what little remembering some do may involve only the nurturing of an ancient grievance rather than the remembering of a lesson learned. And often that leads to murmuring.

Murmuring crosses the scriptural spectrum of complaints: "We need bread and water" (Numbers 21:5); "The needed provisions and military reinforcements have not arrived" (Alma 60); "Why did we ever leave Egypt?" (Numbers 11:20); "Why did we ever leave Jerusalem?" (1 Nephi 2:11.) Some have murmured, perhaps understandably, over such things as persecution by unbelievers and even over what the name of Christ's Church should be (see Mosiah 27:1; 3 Nephi 27:4). It is ironical that even receiving more scripture from God would cause murmuring (see 2 Nephi 29:8).

An early scriptural instance of murmuring involved Cain's offering to the Lord (see Moses 5:20-21). Though ancient, this episode remains instructively intact, advising us that our motivations and intentions are at least as important as our outward deeds. Cain was "wroth" that Abel's offering was acceptable but his was not. Sometimes we too worry if someone else seems more favored of the Lord than we; worse still, we want to be accepted of the Lord—but on our terms!

The real "addressee" of some murmuring is clearly the Lord. The people who complained against Moses were actually "murmuring against the Lord" (see Exodus 16:8; see also 1 Nephi 16:20). At least Tevye honestly acknowledged whom he addressed in his asides.

Jude tells us something about the style, substance, and motives of some murmurers: "These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration because of advantage" (Jude 1:16).

In its extremity, murmuring issues not only from the very discontented but also from the very conflicted: "And they did not come unto Jesus with broken hearts and contrite spirits, but they did curse God, and wish to die. Nevertheless they would struggle with the sword for their lives." (Mormon 2:14.)

Some people murmured against Jesus because He declared Himself to be the Bread of life, saying: "Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? how is it then that he saith, I came down from heaven? Jesus therefore answered and said unto them, Murmur not among yourselves." (John 6:42-43.)

Murmuring took place also when Jesus befriended and dined with publicans and sinners, and likewise when a devout woman used expensive ointment to anoint Him (see Luke 5:30; Mark 14:3-9).

In His parable of the workers in the vineyard, Jesus noted of devoted Church members that those who had worked from the first hour, having "borne the burden and the heat of the day," murmured because they received the same wages as those who had worked only the last hour (see Matthew 20:11). We are so concerned with our entitlements—an odd response for beggars to make (see Mosiah 4:19-20).

Laman and Lemuel murmured against father Lehi for leading them into the wilderness because of the "foolish imaginations of his heart" (1 Nephi 2:11). Laman and Lemuel also murmured because they feared going up against powerful and prestigious Laban (see 1 Nephi 3:31; 4:4). In fact, that depressing duo declared that father Lehi had judged the Jerusalemites too harshly—this even though their wickedness was such that Jerusalem was soon to fall and its people would be taken away into bondage! Sometimes, like Laman and Lemuel, we are too provincial and fail to understand "the dealings" of God. (1 Nephi 2:12; 17:22.)

Lehi rebuked the murmuring Laman and Lemuel because of their complaint that Nephi had said "hard things" against them (1 Nephi 16:3). Father Lehi later observed, "That which ye call anger was the truth" (2 Nephi 1:26). How often we can make that same mistake! Cutting truth can surely hurt, but the compensation is that its painful lancing can drain off pride.

There was more murmuring from Laman and Lemuel because Nephi broke his steel bow, because he supposedly couldn't build a ship, and because as the younger brother he was seen as trying to "rule over us" (see 1 Nephi 16:18; 17:17; 2 Nephi 5:3). These same murmurers, however, soon surfeited themselves on the meat brought back from Nephi's hunts with his new bow, and they were glad enough to sail in the ship Nephi built. How handy good but imperfect leaders are as focal points for our frustrations! Especially if they must hold their tongues and simply take it! We have all heard it: "Why don't the Brethren . . ."

Nephi is described as being favored of the Lord because he did not murmur (1 Nephi 3:6). So far as we know, he never yielded to grumbling.

In modern times, Oliver Cowdery fell short of the coveted privilege of translating. The Lord told him, "Do not murmur, my son, for it is wisdom in me that I have dealt with you after this manner" (D&C 9:6). Emma Smith was likewise told to "murmur not" because in the divine wisdom certain things were withheld from her (D&C 25:4).

Murmuring can block the process of needed tutoring. Yet unappreciated tutoring surely causes murmuring. It is as if we have an unrealistic expectation that life is to flow smoothly, featuring an unbroken corridor of green lights leading to vacant parking places just in front of our destinations!

As we ponder the foregoing and other examples from scripture, additional points become obvious.

First, the murmurer often lacks the courage to express openly his or her concern. If the complaint concerns a peer, the murmurer usually does not follow this counsel from Jesus: "Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother" (Matthew 18:15).

Second, murmurers make good conversational cloakholders (see Acts 7:58). Though picking up no stones themselves, they provoke others to do so.

Third, while a murmurer insists on venting his own feelings, he regards any response to them as hostile (see 2 Nephi 1:26). For example, murmurers apparently do not usually take into account the bearing capacity of the receivers.

Fourth, murmurers usually are short on memory. The Israelites survived in Sinai. They were sometimes hungry and thirsty, but the Lord always rescued them, whether by quail or by water struck from a rock (see Numbers 11:31; Exodus 17:6). With no remembering of past blessings, however, there is no perspective available for evaluating present dissatisfactions. Perspective about what is really going on can be precious indeed: "And thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep his commandments, or no" (Deuteronomy 8:2).

It is strange how those short on memory often have long lists of demands.

Perhaps the most fundamental thing to be said about murmuring, however, is contained in this verse: "And thus Laman and Lemuel . . . did murmur because they knew not the dealings of that God who had created them." (1 Nephi 2:12.)

Having necessarily been out of contact with Pahoran for some time, Moroni complained to him by letter about the government's neglect of the armies, but it turned out that he did not have all the facts. Pahoran's response is a classic in meekness and empathy! (See Alma 60-61.) The story shows that people can be out of touch not only with the facts but also with each other. Murmuring frequently comes about when the murmurer has insufficient information to make a correct judgment; and this emphasizes that having confidence in leaders who keep confidences is part of sustaining them.

For us, as laborers in the Lord's vineyard, to murmur over life's inequities is, Jesus indicated, "to murmur against the goodman of the house" (Matthew 20:11). The goodness of the Lord of the house is attested to in many ways, yet as guests many of us still murmur about present accommodations.

Whether it concerns the impending fall of Jerusalem or the tutoring of Oliver Cowdery, murmuring questions God's capacity. Yet He has assured us, "I am able to do mine own work" (2 Nephi 27:20, 21). Furthermore, He has even told us that certain experiences, over which we might otherwise murmur, can actually be for our good (see D&C 122:7; see also Genesis 30:27; D&C 105:10).

As in the case of the episode of the golden calf, the view from the desert floor is very different from that atop Mount Sinai. Perspective makes such an enormous difference. Let us not forget that, aside from the extent of its disclosure before he was cast out of heaven, Satan does not know the mind of God (see Moses 4:6).

Privy to the Father's thoughts because of His humility, Jesus, on the other hand, knew so much more; in fact, "he needed not that any man should teach him" (JST Matthew 3:24-25).

As if damage to self were not enough reason to resist murmuring, another obvious danger is its contagiousness. Such was the case even with faithful father Lehi, who, for one brief moment, got caught up in the contagion of murmuring (see 1 Nephi 16:20). When Moses once lapsed briefly, it was under exasperating circumstances that included pressure from rebels (see Numbers 20:7-12). No one knows how to work a crowd better than the adversary. Elders Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball tried to discourage Thomas B. Marsh's murmuring, but to no avail. Later, Brother Marsh said in humble self-disclosure:

I must have lost the Spirit of the Lord out of my heart. . . .

I became jealous of the Prophet . . . and overlooked everything that was right, and spent all my time in looking for the evil; . . . I thought I saw a beam in Brother Joseph's eye, but it was nothing but a mote, and my own eye was filled with the beam; . . . as Brother Heber C. Kimball says, I got mad and I wanted everybody else to be mad. I talked with Brother Brigham Young and Brother Heber C. Kimball, and I wanted them to be mad like myself, and I saw they were not mad, and I got madder still because they were not. Brother Brigham Young, with a cautious look, said, "Are you the leader of the Church, Brother Thomas?" I answered "No." "Well then," said he, "why do you not let that alone?" (Thomas B. Marsh, Book of Testimonies, pp. 103, 105.)

Often those who murmur do it sarcastically. Sarcasm can not only prove contagious but also can provide a clever verbal rallying point for the otherwise unfocused and unexpressed feelings. Yet our responsibilities to each other involve more than merely reporting or otherwise displaying how we feel. Being of good cheer itself can be contagious, and it is certainly more in accord with our obligation to strengthen each other and to do things "with cheerful hearts and countenances" (D&C 81:5; 59:15).

Two of the basic things over which we are to be justifiably of good cheer are the transcendent blessings that our sins are forgiven and that Jesus has overcome the world. Additionally, we are assured that He is in our midst, He will lead us along, and He will stand by us. (See John 16:33; Matthew 9:2; D&C 61:36; 88:6; 78:18.) Therefore, knowing that these major and everlasting things are in place, we can better endure such mundane trials as a frustrating traffic jam. And at those times we can be calm enough to ask ourselves how it can rain on the just and the unjust alike (Matthew 5:45) without occasionally raining on our parade. Even while in deep difficulties, those of deep faith are generously disposed, as was reflected in Helaman's report to Moroni from the battle front: "Behold, we do not know but what ye are unsuccessful, . . . if so, we do not desire to murmur. . . . But behold, it mattereth not—we trust God will deliver us, notwithstanding the weakness of our armies, yea, and deliver us out of the hands of our enemies." (Alma 58:35, 37.)

The phrase "it mattereth not" bespeaks a faithful people, filled with precious perspective, who are reluctant to murmur. Job too was like that. He endured much adversity but was anxious that he not "charge God foolishly" (Job 1:22).

Of course there are ways—both formal and informal—by which properly to express legitimate concerns, and even complaints, productively (see Matthew 18:15). These will go unused, however, if one's real desire is to let off scalding steam; there is, of course, so much more heat than light in steam. Yes, we can gripe or grumble merely in a passing way, even cleverly and self-effacingly, reflecting a passing irritation. But even mild murmuring can be more pointed and directed than we might care to admit.

Murmuring can be another form of mocking God's plan of salvation, like filing a minority report suggesting that what God has planned is not fully adequate (3 Nephi 29:6). Yes, God has an overall plan, but we don't care for His specific timing—perhaps because he has not advised us as to the detail (see Enos 1:16; Ether 3:24, 27; 2 Nephi 27:21). Yet we are specifically advised that "all things must come to pass in their time" (D&C 64:32).

Yes, we may acknowledge His overall plan but criticize His style, because He does things in His own way (Jacob 4:8; D&C 1:16; 56:14). We would prefer that things be done in our way, even though our ways are much lower than His (see Isaiah 55:8-9). The different, lower perceptions on Sinai's desert floor resulted in the golden calf, a contrast for which there are obvious analogies today.

We might add that God has told us He intends to try our faith and our patience (see Mosiah 23:21). Such stress is the setting from which murmuring most often emerges. God's timing, which calls for our patience, is often His way of preserving our agency. We halt at a busy intersection when we hear sirens; we pull over for fire trucks. Spiritual emergencies are no different, except that, alas, there are no loud sirens to be heard!

God's long-suffering is sometimes necessary to provide additional opportunities for us to repent. We may think God is merely marking time when actually He is marking openings for us which are sorely needed. But despite this patient care, we are slow to escape from the familiar cell of selfishness.

Perhaps when we murmur we are unconsciously complaining over not being able to cut a special deal with the Lord—we want full blessings but without giving full obedience to the laws upon which those blessings are predicated.

Murmuring can prevent a person from realizing it is time to quit soaking himself in the hot tub of self-pity! Each of us might ask himself how many times he or she has ended up having rich experiences but only after having resisted them at first, sometimes while griping and kicking before reaching the tremendous view that lay just over the next ridge.

Murmuring over the weight of one's cross not only takes energy otherwise needed to carry it but also might cause another to put his cross down altogether.

The load we feel doesn't come solely from our gripes; mostly it comes from the weight of our unkept promises and our unresolved sins. These press down heavily upon us, and while murmuring relieves us through temporary catharsis, it also deflects us from facing what needs to be done. Thus in his surrender to God, the true believer says, with the Lamanite king, "I will give away all my sins to know thee" (Alma 22:18).

If we were not carrying so much else, the cross would be lighter. Furthermore, we will not come to know God unless we do give away all our sins. This is part of losing and finding oneself. To whom shall we give our sins? Only Jesus is willing and able to take them.

The kind of things nonmurmurers are permitted to see should entice us. When his city was compassed about with "a great host" of hostile horses and chariots, Elisha counseled his anxious young servant, "Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them." The prophet then prayed that the Lord would "open the eyes" of the young man, "and he saw: and behold the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha"! (2 Kings 6:14-17.)

Elisha's counsel can help to still our murmuring today: "Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them." If our lips are closed to murmuring our eyes can be opened.

All the ordinances of the gospel, directly and indirectly, can still our murmuring and likewise bear in one way or another upon the theme of remembrance; they also heighten anticipation.

All the big truths of the gospel take their place "fitly framed" in the order of daily life. They do not exist apart from life, but are interwoven with it. For instance, there is a God. He hears and answers our prayers. He knows what we will ask for even before we ask; our prayers are a petition. However, some mortals, if they pray at all, treat prayer as if God were the equivalent of a "911" emergency number. They forget the blessing but remember the number.

We can have known the big truths and then forgotten. But accountability remains even if memories are dimmed.

But behold, when the time cometh that they shall dwindle in unbelief, after they have received so great blessings from the hand of the Lord—having a knowledge of the creation of the earth, and all men, knowing the great and marvelous works of the Lord from the creation of the world; having power given them to do all things by faith; having all the commandments from the beginning, and having been brought by his infinite goodness into this precious land of promise—behold, I say, if the day shall come that they will reject the Holy One of Israel, the true Messiah, their Redeemer and their God, behold, the judgments of him that is just shall rest upon them (2 Nephi 1:10). We have meaning, as individuals, apart from our mortal roles and work. In the world to come one will not be known as a teacher, or a harness maker, or a secretary, or a mortician, or a policeman, or a housewife. The chores we do here are useful, some even essential. But there and then (and one would hope well before that) we will put away childish things, especially the toxic toys. Some skills no longer relevant will be discarded, too, like training wheels and water wings.

The Christian virtues, however, are both eternal and portable. They are never obsolete. They will always be relevant. Possessed of these in goodly measure, we will become, if faithful here, a man or a woman of God there.

This is all part of the fresh view of ourselves that we can have through the wonderful flood of light. There is much divine preparation under way, highly individualized preparation. Regarding the glorious potential future the Lord told the Apostle John: "To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it" (Revelation 2:17). This white stone, wrote Joseph Smith, "will become a Urim and Thummim to each individual who receives one, whereby things pertaining to a higher order of kingdoms will be made known" (D&C 130:10).

Yet even with all the help now given to us and the supernal promises as to what lies ahead, there are stumbling blocks presently in our paths. These are real rocks of resistance to be overcome, and there can be much murmuring unless they are removed.

1990 Bookcraft
