Neal A. Maxwell, Wonderful Flood of Light (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990)

Chapter Five

"Taking Away . . . Stumbling Blocks"

Given human nature and our freedom to choose, or moral agency, plus the divinely designed proving and tutoring nature of mortal existence, the presence of stumbling blocks on the path to the development of faith should be no surprise (see D&C 76:53). But whether expected or unexpected, stumbling blocks are vexing—unless one is blessed with the wonderful flood of light that provides the illumination with which to see beyond them.

A stumbling block is defined as involving "something repugnant to one's prejudices" (The Oxford English Dictionary). One's prejudices or life's conditioning experiences can block the way to acceptance of a powerful and needed truth about things as they really are.

The Lord, perfectly perceiving human prejudices as these encrust mortal lives, describes His restored work as a "strange act" and "strange work" brought to pass so that men may discern "that which they have never considered" (D&C 101:94, 95). A stumbling block of the Jews of Jesus' day, for instance, was their expectations about what the Messiah would do, such as emancipating them politically. To them, Jesus was not an emancipator, and his death was an unfulfilling stumbling block. This irony had been prophesied. The Greeks, on the other hand, regarded the whole idea of a resurrecting messiah as foolishness. (See Isaiah 8:14; 1 Corinthians 1:23; 1 Peter 2:8; 2 Nephi 18:14.)

In a way, stumbling blocks reflect the problem of perspective noted in scriptures about motes and beams. Some things seem larger than they are; others, not large enough. For many, the concept of revelation is a special stumbling block on the path leading to faith. The silence of the centuries of spiritual famine foreseen by Amos had led many to speak of the human connection as Peter foresaw: "All things continue as they were from the beginning" (2 Peter 3:4). The seeming sameness of it all leads to doubt and to a discounting of spiritual things.

The doctrine of revelation is intrinsically offensive to others who exclude from credibility any knowledge which is spiritually acquired. Thus this gospel doctrine of revelation is "repugnant to one's prejudices" for many moderns. Yet revelation is the only way of knowing certain transcendent things:

Behold, great and marvelous are the works of the Lord. How unsearchable are the depths of the mysteries of him; and it is impossible that man should find out all his ways. And no man knoweth of his ways save it be revealed unto him; wherefore, brethren, despise not the revelations of .......

For the Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not. Wherefore, it speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be. (Jacob 4:8, 13.)

As George MacDonald has written,

No revelation can be other than partial. ... For what revelation, other than a partial, can the highest spiritual condition receive of the infinite God?... the true revelation rouses the desire to know more by the truth of its incompleteness. (George MacDonald, Unspoken Sermons, Series 1 [London: Alexander Strahan, 1867], pp. 35-36.)

For our Lord's arguments are for the presentation of the truth, and the truth carries its own conviction to him who is able to receive it (Unspoken Sermons, p. 18).

Sad, indeed, would the whole matter be, if the Bible had told us everything God had meant us to believe. But herein is the Bible itself greatly wronged. It nowhere lays claim to be regarded as the Word, the Way, the Truth. The Bible leads us to Jesus. . . . It is Christ "in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge," not the Bible, save as leading to him. (Unspoken Sermons, pp. 52-53.)

Every principle God has revealed carries its own convictions of its truth to the human mind (Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 9:149).

The Lord does reveal Himself, truths, and elements of the future, but He does so on His terms! This is a divine constraint that makes for difficulties for the unmeek, because "the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned" (1 Corinthians 2:14).

Some people expect—almost demand—that God will reveal himself on their terms and even according to their own schedule. Yet they would still reject God, especially if it should turn out that He resembles us mortals too much!

There are many who believe in some kind of God. Some believe in a god who has never declared his purposes clearly, a god who seems distant and preoccupied. Many likewise have a vague hope of some form of existence beyond the grave. Still others say that there once even was revelation from God, but certainly not in our time.

Not only was Jesus a stumbling block to the Jews and foolishness to the Greeks, but also Jesus' teachings offended many (see 1 Corinthians 1:23; Romans 9:33). Such ancient attitudes have their modern counterparts, because the things of the Spirit are still foolishness to the natural man. Jesus observed of Himself and His work, "Blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me" (Matthew 11:6).

Several illustrations of ancient antecedents follow, showing the firm exclusion of things "spiritually discerned" by revelation. First Sherem:

No man knoweth of such things; for he cannot tell of things to come (Jacob 7:7, italics added).

Next Korihor:

Why do ye look for a Christ? For no man can know of anything which is to come.... How do ye know of their surety? Behold, ye cannot know of things which ye do not see; therefore ye cannot know that there shall be a Christ. (Alma 30:13; 15, italics added.)

The unbelieving Nephites:

But behold, we know that this is a wicked tradition,... to cause us that we should believe in some great and marvelous thing which should come to pass, but not among us, but in a land which is far distant, a land which we know not; therefore they can keep us in ignorance, for we cannot witness with our own eyes that they are true (Helaman 16:20, italics added).

Laman:

Now, [Nephi] says that the Lord has talked with him, and also that angels have ministered unto him. But behold, we know that he lies unto us (1 Nephi 16:38, italics added).

The resulting view of life is one-dimensional, being fed by doubts of and disbelief in immortality: "And thus [Korihor] did preach unto them, leading away the hearts of many, causing them to lift up their heads in their wickedness, yea, leading away many women, and also men, to commit whoredoms—telling them that when a man was dead, that was the end thereof" (Alma 30:13, 15, italics added.)

In sum, many maintain that we simply cannot know the future; that angels do not minister to man; and furthermore that we cannot accept the word of those who testify otherwise! For some this amounts to an article of faith: "We find insufficient evidence for belief in the existence of a supernatural; it is either meaningless or irrelevant to the question of the survival and fulfillment of the human race. As non-theists, we begin with humans not God, nature not deity.... No deity will save us; we must save ourselves. " (Humanist Manifesto II, Encyclopedia of American Religions: Religions Creeds, J. Gordon Melton, ed. [Detroit: Gale Research Company, 1988], p. 641.)

Fortunately, as Latter-day Saints we know better, having been blessed with the witness of the Spirit. We recognize that the development of one's spiritual capacity is not only possible but also vital. The various human senses are prized and useful. These are interactive, but they are also individualized. We do not use our ears to smell, our eyes to taste, or our noses to hear. We do not expect one sense to do the work of another. Similarly, the highly valued scientific method has its own yield—its own ways of discovering and knowing. But it is to be pursued on its own terms, and when it is, much benefit can result.

It is so too with "the things of the Spirit." These are spiritually discerned—that is, they yield to the methodology of the Spirit. (1 Corinthians 2:14; see also Romans 8:5.) In its own way the Spirit provides individual verification as the individual observes certain conditions, thereby even offering a form of needed "reproduceability."

To exclude revelation as a way of gaining knowledge is to exclude certain vital truths altogether—truths revealed over the long span of religious history. The historical pattern of revelation in fact goes back to the beginning:

And after God had appointed that these things should come unto man, behold, then he saw that it was expedient that man should know concerning the things whereof he had appointed unto them;

Therefore he sent angels to converse with them, who caused men to behold of his glory.

And they began from that time forth to call on his name; therefore God conversed with men, and made known unto them the plan of redemption, which had been prepared from the foundation of the world; and this he made known unto them according to their faith and repentance and their holy works. (Alma 12:28-30.)

Noteworthy are Alma's words that "it was expedient that man should know concerning the things whereof [God] had appointed unto them" (Alma 12:28). This is precisely the perspective—God's plans for men—that mortals need and that Laman and Lemuel did not have. They murmured "because they knew not the dealings of that God who had created them" (1 Nephi 2:12). Without a view of eternity, we can easily misread the daily things; thus the fresh view brought by the Restoration brings a change of mind and becomes crucial for us all in daily life!

For those meek enough to consider it, one way in which the stumbling block of doubt concerning revelation can be removed is by examining and then acknowledging the fruits of the Restoration, which are explainable only through revelation. This was the purport of the angel's words to Nephi. "And it shall come to pass, that if the Gentiles shall hearken unto the Lamb of God in that day that he shall manifest himself unto them in word, and also in power, in very deed, unto the taking away of their stumbling blocks—" (1 Nephi 14:1).

Searching out and seeing the blending of the truths and witnesses of the Bible and the Book of Mormons (not possible for Joseph Smith to have managed) is another way to remove the doubts about revelation. The Lord told Joseph of Egypt:

Wherefore, the fruit of thy loins shall write; and the fruit of the loins of Judah shall write; and that which shall be written by the fruit of thy loins, and also that which shall be written by the fruit of the loins of Judah, shall grow together, unto the confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace among the fruit of thy loins, and bringing them to the knowledge of their fathers in the latter days, and also to the knowledge of my covenants, saith the Lord (2 Nephi 3:12).

The growing together of Bible and Book of Mormon helps establish the truth of both books.

God foresaw the sweeping skepticism of our time, but He also provided ways out! The miraculous miracle which resumed the ancient pattern is really explainable in only one way. Just as occurred to others in the beginning of religious history, visitations to Joseph Smith were made by many heavenly messengers, bringing vital knowledge concerning God and His plans and purposes. "Wherefore, I the Lord, knowing the calamity which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth, called upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and spake unto him from heaven, and gave him commandments" (D&C 1:17).

There were many angels at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple on March 27, 1836. The Prophet elsewhere refers to "divers angels... from Michael or Adam down to the present time" (D&C 128:20-21). Those heavenly visitors were not mute. Joseph was ordained by them, received keys from them, and was instructed and directed by them.

Thus vital missing truths have been restored by revelation, but only for those who will believe: "And now, Moses, my son,... in a day when the children of men shall esteem my words as naught and take many of them from the book which thou shalt write, behold, I will raise up another like unto thee; and they shall be had again among the children of men—among as many as shall believe." (Moses 1:40-41, italics added.)

It is unfortunate that for most the stumbling block regarding revelation remains. Many mortals simply exclude spiritual things. Nor can those who receive revelation share indiscriminately all they have received:

And now Alma began to expound these things unto him, saying: It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him.

And therefore, he that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full.

And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell. (Alma 12:9-11; see also Matthew 13:10-13; 16:20; 3 Nephi 28:11, 18; Ether 13:13; Helaman 4:12; D&C 6:12; 41:6.)

Paul sums up the concept that what we truly focus on determines what we will see: "For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh; but they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit" (Romans 8:5).

Another stumbling block for some mortals is the seeming injustice of God. We naturally recoil from the jarring examples of the human condition with its many injustices, insensitivities, inequalities, and immense sufferings. Surely, however, we dare not assume that our anguish reflects a more highly developed sense of empathy for humanity than God Himself has! Yet the stone of stumbling is there. Says George MacDonald: "I suspect a great part of our irreligion springs from our disbelief in the humanity of God" (George MacDonald, The Miracles of Our Lord [London: Strahan and Co., 1870], p. 265).

In fact, many things show that our God is just and merciful. It is God who has given us dozens upon dozens of urgings concerning our responsibilities to the poor, including the word that poverty can destroy opportunities for education (3 Nephi 6:12). It is He, however, who had told us that the real remedy for poverty requires that things be done in His own way (see D&C 104:15-16). Poverty will not be cured by mortal bandaids. The same Lord who criticized Sodom because of their gross sexual immorality also lamented that they grossly neglected their poor (see Ezekiel 16:49). It is God who has warned us of the great inequality that occurs because of sin (see D&C 49:20).

It is He who has told us that it is not right that one man should be in bondage to another (see D&C 101:79).

It is He who has warned us about how very few people can handle power properly and riches properly (see D&C 121:39; Luke 18:24-25).

It is He who, from the beginning, has beckoned us, His children, to return to Him, yet we can choose either liberty or captivity, for as he told Adam, "nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself" (Moses 3:17). We have our moral agency (see D&C 101:78).

It is He who, through the redemption of His Son, Jesus Christ, has prepared for the billions and billions of mortals three post-resurrection kingdoms of glory. It is He who rejoiced in those brief periods (see 4 Nephi) when people were truly righteous, and when there "could not be a happier people." It was He who guided the formation of the righteous and remarkable city of Enoch and who wept over the condition of the wicked (see Moses 7:28).

It is He who has told us He delights to honor those who serve Him (see D&C 76:5).

It is He—just and merciful—who has told us that the workers in the vineyard who come in the last hour shall receive the same wages as those laboring from the very first hour (see Matthew 20:1-16). It will be so because of the "goodman of the house."

Notwithstanding all his concern for his children, God, being just, merciful, and wise, did not initiate the plan of salvation, with its conditions essential to growth, only to suspend it when the going gets rough. He did not give us moral agency merely to withdraw it, because He desires for us the greater happiness it brings us. He, much more than we, must endure the suffering of His children. His work and glory is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man (see Moses 1:39). But it will be accomplished in his own due time and in his own way (D&C 88:68; D&C 24:16; 136:18; D&C 64:32). And since His ways are so much higher than man's ways (see Isaiah 55:9), we must not expect to judge them by our mortal reasoning but rather accept them with faith and trust in Him.

The Lord will surely stay the course. The only question is, will we?

As we have seen, we cannot properly charge God with being insufficiently sensitive to human suffering. Instead let us do what we can within our circles of influence to remedy human suffering but without forgetting the tie between agency and misery (as well as between agency and happiness) and certain of life's overarching purposes. Indeed, the reality that "there is an opposition in all things" (2 Nephi 2:11) may mean that Murphy's Law (anything that can go wrong will go wrong) is a vexing subset of that reality.

What we should not do is magnify our sufferings instead of our callings by having an exaggerated sense of those sufferings, real and intense as these are at times. An extreme case is Sidney Rigdon, who—swollen with self-pity—said while in Liberty Jail "that the sufferings of Jesus Christ were a fool to his" (Keith W. Perkins, "Trials and Tribulations: The Refiner's Fire," in The Capstone of Our Religion, Robert L. Millet and Larry E. Dahl, eds. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989], p. 147).

Keith Perkins observed of this moment of truth: "After this experience he [Sidney Rigdon] was no longer the great leader of the Church that he had been. Joseph Smith no longer wanted him as a counselor because of his unfaithfulness; the Prophet later remarked that if Sidney Rigdon led the Church he 'would lead the Church to destruction in less than five years.'" (In Capstone, p. 147.)

The slide of Sidney Rigdon—all the way out of the kingdom—brought this response of remembrance from Brigham Young, showing empathy for Sidney Rigdon but also Brigham's firm principles:

I am willing that you should know that my feelings for Sidney Rigdon as a man, as a private citizen, are of the best kind. I have loved that man and always had the very best feelings for him; I have stood in defense of his life and his house in Kirtland, and have lain on the floor, night after night, and week after week, to defend him. There are those who are following Sidney for whom my heart is grieved, I esteem them as good citizens. But when it touches the salvation of the people, I am the man that walks to the line. (Brigham Young, quoted in Times and Seasons, September 15, 1844, p. 648.)

Few episodes show God's empathy more than the colloquy with Enoch. Enoch was puzzled over how the Lord (who had created many earths besides this one, resulting in numberless creations by our reckoning, and who was surrounded by holiness, peace, justice, truth, and mercy) could weep. Enoch, full of empathy for mankind, nevertheless asked the Lord, "How is it that thou canst weep?"

The Lord replied that Enoch's contemporaries were among the very "workmanship of [his own] hands." He had given them their moral agency and a commandment to love one another. But "behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood"; and their wickedness was great. Thus viewing the lack of love and the abundance of sin, the Lord's reply to Enoch was: "Wherefore should not the heavens weep, seeing these shall suffer?" The weeping was over the status quo, but especially since these individuals were going to suffer in torment until the redemption occurred! So the Lord again responded to Enoch's question, "Wherefore, for this shall the heavens weep."

Then the Lord told Enoch "all the doings of the children of men... their wickedness, and their misery." Then it was Enoch's turn to weep, "and his heart swelled wide as eternity." At first, Enoch refused to be comforted. But he was shown the atoning day of the Lord! (Moses 7:29-67.)

No one can read this supernal revelatory account without feeling the divine tenderness of God's sharing in human suffering. In view of this, praise be to God for His long-suffering and patience! Our Father and our Redeemer are perfect in both their mercy and their justice—and divine empathy bridges those two virtues. "In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old" (Isaiah 63:9).

Lacking gospel light or ignoring gospel perspective, we create many of our own problems. Those who desire complexity instead of simplicity can surely complicate simple things. Those who insist on "looking beyond the mark"—the obvious—are those most likely to trip over stumbling blocks, as the Jews were anciently:

But behold, the Jews were a stiffnecked people; and they despised the words of plainness, and killed the prophets, and sought for things that they could not understand. Wherefore, because of their blindness, which blindness came by looking beyond the mark, they must needs fall; for God hath taken away his plainness from them, and delivered unto them many things which they cannot understand, because they desired it. And because they desired it God hath done it, that they may stumble. (Jacob 4:14.)

Just as one can experience temporary blindness by staring at the glare of sun-drenched snow, one can likewise stare into ambiguity and incomprehensibility too long. Then the plainness which is near at hand goes unseen. Squinting to see past plainness and beyond the obvious causes some to end up "looking beyond the mark," thus tripping over even the smallest stumbling blocks.

Blindness can be cultural as well as individual: "For I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery,... that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in" (Romans 11:25).

Thus the wonderful flood of light of the restored gospel is so essential in order that we may have a fresh view and thereby change our minds and our behavior. This individual increase of light, this progress continues as we seek it: "That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day" (D&C 50:24; see also Matthew 6:22). Meanwhile, many things can obscure our view of reality or can block our spiritual memories.

Another stubborn block is that, in Wordsworth's words, "the world is too much with us." We are not only diverted, sometimes we are almost fixated by temporal and lesser but pressing things. This stumbling block includes the diverting satisfactions that go with the "joy for a season" flowing from men's accomplishments. We can, wrote Paul, pursue "foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men" (1 Timothy 6:9).

The cares and anxieties of the world occupy us as if we were children making dikes and castles on the beach, unaware that each day's incoming surf will erase our sincere but temporal labors.

In keeping with Nephi's prophecy (2 Nephi 28:8) there exists also the mistaken and hindering notion that God will "beat us with a few stripes" and all will still be well. This expectation of an "easy fix" blocks many of us from doing the hard things. This particular stumbling block is most often encountered at the border between casual and serious discipleship. Many not only are detained by it but also come to rest in its rooms of rationalization.

There are still others who stumble simply because they are jaded or bored. Their "yawns are a silent shout" from being oppressed by the "hum-drum nihilism." Boredom causes people to "die as to things pertaining unto righteousness" (Alma 12:16). Would that such souls could emulate the prodigal, who finally "came to himself" and returned to his father (Luke 15:17, 20). One cannot be laid back and still press forward. To "awake to righteousness" requires us to "awake and arouse [our] faculties" and to "awake to a remembrance" and to dispel the "cloud of darkness," so that we, like Lamoni, can be "lit up in [the] soul." (1 Corinthians 15:34; Alma 32:27; Mosiah 2:40; Alma 19:6.)

Another stumbling block for some is the fact that, in their perception, the vast majority of humans have never heard and will never hear the gospel of Jesus Christ; and how can a just God judge mortals who are deprived of this important knowledge? What they do not understand is that God has made "ample provision." He has supplied not only the needed Savior but also a spiritual safety net for those who died without a knowledge of the gospel or who died in infancy. Thus all who would have sincerely received the gospel had they heard it in mortality will receive the same rewards as those who did hear it here and lived by it. Their receiving of equivalent and ultimate blessings shows the justice and mercy of God. "All who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God: also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom" (D&C 137:7-8).

This soaring promise, fulfilled in part by vicarious ordinances in holy temples, applies to many millions of souls, such as those who lived in the Middle Ages out of reach of the Restoration. In God's mercy there is a plan for all and a place for each. This particular doctrine removes a major stumbling block for those who view the sweep of the centuries as evidence of God's injustice. As a church we do not fully appreciate the emancipatory, as well as the revelatory, significance of the above verses.

We are similarly assured concerning all the children who die before the age of accountability: they are heirs to the celestial kingdom (see D&C 137:10). The mercy of God is not at the mercy of infant mortality. Elder John A. Widtsoe further observed: "Those who die before the age of accountability have their bodies. If in their pre-existent state they have not made themselves unworthy, it is not thinkable that they will be deprived of any blessing held in reserve for the saints of God. They will be in the hands of the Lord, who is full of love and justice. We may safely leave them there." (John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations, vol. 1 [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1943], p. 279.)

Hence the Father's arm of mercy has been extended to those in various dispensations. He keeps trying to communicate with those who have ears to hear, whether on this side of the veil of death or the other.

Certain powerful verses of scripture that, for the present, seem to slumber as if in the Church's unconscious will also come to the fore to push aside still other stumbling blocks. These await the blossoming moment of our collective understanding or the marshaling moment of collective undertaking.

One such verse concerns human, economic inequality; it stresses the destabilizing effects of poverty: "But it is not given that one man should possess that which is above another, wherefore the world lieth in sin" (D&C 49:20). The time of our deeper, collective appreciation of the gospel's response to this particular challenge is not yet, but it will come. The interplay of agency and poverty are finally resolvable only through the fulness of the gospel by those willing to do things in the Lord's own way (see D&C 104:16).

There are many who are genuinely contributive and who lead decent lives even though they genuinely believe that "when a man [is] dead, that [is] the end thereof" (Alma 30:18). These individuals do not stumble so much as simply and sincerely halt their journey of faith short of where they might have gone. This severe stumbling occurs because of life's seeming pointlessness for those who see things without the eye of faith.

Actually, God has carefully designed this life according to His announced and stern specifications, which include letting us use our moral agency (see D&C 136:3; Mosiah 23:21; Deuteronomy 8:2; Abraham 3:25; D&C 98:12). Should we choose to live without God in the world and without knowledge of those design specifications, it is quite likely that we will comment critically. All feel those stern specifications, even those who do not acknowledge the Architect; and the latter tend to multiply their murmuring.

Some who do not acknowledge God—and, for that matter, some who do—proceed through life insensitively. Like Korihor, they apparently believe that in this life we fare only according to the individual management of the creature, and that everyone conquers according to his genius or strength (see Alma 30:17). To the "strong," this seems ideal, but what of the conquered and subdued? Injustice multiplies like insects in the sunshine.

Because of stumbling blocks, some people simply and sincerely throw in with prevailing scientism, turning away from exploration of the realm of religion.

The scientific method is so useful to mankind in many ways. It focuses on the available data concerning the how and what of things, but it leaves to the individual the answering of the why questions. In any case, there is assumed to be a paucity of data concerning these questions, and a further assumption is that stereotyped religion is not a significant source of such data. Hence other data are looked to. Stephen W. Hawking writes: "Up to now, most scientists have been too occupied with the development of new theories that describe what the universe is to ask the question why. On the other hand, the people whose business it is to ask why, the philosophers, have not been able to keep up with the advance of scientific theories."

The large and haunting questions of why still brood ominously over the human scene. Some are hopeful: "However, if we do discover a complete theory, it should in time be understandable in broad principle by everyone, not just a few scientists. Then we shall all, philosophers, scientists, and just ordinary people, be able to take part in the discussion of the question of why it is that we and the universe exist. If we find the answer to that, it would be the ultimate triumph of human reason—for then we would know the mind of God." (Stephen W. Hawking, A Brief History of Time [New York: Bantam Books, 1988], pp. 174, 175.)

A further and great stumbling block is the human inability to endure well. When we come to see things with a correct view, we will see, for instance, that those sufferings which are "common to man" (1 Corinthians 10:13) provide no exemptions or immunities. We will also see that some suffering involves customized tutoring, given for our own good (see D&C 122:7). It is thought that in the premortal world some may have even agreed to accept suffering here. While much of the suffering simply cannot be explained at present, in all situations, whatever their nature, we are to endure well and to hold out (see 2 Nephi 31:16; D&C 122:9; 121:8; 6:13). We are to have faith in God, which involves the special trust that goes with waiting—waiting sometimes without answers, or waiting for an illness to pass or to finally claim us. But how does one so perform if he believes his God is indifferent or unable to do His work?

This underscores the great serviceability of the quality of endurance. We do not need to incessantly ask why? but perhaps only how long?

It is striking that on one of the rare occasions when we have the direct and testifying words of the Father they concerned the importance of enduring. Nephi reported: "And I heard a voice from the Father, saying: Yea, the words of my Beloved are true and faithful. He that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved." (2 Nephi 31:15; see also 2 Nephi 31:20.)

The remedies for people who stumble because they feel unvalued, unloved, unused, unheeded, and unappreciated include coming to know about God's love and coming to see the disappointments of the day in the context of the blessings of eternity and God's plan of happiness. It is vital for one to know that life's real difficulties are "but for a small moment" and thereby to trust in God's timing (see D&C 122:4; 2 Corinthians 4:17). Likewise, with the fresh view that comes from Restoration light we realize that our qualities and gifts are portable and will go with us into the next world. These qualities and gifts may not have been adequately appreciated here, but they are much in demand there!

Our suffering, of course, comes from a mixture of our mistakes, the mistakes of others, complex circumstances, and inexplicabilities. Try as we may to sort all these out, there are often too many factors and too many imponderables. But even though we do not know "the meaning of all things" we can still know that God "loveth his children" (1 Nephi 11:17).

Even so, we must know that we are the focus of the Lord's work. He has His own schedule, however, and will do certain things "in [his] own due time" (D&C 42:62; 59:4; 64:32). The various episodes in scriptures provide precious perspective. One focus on a particular challenge to the Church was spread over some time. When officers serving the Jewish leaders indicated their favorable impression of Jesus and his teachings, "Then answered them the Pharisees, Are ye also deceived? Have any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him?" (John 7:47-48.) Months later, however, "among the chief rulers also many believed on him; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the synagogue: for they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God" (John 12:42-43). And still later, "the word of God increased; and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly; and a great company of the priests were obedient to the faith" (Acts 6:7).

Another stumbling block, surprising in a way, is man's very capacity and opportunity to choose. Without recognizing the stone for what it is, some truly stumble over the major role of free agency within the plan of salvation. Wrong choices do produce much human tragedy and suffering; therefore, we might like to have "the voice of an angel" to affect the choosing of others. But Jesus' message is one of invitation, not intimidation. As free volunteers, we can't keep ourselves or others on the strait and narrow path by the tyranny of even that trumpet.

How ancient is this pattern of our choosing? It clearly existed in the first estate, where God obviously permitted us to choose. "For behold, the devil... rebelled against me, saying, Give me thine honor, which is my power; and also a third part of the hosts of heaven turned he away from me because of their agency" (D&C 29:36).

God's commitment to our freedom is of greater length and depth than we ever have imagined. He affirmed our agency again in the Garden (see Moses 7:32). In the mortal garden, men can choose "of every tree." But, as in the other garden, we are advised to avoid certain things.

The scriptures make it clear how powerful and essential is this gift of agency: "All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence. Behold, here is the agency of man, and here is the condemnation of man; because that which was from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them, and they receive not the light." (D&C 93:30-31.) We are left to "do according to [our] own will" (Mosiah 2:21) so "that every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment" (D&C 101:78).

We have agency, and life provides alternatives and opportunities from which to choose—all in order for us to grow. Otherwise, our existence would be a "compound in one," an undifferentiated lump of insensibility.

There had to be "an opposition" in all things. Without such opposition there would be no righteousness, no wickedness, no holiness, no misery, nothing that was good, nothing that was bad. All things would be that seemingly inert "compound in one." We would be as if dead, with no sense or insensibility. There would be no purpose in the end of our creation! (See 2 Nephi 2:11.)

The above scriptural pairings tell us much. In the listing of holiness and misery as opposites, the absence of holiness means the presence of misery! Likewise, the more holiness, the more happiness. Hence, "More holiness give me" ("More Holiness Give Me," Hymns, no. 131).

Our task, then, is to "choose the right when a choice is placed before [us]" ("Choose the Right," Hymns, no. 239). We have had that privilege of choosing, however, for a long, long time!

Granted, there are times when things get very bad, as in Sodom and Gomorrah or in the days of Noah. Then the Lord acts! President John Taylor said of the wickedness of Sodom and Gomorrah: "It was better for [the inhabitants] to die, and thus be deprived of their agency, which they abused, than entail so much misery on their posterity, and bring ruin upon millions of unborn persons" (John Taylor, The Government of God [Liverpool: S. W. Richards, 1852], p. 53).

The long-suffering of God does not strive with man interminably (see D&C 1:33; Genesis 6:3).

The Lord wants us to be forgiving, however (see D&C 64:9-10), thus providing support and welcome for the repentant individual. God knows whether or not the repentance is sincere, but to us it is given to "continue to minister" even to the unheeding because we "know not but what they will return and repent" (3 Nephi 18:32).

Enduring and forgiving provide us with much-needed experience. And experience, after all, is one major reason why we have come to earth to pass through our second estate.

We seem to learn some things best by experience:

And Laban said unto him, I pray thee, if I have found favour in thine eyes, tarry: for I have learned by experience that the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake (Genesis 30:27).

We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion (D&C 121:39).

If the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good (D&C 122:7).

That my people may be taught more perfectly, and have experience, and know more perfectly concerning their duty, and the things which I require at their hands (D&C 105:10).

Experience not only helps us come to know things for ourselves but it also makes the precious process of remembrance possible.

Enduring brings such a rich supply of experience, of opportunities to use our moral agency, especially when we take Jesus' yoke upon us in order to learn of Him in an accelerated way: "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls" (Matthew 11:29).

Experience, however, cannot be rushed. Experience requires time. And time requires patience.

The gospel's answers to the big why of life help us answer the little whys. We can then better keep going even when bruised, battered, and bleeding. Like Jesus, though on our tiny scale, we are to continue until "it is finished" (see John 19:30). One day God will "wipe away tears from off all faces" (Isaiah 25:8). After all, "we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand" (Psalm 95:7).

Meanwhile, to develop an "eye single" will help us to see stumbling blocks for what they really are. That focused eye will also see that the basic truths are so simple and yet so stunning—for example, that "all the planets which move in their regular form do witness that there is a Supreme Creator" (Alma 30:44), and that "all things are created and made to bear record of [Jesus Christ]" (Moses 6:63).

We will see, for instance, divine design not only in the galaxies but also in the minute, double helix of the DNA molecule's marvelous order and beauty!

True, some observe such ordering beauty without assigning credit to God, and they are left free so to conclude (see Isaiah 45:9). Perhaps some such fear being "taken in" should they believe in a God and thus go against conventional, agnostic wisdom. Or perhaps some are simply too busy discovering the trees to ponder the forest—the large, strategic questions, such as "Why?" There are those thoughtful scientists, however, who, having considered how the universe came into being, what it is composed of, believe in God.

But of all the stumbling blocks, personal sins are clearly the largest and most retarding. Before we can receive all that God has for us, we must first make room by giving away our sins.

1990 Bookcraft
