Neal A. Maxwell, Wonderful Flood of Light (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990)

Chapter Six

"Give Away All My Sins To Know Thee"

As our view of things as they really are becomes clearer by reason of the Restoration's wonderful flood of light, our desire to change and to improve becomes stronger. So far as our individual spiritual development is concerned, we usually know what we have to give up, what has to go. Why then do we cling so tenaciously to those things?

Is it because, deep down, we really think God will only beat us with a few stripes and then quickly forget our sins? (2 Nephi 28:8.) Do we think our good works are more than enough to compensate for our few frailties? Do we think the things we cling to are not really so bad after all? Or do we cling to certain things simply because everybody else seems to have a few personal deficiencies too?

Only an eye that is becoming single to the glory of God will keep us conscious of our beams and even our remaining motes. Such illumination brings the restlessness of incipient righteousness. And we reach a point at which we genuinely say, as did King Lamoni's father, "I am willing to give away all my sins to know [God]" (see Alma 22:18).

In this situation, the cleaner we become, the more conscious we are of the remaining dirt. Like remarkable Peter, we may be essentially "clean, but not all" (John 13:10). Cleansing circumstances are to be welcomed even if the scrubbing is painful.

An eye not single is a dangerous eye, "for although a man may have many revelations, and have power to do many mighty works, yet if he boasts in his own strength, and sets at naught the counsels of God, and follows after the dictates of his own will and carnal desires, he must fall and incur the vengeance of a just God upon him" (D&C 3:4).

Not only can an unsingle eye result in an obscuring of our view of certain things but it also means that we are giving off less light even though more individual illumination is always and urgently needed (see D&C 88:67).

An incomplete view of things can also cause us to turn into complainers (Jude 1:16; 1 Nephi 2:12). Furthermore, any blockage might cause us to scoff at sacred things or even at the servants of the Lord (see 2 Peter 3:3).

If we indulge in lust, this can "choke the word" (Mark 4:19). As with Cain or with Laban (see Moses 5:31-33; 1 Nephi 3:25), the lust might be for property and riches. "But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition" (1 Timothy 6:9). This is one reason why we are told to "seek not for riches but for wisdom" (D&C 6:7).

Not only does lust choke the word but so also do the incessant cares of the world, especially if we become "overcharged" with them (see Matthew 13:22; Luke 21:34).

Unchecked lusts do not usually exist in isolation but instead will probably drive one to seek the company of the like-minded, who even recruit teachers specializing in the curriculum of concupiscence (see 2 Timothy 4:3). In any such group, whether formal or informal, the risks of retaining our sins are great. Though we should be willing to "give away all [our] sins," some sins seem especially hard for us to give away. For instance, it may be hard for us to give up our comfortable and established dominance of other humans. Even if it is not malicious, this subordination, this putting others down, can give us a false lift. Such predictable and unredemptive relationships will make it difficult for us to be meek in all circumstances.

For some it may be difficult to give up a particular form of lasciviousness which, though expressed only in marriage, is not proper. Disciples are to be different, however, living "not in the lust of concupiscence" (1 Thessalonians 4:5).

We may have a particular "toy," a childish thing or activity which is difficult for us to "put away." Whatever it is, it has come to mean too much to us. Such holding back holds us back spiritually.

It may be hard for us to give up praise or place in the world's establishments, especially if that place is earned and deserved.

It may be difficult for us to give up a particular gripe, or an issue for which our clever murmuring has almost become a trademark. We could end up as residents in a compound of complainers almost without noticing it. To walk away from such a pattern may involve the biggest steps we have ever taken!

The sin we are reluctant to give away may be nonlethal. Nevertheless our failure to jettison it keeps us from a measure of our real tasks.

Activities that are personally renewing are very appropriate when properly kept in place. By renewing us, these can help us to serve better. But, like riches, they must be pursued secondarily (see Jacob 2:18-19). If our eye is not becoming ever more single, seeking to "build up" the kingdom of God, it is dangerous to "give place" to such pursuits. Even harmless hobbies must be kept in their confined place, or they can take over.

Unconditional surrender of our shortcomings, on the other hand, brings us unforeseen opportunities for service by providing the optimum conditions for our personal growth. In fact, unconditional surrender to God is actually a personal victory! Such surrender is giving up squinting through a homemade telescope in exchange for a chance to see things as they really are. This fresh view made possible by this dispensation's flood of light is made more breathtaking by our using an eye single to the glory of God.

This surrender is giving up our hovel, which we have cobbled together in the earthly slums, in exchange for a celestial mansion on the hill.

It is giving up the headaches that go with intense selfishness in exchange for being able to focus all of one's mind on Him and on His cause. This relief from recurring spasms of selfishness produces its own special form of rest (see Matthew 11:28).

It is also leaving the church of selfishness with its solitary member in exchange for belonging to a genuine community of saints.

Why, therefore, the resistance to such surrender? There is one particular reason among many. When citing the scripture about losing oneself and finding oneself, we often fail to take into account the vital, preceding verse:

Then said Jesus unto his disciples, if any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it.

For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? (Matthew 16:24-26.)

But what are we first to deny ourselves? Verse 26 in the Joseph Smith Translation reads: "And now for a man to take up his cross, is to deny himself all ungodliness, and every worldly lust, and keep my commandments." The "giving away" of all of one's sins is a preceding and accompanying condition to losing oneself for the Savior's sake. Unless we give away those wrong things we cannot "give place" for the seed of faith to grow (see Alma 32:27). The crowding cares of the world will constrain the things of the Spirit (see Luke 8:14). This need for particularized denial is also strongly emphasized in the directions given by the resurrected Jesus:

Behold, it is written by them of old time, that thou shalt not commit adultery;

But I say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a woman, to lust after her, hath committed adultery already in his heart.

Behold, I give unto you a commandment, that ye suffer none of these things to enter into your heart;

For it is better that ye should deny yourselves of these things, wherein ye will take up your cross, than that ye should be cast into hell. (3 Nephi 12:27-30.)

Mental as well as physical adultery are especially mentioned as being among "these things." Therefore, losing our lust is part of losing ourselves for the Savior's sake. Losing the burden of our lust makes possible the taking up of the cross.

The forming of discipleship is like the forming of friendship, about which Boswell wrote: "We cannot tell the precise moment when friendship is formed. As in filling a vessel drop by drop, there is at last a drop which makes it run over; so in a series of kindnesses, there is at last one which makes the heart run over." (James Boswell, Life of Johnson [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1980], p. 848.) Yes, there are identifiable, measurable, and initial turning points, but discipleship's development is deed by deed and thought by thought—along with the giving away, one after another, of our sins.

The fulness flowing from Restoration scriptures thus provides a much more complete picture of what is required in the losing-finding sequence. Without that picture, too many of us try to serve God and man while still indulging ourselves. Jesus goes to the very heart of the matter, showing that full service to God and others requires full personal integrity. The person, halved by hypocrisy into his public and private portions, must first find his true self.

There is the additional point that commandment keepers, undiminished by gross sin, have so much more of themselves to give! Lest we rationalize the indulging of ourselves, holding on to ungodly things because these seem so private, we have only to look at Sodom and Gomorrah to see what cumulative misery consenting adults caused through their so-called victimless crimes!

Ambivalence diminishes as sins are given away. Otherwise, even though he gains the world of music through composing significant songs, a composer who goes rutting about while neglecting his wife and family has broken their tender hearts (see Jacob 2:35) even though putting musical notes together. In the family's next generation, tragic anger or imitation may be acted out. The music which flows from such a composer cannot compensate fully for his folly. In eternal perspective, a soothing symphony does not compensate for jarring cacophony in personal conduct. Besides, better music is ahead (see 1 Corinthians 2:9).

A philanthropist may "gain" worldly acclaim by dispensing his largesse. If, at the same time, he is engaging in hanky-panky with other funds, he has lost his integrity of soul.

An athlete may "gain the whole world" as to sports records, but by failing to deny himself drugs he becomes a "castaway" (1 Corinthians 9:27). Castaways of all types have cast away the cross in their eagerness to gain the whole world.

An otherwise successful politician can be unsuccessful in preventing his addiction to earthly power while the powers of heaven were in fact accessible to him.

How can we possibly lose ourselves, anyway, if we withhold some of ourselves? How can we lose ourselves if, even in small ways, we go on indulging ourselves in ungodly things? This is not unconditional surrender to God. Hence to deny oneself "all ungodliness" is a vital test.

To withhold some of oneself brings subtle consequences. There is always the irrevocable loss of misspent time. Time spent in indulging oneself cannot be spent simultaneously in other ways. We cannot engage in murmuring and use that same time for praising. We cannot engage in griping at the very time we are consoling others. Each moment belongs either to us or to God!

Though not yet fully worthy we are actually of enormous value, for "the worth of souls is great" (D&C 18:10). Yet compared to all that God has done for us we are by that measure still "unprofitable servants." Several scriptures portray people exclaiming over God's creations in terms that seem to underscore the comparative and seeming "nothingness of man" (see Mosiah 4:5, 11; Helaman 12:7; Moses 1:10). Certainly the vastness of God's creations can make us feel as if we are comparatively nothing; it caused dazzled Enoch to say to our loving Lord, "Yet thou art there" (Moses 7:30). But the reality is that we are children of God! We are of great worth!

Again, gospel perspectives are vital. Losing oneself means losing concern over getting credit; by knowing our true identity we need not be concerned about seeming anonymity. It likewise means losing our desire to be in the driver's seat; putting our shoulder to the wheel is enough.

It means that eagles meekly serve under sparrows—without worrying over comparative wingspans or plumage.

Losing oneself means yielding the substance of one's own agendum if it does not match the agendum of the Lord. It means losing the elements of our leadership style which are not consistent with His. (It is, after all, easier to be a character than to have character.)

There are affirmative things which accompany the losing of self. One is greater caring for the needy. There are many who thirst not only for water or hunger not only for bread but also for the word of the Lord and for friendship. The needy include both the poor in substance and those who are poor as to needed support systems. Losing oneself brings more noticing of others. The more preoccupied we are, the more who will pass by us unnoticed (see Mormon 8:39). We should, then, be more mindful of others, as God is always mindful of man.

Losing oneself means keeping ourselves more spiritually intact; being "ready always" (1 Peter 3:15) so that we are able to help more. Self-denial means patience and humility in a crowd, in a queue, in a parking lot, or with a harassed clerk.

Being of good cheer may not halt or deflect the downpour of discouragement which is drenching others, but it is the unfolding of an umbrella and walking together under it.

Losing ourselves means being willing to go to Nineveh when we would much prefer to go to Tarshish (see Jonah 1:2-3).

Losing oneself means losing one's impulsiveness. Jesus told Peter to put up the sword (see John 18:11). He told Oliver Cowdery he had to make intellectual effort in order to receive revelation (D&C 9:8-9).

Losing ourselves means dropping our resistance to feedback so that we can grow faster, just as did meek and receptive Moses, the brother of Jared, Peter, and Joseph Smith.

The Ten Commandments (Exodus 20:1-17) focus on our relationships with God, self, parents, and neighbors. Further commandments add detail. In addition to honoring God, we are to honor our parents. We are to honor others. We are to esteem neighbors as ourselves (see Philippians 2:3; Mosiah 27:4; D&C 38:24). We honor God by surrendering to God, by giving away our sins—putting at His feet the old self, old baggage, old equipment, and so on. Doing this ensures our getting to know God, and it brings greater richness in all other relationships too.

On the other hand, a swollen self will resist denial and surrender and will almost automatically violate the Ten Commandments, whether by profaning God's name or by neglecting parents. A swollen self is not sensitive and submissive. It is demonstrably indifferent to the life needs of others and may even violate the sixth commandment, whether by actually slaying someone or by enslaving him—for example, with drugs.

A swollen self may exhibit carelessness about the property of another by stealing, defrauding, or "dealing falsely," thus violating the eighth commandment.

A swollen self may be tempted to sexually violate the sanctity and purity of another human, thus disobeying the seventh commandment. A swollen self can be insensitive to the reputation of others by defaming, libeling, whispering innuendos, or being a "tale bearer," thus violating the ninth commandment.

A swollen self can look at a person or a thing and say "I need it, so I will take it, it is mine"! If he cannot take it, he probably will covet it intensely.

The case of Cain is instructive. Apparently as he reached the age described as that in which an individual "became for himself" (3 Nephi 1:29) "Cain hearkened not [to his parents], saying: Who is the Lord that I should know him?" Later, when his less-than-best offering was not accepted by the Lord, he became "wroth," listening neither to the Lord nor to Abel, whose offering, he told the Lord, "thou didst accept and not mine." Cain said he was "tempted because of [his] brother's flocks." After killing Abel, he declared, "I am free," realizing that his brother's flocks were now his. Coveting preceded murdering, but Cain's unhearkening self preceded all else. (See Moses 5:16-38.)

The swollen self can, of course, be temporarily cut down to size by circumstances, as Laman and Lemuel demonstrated, but it cannot be finally shrunken except by submissiveness to the commandments of God. The giving away of our sins means that our souls can thereafter be genuinely enlarged "without hypocrisy, and without guile" (D&C 121:42).

So much of our maturing—whether avoiding being offended, being disappointed, being discouraged, feeling neglected, feeling unappreciated and unheeded—consists of shifting the emphasis from meeting "my" needs to meeting those of others. More accurately still, however, the eye that is single sees—for the first time—what one's own needs really are! We gain a fresh view and can change accordingly.

Losing our lives for Christ's sake really means exploring and discovering things about ourselves and others which we have never known. In that journey we will have the best of guides. This journey can easily be refused, however. We can loiter about in the spa of selfishness. To gain the whole world indulgently causes an individual finally to lose his soul and to become a "castaway" (1 Corinthians 9:27). What then of worthwhile achievements which gain comparative trifles—so much less than the whole world?

An attorney may neglect weightier, spiritual things in order to labor legitimately for several years to lower his corporation's taxes by two percent.

A professor may neglect his family to publish a book which at last is chosen by an academic jury as a class text.

A scientist may let his marriage wither and perish while he comes up with a new process which will increase the life span of stored food.

These lesser labors are legitimate accomplishments. Commendable self-discipline has been involved, which is a portable, spiritual quality.

But Jesus pleads with us to develop a sense of proportion, lest we "strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel" (Matthew 23:24). On the two great commandments, said He, all the law and the prophets hang (see Matthew 22:40). Furthermore, amid many spiritual duties, there are some things that are "of the most worth," the "weightier matters" (D&C 15:4-6; Matthew 23:23).

This sense of proportion is one of the great benefits of seeing with the eye single. The eye single is not fooled by fanciness into ignoring plainness. Brigham Young reminded us, for instance, that many of the things which seem so plain to us in the gospel are actually the mysteries.

If you could see things as they are, you would know that the whole plan of salvation, and all the revelations ever given to man on the earth are as plain as would be the remarks of an Elder, were he to stand here and talk about our every day business. . . . You may now be inclined to say, "O, this is too simple and child-like, we wish to hear the mysteries of the kingdoms of the Gods who have existed from eternity, and of all the kingdoms in which they will dwell; we desire to have these things portrayed to our understandings." Allow me to inform you that you are in the midst of it all now. (Journal of Discourses 3:336.) What seems so plain—keeping the commandments in one's daily life—is "it!" There is not something else of a higher order which we are supposed to be doing instead.

This spiritual reality may seem unspectacular, even ordinary, especially if one assumes that some more important and more glamorous chore awaits beyond the horizon. To keep the commandments and to honor our covenants—whether one is a cashier at a grocery checkout counter, a neurosurgeon, an automotive mechanic, or a government official—is what matters, daily and eternally (see Luke 9:23). Each individual is to give away his sins, to deny himself, to lose himself, and then to find himself and full and everlasting joy.

When other things push away or prevent the doing of these simple, seemingly ordinary things, we are in deep trouble—especially when we no longer realize what the real things are!

So it is that this restored work not only involves the things of eternity but is also drenched in daily significance. True disciples, for instance, would be consistent environmentalists—caring both about maintaining the spiritual health of a marriage and preserving a rain forest; caring about preserving the nurturing capacity of a family as well as providing a healthy supply of air and water; caring for both the prevention and the treatment of the miseries caused by the diseases of transgression.

Adam and Eve were to "dress the garden," not exploit it. Like them, we are to keep the commandments, so that we can enjoy all the resources God has given us, resources described as "enough and to spare" (D&C 104:17), if we use and husband them wisely.

Given the flood of light and its fresh view, one's personal life is to be constantly pursued across the full range of symmetrical Christian virtues. One could be a great missionary through sharing the gospel but still be slack in doing needed civic chores. One can perform impressive civic chores yet be a failure within his own family (see 1 Samuel 2:12; 3:13). One may appropriately and publicly celebrate beauty yet lack reverence for other aspects of the divine. Commendable generosity in one thing does not reduce our accountability for smallness of soul in another. Remember "one thing thou lackest" (Mark 10:21).

Aside from the consideration of proper balance in our lives, those who make commendable contributions may in one sense have already received their recognition and reward—here and now (see Matthew 6:2, 5, 16). This may be just as well, for some honors—justifiable enough here—would be embarrassing to receive later in a celestial setting.

Even worthy, mortal roles can entrap us. As we make contributions, these often draw to us applause, audiences, and even loyal constituencies. Recognition can turn our heads and we can lose the fresh view by being diverted from the need to become more like meek Jesus.

Speaking of contributions, it is better to be sure to do a few things than to do nothing. Moreover, even if we are personally inconsistent, others are still blessed personally by our genuine contributions.

There are, for each of us, mote and beam inconsistencies to be "given away"!

Losing ourselves includes a willingness to witness for Jesus, as this insightful translation of Joseph Smith's makes clear:

But he who denieth me before men, shall be denied before the angels of God.

Now his disciples knew that he said this, because they had spoken evil against him before the people; for they were afraid to confess him before men.

And they reasoned among themselves, saying, He knoweth our hearts, and he speaketh to our condemnation, and we shall not be forgiven. But he answered them, and said unto them,

Whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of Man, and repenteth, it shall be forgiven him; but unto him who blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him. (JST Luke 12:9-12.)

Jesus thus gave reassurance to His anxious disciples who apparently had not publicly confessed His name sufficiently. Yet there was hope, if they repented. This is another example of how repentance can bring about real and needed changes in our lives.

One of the most difficult things for us to "give away" is our Martha-like anxiety, our being conscientiously "careful and troubled about many things" (Luke 10:41). Such worrying and working may even make us feel approved, so that the things of the moment come to dominate the things of eternity. The meal Martha was busily and conscientiously preparing was soon eaten and forgotten. Mary, instead, had "chosen that good part," which would not be taken from her; she had a sense of proportion.

Some of the time, therefore, as with Martha, we murmur because we are focused on the wrong things through lack of perspective. Laman and Lemuel lacked gospel perspective, so they grumbled over one thing or another (see 1 Nephi 2:12).

Martha-like anxiety also expresses itself in our hurrying, even in good causes. Rushing, we find the red traffic light on the way to an important meeting. A fuse goes out, halting the carefully prepared entertainment of guests. When buying a gift for someone in need, we unexpectedly encounter a long line. Doesn't God know we are in a hurry! Doesn't He realize we are only hurrying in order to do something that is good! Thus we can be "anxiously engaged" in a "good cause" but fail to keep things in perspective, having not chosen "that good part."

When genuine frustrations come along, we are still urged to bear them with good cheer and with patience (see Mosiah 24:15). Patience is for coping with unmet expectations, since the way not only is strait and narrow but also lacks a smooth surface.

A new layer of experience cannot be laid down without our feeling its weight and its immediacy. New cares, therefore, so soon cover the old, as the present muffles the past. For instance, a much-needed but unexpected check arrives in time to ease financial worries, and the next day the car is found to need a new transmission. Or children and grandchildren arrive safely after a long and anxious journey and are tucked away safely in one's household, and then the baby cries all night. "Now" is "now." Hence it is so easy to say of our best blessings, "That was then and this is now." The very nature of our five senses—of hearing, of seeing, of smelling, of touching, of tasting—focuses us on now. How does one say to the eye, "Don't receive the next impression"? or to the ear, "Ignore that incoming sound"?

One of the functions of the sixth sense is to balance yesterday, today, and tomorrow with spiritual remembrance.

There is not much space in this life for reveries. Instead, the "old roomers," the cares of the world, quickly move back in, evicting bliss and sometimes even memories of blessings.

Jesus issued pointed words to sign-seeking hypocrites who could "discern the face of the sky" but nevertheless did "not discern the signs of the times" (Matthew 16:3). They could forecast the local weather for the next brief moment but could not see the enveloping things of deeper import! Yet they wanted a sign from heaven, when there were signs all about them which they simply could not discern! The weather presses itself daily upon us, but it is always changing and passing; the weather is proximate, however, not ultimate.

When we have an eye single to God's glory, there is no room for other consuming causes. Yes, we are to be anxiously engaged in good causes, but all good causes are actually subsets of God's great cause—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man (see Moses 1:39; Moroni 7:28). Moreover, just after the words indicating that we are to be "anxiously engaged" in a good cause of our own free will, we are reminded that we must obey the commandments (see D&C 58:30).

We desperately need the perspective which comes from an eye single. Such an eye is focused. It is not blurred at the edges. It also has real depth perception. It sees both the things close at hand (the needs of our own families) and things distant (the needs of the human family). An eye single can identify the returning prodigal while he is "yet a great way off," or it can spot a very distant tiny cloud that signals rescuing rain (see Luke 15:20; 1 Kings 18:44). The natural man's ways are not God's ways, in large measure because we lack His eyes. We lack the focused vision that is provided by an "eye single" only when our "minds become single to God" and to his work and glory (D&C 59:1; 88:68).

God sees as if in an "eternal now." We myopic mortals tend to think our present sample is the total sample—"all things continue as they were from the beginning" (2 Peter 3:4).

The "eye single" is minus the motes and beams of sin, and signifies being "pure and undimmed by sin" (James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1962], p. 243).

The Perfect Example is ever before us. Our unique Lord can thus encourage us. Furthermore, as to the giving away of our sins, there is only one who can take them in order that we might not suffer needlessly. But there is more! He who has done so much for us would also have us become more like Him!

1990 Bookcraft
