Neal A. Maxwell, Wonderful Flood of Light (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990)

Chapter Seven

"There Is None Like Unto the Lord"

The fact that Jesus is actually to be our Exemplar is made abundantly and directly clear, especially in the restored gospel's wonderful flood of light. This requirement is not something to be brushed aside. Indeed, it cannot be, when we have the fresh view of reality.

For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you (John 13:15).

Jesus Christ [shows] forth all longsuffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting (1 Timothy 1:16).

Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps (1 Peter 2:21).

And again, it showeth unto the children of men the straitness of the path, and the narrowness of the gate, by which they should enter, he having set the example before them (2 Nephi 31:9).

Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel; and ye know the things that ye must do in my church; for the works which ye have seen me do that shall ye also do; for that which ye have seen me do even that shall ye do (3 Nephi 27:21).

Behold I am the light; I have set an example for you (3 Nephi 18:16).

Each of us plays various roles in family, Church, community, business, education, and so forth. Though we have differing needs, we have in common the need to focus on all Christ's qualities, especially those which individually we most need to develop more fully, for "he that saith he abideth in him ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked" (1 John 2:6).

In the quietude of individual contemplation of Christ's qualities we will find much customized counsel. In some cases it may be pointed, as it was for the rich, righteous young man who queried Jesus about what more he needed to do to obtain eternal life. "Then Jesus beholding him loved him, and said unto him, One thing thou lackest: go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up the cross, and follow me. And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved: for he had great possessions." (Mark 10:21-22.)

We can, of course, stop short and merely adopt a few techniques illustrated by the Savior. But unless we emulate Him as completely as we can, we will have deprived ourselves of the great model. Moreover, our emulation is to be of both style and substance. God's love underwrites his listening, for instance. Can we conceive of a God who is a nonlistener? Or who is lacking in power? Or who is unwilling to assert Himself on an issue of principle? As we become more like Him it will take place in both attributes and actions.

Even attempting merely to list the qualities of Jesus Christ will fall short, to say nothing of attempting to describe those marvelous qualities.

Underlying the striking patterns of leadership are many qualities of the Master Leader, among which are these few:

Granted, we lack Jesus’ immense knowledge, for "neither could he be taught; for he needed not that any man should teach him" (JST Matthew 3:25). Granted, too, even though we mortals are kinsmen eternally, our "here and now" relationships often involve only short-term associations. Moreover, we do not always choose those with whom we work. Even so, all the principles and patterns of Jesus’ leadership are crucial for us to understand and to apply.

Christ blended humility with His divinity. An example is his openly acknowledging, "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me" (John 7:16). Also, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect" (Matthew 5:48).

He continued to teach correct principles, blending accuracy and modesty, even after He was perfected and resurrected. "Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect" (3 Nephi 12:48). "Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am" (3 Nephi 27:27).

This inclusion of Himself as a model shows His devotion to truth even amid His marvelous meekness. He desires us to become "finished" and "completed."

What a student-son He had been!

"Then answered Jesus and said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do: for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise" (John 5:19). By following the Father's example, then, Jesus became perfected in His attributes of love, mercy, patience, meekness, knowledge, truth, judgment, and so forth. Though we lack many qualities, we have been directed to become more like Him in each of those attributes. Obviously the way for us to achieve perfection is to follow His example.

The stunning doctrines of the Restoration tell us of our own individual beginnings and also of our possibilities in eternity—of pedigrees and possibilities! We must not be lulled or dulled simply because, meanwhile, we are so imperfect. Nor should we rationalize our responsibilities simply because we are often in short-term relationships with other people. The hungry or thirsty stranger, Jesus said, represents more than himself or herself (see Matthew 25:31-46). We are accountable for doing our part in all relationships and for providing what leadership, service, and influence we can. Those within our circles of influence constitute our present sample of humanity; they are neither mere functionaries nor strangers in a transit lounge.

Jesus was a principle-centered leader but also a people-centered leader. Jesus spoke "the truth in love" (Ephesians 4:15), both correcting and commending. As noted, during the space of a three-hour visit with the Lord the admirable brother of Jared was reproved for not remembering to be sufficiently prayerful (see Ether 2:14). Yet later Jesus warmly commended this same prophet by saying, "Never has man believed in me as thou hast" (Ether 3:15).

Unlike Jesus, sometimes we are so concerned with our own feelings and those of others that we subordinate principles to feelings, or vice versa! Hence we often do too little both of correcting and of commending.

Joseph Smith knew what it was to be corrected by the Lord (see D&C 10:1-3). So did Oliver Cowdery (see D&C 9:7). Their reproofs were not vague but very specific: the Prophet Joseph Smith's for not following original instructions concerning the Book of Mormon manuscript, and Oliver Cowdery's for not continuing as he had commenced and for thinking he merely needed to ask for revelations without making intellectual effort.

Jesus tutored Peter in a highly individualistic way, mixing reproof ("Put up again thy sword"—Matthew 26:52) and commendation ("Blessed art thou . . . flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee. . . ."—Matthew 16:17). Peter overreacted to one reproof, declaring, "Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head" (John 13:8-10).

The correct manner and motivation for reproof are indicated in Doctrine and Covenants 121:43. In practice, however, when we undertake to reprove we frequently are prompted not by the Holy Ghost but by ego. Moreover, we often fail to reprove "betimes," meaning speedily and early on. Time can harden feelings as surely as the sun bakes wet clay. Jesus was willing to provide tutorials in one-on-one audiences with some of His followers. Such personalized help can be especially nourishing in the tenderest and most needful moments. For instance, Christ stood by imprisoned Paul in the night to cheer the Apostle and also to call him to Rome (see Acts 23:11). One cannot help but wonder, when Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego were in the fiery furnace, if it might not have been the Lord Himself who was the fourth figure in that fiery furnace (see Daniel 3:25).

The Lord used such salutatory and tutorial tenderness, as we read in his words to Moses and Joseph Smith:

And, behold, thou art my son; wherefore look, and I will show thee the workmanship of mine hands. . . .

And I have a work for thee, Moses, my son; and thou art in the similitude of mine Only Begotten. . . .

And now, behold, this one thing I show unto thee, Moses, my son; for thou art in the world, and now I show it unto thee. (Moses 1:4, 6-7, italics added.)

My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment; . . . (D&C 121:7, italics added).

Know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good (D&C 122:7, italics added).

The Lord's being so near at hand was underscored by Enoch's exclamation about our Lord's many creations amid the expanses of space: "Yet thou art there" (Moses 7:30).

There are dozens of such highly personalized reassurances in the scriptures. Examples are the Lord's words to Abraham and to Jeremiah, which encouraged them by giving them precious, personal perspective:

Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations (Jeremiah 1:5).

And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born (Abraham 3:23).

Divine praise was given to a humble Roman centurion: "I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel" (Matthew 8:10).

Jesus prophesied in ways that allowed later remembrance to occur: "Verily I say unto you, That this night, before the cock crow. . . ."(Matthew 26:34); and "This he said, signifying by what death [Peter] should die" (John 12:33). A developing faith in Jesus Christ is much aided by the provision of spiritual evidence of His foreseeing and individualizing.

To the humble woman of Samaria who knew that the Messiah was to come, Jesus made a simple declaration—"I that speak unto thee am he" (John 4:26)—in confirming His divinity, which He withheld from others, including the inquiring but powerful Pilate.

Aaron, who may have yielded to the crowd during the golden calf episode, was nevertheless honored later by having the lesser priesthood named after him and his seed "throughout all their generations" (Exodus 32:2-6; D&C 84:18). Jesus lifts us up in a world which so often puts people down.

Though sometimes sternly tutored, Peter was honored as the chief Apostle, and with James and John he became the means whereby the apostleship was restored to the Prophet Joseph Smith (see D&C 128:20).

All of these and other examples combine to let us know that Jesus provides forgiving hope for His serious and sincere followers. That hope was extended even to the woman who was taken in adultery, for Jesus’ focus was on her and not on the crowd. In fact, he confronted the crowd by inviting any who were without sin to cast the first stone. Yet Jesus acted redemptively, not permissively, telling the woman to "go, and sin no more." (John 8:1-11.) Jesus attended to important details, such as the Nephite failure to record the prophecy of Samuel, the Lamanite, about the general resurrection following Jesus’ resurrection (3 Nephi 23:9-13; see also Matthew 27:52-53). The editorial reproof was pointed but not overdone.

The great David had it "in [his] mind" to build a temple to the Lord, but because he had "shed much blood" he was not the man to do it, and instead it was to be done by Solomon (see 1 Chronicles 22:7-9). The Lord was direct with David as to the reason for the restraint, but His love for David did not cease, even though the assignment to build a glorious temple was given to another.

Jesus customized His counsel while simultaneously teaching great, general principles.

Even Thomas (who needed to see in order to believe) was still told that he was blessed. Then the Savior taught a general principle: "Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed." That principle was soon amplified to the Nephites: Blessed are they who see and believe, but "more blessed are they who shall believe in your words because that ye shall testify that ye have seen me." (John 20:24-29; 3 Nephi 12:1-2.)

After the miracle of the loaves and fishes, the details of which apparently were soon forgotten by the Apostles, Jesus reproved them by using remembrance, asking them to recall how many baskets of leftovers had been picked up (see Matthew 16:6-12). Teaching in the present can be enriched by remembrance of previous lessons.

As a result of Jesus’ teaching to a formerly legalistic Paul, the Apostle to the Gentiles, the latter was able to write his powerful verses on charity (see 1 Corinthians 13). Paul also wrote about the importance of "speaking the truth in love" (Ephesians 4:15).

Jesus, meek and lowly, encourages us to learn of Him and His meekness by taking His yoke upon us so that, better sensing such weight, we too might be meek and lowly.

Too many times, if we look beneath a failure or ponder a situation we did not handle well, we will find that our ego was extruding, a situation ranging from talking too much to putting someone else down. Or that we showed insufficient love, displayed in a range from our casualness on the one hand to our failure to commend or correct on the other.

Jesus was unconcerned with His personal visibility or His ascendancy. He deliberately descended below all. Contrariwise, the scriptures as well as secular history are full of examples of people for whom ego trips became life's only journey.

Truly, to be Prime Minister was fun but to be Prime Minister and Lloyd George at one and the same time was very heaven!

The time would eventually come when he would cease to marvel at the position in which he found himself and regard the adulation of the mob as no more than his rightful due. The cheerful good humour would slowly dissolve into a colossal egotism. (Peter Rowland, Lloyd George [London: Barrie and Jenkins, 1975], p. 376.)

Some find themselves "needing acclaim as a man with a goiter needs iodine" (Ted Morgan, Churchill [New York: Simon and Schuster, 1982], p. 434). In fact, Brooks Adams observed that "the effect of power and publicity on all men is the aggravation of self, a sort of tumor that ends by killing the victim's sympathies" (Henry Brooks Adams, p. 776, quoted in John Bartlett, comp. Familiar Quotations, 14th ed. [New York: Macmillan, 1968], p. 776).

How different is Jesus! Truly "there is none like unto the Lord" (Exodus 8:10). Yet "the world, because of their iniquity, shall judge him to be a thing of naught; wherefore they scourge him, and he suffereth it; and they smite him, and he suffereth it. Yea, they spit upon him, and he suffereth it, because of his loving kindness and his long-suffering towards the children of men." (1 Nephi 19:9.)

Even after treading the winepress alone (see D&C 76:107), which ended in His stunning personal triumph and in the greatest victory ever, majestic Jesus meekly declared, "Glory be to the Father"! (D&C 19:19.) This should not surprise us. In the premortal world Jesus meekly volunteered to be our Savior, saying, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever" (Moses 4:2). Jesus was ever true to His word.

In contrast to Jesus’ meekness, most of us have keen and continuing concerns about status. There were, by way of example, those who had deep concern that Moses or Nephi not "rule over them."

Is it a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of a land that floweth with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness, except thou make thyself altogether a prince over us? (Numbers 16:13.)

And Laman said unto Lemuel and also unto the sons of Ishmael: Behold, let us slay our father, and also our brother Nephi, who has taken it upon him to be our ruler and our teacher, who are his elder brethren (1 Nephi 16:37).

Yea, they did murmur against me, saying: Our younger brother thinks to rule over us; and we have had much trial because of him; wherefore, now let us slay him, that we may not be afflicted more because of his words. For behold, we will not have him to be our ruler; for it belongs unto us, who are the elder brethren, to rule over this people. (2 Nephi 5:3.)

Jesus not only gave the greatest answers to life's greatest questions, but He also knew how to put especially productive questions. Frequently His interrogatives carried with them leadership lessons. "How is it that ye do not understand?" (Matthew 16:11-12) is a phrase used several times (see also Matthew 15:17). This was not an impatient complaint by Jesus, as it might be if it came from us, but rather was His invitation to ponder and to analyze. "Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear my word" (John 8:43).

His salutation and questions were sometimes very personal, whether to Saul, to Joseph Smith, or to Peter. "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" (Acts 9:4.) Then there was the tender but probing "Lovest thou me?" (John 21:15-17.)

In a most tender but teaching scene, reverential and adoring Mary, at the feet of the resurrected Jesus, was constrained—"Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father" (John 20:17). Jesus would not let Mary's expression of even the most devout and sincere adoration result in an error. He loves us too much to look the other way.

He loves even those who refuse His counsel, as in the case of the rich and righteous young man who had done all that he was supposed to do—yet "lacked" one thing (Mark 10:17-22).

Jesus’ commendations are both personalized and specific. Hyrum Smith was commended for the "integrity" of his heart (D&C 124:15). Nathaniel was commended for being an Israelite "in whom is no guile" (John 1:47).

Is our praise, when we give it, both justified and specific enough?

Even in the less-attended-to episodes in holy scripture we find rich instruction and example from Jesus’ leadership. For instance, He was able to forego recognition in the conversation with two of His disciples on the road to Emmaus. Instead, He taught them from the holy scriptures, deferring recognition.

We sometimes have difficulty in deferring recognition.

Jesus could not have done the things He did if He had been like some of us—fretting over dominion, fearing the criticism of the world, and seeking glory and praise. In contrast there was Lucifer, whose ascendancy was more important to him than our agency (see Moses 4:1, 3).

Though aware of them, Jesus was unperturbed by the comings and goings and the connivings of secular rulers such as Herod and Pilate. "And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together: for before they were at enmity between themselves" (Luke 23:12). They "made a deal," but were soon out of power. Jesus went forward with His eternal ministry, His cause being the cause of all mankind (see Moroni 7:28).

Jesus is the Master Leader not only because He is meek and lowly and thus can cope with irony and adversity but also because He counsels us correctly as to life's basics. One of these is that we are not to seek the things of this world. Instead we are to seek first to build up the kingdom of God and to establish His righteousness; and if we do this, all that we need will be added to us (JST Matthew 6:38). In order to "seek first" we should first deny ourselves (Luke 9:23).

We are especially warned about the dangers of ingratitude, pride, riches, and power.

In so many ways we are told what manner of men and women we ought to become (see 3 Nephi 27:27). He commands us, "Settle this in your hearts, that ye will do the things which I shall teach, and command you" (JST, Luke 14:28). Through his prophets He pleads with us to become "settled" (Colossians 1:23).

There are several things which are typically difficult for us in daily life.

For example, it is difficult for us to let virtue garnish our thoughts unceasingly (D&C 121:45). Do we really expect it to be otherwise—complete with authorized recesses from righteousness?

It is easy for us to be offended, because "it must needs be that offences come" (Matthew 18:7). Yes, those who give offense are fully accountable, but especially "blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me" (Matthew 11:6; see also 13:21).

It is difficult for us, when doing good, to avoid "pleasing ourselves" (Romans 15:1)—even if only by reflecting inwardly and favorably—or to resist adulation.

It is difficult not to grow weary of well doing (see Galatians 6:9). Jesus commended one prophet for his "unwearyingness" (Helaman 10:4-5).

It is difficult for us to be long-suffering with others, as God surely is with us (see Exodus 34:6; 2 Corinthians 6:6; 1 Peter 3:20).

It is difficult for us to speak in favor of one who deserves support but whom the crowd is against unjustifiably. Jesus befriended lepers and publicans, and rescued and counseled the beseiged, adulterous woman (see John 8:3-11).

It is difficult for us to put our hand to the plow without looking back; we are insufficiently "settled" spiritually. It is difficult for us to be meek and lowly. Praise can turn our heads away from concentrating on the furrow to be plowed.

It is difficult for us to speak the truth in love (Ephesians 4:15).

It is difficult for us to respond to cutting truths, even when these lancing words make it possible to drain off pride (see 1 Nephi 16:2). Like Laman and Lemuel, we may mistake truth for anger.

It is difficult for us to endure aloneness even in a good cause.

Perhaps the most difficult of all is the task of balancing these important principles. How, for instance, does one balance speaking the truth in love on the one hand with being long-suffering on the other? How does one balance not doing things "to be seen of men" with avoiding hiding one's light under a bushel?

Thus we must have His Spirit to be with us, to show us not only all things we must do but how to do them with proper spiritual poise (see 2 Nephi 32:3).

Jesus did not act amiss. He always provided what was needed. He was always teaching and counseling. He did His work in a customized way. He knows his sheep and they follow Him (see John 10:27). Thus we see Him rescuing and emancipating a woman taken in adultery; providing a crowning ordinance for protesting Peter; declaring His divinity to a devout woman from Samaria; praising and healing for a centurion; diagnosing for Oliver Cowdery's failure but reassuring Oliver that he was not condemned; tutoring the Brother of Jared on how to build a barge; witnessing and restraining for Mary at the empty tomb; praising Peter; reassuring Jeremiah and Abraham. On and on the stunning list goes!

Thus God's ways as shown forth by the Son are vastly higher than man's ways (see Isaiah 55:8-9). And in terms of constancy and consistency, He is the same yesterday, and today, and forever (see Hebrews 13:8). We are at the mercy of our moods. His view is universal. Ours is provincial.

He is selfless. We are selfish. He is perfection, we are imperfection. He lives in an "eternal now." We live in time and are concerned with daily things, including our daily bread. He has perfect remembrance. We are forgetful.

Whether in a micro or a macro mode, God is "able to do [His] own work." Parting the Red Sea for ancient Israel was easy for Him who, centuries before, had brought to pass the parting or dividing of the earth's oceans and continents (see Genesis 10:25; 1 Chronicles 1:19; D&C 133:24).

God lets us choose, just as He allowed Cain to think, erroneously, that he was "free" after he had slain his brother Abel (see Moses 5:33). He likewise allowed some ancient Jews to engage in "looking beyond the mark" (Jacob 4:14).

He emancipated ancient Israel from Egypt. He has tilted the earth just right and moves it in orbit in such a way that we have seasons. He also reminds us that there can be "seasons" in our own lives (Ecclesiastes 3:1).

On Sinai He wrote on tablets for all mankind the words of the Ten Commandments. To those open to promptings, He causes the individual burning of the bosom to affirm the truthfulness of certain things.

As we consider His long-suffering, His timing, His purposes, and His omniscience, the best and only way to become like Him is as a result of our own willing and consistent pattern of choices, but not because He has intimidated us.

Those of us who are acquainted with the still, small voice are personal witnesses to His micro-management. We are not surprised, therefore, that He who foresaw that certain manuscript pages of the Book of Mormon would be lost had centuries before made ample provision for the work to go forward just the same (see headings to Doctrine and Covenants sections 3 and 10; 1 Nephi 9:5-6; Words of Mormon 1:5-7; Mormon 8).

Those striving to follow the Savior know of the reality of God's marvelous capacity because, from time to time, we too are able to do some of His work. Inadequate as we are, He uses us—sometimes well beyond our known capacity. And we know it and witness that it is so! For this, however, we should give to Him all the honor, praise, and glory! We should not, of course, boast of ourselves, but only of Him. (See Alma 26:12, 35-36.)

Not only do we have perfect Jesus as our ultimate Exemplar, but also His servants, the men and women of God, are proximate examples. Though imperfect, these individuals mirror significantly in their lives qualities perfected in the Master. Enoch, as he became better and better informed, found his empathy growing until figuratively "his heart swelled wide as eternity" (Moses 7:41). Much inspiration can come to us from our companions in the journey of discipleship. Therefore the concept of believers being "compassed-about with so great a cloud of witnesses" (Hebrews 12:1) is to be appreciated not only in terms of witnesses from antiquity such as Abel, Enoch, and Noah but also by the way in which the Lord's modern disciples likewise have sufficient faith in the Lord to mirror His qualities in their lives.

By citing only a few qualities possessed by a few First Presidency members of the recent past one can see how each of these "witnesses" joins the compassing cloud.

President Joseph Fielding Smith was not only a prophet who taught the whole Church but he also taught his considerable posterity especially well. Like Lehi, he was anxious "that [his] family should partake" (1 Nephi 8:12). To the very end of his mortality, one saw in President Smith the seriousness of his own discipleship, including his persistent desire to honor his covenants. Though seemingly stern, President Smith was especially merciful. His posterity is a tribute to him not only as a prophet but also as a father, a grandfather, and a great-grandfather.

President Harold B. Lee, so conscious of Jesus’ example, almost never ceased teaching, refusing to let a teaching moment pass unused.

As a Regional Representative, the author once accompanied President Lee to a stake reorganization. In the course of the interviews a spiritual experience occurred showing how the one called had unmistakable foreknowledge of the call. Ever the teacher, President Lee put his hand on my thigh and said simply, "You see, Neal, why it is so important for us to operate under the direction of the Spirit in doing this work?" It was a lesson never to be forgotten, because the teacher went the second mile to ensure that it would be so!

He was able to squeeze insights and lessons out of experiences and episodes which were compressed into small time-frames. President Lee did not have to go through prolonged experience in order to learn the lessons or gain the useful insights.

Being secure spiritually, he was unthreatened by those of the world who were presumed to know more than he. Being grounded and rooted in strategic truths, he invited and considered tactical insights from a surprising variety of sources.

President Spencer W. Kimball exhibited the same "unwearyingness" as the Lord commended in Nephi (Helaman 10:4-5). One of the author's last real conversations with President Kimball included his wistful comment concerning his ministry: "I should have done more!" How he could have done more none of us knows, but this comment is indicative of his unwearyingness. He endured so well the unusual number of afflictions life placed upon him while serving so many so incessantly.

He esteemed all people alike (see Mosiah 23:7; 27:4). He was not afraid of his moment in history (Helaman 7:9). He knew that his appointed days were his days and he used them well.

President N. Eldon Tanner also endured well, saying that the Lord "had never said it would be easy." President Tanner had the meekness which permitted him to advance an idea and then let it have a life of its own rather than oversponsor it with his immense personal prestige in order to give it some advantage in the arena of decision making. In years of association with him, the author remembers only once—and that was a brief and modest reference—when he mentioned his high-level experience in Canada in provincial government and in constructing the trans-Canada pipeline. A lesser man would have burdened colleagues with "Back when I was . . ."

President Tanner never multiplied words, as was evidenced when, a few hours before he died, he gave his gathered family members a simple, powerful final sermonette the gist of which was: "Love one another, do not find fault with each other, and always forgive one another, always take counsel from the leaders of the Church and follow them diligently." (Personal account as related by his daughter, Ruth.)

President Romney also was meek and likewise endured well. He had that quiet confidence that goes with being "settled in his heart" (JST Luke 14:28). He was so settled that he sometimes meekly remarked that he genuinely felt sorry for the critics and enemies of the Church, because in spite of them this work would inevitably triumph. His self-effacing sense of humor was possible because, being unconcerned with self, he had time to notice incongruities and ironies. The twinkle in his eyes reflected flashes from a soul "filled with light" and faith.

Each of us is blessed with his own cloud of affirming witnesses. Their leadership status, of course, matters little. It is what they transmitted that we cherish! If we but knew how anxious the Lord is for us to be more conscious and remembering of all those who compose our clouds of witnesses!

He also is anxious for us to be more aware that as members of His kingdom we are to be lights. As a major example, temple-worthy Church members do not fully understand how crucial they really are to all mankind. Jesus’ words to his New Testament audience about salt and savor can be conjoined with His declarations in latter-day scriptures in this revealed way: "When men are called unto mine everlasting gospel, and covenant with an everlasting covenant, they are accounted as the salt of the earth and the savor of men" (D&C 101:39). Such individuals are "set to be a light unto the world, and to be the saviors of men" (D&C 103:9).

If those comparatively few people who have made temple covenants do not keep those covenants, what will happen then? The world does not understand this, but we should.

Modern temples relate us to things which are very ancient. Indeed, the holy temples tell us of things "plain and precious"—things lost for centuries which have now been restored—and part the curtains both to antiquity and to eternity.

Temples are designed not only to endow and to seal us but also to refine us. The Second Book of Esdras, an apocryphal work, says: "The Most High made this world for the sake of many, but the world to come, for the sake of few. . . . The earth . . . produces much more clay from which earthenware is made, but little dust from which gold comes." (2 Esdras 8:1-3.) (Edgar J. Goodspeed, trans., The Apochrypha: An American Translation [New York: Vintage Books, 1959], p. 73.)

God seeks in so many ways to consecrate the events in our lives for the welfare of our souls, and we should even pray to Him that whatever we undertake to perform will be finally consecrated to that end (see 2 Nephi 32:9). Father Lehi prayed over the afflictions his son Jacob had known, including "the rudeness of thy brethren." Lehi asked that God "would consecrate [Jacob's] afflictions for [his] gain." (2 Nephi 2:1, 2.) Jacob doubtless denied himself reciprocal anger at Laman and Lemuel. Additionally, having lost himself, Jacob later found himself to be a poet prophet!

How could one so see life and act in this way without the gospel view of God, self, others, and the universe that comes with the Restoration's wonderful flood of light?

Our Father is truly anxious that our experiences, our performances, and even our afflictions move us forward spiritually. The moments of suffering may be our greatest moments, though at the time we would gladly forego them.

In describing His expansive Messianic mission summationally, Jesus has focused on His crowning moments of suffering. His great atoning and rescuing act is the essence of His gospel, as he told the Nephites,

Behold I have given unto you my gospel, and this is the gospel which I have given unto you—that I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my Father sent me.

And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me, that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil. (3 Nephi 27:13-14, italics added.)

His further post-resurrection declarations about the Atonement correlate fully with the above summations:

And behold, I am the light and the life of the world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning (3 Nephi 11:11).

Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—

Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men. (D&C 19:18-19.)

Many centuries after the Savior's declarations to the Nephites, the divine summation was much the same:

And this is the gospel, the glad tidings, which the voice out of the heavens bore record unto us—

That he came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness (D&C 76:40-41, italics added).

Jesus has described His restored gospel as constituting the "glad tidings" (D&C 31:3). Those joyous tidings have come to us by means of a "miraculous miracle."

What greater message could mortals hear? What more stunning words affirming life's meaning?

Surely "there is none like unto the Lord" (Exodus 8:10). And He actually asks us to strive to become more like Him. Of all possible goals, "there is none like" that one!

And, most important, He actually beckons us to come and live with Him forever! Of all possible invitations, "there is none like" that one!

1990 Bookcraft
