Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

The Next Speaker

CHAPTER I

3AT THE RADIO

3On a Sunday afternoon, not long ago, a small group sat in the living room of a suburban home near Salt Lake City, listening to Aunt Rebecca and relishing her latest comments on current events, personal affairs, and things in general. In one end of the room, near the radio, a lone member of the family reclined on the davenport, dividing his attention alternately—sometimes simultaneously—between Aunt Rebecca and the radio speaker.

3"What's the laughing for?" inquired Aunt Rebecca.

3"The speaker has forgotten something. He wants to start reading his speech."

3"Just like you men. You're always forgetting something." The words rolled freely as Aunt Rebecca spoke. Although past seventy, she exhibited the vivacity and vigor of a high-school girl. "I wish you men would forget to write speeches and books and everything else and let the people stay awake at meeting and around the fireside in the evening. Who's speaking?"

3"Brother X."

"He's one of the best. I like to hear him." And without further thought or comment regarding this favorite speaker, Aunt Rebecca continued to dispense her philosophy, setting everybody right in her terse, interesting, humorous style and adjusting all matters, at least the major ones, in the family, the state, and the nation.

4The competition against Brother X was proving too great. Aunt Rebecca was winning out better than seven to one. And why shouldn't she? The odds were against the radio speaker. Aunt Rebecca was right there on the job. Her comments were timely, her personality commanding, her manner pleasing, and her wit rare, and as a member of the family remarked later, "There is a lot of good sense in what Aunt Rebecca says." Moreover, she was covering a wide range, selecting her subjects here and there, while her opponent was confining himself to one thing—the field of religion.

4"Elder J. Golden Kimball will be the next speaker," came from the radio.

4"Did he say Kimball?"

4"Yes, Aunt Rebecca, J. Golden."

4"Bob and Joe!" her voice rang clearly to the up-stairs rooms, "come down here. Brother Kimball is going to speak."

4A brief silence ensued; then quietly our ten-year-old daughter whispered as she edged over to the davenport, "Papa, why does Aunt Rebecca stop talking?"

4"J. Golden Kimball is going to speak over the radio," replied her daddy.

5"Who is J. Golden Kimball and why should Aunt Rebecca stop talking, even if he is going to speak?" questioned the little girl.

5"Because she wants to hear what he has to say."

5"Where is he?"

5"At the Tabernacle."

5"What does he look like?" asked the daughter.

5"Oh, he is a tall, slim man. I'll tell you later. He is getting ready to talk," answered her daddy.

5"Has he a tall, slim voice?" inquired the little girl.

5"Yes, he has. Be quiet, dear, so we can hear him," insisted the father.

5"Let's have the radio loud enough so we can all hear," came from Aunt Rebecca. "Guess I hear enough things; but you know these old ears of mine are not quite what they used to be."

5There was a moment's silence. Then the high, shrill voice from the radio began:

I take it that we will all be relieved when I get through. I certainly got the surprise of my life being called on this morning. I anticipated being in agony most of the conference. I desire you to know and feel that I am trying to tell the truth, which I find is a very difficult thing to do. It is not my intention to skate around on thin ice and keep you people in anxiety. I know as well as I know anything that a man cannot speak to the Latter-day Saints—in fact, he should not, if he can only determine the matter—except when he is under the influence of the Holy Ghost. I have never been able to determine when I am going to speak by the direction of the Holy Ghost, and sometimes when I thought I had it, some of the brethren did not think so. So it leaves me in doubt and uncertainty.

6I do not know why we should be fearful among our people, or anywhere else, as long as we make efforts to serve God and keep His commandments.

6I have been thinking about something for some time. I haven't got it in the form of a speech. Men come to me occasionally, not very often, and shake me by the hand and say, "I am glad to shake hands with a good man." I never feel so "cheap" as when that happens, and I have always been thankful that they did not know me so well as I know myself. It is along that line that I would like to talk to you for a few minutes.

6What is a good man? That has been a big problem with me. I have had a good many business dealings with men who claimed to be good men. They said they were good, and they told me how good they were, and when they got through with me I did not have anything left. [Laughter] Whenever a man comes to me now and tells me how honest he is, how good he is, I am not going to do business with that man.

6I am going to read to you a little from the Book of Mormon. I remember an apostle on one occasion said to me—I had been interviewed regarding something I had preached—"Golden, why don't you read the Book of Mormon?" I said, "I do as much as you do." And that was true at that time.

6I have read the Book of Mormon. I have tried to understand it; I have tried to appreciate it; I have tried to believe it as my father believed it. There was no book that Heber C. Kimball read, and believed in, more than he did the Book of Mormon.

I find that a man can act good and talk good and look good and not do any good. That which I am going to read to you is from Moroni's writings in which he tells something about a good man, which his father, Mormon, had told him. I haven't the time to tell you about the goodness and greatness of Mormon and Moroni, but I have great love for those characters. I quote the following:

7"For I remember the word of God, which saith by their works ye shall know them; for if their works be good, then they are good also. * * * Wherefore, a man being evil cannot do that which is good."

7I am glad he bears down on that.

7"For behold, a bitter fountain cannot bring forth good water; neither can a good fountain bring forth bitter water; wherefore, a man being a servant of the devil cannot follow Christ; and if he follow Christ he cannot be a servant of the devil."

7Now, there is another part I want to read, and I believe this. I may be of the old school, but I have heard it all my life. I believe it in my heart and with my whole soul. If it is not true, "then there is no truth, but we have been mistaken from our youth." We as a Church know this to be true: "And again, I exhort you, my brethren," [says Moroni, and this was about the last that he wrote] "that ye deny not the gifts of God, for they are many; and they come from the same God. And there are different ways that these gifts are administered; but it is the same God who worketh all in all; and they are given by the manifestations of the Spirit of God unto men to profit them.

7"For behold, to one is given the Spirit of God that he may teach the word of wisdom."

7What a wonderful gift!

7"And to another, that he may teach the word of knowledge by the same Spirit;

7"And to another, exceeding great faith; and to another, the gifts of healing by the same Spirit;

8"And again, to another, that he may work mighty miracles;" * * *

8"And again, to another, the beholding of angels and ministering spirits." * * *

8"And all these gifts come by the spirit of Christ; and they come unto every man severally, according as he will.

8"And I would exhort you, my beloved brethren, that ye remember that every good gift cometh of Christ."

8Patriarchs tell me that prophecy is one of my gifts. It is only my gift through faith and through living up to the precepts of the Gospel of Christ.

8I have been told that I should prophesy. I want to say to you Latter-day Saints that to be a prophet of God all fear and all doubt have to leave your mind, and you then open your mouth and God gives you words. But I have become so fearful about things I would be afraid to let loose. I want to tell you there are a lot of us in the same fix. We are afraid of what people will think and are doubtful about the fulfilment.

8When Heber C. Kimball prophesied that goods would be sold as cheap on the streets of Salt Lake as in New York, he himself turned to President Young and said: "Brother Young, I think I have made a mistake."

8Brother Young said: "Never mind, Heber. Let it go."

8Charles C. Rich, after the meeting, said: "Heber, I don't believe a word you said."

8Heber said: "Neither do I." [Laughter] But he said: "God has spoken." And God had spoken.

8No wonder he was frightened, for the people were in the depths of poverty, a thousand miles from nowhere.

My testimony to you is that those gifts and promises are the heritage of God's children. I am not a visionary man; I am not a dreamer. I sometimes wonder what my gift is. I have never seen an angel, but I have the assurance that comes to me and is burned in my heart, like a living fire by the power of the Holy Ghost, that God is the Father, that Jesus is the Christ. I believe with all my soul that Joseph Smith was a prophet and is a prophet of God, and God knows there is ample proof to substantiate it. I also believe that Heber J. Grant is a Prophet of God, and, whenever God gets ready to give him something to tell you, I promise you in the name of the Lord you will get it, and you will get it straight, too.

9The Lord bless you. Amen.

9"Some talk!" said Bob. "He sure sized up the good people about right—the kind that brag about themselves."

9"He always could size people up and situations, too," spoke Aunt Rebecca. "He is a keen observer and has the power of discernment, as well. His father had it before him."

9"What about the gifts he spoke of?" inquired Joe.

9"Oh, that's straight goods," replied Bob; "that comes from the Doctrine and Covenants."

9"He certainly is a unique character," said Joe.

9"I think he is the Mark Twain of Mormonism or the Will Rogers of the Church. I don't know which," returned Bob.

9"He is neither." Aunt Rebecca settled the question decisively. "He is J. Golden Kimball and when he is gone, there will never be another. He was the original product and when Providence had finished him, the pattern was lost and never found again."

10It is fair to assume that many people were enlightened and cheered along life's way by this brief talk, and that the audience was refreshed and put in good humor for the succeeding speaker, whom Aunt Rebecca declared to be one of the best in the Church. But, for some reason difficult to explain, she paid no further attention to the radio, but again assumed the stage in that suburban living room with her spontaneous and entertaining comments and philosophy, this time based upon that Tabernacle talk just concluded. And again our little daughter put the question: "Who is J. Golden Kimball and what does he look like?"
