Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

11CHAPTER II

11A UNIQUE PERSONALITY

11For the benefit of those who are not familiar with J. Golden Kimball and the church to which he belongs, some explanations are perhaps necessary. The occasion of the radio address of the last chapter was the general conference of the Mormon Church held at the great Mormon Tabernacle in Salt Lake City. Let us shift the scene from that suburban living room to the Tabernacle. Ten thousand people are present at this gathering—probably many times that number are listening over the radio.

11J. Golden Kimball is one of the general authorities of the Church, being a member of the First Council of the Seventy, the quorum next in rank to the apostles. As such, he is called upon to speak at these conferences and at many other meetings.

In his unique and interesting way he instructs and counsels the people. He tells them stories, often humorous, each one with a point; recalls faith-promoting incidents; quotes scripture and interprets it; makes his observations; and presents his views and philosophy. Someone has remarked, "He drives his points home with humor, teaches in his own original way; and the people remember what he says." From the talk over the radio, it may already be apparent that he is a man who does his own thinking. That he is fundamentally sound and full of faith, no one who knows him will question. Few there are who want to miss him. Even Aunt Rebecca, as we have seen, with her inherent propensity for expressing herself, was willing to yield the floor to J. Golden Kimball—an undeniable tribute to him.

12Let us picture him as he appears in the Tabernacle when his name is called as "the next speaker" at the conference.

12A tall figure, "six-foot-three," so exceedingly thin that he seems almost transparent, responds to the announcement of the presiding officer. All eyes are upon him as he slowly arises from his seat and makes his way to the speaker's stand. He is within a few weeks of his eightieth birthday; his step therefore is rather cautious and deliberate, as he climbs the flight of steps leading from the second row, where the First Quorum of the Seventy are assigned to sit, up to the fourth row, occupied by the First Presidency of the Church. Presently he reaches the upper pulpit and the microphone.

It would be difficult to visualize such a unique and picturesque figure as is presented by "the next speaker." Let us get a close-up of him as he stands there in the pulpit: Seventy-five inches in height; very slender; somewhat bent by the heavy physical work done in his teens and the burden of his four score years; a head unusually large and unlike any other, with a sizeable bump at the back; his complexion sandy; a few lonesome hairs on top that have triumphantly weathered the storm; keen and penetrating eyes, black and beautiful, expressive of humor and sympathy; a very long, narrow, perpendicular face, intensely interesting, with features regular; withal, a serious countenance, expressive of sadness rather than of the humor for which he is noted. He seldom laughs, but is often seen to smile dryly as he speaks.

13Let us think of him, not too much as a humorist, but rather as a man with a message, a minister of the Gospel, who just naturally uses a bit of his humor and originality to put the message over.

13You will be convinced that the message is the thing uppermost in his mind. The message is the medicine, the humor is his way of getting the medicine down. He learned the lesson early. "When as children we needed a dose of something," he says, "my Aunt Ruth used to hold us down while mother poured the medicine into our mouths. Not so with my father; he used to say, 'If you have to give a baby medicine, tickle it under the chin and when it starts to laugh, down goes the medicine.'" It must be admitted that J. Golden Kimball is an adept in administering spiritual and moral dosages as his father prescribed.

His language is just as natural and spontaneous as the things he says. It is, of course, the vehicle of his thought. "Seldom, if ever, do I study my words," he remarked recently. "Usually I have something in mind to say, but more often do I depend upon the inspiration of the occasion for the message, and always for the language to put it over."

14As a heritage from cow-boy days, he uses some of the Western phraseology. "'Hell' and 'damn' seem to stick with me," says he; "just can't get rid of them. I have a moving-picture mind, and when I get in conversation or before an audience, usually the pictures and ideas come thick and fast. Unpremeditated, the language comes with them and I pass it on, those two words included—I suppose for emphasis."

14His first talk may have revealed that this man does not really preach. It is seldom, as you will notice from that radio talk, that he has a well-defined theme carefully and logically developed. Usually, he talks frankly and freely, making one point after another—in that motion-picture style. Often the points are unrelated, but seldom are they without value and "punch."

14Now and again it will be observed that things irrelevant and in lighter vein and even without any point proceed from his mouth. "I mix the wheat with the chaff," he has said in his public addresses, "and it's up to you to take your choice. In my talks you will find foolishness, maybe some wisdom, and I hope a lot of truth." One thing is certain: these talks are never tiresome.
