Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

The Biographical Road

CHAPTER III

17FIRST YEARS

17Pioneer life was but six years old in "Great Salt Lake City" when a baby came to the old "Kimball mansion" on North Main Street, built in 1849. Not only was this infant sent to a residence which was, for those days, "a palace fit for a king," but it was to be a member of one of the most prominent families, a family of first importance in the church and the state.

His father was no less a person than Heber C. Kimball, apostle, prophet and First Counselor to Brigham Young in the First Presidency of the Mormon Church. Heber C. Kimball, as is well known, was outstanding for his faith and spiritual strength, for his prophetic gift and vision, and for his undying loyalty to his associates. He was a giant in physical strength. His chest measured the same from front to back as from side to side. It is related that one day when a favorite mule got stuck in a ditch, Heber C. Kimball took hold of the mule's harness with one hand while several men pulled on a rope held in his other hand, and in this way the animal was extricated. You may have read that he used to wrestle with Joseph Smith. Wrestling was an occasional pastime of the Prophet. "But I never threw him," said he; and then added, with characteristic Kimball humor and good fellowship, "You see, he was the Prophet of God."

18Heber C. Kimball possessed marked business ability. Through keen understanding and foresight, coupled with industry and good management, he was able to build for himself homes, grist mills and other mills, and school houses, and also to raise crops sufficiently great to feed his large family and many others as well, when they needed food.

18He served as first Chief Justice, also as Lieutenant Governor of the Provincial Government of the State of Deseret. He was a member of the first legislative assembly of the Territory of Deseret, and in the March session, 1851, he was President of the Council Branch of the Assembly. He was a useful citizen until his death in 1868.

18We shall let his son tell more of this illustrious parent. Were it not for J. Golden's frequent references to his father and the eloquent picture he has drawn of him, as presented later in this book, chiefly in one of his talks, we should feel it necessary to speak at greater length here of this outstanding and remarkable man: prophet, church leader, counselor, pioneer, educator, business man, citizen, husband, father and friend.

18Turning from his father, we now present J. Golden Kimball's own brief but expressive account of his mother, which is taken from a writing by him in 1912:

19My mother, God bless her memory, was the youngest daughter of her parents and the only one of that family who joined the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Her name was Christeen Golden. She was born of honest, moral parents, who were farmers in Hopewell, Mercer County, New Jersey. Mother's grandfather was the famous John Goldy, whose farm at Hopewell joined the farm of John Hart, a signer of the Declaration of Independence.

19It is related, by a member of the family, that in the battle of Trenton, New Jersey [Revolutionary War] five of the sons of John Goldy left the farm one day, all of them barefooted, to circle around and join Washington's troops. They had but one gun. It is now on exhibition at the Capitol Building at Trenton, New Jersey, and is said to be the longest barrel shot-gun in America. As they walked along they came within firing distance of the enemy. One of the Goldy boys quickly fired and "killed several British officers. * * * The guns were then turned on our boys. Three of them disappeared and were never heard of again.

19Mother married Heber C. Kimball at Nauvoo, Illinois, and she knew not her number as one of his polygamous wives. I don't know either. Mother didn't have any idea, as father never told her. My mother was no concubine, but an acknowledged wife. She was a wife and mother. And not many lived who, to my mind, were quite so good.

19Mother was simple, plain, and cheery in her living and manners and most generous, hospitable, and kind in her nature—a true and devoted wife and Latter-day Saint. She taught us by example rather than by precept, and her example was fine, noble, and elevating. She never nagged us, and I don't believe there ever was a mother who was more anxious than she was that her sons should live good lives, go on missions, and be honest, honorable, and upright.

20Her life was one continual devotion and sacrifice. She was falsely accused, and suffered just as I suffer, only she kept still about it. I love her memory more than I do anything else at this date.

20From that same writing we quote a paragraph or two regarding his early schooling:

20Yes, I was educated, as hard as it is to believe, in many, many schools of the kind. But, for some reason I never advanced very fast, as the schools, each succeeding year, changed teachers, changed methods, and continued reviewing. However, I gained something, learning line upon line, and stood among the best educated of that pioneer age. My life scholarship was paid in the University of Utah at that date—1867. The University of Deseret, it was then called, was established in the old Council House, which stood where the Deseret News Building now stands. But my father died in 1868, which ended my schooling for many years.

20Speaking of early Utah schools, let me say that my father built at Salt Lake City, just west of our present Lafayette School building, the first school house west of the Missouri River. For many years, he maintained a private school for his family and the neighbors. All the children in the neighborhood were invited to attend the Kimball School, and without any cost whatever to them. Father hired first one teacher and then another to run the school. It was in his school that I and many others made a start.

Seemingly it was Heber C. Kimball's intention to supplement this training. Golden was a favorite son. His father began training him to become his private secretary when Golden was only well into his teens. His father had great confidence in him and spoke of him as a boy of unusual promise. For the sake of discipline he was very strict with Golden. Along with bookkeeping, penmanship, etc., he would test him as to character, often setting a trap for him by leaving coins or candy in tempting places. But Golden never touched them. This pleased the father greatly. The father's influence on the son was potent in the years to come. The son's profound admiration for his father lives to this very day, as is evidenced by the high tributes which this son so often has been pleased to pay to his illustrious and noble parent.

21Listen to one of these tributes: "You Latter-day Saints know well how proud I am of my parentage. When I stop believing in my father and mother I will stop believing in the human race; for where they go, I want to go."

21In that same talk he tells something of his early training:

I will tell you how I was brought up and then you can make some excuse for my general makeup. A lot of us boys used to meet up in the Eighteenth ward, right where now stands the Lafayette School, that beautiful building which cost over $170,000. I was educated in a very small building on the same block. We had a brother who was somewhat of a general, and he trained us boys—that is, when father was away. He would get us behind the barn, where no one could see us; then he would put a chip upon one of our shoulders and tell one of the other boys to knock it off. Then we would fight. That was part of the training he gave us, and when we asked why he did it, he said, "It makes you tough."

22My father had a great garden, and it was fenced in by a six or eight foot stone wall. He told us we couldn't have any of the fruit; but we got it anyhow, and I will tell you how we got it. This same brother of ours took one of the boys and dangled him over the wall with a rope, and he loaded his shirt bosom and pockets with apples. One time, Father Tucker, the gardener, got after him with a willow, and lambasted him. Brother said that would make him tough.

22For fifteen years of my life I was disciplined and instructed by my father, which has been an anchor to my soul. The things I was taught in my childhood (father died when I was fifteen years old) have been the savor of my soul; and the Holy Ghost has brought them to my remembrance.
