Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

23CHAPTER IV

23THE BOY BECOMES A MAN OVERNIGHT

23Upon the death of his father in 1868, J. Golden Kimball became a man. He was the eldest of three children. Besides him were Elias and Mary Margaret. How true it is that responsibility develops character. Here is an instance of a man being born almost overnight. By a single event, the son of a prominent man was brought face to face with a compelling situation. A challenge was before him; a mother and three children needed support. His dear mother, ever sacrificing as she was, wanted him to continue his education at this time. But, he would not. Under the circumstances it was not fair to her. So he set out to become a specialist in driving mules, for he considered that would be "a profession of some immediate value." Thus, as one man put it, "J. Golden Kimball became one of the early M. D.'s of the West, for he was as good a mule driver as could be found in these parts."

23Unhesitatingly, he assumed a man's responsibility and worked with the vigor and determination of a man. "I was a worker," he says, "and had enough ambition to have made me President of the United States of America."

24About four o'clock every morning found him tending the horses for the man who employed him, and from then on till after dark he was busy driving or caring for the teams.

24Several years later, having served a practical apprenticeship, he went into the contracting business for himself: freighting, digging cellars, hauling rock, and doing all kinds of teaming work. As time went on, he completed many contracts and dealt with many people. It is reported that he always saw to it that the work was done right and that the price paid for it was reasonable. He never took advantage of people, but was honest in his dealings with every one under all circumstances.

24Convincing evidence of his consideration of others lies in a statement given by his brother, Elias: "Golden always went over the situation, figured the job, took the full responsibility of the contract himself, and then, when the work was completed, he shared equally with his brothers who helped him. If five of us worked on the job, he would split the returns five ways. He would never take a cent more for himself than he gave to us. One time when Golden was figuring the rock-hauling for a large mill near Tooele, Utah, for Elias Morris, some of his brothers objected to hauling the big stones. He decided, however, to take the contract and hauled the large rock himself. When settling time came, he divided the proceeds from the contract equally among us."

25Needless to say, these admirable qualities won for him the universal respect and esteem of his brothers and of all those with whom he dealt. His contracting business increased until, as he reached his twentieth year, he found himself doing some of the larger contracting jobs in the community.

25All in all, however, the contracting business proved unprofitable for J. Golden. "Between stations" he and his immediate family nearly starved. "Finally," he says, "we starved out. Just couldn't make it. Mother sewed for Z. C. M. I. at those early starvation prices, kept boarders, with poor surroundings and accommodations, as by this time we had been boosted out of father's mansion and lived in a two-room house. Mother went to Brother Brigham repeatedly to secure a position for me, but of no avail. I suppose there were too many others who wanted work. So we were left to hustle for ourselves, and that's how I became a hustler."
