Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

26CHAPTER V

26PIONEERING IN BEAR LAKE VALLEY

26In 1876, the family decided to leave their home and try their fortune elsewhere. His mother had emigrated to Utah as a pioneer in 1848, his father being one of the original pioneers of 1847. In 1876, after eight years of hard struggle since the father's death, the mother joined her children and left Salt Lake City. They located in Meadowville, Rich County, four miles from Bear Lake and about a hundred miles northeast, as the crow flies, from Salt Lake City. There they bought squatter's claims from Isaac and Solomon Kimball, who had been called there by Brigham Young to help settle that country. In all there were eleven sons of Heber C. Kimball in that territory. Golden and his brother, Elias, assumed the obligation to pay Isaac and Solomon one thousand dollars for their claims. It was the first time they had gone in debt, and to them at that time it seemed a tremendous undertaking.

"There was no house or improvements," says J. Golden Kimball, "no title, and the land not yet surveyed by the United States, and we commenced a fight for life. God knows it was a hard fight with poverty and terrible blizzards in winter. We felt some years that we had nine months winter and three months late fall. We worked, we toiled early and late, and the strange part of it was we never got discouraged. We hadn't sense enough to know when we had failed. Fifteen long years of hard work and sacrifice, but final success. Mother remained with us until we sold out in 1892—or about that time."

27Those were pioneer days with all the work, hardships, privations, successes and failures incident to life in a new and forbidding country. To begin with, one log room, sixteen by twenty, housed the family. Later a kitchen lean-to was added.

27There were the usual long, strenuous hours extending from before daylight till after dark; mother, daughter, and sons all cooperating and exerting every effort to make things go. The wolf came pretty close many and many a time. Once he hung around for three whole days. The family had no bread, not an ounce of flour in the house and, of course, not a cent of money. Finally Golden saddled his horse, went to the store keeper at Lake Town and asked for a sack of flour on credit, offering to leave his horse, bridle, and saddle until the flour was paid for.

27"Not much," replied the staunch old Englishman. "I want the money. One of your brothers owes me now for some goods I sold him."

Later, it was learned that the amount of this bill was twenty-five cents, which, being so small a sum, had been overlooked. But, the merchant obstinately insisted that he was right; someone in the family had neglected to pay him, and Golden failed to get the flour.

28In dire necessity, he turned his horse towards the bishop's house, where he offered the horse and saddle as security for a sack of flour. "That isn't necessary," quickly responded Bishop Ira Nebeker; "I'll let you have the flour and want you to come back any time you are in need." As soon as possible the flour was paid for.

28As the years passed, the worldly circumstances of the family improved. By sheer hard work and good management, the struggle was crowned with victory, and these two brothers, Golden and Elias, became the proud owners of one of the finest and most successfully operated cattle and horse ranches in the Bear Lake district.

28Even during the poverty and desperate struggle of those first years, they were happy in that little one-room log cabin. Some of their evenings were devoted to reading. Many of Elias's were spent that way; he was a little more studious than his brother. Golden read a little, but was more socially inclined and liked to go to all the parties and dances.

28Looking back on those days, J. Golden has this to say in one of his Conference talks:

For twelve years of my life, after my father's death, I was as free as the birds that fly in the air! there was no restraint further than the counsel from my mother. I took no active part in the Church. I was just as free as non-members of the Church feel that they are free. That is a part of my history I am not making much noise about; I am trying to forget some things that I did. However, I don't want you to be impressed with the idea that I committed anything criminal, anything that would deprive me of the Spirit of God. But I am sorry, oh how sorry! that there was no restraint or responsibility placed upon me, that I was not actively engaged in church work during those twelve years.
