Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

30CHAPTER VI

30LOGGING DAYS

30When the call came to Bear Lake for volunteers to go to the canyon during winter months and cut logs for the construction of the temple at Logan, J. Golden Kimball responded. Joining others from the entire section, he worked in Logan canyon in temperatures ranging from "ten to forty below zero in snow to the waist."

30Strange as it may seem, there were no immediate bad results so far as their health was concerned. Each night they would return to camp with their clothes "frozen as stiff as a board from the waist down." After supper, they would lie around in front of the fire until they were thawed out, and then go to bed. No one caught cold or got sick during those winters as a result of exposure to the weather. There was no money paid or expected for this service. It was a voluntary contribution to the Church.

Over a hundred men worked at this camp, felling the logs, bringing them to the mill, sawing them into lumber, and hauling the lumber to Logan. While the men were decent and wholesome, they were rough and careless in some ways. Golden was one of the ring leaders when fun was brewing. One evening when their spirits ran high, he and his brother led the crowd in a spontaneous demonstration against the cook, "a large Danish woman who would take the prize anywhere for being the dirtiest and most careless cook in the country."

31No inconsiderable fun was had at the expense of this defenseless, yet careless, woman. Biscuits were suspended by threads of hair found in them, dirty dishes were exhibited, songs were sung, stories were told, and thoughtless comments made, half in jest, half in seriousness, but greatly to the embarrassment of the woman who presided in the kitchen.

31During the next visit to the sawmill of Brother C. O. Card, then in general charge of the camp, the matter was reported, and a trial was arranged for J. Golden Kimball and the other ringleader in the affair. Attorneys were selected, the jury was chosen, and the case tried. "We were guilty as could be," says J. Golden, "but the jury let us off. It was made up of men who were on our side."

31Following the trial, Brother Card called J. Golden to him and said, "I want you to take charge of this camp."

31"Why so, when I've been causing all this trouble?"

31"I can see you were guilty this time, although you were acquitted," responded Brother Card. "But I can see, also, that you have got the right stuff in you."

Included in the directions to the new superintendent were the instructions to have the men stop their swearing, to hold meetings, and to have prayers in camp morning and evening. "Everyone is to pray," said Brother Card; "call on a different man each time."

32"That's a pretty big order, either one of them," replied J. Golden. "There are men in this camp, I reckon, (I being one of them) who never have prayed in public but have been in this business of swearing all their lives."

32But the new man showed that he merited the confidence placed in him. Difficult as the task was, he had the courage to tackle it. Moreover, he was frank and honest and "had a way with him" and the men liked him. He was one with them, and, though it may sound incredible, the meetings were held, and he induced every man in that camp to pray. Some of the prayers were funny, but they were all sincere.

32To quit swearing was the hardest part. A habit, deep-rooted in youth and followed persistently thereafter, is not so easily broken. These were cowboy days, and most of the men came from ranching districts. The whole country was new. The men were genuine, as evinced by their whole-hearted support of the Church in this strenuous undertaking to build a temple. This response and many other big, fine things about them would have convinced one of their sterling worth. But, at the same time, they were rough.

33The superintendent recalls that he worked his way up a little side canyon to the spot where George X, the champion swearer of them all, was wielding his ax to fell a tree. "He was an excellent woodsman," J. Golden says, "and as we stood there in the snow four feet deep and way below zero, I said, 'George, you must stop this damn swearing; those are the orders.'"

33"But, "But, damn it, Golden, I just can't do it. I was raised on it. That's my native language, and its pretty hard to ask a fellow to start learning new speech this late in life."

33"But, George, we've got to do it; that's my orders. I've quit already, and if I can do it, you can."

33"All right, Golden, if you've quit, I'll quit too, if you say I have to."

33The man liked J. Golden Kimball. With strenuous effort that man stopped his swearing, excepting "hell" and "damn it," and in those days, in a rough country, that wasn't considered swearing. "The whole camp fell into line," relates Elias S. Kimball, "and many times since as I have thought about that thing it has appealed to me as a most outstanding example of leadership resulting in part at least from the high esteem of the men for their leader. Of course, the Lord may have helped out, too."

The logging-days over, J. Golden accepted a position as superintendent of a private lumber mill, owned by Hyrum Woolley, where he remained for some time and then returned to the ranch.

34Following is one of his own stories of those logging days:

HumorKimball, J. Golden34Joe Morris was the best man with oxen I ever saw. One time when we were hauling some of those temple logs to the sawmill, he turned the whip over to me. There were six yoke. I had never tackled half so many. "You can't learn younger, go ahead," Joe said to me. So I took the whip and started in. The oxen, dumb as they were, knew a change had been made. Immediately they lagged and some of them turned around to look at me. I fancied they were all laughing at my shrill voice. Joe stood by and laughed; he wouldn't help a bit. I spoke quite respectable for a time to those oxen, but what good did it do? Then I started to cuss. (It was after the manifesto on swearing, too, but I was mad and had to turn loose. I never did it again; that was the last time.) And, boy, how I did cuss! Did I wax eloquent! I'm afraid I did. But, did those oxen sit up and take notice? They sure did; every one of them got down to business. You see, they were Church oxen, and when you talked that language to them, they understood it.
