Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

35CHAPTER VII

35THE ROAD TURNS

For twelve years after his father's death J. Golden Kimball felt no restraint of any kind except to be good to his mother. No man's hand was stretched out to guide him in the footsteps of his father. He was living the out-of-door, carefree, rancher's life, and, except for his mother's gentle example, he was thinking of cattle and horses and good times, rather than of anything else. But soon he was to stand at the bend of the road and to feel the influence of a good man once more.

35In the summer of 1881 something happened to change once again the destiny of this unique character. It was a thing less tragic than the death of his pioneer father, but one doubtless just as effective in turning this young man, now twenty-eight, in another direction.

35A rather stout man of German accent came one day to that little town of Meadowville to hold a meeting. In his outward appearance he was not specially attractive. Certainly there was nothing pleasing in his deep, gutteral, broken accent. However, one could not be long in his presence without feeling that that sturdy body was the tabernacle of a great, inspiring soul. That person was Dr. Karl G. Maeser.

36The meeting was called. The people responded well; yet the number was not great. Under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, for one hour and a half Karl G. Maeser testified of God, made a plea for education, and spoke in the interest of the Brigham Young Academy (now the Brigham Young University). Golden and Elias were thrilled. His words electrified their souls. From that night their ambition was kindled not only for education but for a greater knowledge of God as well. The very next day they commenced laying their plans for an education. They began to see that there was something more in life than caring for horses and cattle. In one single hour, speaking under the influence of the Holy Spirit, Dr. Maeser had enlarged their vision and set their ambition on fire. From then on they wanted to do something and to be somebody.

They sold some things off the ranch at considerable sacrifice and decided to peddle washing machines to get the balance of the necessary money to go to school. They worked as hard as two men could, soliciting and selling the machines for miles around. Finally they got enough money to buy fifty more machines, which, when sold, would yield them the coveted sum to send them for one winter to the Brigham Young Academy. They paid the agent the cash for these washing machines, but never saw the machines or the agent again. He had skipped with the money. You can imagine what a blow this was to them. Their disappointment was terrible; the way seemed black in every direction. But they kept on plugging and finally came out triumphant. More washers were sold, and, "after sweating blood to get it," the money was secured (at least part of it) and they set out one cold winter's night for the Academy at Provo, Utah, the first young men to leave this section for an education.

37Golden and Elias had engaged transportation on the stage but, to accommodate a friend, they cancelled the order and went with him in a wagon, leaving Meadowville about 8 p. m. It was forty degrees below zero. One of them would drive for a while and the other two would run behind the wagon to keep from freezing to death. It was a trip long to be remembered. Upon arriving at Evanston next morning at four a. m., they were more dead than alive, and it took the warm room of the hotel and hot drinks to revive them.

37Their mother, also, moved to Provo for the school term and boarded, besides her own sons, five young men to help pay expenses. In addition, it became necessary for them to haul coal from Coalville, and vegetables on return trips to earn additional money.

Two school years were thus spent by J. Golden Kimball at the B. Y. A. Here, he secured a fairly good education for that day. He excelled in some of his subjects and won recognition in several of the speaking contests.

38But of greater value even than the technical training was the inspiration of that great educator, Karl G. Maeser. From him the students learned of the real purpose of life, the value of achievement, the meaning of service. From him they learned that great man's interpretation of life, of character, of success. From him they received many valuable suggestions as to the place they might fill in the great drama of life. "Whatever you are, don't be a scrub," he would say in his characteristic, earnest style. And he used often to say, "Let me tell you what I mean by giving my word of honor. If I were to be locked in a prison with walls twenty feet thick, there would be a chance that I might escape. But should you place me in the center of this room and draw a circle around me with a piece of chalk, and I should give you my word of honor that I would stay inside that circle, do you think I would step over that line? No! Never! I would die first."

Of those who were under the inspiration of this great teacher, one man became a judge in the Supreme Court of the United States and others became apostles, college presidents, and national and local senators and representatives. Scores of his graduates worked their way to the front ranks of education. Many others became prominent in the law and divers other professions. These and hundreds of others became conspicuous for distinctive service in the various walks of life, to say nothing of the excellent contribution of the rank and file of his students (men and women alike) to the building up of the home, the church, and the state. J. Golden Kimball received his share of that inspiration.

39Many years later, the Maeser incident at Meadowville and the days at the Brigham Young Academy were recalled by Brother Kimball:

39President Grant told us last evening of a spot of ground he will never forget. And it impressed me with a feeling which never can be blotted out—my experience as a pioneer in Bear Lake when I went into that log meeting-house and heard Brother Maeser talk. He was talking about the Gospel. I shall never forget it. Although I have never remembered what he said, I know how I felt, and my brother Elias and I, and our mother with us, made as great a sacrifice as I have ever seen made to go to school, and later to go on a mission, when we moved from Bear Lake down through Evanston and through the deep snow by team, and not by railroad or auto. It took us three or four days to reach Provo. We went to school. I attended two years and my brother Elias three.

39That is my testimony. I do not think I have to get myself all exercised and all wrought up and tear my lungs all to pieces to impress you, after forty years of labor in the ministry. Notwithstanding all my mistakes and blunders I have had a testimony of the Gospel from the beginning, and the beginning was in the Brigham Young Academy under the teaching and instruction of Brother Karl G. Maeser.
