Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

40CHAPTER VIII

40"WAY DOWN SOUTH"

40April 6, 1883, immediately following his second year at the Brigham Young Academy, J. Golden Kimball received a call from President John Taylor to go on a mission to the Southern States. Eight days later, he was set apart by Elder Moses Thatcher, and soon thereafter he arrived at Chattanooga, Tennessee, where he was appointed by the Mission President, Brigham H. Roberts, to labor in Virginia "without purse or scrip." One year later, he was made secretary of the mission with headquarters at Chattanooga. He was familiar with the martyrdom of Elders Gibbs and Berry and the shooting of the two Condor boys in 1884, which occurred near his field of labor.

B. H. Roberts, just before his death, related to the author that J. Golden Kimball, a missionary at that time in the vicinity of the Gibbs-Berry killing, exhibited a courageous and valiant attitude. "Brother Kimball not only volunteered, but was insistent that he should go to recover the bodies of these two elders and thus spare me the danger," said President Roberts. "His offer was as generous as it was sincere. But, finally, I prevailed upon Brother Kimball that I should take the risk, pointing out that with that long, lean, greyhound figure of his, effective disguise would be impossible and that the danger from our enemies, bitter and enraged as they were, would be too great if he were to go."

41During the last year of his mission, Golden's health and constitution were broken. He contracted malaria fever, which left with him its effects for the years to come.

41In 1885 after two years of service he received an honorable release and returned home by way of Hopewell, New Jersey, where he visited with his mother's relatives, the Goldens. here he was well received and, before leaving, was invited to preach in the local church. His own account of this visit will appear in another place.

41Six years later, in 1891, he was called by President Wilford Woodruff to succeed William Spry as president of Southern States Mission. After serving three years in this capacity he was again honorably released and returned home in 1894.

No attempt is made here to tell of his excellent service and the many faith-promoting incidents of those years in the missionary field, since frequent references to his missionary experiences are made in his talks. Some of these experiences, taken from his Tabernacle talks, are quoted later in this chapter; others appear in Section IV. It is enough to say that those same qualities of leadership and character that attracted men to him in the contracting and logging days made friends for him and the cause he espoused as a missionary. His exceptional faith, loyalty and humility, his splendid humor, originality, frankness and honesty, his interesting manner and dependable nature, all combined to win the hearts of the missionaries and the people. During this period while in the service of his church he had a rich and wonderful experience. We shall now let him tell some of his missionary experiences.

MISSIONARY EXPERIENCES AS TOLD BY HIMSELF

Brethren, what I want to talk to you about for a few minutes is my own experience. I know more about myself than any man living in the flesh. I am getting pretty well acquainted with myself. I am surprised sometimes at the things I do and say, more than you are. I remember after I went to school I came home and went to Bear Lake. I came down to Salt Lake on a little business which I happened to have with William C. Spence, of the President's office. He said, "Brother Kimball, President Taylor sent you a letter calling you on a mission, and he is disturbed because you have not answered." I said, "How could I answer it, when I never got it?" "Well, you'd better go in and see him."

I went to the President's office, the first time since I was a young boy with my father, and I met that great and wonderful prophet. I said, "President Taylor, I never received your letter."

43"Well, Brother Kimball," (he was so kind; he thought so much of Heber C. Kimball and that made him think a lot of me) "you cannot go now."

43I had been praying for it, I had been asking the Lord why I could not go. My mother had been praying that God would send me out. I said, "President Taylor, give me one hour and I will give you my answer." I went out on the street and the first man I met was Bishop Thomas Jenkins of the Seventh ward, who had been to Bear Lake, and I knew him. I said, "Brother Jenkins, will you sign my note for a hundred dollars?" "You bet, I will," he answered. So we went down to the Deseret National Bank, and he endorsed my note.

43I came back to the office with one hundred dollars in my pocket, and I said, "President Taylor, I am ready." I went on that mission. No greater blessing has ever come into my life.

GUIDED BY HOLY SPIRIT

Now, brethren, I confess to you that I have been among this people for a considerable length of time, and have tried to fill my appointments as best I could. I have traveled among the people from Canada to Mexico, but I have never in all my labors felt the thrill and the flame of the Holy Spirit as I did when I was on my mission. It has been strange to me that I have not been able to reach the hearts, to attain the humility, the childlike simplicity, the perfect faith in God that I enjoyed in the Southern States, as an ignorant elder, perhaps, and with very little information. I traveled without purse or scrip absolutely, and I had such perfect confidence that I never doubted but that I would be cared for.

44When I was an elder in the missionary field, I was sent out into the woods—for that is about where we went in the years 1883-4. We did not go in cities; they were not safe places to go. So we went to the woods, among the poor people, and preached the Gospel. And we were sent forth without purse and without scrip—all it cost me to fill a mission was to get to my field of labor. I paid for that myself, and it was up to me to get back home as best I could. That is about all the money I had, with enough to buy a few clothes, and I remember they were rather poor. At one time I was up in the Blue Ridge mountains of Virginia, in the winter, with a straw hat and a duster on. It was not very suitable; it was not very warm. We could not wear overcoats—could not carry them in that country. All we carried was an umbrella.

We never were at a loss to know what to do, my companion and I, when we had the spirit of our calling. We heard that voice—not very often, not as often as we should have done, but we heard it behind us saying, "This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right and when ye turn to the left."

45I stand before you as a witness for God that he never forsook us. I walked—and I am a very poor walker; I am not built for it—hundreds and hundreds of miles, and I never lay outdoors but twice, though I want to confess to you I hustled. There is nothing I dreaded worse than lying outside on the ground. I prayed, and my companion prayed, and then we got up and moved on. I guess we would have starved to death if we had kept praying and had not hustled; the Lord doesn't help people who do not hustle and move, after they pray, and do their duty.

I remember thirty-seven years ago I was secretary for Brother Roberts, who presided over the Southern States Mission. After I had traveled for a year without purse or scrip and had tested God thoroughly, I found the Lord's word good. He never failed me. I traveled in the state of Virginia. I went on one trip with a young elder—and I say it with a good deal of pride—six hundred miles without purse and without scrip and without friends. No man had ever heard the voice of a Mormon elder where we traveled. We left a trail behind us, a trail that other elders have traveled. At no time during that three months did I sleep outdoors, but I came mighty near it a lot of times. I thought the Lord surely had forsaken us, at times, but when it came to the last test, some one's heart was softened, and they fed us, and they gave us a bed; so we had no use for money.

HumorKimball, J. GoldenMALARIA

During my labors in Chattanooga with Brother Roberts, as it was in the early history of that city, I was thoroughly poisoned with malaria. I was drunken, not with strong drink, but with malaria. I was as yellow as a parchment. As I went along the streets one day in Chattanooga, a stranger met me. He happened to be a physician. He said, "Young man, I don't know who you are, but if you don't do something for yourself, you will die."

46"Well," I said, "I won't die, as I'm a Mormon—you can't kill them."

46When Brother Morgan came down and relieved Brother Roberts, I was still in the office, looking worse than ever. Brother Morgan looked me over carefully. He said, "Brother Kimball, you better go home. The mission is very hard-run for money. It will cost twenty-four dollars to send you home alive, but it will cost three hundred to send you home dead." It was a matter of business in that office; they had no money. I think maybe that was all I was worth.

"No," I said, "Brother Morgan, I don't want to go home. I believe I was called on this mission by revelation; at least they told me so in my blessing. Now God has been good to me and He has been faithful and true; I have tested Him out and if He can't take care of me, when I have been as faithful as I have, and made the sacrifices I have, then He is not the God of my fathers."

Temple WorkKimball, J. GoldenVISITS MOTHER'S FOLK

So Brother Morgan let me stay, and I filled my mission. I have my release. It is the only release I have ever had, and I prize it very much. When I was released President Morgan said, "Brother Kimball, now you'd better go right straight home." I said, "Brother Morgan, I can't. My mother suffered the pain of death to give me life. She watched over me from my childhood to manhood, and she loved her people. She heard Brother Jedediah M. Grant, President Grant's father, preach in Philadelphia, when she was a girl twenty years old. She heard only the one discourse and she embraced the Gospel. Then she took the Church works and went to her people, a good people, an honest people, a wonderful people, but they all rejected it, and she had to leave. And it broke her mother's heart. She went back to Philadelphia, and in company with President Jedediah M. Grant and his wife traveled by team to Nauvoo and married my father. And that is how I happen to be here today. My mother watched me grow to maturity. You know the one great vision and dream she had: It was that her son, her eldest son, should grow to manhood and go back to her people and let them see what Mormonism had done."

48And I went, and God kept me alive and I visited them for five weeks and I preached in their church. My mother's relatives told their old minister, who had preached there for thirty years, that unless he let Christeen Golden's son preach, they would leave his church. So I got to preach. He was a clever old fellow, too. I thought I would ease up on him a little and get another chance. So I preached in his splendid church building and when I got through he said to his people, "This man has told the truth. I have preached it to you for thirty years." "Well," I said, "I'll fix you the next time," but I never got another chance. At any rate, while I was there I secured the names of over 150 of my mother's people and I brought them back to her, and her dream was fulfilled. For in the winter of 1884 my brother Elias and I accompanied our mother, and we did the temple work for the Golden family—and I am still alive.

PREACHES TO TREES

I remember when we arrived at Chattanooga, Brother Roberts sent me and a son of an apostle into Virginia. When we reached our field of labor, we lay around there for three weeks. I said to my companion, who was from the Brigham Young Academy, "Let us go up into the woods and see if we can sing." (I couldn't carry a tune; I never tried to sing in the Academy.) "And let us go up and learn to pray." We did not have any audience, only those great big trees. And I said, "Let us learn to preach." I would advise young elders to do that before they start out and not practice so much on the people—we practiced on the trees. So I prepared myself and occupied the time. My companion was prepared, and we sang. We made an awful mess of it, but after a while—and that is another testimony—God brought the tunes to us, and we could sing the songs that we had listened to in the Academy. Then we preached. God was kind to us and he loosed our tongues and we found we were able to express the things we had studied. I remember my companion was dismissing. We had our eyes shut and our hands up. I thought he would never get through. And when he said, "Amen," we looked back, and there were four men standing behind us with guns on their shoulders. I said to my companion, "That is another lesson; from this time on in the South I shall pray with one eye open."

So I will conclude my remarks by saying that I filled that mission. Brother Roberts and Brother John Morgan are my witnesses that I completed it, although I was broken down with malaria. But I came home with an honorable release; it was in 1884 that I came home. I worked in the Mutuals in Bear Lake and with the elders. I wound up as Superintendent of the Mutuals. I traveled from Evanston to Soda Springs in snow and cold weather, and suffered. By the way, when I went on my first mission I told President Taylor, "If you let my brother Elias stay at home, I can fill my mission." That put the idea in his head, and Elias was called right after I was, and we both went. We left our cattle and our horses and everything we had.

ORDAINED A PRESIDING SEVENTY

Then came my second mission. There was no noise about it; word just came, "You are called to preside over the Southern States Mission, and Brother Spry will take you down and turn the mission over to you." He did, and he did it mighty hurriedly, too, and left me to preside. During my first year I came home with an emigration. And while I was trying to comfort my wife, who was sick, Brother Roberts telephoned me to come down and be ordained as one of the First Council of the Seventy. They never asked me, they never consulted with me, they just sent for me, and I have been in this council thirty-three years [1922]. I filled my mission. One day, Brother Reynolds and I came out of the council meeting, and when we got to the gate, he said, "Brother Kimball, you are released, and your brother, Elias, is appointed." The two of us spent ten years in the South and when we came back we didn't have a thing but our families and our lives.

50The Lord has been good to me. No man in the Church has been favored more or treated more kindly than I have been. I have got all that I have deserved and a good deal more.

PERSECUTIONS

I want to ask in all soberness, if you think this Gospel, that has been revealed by the Lord through the Prophet Joseph Smith, can be advocated and preached among the children of men without serious consequences. I tell you, if our elders go out and advocate the truth of this work, it will bring upon them persecution and whippings. It may not be the better element will do that; they never have whipped our elders; it has generally been the same class as those who are killing the negroes in the South, but the people winked at it. I was almost a witness to the killing of our elders in Tennessee, on Cane Creek, and I know something about the spirit of mobocracy.

REMARKABLE HEALINGS

Let me call your attention to an incident. It happened away down in Alabama. That was at a time in the nineties when I presided over the Southern States Mission. The elders had been asked to assemble. They were laboring in that low, marshy, malarial district that was scarcely safe for a human being to live in. And they came straggling in, suffering with malaria, rather low-spirited, because they had been traveling without purse or scrip through that section of the country. We met and held a conference. After the two-day conference was over, we were to hold a priesthood meeting. In those days we had no place to meet in except the woods, but I had instructed the elders to clean some place off in the woods—a circle, where we could meet and hold our priesthood meeting.

52On that occasion there was a young man, whose mother was a remarkable woman, a Latter-day Saint. The father had left the Church years and years before. He opposed the boy, he stood out against him, he refused to assist him. But the mother's faith and the faith of the young man, who was in that conference, did not fail. I don't know what his trouble was, but one of his legs was as large as my body, and it looked like a great piece of raw meat. It looked as if it would burst. The people there did the best they could for him. He had no physician. We did not know what a physician was in the South in my day. So on this occasion I said to this elder: "Well, you will have to stay here with the people. You can't go up there."

52"Why," he said, "Brother Kimball, I have been dreaming about this, and I have been talking about it. It would ruin my whole mission unless I can be at that priesthood meeting."

52"Well," I said, "if you feel that way, two of the elders will carry you up there, one mile."

We went there in order to get away to a place where we would be secluded. When we got into the woods in that little circle and sat down, as best we could, I looked those elders over. I was not very well myself, but I said: "Brethren, what are you preaching?"

53"We are preaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ."

53"Are you telling these people that you have the power and authority, through faith, to heal the sick?"

53"Yes," they said.

53"Well, then, why don't you believe it?"

53This young man spoke up and said: "I believe it!"

53He sat down on a stump and the elders gathered around him. He was anointed and I administered to him, and he was healed right in their presence. It was quite a shock. And every other elder that was sick was administered to, and they were all healed. We went out of that priesthood meeting and the elders received their appointments, and there was a joy and a happiness that cannot be described. The people gathered around. And the elders, before their departure, got down and they cried. Those elders, many of them, had never seen one another until they assembled in that conference, and "Such love," those people said, "we have never known."
