Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

54CHAPTER IX

54HOME AGAIN

54Following the first mission, J. Golden Kimball returned to the ranching business in Bear Lake Valley. While here he served as stake president of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association, as home missionary, and as president of an elder's quorum.

54In 1887 he married Jennie Knowlton, a daughter of John Q. and Ellen Smith Knowlton. For several months the couple lived at Meadowville and then moved to Logan, Utah, where three of their six children were born, Further reference to his wife and children will be found in later chapters.

54Golden and his brother, Elias, bought property in Logan City and close proximity, and accumulated real estate in and near that city. Hoping to gain honor and renown by becoming rich, the Kimball brothers went into the implement business at Logan, Utah, and Montpelier, Idaho. For the first time, except for that thousand dollars paid to Isaac and Solomon Kimball in those ranching days, they went into debt, signing notes for the significant sum of thirty thousand dollars.

After four years of hard work in this business, they came out with "experience plus experience," having lost their capital. They did, however, save their good name by paying off their debts.

55The Bear Lake ranch was exchanged for Cache Valley property and their horses and cattle and other chattels were sold and the money invested in real estate. Not yet convinced of the dangers of speculation and financial overreaching, they bought almost everything for sale. Finally, they joined others and purchased nineteen thousand acres of land in Canada. This time, these brothers paid seven thousand dollars and signed notes for seven thousand dollars. The venture was a total failure. "And thus," writes J. Golden, "we were prevented from chasing the golden calf. Moral: Don't set your heart upon riches, don't speculate, and don't go in debt. After this, again the Lord came to my rescue and called me to succeed Elder William Spry as president of the Southern States Mission." This event has already been briefly chronicled.

It is only fair to say that J. Golden was unduly influenced by others in this speculation. According to his own statement and the testimony of others who know him well, his disposition is rather to be saving, conservative, and careful. "I believe in living within my income and in building up a reserve," he says. "I don't like speculation and never did like it but was induced to speculate by others. Not that I would shift the blame for my own acts, but it is against my nature to speculate and to go in debt. Those who do it nearly always pay the price, just as I have done."

56In 1895 he came to Salt Lake City to reside, after having lost all his earthly possessions.
