Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

57CHAPTER X

57IN THE FIRST COUNCIL OF THE SEVENTY

57April 6, 1892, while serving as president of the Southern States Mission, J. Golden Kimball was chosen a member of the First Council of the Seventy, one of the high positions in the Church. In 1896, following his return from the mission field, he was selected one of the aids of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations. His devoted service, these many years, to these two organizations and to the church is generally known. For approximately forty years, he has attended the executive meetings of these organizations and traveled throughout Zion, speaking words of encouragement and inspiration to the people. It may be safely said that, without exception, his labors have been unusually effective for good in the many thousands of meetings in which he has participated among the priesthood, the young people, and the people generally. Scores and even hundreds of his listeners, upon literally hundreds of occasions, have accepted and retained the spiritual medicine he has offered them. Abundant evidence lies in the innumerable quotations from his sayings and talks everywhere quoted among the people.

It is in this work, seeking the advancement of God's program, that President Kimball, as one of the general authorities of the Church, has spent the last half of his years. This work has become his life, as his talks will reveal. His ambitions, his thoughts, his fondest hopes are linked with the Church. To a friend, he recently wrote, "I would rather be tied to a whipping post and have my flesh stripped from my bones than to lose my faith in this Church and have my spirit killed."

58For twenty-two years, from 1900 to 1922, in addition to acting as one of the First Presidents, he was office secretary to the First Council of the Seventy.

58For nearly fifty years, in all, he has served his people in the capacity, first, as missionary, second, as mission president and, third, as one of the general authorities of the Church. No wonder he loves the faith and the people. And no wonder the thousands of seventies and the people generally, whom he has counseled and inspired for nearly half a century, love and admire him.

58Following are some items and incidents related to the seventies:

LINE OF ORDINATION OF J. GOLDEN KIMBALL TO THE OFFICE OF SEVENTY AND AS A PRESIDENT THE FIRST COUNCIL OF THE SEVENTY

The Prophet Joseph Smith ordained Levi W. Hancock a seventy on Feb. 28, 1835.

58Levi W. Hancock ordained William M. Allred a seventy on May 20, 1845.

59William M. Allred ordained J. Golden Kimball a seventy on July 21, 1886.

59J. Golden Kimball was ordained one of the First Seven Presidents of the Seventy on April 8, 1892, by Apostle Francis M. Lyman.

59Francis M. Lyman was ordained an apostle on October 27, 1880, by President John Taylor.

59John Taylor was ordained an apostle on December 19, 1838, by Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball.

59Brigham Young was ordained an apostle by David Whitmer, one of the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon, on February 14, 1835, and the ordination was confirmed at the same time by the First Presidency of the Church, then Joseph Smith, Jr., Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams.

59Heber C. Kimball was ordained an apostle by Martin Harris, one of the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon, on February 14, 1835, and the ordination confirmed as above stated.

59Joseph Smith was ordained an apostle under the hands of Peter, James and John, some time in June, 1829.

59Peter, James and John were ordained apostles by the Lord Jesus Christ—St. John XV.

WILLING TO SERVE

I am acquainted with the seventies. If you want seventies to go on missions I can speak for them. If you call them they will go, but if you want them to stay home they will do so, and so will I. I will go on a mission if called. I am not just talking either, God knows it, and I know it. I would go if I were brought back in a casket, and I do not know but I would be tickled to death to have it come that way.

I have never been more greatly impressed than by Colonel William J. Bryan, an admirable man who died fighting for God and testifying as far as his knowledge went. What more can any man do? That is the way I feel. I shall stay in this work.—J. G. K.

NO RESIGNING FROM PRIESTHOOD QUORUMS

It must be understood by the Priesthood of God in this Church, that there can be no such thing as resigning from a quorum of priesthood in the Church. When you have made covenant with God and the Church and received the priesthood, you cannot resign. The only way to get out of a quorum of priesthood is to commit sin and get disfellowshipped from the Church. As long as you hold that priesthood we have the right to receive you into the quorums, and it is the duty of those who preside to labor with those who are careless and indifferent.—J. G. K.

CARELESS SEVENTIES

I want to ask the Latter-day Saints if they have ever heard of a seventy being handled that is slothful and careless regarding his duties. I have heard of men being handled who waded out into the mysteries of the Kingdom and commenced advocating false doctrine. One brother asked me the other day if I had ever heard of a man being handled for not knowing anything, and I could not remember a single case of that kind in the history of the Church.—J. G. K.

SacrificeKimball, J. GoldenBRIEFLY PUT

J. Golden was addressing the Seventies Convention at the Granite Stake Tabernacle. A large crowd had gathered to hear him. He had been asked to talk on "the fund", as the treasurer needed support.

60"Brethren," the shrill voice began, "how many of you would give your lives for this Church?" Every hand went up.

60"How many of you would give fifty cents to the seventies' fund?"

61He said nothing more about the fund. But the men saw the point and responded.—From a Seventy.

SEVENTIES AROUSED

Golden Kimball said this over twenty years ago, but it has stuck with me ever since. He had been asked to come down and stimulate us seventies. "Brethren, we have got to work together and fellowship together. There is no other way to get along. Let's all pull together. If we don't, what will happen? Suppose, for example, I do everything the Lord asks of me and by and by He says to me, 'Good boy, Golden, go on up there.' And I am exalted to the highest pinnacle and you people lag behind and fail to do your duty. What fun can I have up there all alone playing the jews-harp and talking to myself and knowing you fellows are stuck in the mud somewhere. Now, you fellows have got to get busy. What do you say?" And they did get busy. The speech was retold many times and had its effect upon the men.—From one who was present.
