Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

62CHAPTER XI

62J. GOLDEN KIMBALL AT EIGHTY

62On June 9th, 1933, J. Golden Kimball reached his eightieth milestone. The glorious hope of eighty springtimes has cheered his heart and pointed the way of life and achievement. The sunshine of fourscore summers has warmed his path and kept alive within him the torch of that faith and love. The soothing charm of twice forty autumns has wrapped him in the haze of the Indian twilight to muse and ponder the things of life. The cold of eighty winters has pressed against those cheeks and slender frame as it thrust its chill and cleansing power into his soul. And eighty times have these eternal rounds brought faith and cheer, meditation and chill, and the many and varied experiences of life to this tall, slender man.

62What kind of man have these seasons made of him? Under the joys and sorrows of these eighty years, what marks have been left upon his brow? What manner of man do we now find living within that huge head and slender frame? Would you like to know some of his innermost thoughts and feelings and something more of his views of life?

Let us go to his home that we might talk with him and view him at his leisure. Scarcely more than a block from the Salt Lake Temple, resting complacently on the southern slope of the North bench and overlooking a most beautiful valley, is his modest home. It stands on the old Heber C. Kimball homestead, within a few feet of the final resting place of that illustrious man. A generous showing of flowers and shrubs lends its springtime beauty to the place and speaks of the artistic temperament of Mrs. Kimball, who loves to be among them and watch them and help them grow. Entering the home, we are aware that the same artistic hand has been at work there.

63Rising from his easy chair in the living room, Brother Kimball greets us with his accustomed smile and bids us welcome. Can you not feel the warmth of that smile and the glow of his genial nature?

There is a fine fellowship about this man. Never is he too much in a hurry, even on the street, for a handshake and a visit. He is sociable, frank, and unusually democratic. If ever there were any pride or feeling in his heart that, by reason of his birth or position, he was better than the other fellow, he lost that feeling long ago. He is a people's man. Why shouldn't we feel at home? You will soon notice that his talk reveals the fact that he lives on the same level as you and I, and that he seems to understand us and our problems. For he, too, meets the average vicissitudes of life and knows, also, something of its trials and tribulations. Probably he has had more than his share of life's burdens. At any rate, something has made him intensely human, and inspired in his heart an unusual love and understanding of others.

64"Brother Kimball, how are you feeling on your birthday?"

64"Well, the old bones and what's on them are telling me that the race is more than half run—some aches and pains, but then, I wouldn't know what to do without them."

64"Any trace of the old malaria from the mission days?"

64"Oh, a bit when it's damp and stormy."

64"How about the moral feeling at eighty?"

64"Oh, I guess I'm about as good and about as bad as you fellows. I never did have a very good opinion of myself."

64"Well, but do you think that by and by when you go up there, he will pass you right off or stop you and ask a few questions?"

64"Being skinny, I may squeeze by. I think, however, he may want me to clear up a few things. Maybe I can explain them and maybe I can't. Wouldn't be surprised if all three of us just get in by the skin of our teeth and, assuming we do get by, what worries me most is location." There was a twinkle in his eye as he went on. "I'm afraid they'll stick me off in some corner or down in the swamps where this old malaria will come back on me."

64"Then, you think there will be locations in the next world?"

65"Yes, a lot of them and some of those fellows with a case on themselves, the self-righteous kind, are going to land down in the swamps, too. That will be a sort of catch-all for a lot of us."

65"What about this average fellow—the one that's not very good and not very bad?"

65"Chances are he will be better off than a lot of people who think they are all right. He may light on high ground. If the average fellow is not pretty well taken care of, you can see that heaven will be rather disappointing and the Lord will prove a poor manager, after running us through this mill to have too many of us land in the swamps."

65"Evidently, you don't think much of the old mill?"

65"Oh, yes I do, and much as I like that average fellow we have been talking about, I would not want to pass these same eighty mileposts again. Neither am I anxious to kick off right away. So there you are."

65"Then you must like something about the good old footstool?"

"I sure do, I love the people, and I hope they like me a little." He was very earnest. "I am a people's man, democratic in my views and always sympathetic with the people in general. I believe in the old Jeffersonian principles of Democracy on which the Constitution was formed. A people's government. That's the thing—not too strong a centralized power that portends to czarism and king-craft and encourages trusts and multimillionaires who bear down on the people. Better have poverty and equality than a favored few with slavery and bondage."

66"Then, you believe the government should be democratic in principle?"

66"Yes, and in practice as well, and the church, too."

66"You would give everybody an even break, everywhere?"

66"Yes, and so would the Lord, I believe, to that average fellow and the poor devil, too."

66"Don't you think the average man gets a square deal in this country?"

66"The squarest in the world, and yet America is still in the making. Another decade may do a lot more for the masses; let us hope so."

66"What about the Church?"

66"The most democratic organization on earth—the fairest and squarest to everyone concerned. It belongs to the Lord, and while its affairs are administered by men, yet the Lord has given them the outline and His spirit to guide them."

66"Do you love those men, Brother Kimball?"

66"Yes, with all my heart, and while I do not worship at the shrine of men—the Lord does not expect us to do that—yet I believe they are the finest men in the world. I know they are."

"Brother Kimball, for half a century you have been working for the Church. Have you grown to love that, too?"

67"Again, with all my heart. What would any of us do without it? When you have loved a thing for fifty years and kept on loving it, more and more, each winter and summer and spring, I guess it would be pretty hard to live without it." His voice was warm and affectionate as he spoke.

67"What about the preaching end of it; do you enjoy that?"

67"Well, yes, when I don't have the rheumatism or have to work too hard to get to meeting. I love the people and love to feed them the bread of life when I can get the Spirit. Of course, I know my way is different, but I can't help that. It seems I was made that way."

67"Brother Kimball, do you try to make the people laugh?"

67"Sometimes, not often. I do think it's best to get the people good-natured and in a mood to take what you give them. You remember what my father used to say about giving the baby medicine; 'Just tickle it under the chin and down goes the medicine.' That's always seemed better to me than the old-fashioned method of using force or too much persuasion."

67"Do you figure out what you are going to say beforehand?"

"Yes, sometimes, but I seldom say it. I depend more on the spirit of the occasion, and when I get up before the audience, my mind seems to work in that motion-picture fashion, and things come before me, one after another, in rather rapid succession."

68"Then your language is not usually premeditated?"

68"No—very seldom."

68"What about those two little words that seem, now and again, to worry the authorities?"

68"Oh, I never intend to use them when I get up to speak, but they just come to me as naturally as singing to a bird. I'm not thinking about words; I'm concerned about the ideas and how to put them over. But those words you speak of are what's left over from the cowboy days. They used to be my native language and I don't seem to be able to shake them. Really, they come from a much larger vocabulary, only I've gotten rid of the others. But, let me ask you, do you think you ought to ask a leopard to change his spots this late in life?"

68"Brother Kimball, I don't want to tire you out or get too personal."

68"Well, I have an easier chair than you have and if you're writing a fellow up, I reckon you have to know something about him—so shoot. If I'm going in print, I'd rather tell how I feel than have some one guessing at it."

68"Then, here's hoping you won't object to this one."

"Try it and see. Seems to me you would make a pretty good district attorney, you and my wife, too. Nothing seems to get by either of you. Go ahead."

69"How do you feel when your remarks upset the authorities and there seems to be, temporarily, a slight lack of harmony between you?"

69"It hurts me." He was unusually serious. "Some people's skin is as thick as a rhinoceros, but mine is not. I presume that the following description given of me when I was young is pretty true: 'He shall have strong mental powers and be stupid in his own way. None will govern him, for he will possess superior qualities of mind—very lofty and unbending spirit more proper to govern than be governed—a lofty spirit with a kind of noble pride. Generally a smile on his countenance, but when moved he will be bold as a lion.' That was said of me way back in the days of Brigham Young."

69He turned in his chair and continued: "Maybe I was born under some such star. I mean well enough, and I regret that my ways don't always please them."

69"Possibly, they do not always understand you."

"Often I think people don't understand me any too well and my motives and intentions. My life and words do not always portray my virtues, being made up, as I am, of bone, a little flesh and sinew, and largely a bundle of nerves. I am so constituted that I am always keyed up to the highest tension." He paused a moment and then went on. "How can such a person be consistent in public or private, and keep peace with his desires, intentions, position, and religion? Such a person is a continual contradiction to his own true self and, from a superficial standpoint, is condemned or, at least, unjustly censured right from the beginning. All my life, I have been trying to master these nerves of mine and my high-strung disposition."

70"Thanks, Brother Kimball. Now, if you don't mind, what does religion mean to you?"

70"Well, religion to my mind means more than to be pious and prayerful. That's fine, but that's only part of it. You need these things if you can get them." He seemed sure of his ground. "But, the bigger things are to love your God, your neighbor, to be generous to the poor, to be honest, truthful, moral, etc., to repent, to sell all you have, leave your family, home, country and follow the Master. These things to me are evidence of faith in God. A few of these virtues I boldly claim to possess."

70"Amen, Brother Kimball. Now, have you any hobbies in church work?"

"I suppose I have and that they are faith and repentance. Somehow, it seems mighty easy for me, thank heaven, to believe in the Lord, in His goodness, mercy and justice, and in His program of salvation and I love to preach these things to the people. So far as repentance is concerned, that appeals to me, too. I know I'm sidestepping right along, although I don't mean to; and if there is one thing in this world I need to do it is to repent and do it often and make a good clean job of it—no reservations."

71"Is there anything dearer to your heart than the Church for which you have worked so long?"

71"No, only my family. I have worked for them a few years, too. Been married now going on fifty years. Only I don't like to put one of these ahead of the other. Why not let them go along together? You know as well as I do that I would sacrifice anything I have on earth for either of them, except my honor, and neither of them would want me to do that."

71"Naturally, your family are most dear to you."

71"Yes, my wife is a fine woman. She comes from just as good stock as I do. She has done me good all her days, God bless her. And heaven knows she has had a hard enough row to get along with a fellow like me. If more of us men only realized how stubborn we sometimes are, we might begin to turn over a new leaf. As for our six children, they are, after all, our dividends for our years of family toil and struggle."

71"What are the names of your children?"

"Jonathan (we call him Jack), Quince (we call her Jane), Elizabeth, Gladys, Richard, and Max."

72"Yes, as one advances in life," he continued with an unmistakable show of emotion, "one turns instinctively, more and more, towards home and loved ones, friends and religion, and all the spiritual things that are so satisfying to one's soul."

72"That's beautiful, Brother Kimball, and now may I wish you more happy birthdays and ask heaven's peace and blessings upon you?"

72"Thanks, I think I'd like to stick around awhile longer if the Lord is willing. Seems like we are never satisfied. And you can say, if you will, that my heart is full of love and sympathy and tolerance for everyone, especially for that average fellow we were speaking of a while ago. Tell them that for half a century I have been trying to understand them and to work for them, and I hope they will try to understand me. I don't know whether I have any weight or not, but tell them that, besides preaching to them, I'm praying for them right along."

The interview over, we leave the home and the presence of this interesting personality. Once having met him or ever having heard him speak, one would not soon forget him. He is so unique in personal appearance and makeup—so humorous and interesting. And, had he been directing the conversation just concluded, it would have sparkled with humor and originality. This man, as we have seen, is truly original. Seldom, does he borrow other people's ideas and speech, the exception being that he does lean on his noted father. The people love him for his humor, his originality, and for his delightful frankness and honesty.

73But consciously or unconsciously they love him for his faith. His faith, after all, is his anchor. It furnishes him his footing, his background, and his inspiration for the greater part of what he says and does. Subtract from him this foremost quality and there would be less remaining of J. Golden Kimball than if he were robbed of any other of his virtues.

73His faith has led him to a knowledge of God and His program for saving and exalting the race. It has led him to a profound love for his fellows, to a deep concern over their successes and their failures and to a democratic and tolerant attitude toward them. It has led him to an intelligent understanding of life and its values. It has led him to a position of security in the hearts of his people and in the esteem of the Master.

73How fortunate there has been this blending of humor, originality, and frankness with the weightier virtues of faith, love, and tolerance! How they have enlivened the interest in the man and his message of truth! How generously have they enriched the makeup of his rare and unique personality!

J. Golden Kimball is prompt, businesslike and dependable. His dependability and his sympathetic feeling for others have brought many people to him for counsel. Young men and women and older ones, some of them in serious difficulty, have sought his aid. The sane and kindly help given by him has often contributed to mending their mistakes and troubles and helping them to get back again on the regular highway. "His personal work with such people has been most excellent," declares a life-long acquaintance. "Many people, including some now prominent, have been helped around the bend of the road by Golden." While he is unusually frank, it is said of him that he never betrays a confidence.

74One of his special gifts is that of discernment, a gift possessed by his father to an extraordinary degree. J. Golden has inherited a goodly portion of this trait. "Instantly," says a friend, "he can tell whether a man is for or against him. He can discern whether a person is telling the truth. He can size up an audience or a situation more quickly than any one else ever saw. He has the gift of prophecy as well—but is seldom moved upon to use it."

Here is a man who sees straight, one of those rare persons with normal vision. Instinctively his eye travels the direct line through the mist and haze into the center of a problem or a situation. And seeing the truth, he has the courage to express it. Conventionality does not stop him or even swerve him from his course. More than form and favorable opinion, he loves truth and is both honest and fearless in telling it.

75Clearly, as you will discern, his motive is to help people. It is not his practice to say things that will embarrass or injure others. Rather, he is considerate and kind in his makeup. His love and tolerance have won for him the esteem and friendship of many people in many classes.

75One of his lifelong friends, speaking of his honor, cited many convincing incidents pertaining to his conduct. Among them were some actual occurrences of how, on several occasions, he had been known as a young man to protect the honor and virtue of some of his girl friends. Again, his attitude toward certain of his youthful acquaintances, whose conduct was known to him to be questionable, was most generous, tolerant, and conducive to elevating these companions and restoring their self-respect. The golden rule found lodgment in his heart at a very early date.

One cannot be around J. Golden Kimball, even momentarily, without feeling that he is absolutely honest, frank, and genuine. There is no hypocrisy about him, not an ounce. Nor is he superficial in any respect. And while he has regard for the material things, and possesses a financial mind capable of analyzing and appreciating the importance of money and its uses, yet he is not worldly in his desires or ambitions. His mind, rather, runs decidedly towards the spiritual. He is attracted to his family and their spiritual needs, to the church, to friendships (he himself is a true friend and retains his friendships) to the life and work of the Master. "As the years come and go, I find myself and my ambitions," he says, "more and more closely linked to these things. The religion of my father is the religion for me. The same testimony that fired him and spurred him on burns in my soul today."

76Like some other servants of the people, and prophets of God, he is rather a sad and lonely man. Much of his time is spent by himself, reading, writing, and meditating. He reads rather extensively. He writes principally for his own use to crystallize and preserve his own thoughts and to record some of the things he reads. Those writings, promiscuous and generally unfinished, often in note form only, he usually files away where, as he remarks, "They can't do any harm." Sometimes, he will carry a few pages in his pocket to a conference but "almost never uses them."

76These writings, however, and the hours he spends in meditation are of significant avail. For during those hours he shares the fortunes of his family and his people, their joys and their sorrows; he plans and prays for their welfare and their salvation. During these hours come to him ideas, inspiration, and background for his more active performance in serving those he loves.

Having lived, not the life of the rich man, the idler, or the aristocrat, but the normal life with most of its ups and downs, he is exceedingly human as his sayings and talks will testify. Especially does he have a warm spot in his heart for the downtrodden and the unfortunate, whom he has befriended all his days. Under the promise of the Master, that the merciful shall obtain mercy, one would say that this man will certainly share in that blessing.

77He has had his share of ill health. Contributing have been that malaria germ contracted in the Southern States and doubtless, also, the confinement in his office, especially of those twenty-two long years when, in addition to his other responsibilities, he served as office secretary to the First Council of the Seventy. And inasmuch as our friend has a huge streak of pessimism in his makeup and unhappily learned many, many years ago how to worry, we must list this as one of the contributing factors.

77Admirable, indeed, are the modesty and humility of this man. Nothing that is said in his favor ever seems to change his modest opinion of himself. No honor or recognition that has come to him has ever elevated him in his own estimation to a feeling of importance and conceit. In the very midst of his popularity, he has remained modest, humble, and wholly inoffensive from bigotry. These are winning traits. Doubtless, if he had regarded himself more highly, others would have been less attracted to him.

78President Kimball has grown to be a familiar and loved figure not only in the pulpit but on the street, in his office and home, and in the homes of his friends as well. Wherever he goes, he is welcome and wanted, both in public and in private life. And when in the course of events, it pleases God to call His servant home, thousands will miss their friend and mourn his passing.
