Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

Sayings and stories Along the Way

CHAPTER XII

81SAYINGS AND INCIDENTS, HUMOROUS AND OTHERWISE

Introductory

It seems needless to say that the sayings in this and the succeeding chapter suffer from transcription, particularly those that come from the subject of our book. Proceeding from his mouth, his words are enlivened by his unique and interesting personality, by the high, shrill, slender tones of his voice, and by his singular and picturesque appearance. These cannot be transcribed; neither can the soul of this genuine, interesting, humorous character. At best, they can be but feebly imagined or described. All we can suggest is that the reader keep before him as best he can the mental picture of J. Golden Kimball as he reads. Most of the items included in this section that are not otherwise accredited, are by J. Golden Kimball himself. In a few instances, where the source is not given, it will be apparent that someone else is the author.

THE TRUTH STINGS

I want to tell you in a few words that there is nothing in the world that the wicked dislike so much as the truth.

PRESIDENT KIMBALL'S AUTHORSHIP

I write books, but I put them in pigeon holes and lock them up where they cannot do any damage.

SPECULATION—AND AFTER

You see after that speculation, we never got ahead again. Then we went over the hill to the poorhouse, and have been feeding on stubble ever since.

82REPENTANCE A SAFE-GUARD

82Someone said, "They're liable to cut you off the Church." Guess maybe some of them would like to. But they can't cut me off the Church, I repent too fast.

GOD WILL FORGIVE

I acknowledge that I am imperfect, and no one is more sorry than I am. I have made mistakes, but I have faith in God, and I know God will forgive a man who repents.

TOO MUCH PREACHING

I have heard so much about goodness that sometimes I get unhappy, even at conference, and I feel like a little girl I heard of that did wrong. Her mother importuned her and labored with her, just as we have labored with you people, and she said, "Mother, don't try to make me good; shoot me."

PURPOSE OF THE MISSIONARY

An elder is sent out, not to represent his personal views or the views of the people, but to proclaim the truth as it is revealed. He is not chosen as a spokesman for the people, not just as a messenger, but as the bearer of a message to the world.

HALF WAY TO THE CELESTIAL GLORY

In one of his recent sermons J. Golden declared, "I would like to preach a man's funeral sermon while he is living; you can't tell the truth about him when he is dead. I have given many a man a ticket to the celestial glory that I knew wouldn't take him half way."

THE LIFE WORTH WHILE

This world was not made just to hold people imbued with selfishness and unhappiness, with no ambition beyond eating, drinking, and begetting. We ought to plan ahead, have some purpose—that is truly living. Life means opportunity. Life means development. Life well spent means knowledge, growth, simplicity of life, and complexity of thought.

TRAINED CITIZENS

Our children need to be taught the great problems of the day. The schools should be ringing with the hammer strokes of the world's workshops. The children will thus become trained citizens of the republic. Then our citizens will hereafter be studying and battling as heroically for their civic and industrial liberties as their forefathers, the war patriots, battled for war ideals.

HOW TO LIVE LONG

Recently someone inquired of Golden as to the state of health of one of his friends. He replied, "Well, he's in a pretty bad fix, but I believe he will live longer than any of us. The only way to live a long time is to get some incurable disease and then take care of yourself. Some people who haven't anything the matter with them don't take care of themselves, and they die."

BANKER'S ADVICE

As is well known, bankers have not been in very good repute during the depression and on one occasion one of them jocularly accosted J. Golden and said, "Brother Kimball, you shouldn't use such language as you employ in our church gatherings."

84To which Golden retorted, "I don't think this is a time for bankers to be giving advice to anybody."

FAITH IN PEOPLE

I want to say to you brethren and sisters, if you do not think I am loyal to this Church, and faithful, and keep all the commandments, do not sustain me. I would not have a position in this Church if I could not have the faith of the people, if I could not reach their confidence and be instrumental in the hands of the Lord in saying something at least that will give them a little courage.

FRANKNESS

Now, if there is any one thing that I am normal in, it is frankness. Whenever the time comes, in my ministerial labors, that I cannot be frank and honest with the people I will feel that my usefulness has come to an end. I cannot talk if I have not freedom, and if I ever feel that I have not the support of the people I will be unable to talk.

THERE'S LIFE IN THE SKELETON

Now there is one other thing before I get started. Everywhere I go among this people they look at me with sympathy and pity, and ask me how my health is. Only a few days ago I walked down Main Street three blocks, and twelve people asked me that question. And I felt like kicking the last one. I want to say to you Latter-day Saints that when I am walking around, I am alive and my head works. That is what keeps my body going. I thank God for that.

MISSIONARY SERVICE

No greater favor ever comes to a man than to be called on a mission. I met a nephew last night, one of Heber C. Kimball's grandchildren. He said, "Uncle Golden, when I was a young fellow"—he is now a high councilor in one of the stakes—"you came to me and said, 'Are you ready for a mission?' I answered you as I should not have done. The greatest mistake I have ever made in my life was that I did not respond at that time and have you present my name."

86MILK-FED GENERATION

86This generation has had too much ease, too much money, too much pleasure. They have lived upon milk and honey when they ought to have been fed on bread, cresses, and cold water, and slept in the mountains. I am sorry my children have not lived on the kind of food I was brought up on; then they would have more backbone. We should adopt a policy to stiffen our children's backbones; if necessary, feed them on raw meat, cayenne pepper, and green cactus diet.

HumorKimball, J. GoldenGOD SENDS THINGS C. O. D.

About twenty years ago my family went to California, as my wife needed a rest. I remained at home on account of my church duties. Christmas time came and my folks arranged with a mercantile store at Los Angeles for a lovely present for me, to be charged to their account and to be mailed to me in time for Christmas. Through a mistake the store sent it C. O. D. I paid for it without knowing its contents.

87A sudden flash came to me. That is exactly how the Lord works. You receive a blessing with promises from a patriarch, or a blessing when set apart for a mission or upon asking the Lord for help; they are all C. O. D. You pay cash and the goods are delivered.

A FAMILY MAN

Some men are cut out especially for family life and get a lot of joy and happiness out of it. Others are fair and square, good husbands, good fathers, kind as a woman but are not what you would call ideal family men. They are not so gifted in this way, yet they are affectionate and loving in their way and are on the dead square fifty-fifty and would do anything on earth they could for them. I suppose Golden belongs to this class—An intimate friend.

HumorKimball, J. GoldenKIND HUSBANDS

A number of years ago Brother Kimball was appointed to attend a stake conference in the north country. The people were mostly Scandinavian. He said, "You good people build farms and sheds and take wonderful care of your animals, but there isn't one man in a thousand knows how to be good and kind to his wife." A smile of pleasure was visible on the faces of the women. Giving them ample time to enjoy his thrust at the husbands, he shot off the other barrel: "Now, ladies, there isn't one woman in 999 that knows when she is well-treated."

88Afterwards a little Scandinavian woman shook his hand and said, "Brother Kimball, you say the funniest things, but they stick."

ON THE CARPET

I remember that not so many years ago Francis M. Lyman, a man with whom I traveled a great deal—I don't think he ever worked on a man harder in his life than he did on me to mould me and fashion me like him—said to me, "I am through with you. I don't make any progress." I was on the carpet with him. The next day—you know how he took your hands and rubbed them—he said: "Brother Kimball, do you love your brethren?"

88"Well," I said, "I love some of them a damned sight better than I do others."

88"That is true," he said, "there is a difference, and the fault isn't all ours."

HumorKimball, J. GoldenTHE WAY TO KEEP OUT OF DEBT

I can tell you how you can keep out of debt; but I can't tell you how to get out after you get in. I had a man come to me the other day who wanted me to indorse his note. I had sworn, almost on an oath, I would never sign another note, not even for my wife. But he looked at me so pitifully, and was in such dire distress, and I had so much confidence in him, that I told him I would sign it—although I was quite sure I could not pay it if he did not. He applied at one of our banks. They did not know me—for which I was thankful. I went to the bank and looked the man in the face. He said, "Mr. Kimball, haven't you got any collaterals?" I said, "Collaterals—I should say not! I haven't got a collateral of any kind." He said, "How do you expect me to take your endorsement?" I replied, "On my looks and general character. That is all I have got." And he turned me down; and I have been tickled to death ever since. That is the way to keep out of debt.

GUNS AND MISSIONARIES

You have listened to three presidents of missions. I know just about as much about missionary work as they do. I spent five years in the Southern States, and filled my first mission in 1883, when they killed elders. I was with Elder Roberts, and I know all about that experience. I never got much notoriety out of it, but I know something about it, just as much as anyone who was there. I know what it means to smell powder, and I am glad of it, and I thank the Lord I did not run. I guess I would have done so, but I had no place to go. These brethren that have been talking to you have been in the Lord's service; they are soldiers of the Cross, and they are too old to go in the army of the United States; and so am I. But I would like to touch off a thirteen-inch gun anyhow. I am a great believer in the United States, but my service is first for God, for our Heavenly Father.

FamilyKimball, J. GoldenCOMBS AND HUSBANDS

A well-dressed, fine looking lady entered the ward chapel. It was a rural community. Brother Kimball, the visiting authority, was staying at her home. He knew the family well. "Had to look twice, I hardly knew you Julia." Then he reached down and touched her on the shoulder, "Let me give you some advice; why don't you fix up a little around the house, put on a better dress, slick up your hair a bit, kalsomine your face and wear a big smile like you've got on now? If you don't, you'll be losing your husband one of these days and I wouldn't blame him much, would you?"—From Julia, herself.

COLORFUL PREACHING

I will begin by reading a few words from the Prophet Joseph Smith's sayings: "I want the liberty of thinking and believing as I please. It feels so good not to be trammeled." I don't know whether I am able to make myself clear.

90Not long ago I met one of my friends—he was a good friend, too, president of a stake. He said, "Brother Kimball, you don't make yourself clear."

Well, I don't know of any man on earth that ever did, so all people could understand all right. The Savior seemed unable, sometimes, to get His children to understand just what He meant, although He was very clear in the doctrine which He preached. I know I have some friends who do not believe in the way I get at it, but I am not trying to please all of them, because that is absolutely an impossibility, so I have given it up. My temperament is such that I cannot say anything inspiring, or bubble with enthusiasm, and be clear, happy, or joyous, if I have to wear a restraining collar and cater to popular sentiment. I would like my preaching to have color, thrill, feel homelike, and revive old memories, and if I can't feel that way among the Latter-day Saints, where on earth can I go that I will feel free?

THE CHURCH MAKES YOU BETTER

Some find a great deal of fault with the Church. I want to tell you there is no fault in the organization of the Church; it is perfect. There is no fault in the Gospel of Christ; if lived up to, it makes you better; it makes you good in your home; it makes you good to your wife, and good to your children. It makes you good on the streets; it makes you honest; it makes you kind and generous. I know that—nobody knows it better than I do. That is what the religion of Christ does.

The Church is all right. I have got no ax to grind; I am not one of those that worship men; I worship God. I do not put my trust in the arm of flesh, but I honor the priesthood of the Church. I have this to say concerning the authorities of the Church: I have labored with these men for many years, and the men that work the hardest of any men I have ever lived with in my life are the men who are in authority in the Church of Christ. I know what I am talking about.

92Now, where is the fault? I invite every one of you to go home and find it, and I promise that if you find any big fault anywhere it will be right in your own home. If you can handle your own home and mind your own business, you will have no time for fault-finding. I know where my trouble is and I am trying to cure it. I am learning this lesson that there is no use of my trying to govern a family until I govern myself.

GRATITUDE OF CHILDREN

I have learned one lesson with children that I never knew before. There is nothing on this earth that grieves and hurts me worse (outside of sin and wickedness and rebellion) than, when I do everything I can for a child; and there is no evidence given of gratefulness, no gratitude, no thankfulness, but it is regarded as a debt the father owes to the child. Have you ever had a child say to you, "Well, you owe it to me"? I never had any of them do that but once, and it made me feel as if I could have eaten him up.

I don't owe my children anything but love, protection, a home and shelter, and an education. I owe that to them, and the law requires it. But outside of that, shall they be grateful? Now, wouldn't it make you feel sad when the mother is broken down after she has gone and worked her finger nails off to do something for a child, and, then, he doesn't appreciate it, because he sees something on the outside that is greater, sees someone receive a better present! Did you ever make a Christmas present to a child, and when he got it he was disappointed, and your Christmas was ruined? Were you ever made to feel almost broken-hearted, when you had affectionately expended every dollar you had, because other people's children had presents much better, and the whole day was spoiled for your children and for you, too? Ingratitude is a sin in the sight of God.

93Now, then, you children have to learn to love your fathers and mothers and appreciate what they have done for you, and then you will not be ungrateful.

PREJUDICE

I have one more shot at you, and I am going to let you have it right in the neck. I want to say to every bishop, to every president of a stake, to every man who holds authority in this Church: The most dangerous thing that menaces us is to get prejudiced. * * * How I hate it! No man that lives in the flesh can be prejudiced and be just. I remember one of my older brothers who was a kind of reckless, harum-scarum boy. Father worried over him a good deal, and when father knelt down to pray with this son he used to pray to God about him. Before he died my brother said to me: "Golden, father tried to prejudice God against me."

94I said: "It isn't true. God cannot be prejudiced. God knows His children; God understands them."

94I pray that we shall not be prejudiced and try to hurt others. I am going to tell you a truth that Heber C. Kimball told, and I have it in writing. I was surprised to learn how early that was in the history of the Church. He said, "The Lord told me that there were men that have tried to do me injury in the eyes of His servant, Brigham Young, and they shall see sorrow unless they repent, and be removed from their places."

94Brethren, let us be careful. I do not believe that I am man enough if I am prejudiced against my wife that I can be just. The Lord knows I owe her a heap. You cannot be prejudiced against your own child and be just and charitable and forgiving and patient and long-suffering. So I would like to be careful. A lot of things are said to me about men. When I allow myself to be prejudiced against a man, no matter how good he is, I don't like him until I can get rid of that prejudice.

FATE: THE OLD MONKEY

There was a very prominent citizen once that had an intelligent monkey. He was a mischievous fellow, and he just went around the house knocking everything down. He knocked over everything that he came to; he discovered that the things he knocked over did not get up again. He was just as mischievous as fate seems to be with us.

95Finally, this good citizen took the image of a little man, made of some kind of material, and placed it on a very strong base. It was so arranged that when you knocked it over it would come up again. So he set this little man in the room. The monkey came around, took his right hand and cuffed it over. To his surprise it wobbled a little and staggered, and then rose up and seemingly looked at him. Then he took his other hand and cuffed it again, and it came up again. Then he took the right hind leg and knocked it again, and then with his left hind leg; then he got on it with all four hands and took one hand up at a time. To his surprise the little man rose up.

95The intelligent monkey almost became a monkey maniac. He kept at it and kept at it until he hated and despised the little man; and whenever someone would move the little man near the monkey, he would get off in the corner and chatter and become angry. He wouldn't have anything to do with the little man.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is similar, or like that little man. You can knock it down one hundred times; you can knock it down one thousand times; it may wobble, but it will rise up again, and it will keep rising up until God has accomplished His work. This is God's work, and I look in sympathy upon men who oppose it. I stood on the street last night—something I hardly ever do—and listened to a man abuse the Church; and I had to laugh. I was a good deal like father was once when he was praying. In the midst of his prayer, he burst out in a loud laugh, and he said, "O Lord, forgive me; it makes me laugh to pray about some men." It always amuses me when I see a man or a coterie of men try to break down this Church. I would say to this kind of men: "You had better let the Church alone; you had better let the people alone, because you can't destroy this Church."
