Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

CHAPTER XIII

97OTHER SAYINGS AND ADVICE

WHAT MONEY DOES

If I had a million dollars, I'd be the most sought-after man in the Church. But I haven't got it—damn it.

SPEAKING OF SUITS

Walking into a clothing store, J. Golden approached a clerk and said, "I'd like to see a suit that will fit me."

97Whereupon the clerk eyeing the tall, skinny figure of his prospect replied: "Hell, so would I."—Told also on Anthony C. Lund.

EINSTEIN NEEDED

"Do you know J. Golden Kimball?" was asked of a certain man.

97"Be hanged if I know whether I do or not," was the reply. "I've been with him and heard him speak off and on for forty years, and I'm still in doubt."

HumorKimball, J. GoldenANTIDOTE FOR SLEEP

One time President Francis M. Lyman was complaining to me that I upset the authorities too much.

98I answered him, "Well, you see, Brother Ly man, you talk to send them to sleep and I have to talk to wake them up."

HumorKimball, J. GoldenLACKING RESPECT

Brother Kimball was crossing the street in front of the Hotel Utah just as an automobile came swiftly around the corner and almost ran over him. Straightening up and catching his breath, he exclaimed, "Hell of a lot of respect they have for the Priesthood!"

HumorKimball, J. GoldenSELECTING A BRIDE

Some select a girl because she has pretty eyes; some because she has pretty hair. I knew a man who chose a girl because she could sing. He married her, and the next morning, when he saw her without any paint or powder on, and saw a part of her hair on the dresser, he looked at her and said, "Sing, for hell sakes, sing!"

DOCTORED POSTUM

Traveling with one of the brethren and feeling the need of a little stimulant, J. Golden whispered to the waiter as his companion's head was turned, "Put a little coffee in my postum this morning, and don't say anything." The waiter returned with the postum but left his discretion in the kitchen. For he blurted out in a voice audible to both, "Which one of you gentlemen ordered coffee in his postum?"

WHOSE FUNERAL

The long distance telephone rang, and J. Golden was heard to say, "Yes, I know the man. Yes, I'll come up and talk at his funeral."

99During the services when Brother Kimball was over half way through his sermon, he looked in a certain corner of the congregation and, to his dismay, saw the very man whose sermon he thought he was preaching, and exclaimed: "Bishop, who the hell's funeral is this?"

ANGEL BRIDES

During the course of his remarks at one ward (addressing the young people) he said, "I am reminded that this is the month of June and that it's mating time. I suppose some of you young folks will be getting hitched up to each other. And I just want to warn you not to expect too darn much of each other, and then maybe you won't be disappointed. Now, here, when I got married, I thought I was marrying an angel, and many are the times since I wish I had."

DON'T GET PERFECT

I have often wondered what would happen if a perfect man married a perfect woman. I'll bet he would shoot her inside of a week if she didn't poison him first.

HumorKimball, J. GoldenSABBATH BUSINESS

Three men entered the seventies office at Salt Lake City. "Brother Kimball," said the spokesman, "we have come for some books."

100"But," responded Brother Kimball, then general secretary of the seventies, "we do not sell books on Sunday."

100"We are a long way from home," urged one of the men, "and would very much like to place our order. Can't you possibly take care of us?"

100"Sorry," replied the secretary, "would like to accommodate you. I can see your fix, but we have an iron-clad rule; you can see it would not be right for our office to do business on Sunday.—How big is your order?"

CHURCH SLUMBER PARTIES

We went on a six-weeks' trip through the southern part of the state. We held two or three meetings each day. At Kanab conference I listened to Brother Francis M. Lyman for a long time. Then I dozed off and had a dream. I dreamed I was falling over a cliff one hundred feet high. I wondered how long it would be before I hit the bottom. Finally I landed stretched out on the platform, helpless and discomfited before four hundred people. Brother Lyman turned and said, "Young man, you have ruined one of my best sermons." It cured me of sleeping in church.

101"Brother Golden really shouldn't talk that way in conference," remarked one of the general authorities quite seriously to his son following the meeting at which J. Golden Kimball had spoken.

101"Father," replied the son respectfully, "do you know how many of you brethren were asleep before Brother Kimball started to talk?"

101"How many asleep?"

101"Yes," answered the son, "I counted ten. But I noticed that the slumber party was over as soon as the President announced Brother Kimball as the next speaker."

KIMBALL HOSPITALITY

I remember [in those ranching days] one old woman, who walked fifteen miles from a neighboring settlement. She was a perfect stranger to us and said she had heard Elias and me speak in her town of Fish Haven. She was sickly, worn and dirty. "What are you going to do with her, mother?" I asked.

101"I'm going to feed her and give her a bath and put some clean clothes on her and let her sleep in my bed," was the reply.

DISPENSING THE BLUES

I was lying in the hospital waiting for an operation. I had been there six days in preparation and in nervous anticipation of the event. The operation was serious. The doctor said I needed "considerable fixing." Later, I learned that over twenty inches of incision was required, most of it in the bone.

102The day before the dreadful ordeal, a mutual friend brought Brother Kimball to administer to me. First, he talked and visited a considerable time and then blessed me. There was nothing frivolous about his talk, and yet he soon had me smiling. Later, the smiles were interspersed with laughter. I began to see things in proper perspective and to realize that all was well with the world and that the sky for me, after all, had but one dark cloud in it, which, probably, would soon roll away. I felt I was in the presence of a sane, well-balanced man and a man of exceptionally strong faith. In truth, never did I feel the power of faith more than that day.—A Debtor.

FAITH AND HEALTH

I got a telephone message some time ago (I think a year ago, maybe) that I had some relatives in the hospital. They wanted me to hurry there and administer to them. They were two sisters. They were married, and they were not city people. And, by the way, their father and mother were good Latter-day Saints, and these young girls had been taught the faith and they had been active. But they were not healed; so they came to the hospital. When I arrived I found one of them in one room, and she had been operated upon, and was getting along very nicely. The other sister wanted me to bless her before she was operated upon. I asked her how much she was paying for her room. She told me. "And how much are you paying the doctor?"

103"Three hundred dollars."

103"Well, haven't you got confidence in him? He is charging you enough. Why don't you trust him?"

103"Well," she said, "Uncle Golden, I have been administered to, but I was not healed, and I felt forced to come to the doctor."

103I said, "I am a little jealous for God, and if I bless you, and you are healed, who is going to get the credit? If the doctor gets all the money and all the credit, and God heals you; I don't think that's fair."

103So I blessed her as best I knew how, and I blessed the doctor. I made a full job of it, and blessed the nurse, and asked God that His Spirit might be there and the patient's life be spared, and it was spared.

I realize that hospitals, physicians, and surgeons do wonderful things, and that faith without works is dead. I want to bear testimony to you (and I know it, I don't think it, I don't imagine it) I have seen God heal the sick. I know that where there is sufficient faith there is nothing impossible. When we were in the South, God had to take care of us, whether it was stormy or sunshine, as we had no choice. I know the Lord can take care of us and will take care of us if we have faith.

HumorKimball, J. GoldenQUARTETTES AND APOSTASY

Way back in the nineties, J. Golden Kimball took a quartette and went up North to hold some meetings and rouse the people somewhat, the seventies in particular. In a certain district the spirit of apostasy was entering some of the smaller communities. Attracted by his style of preaching, they came from far and near to hear him speak. At one place, he began by dividing the quartette, having two members on the one side of the house sing, "Come, Come Ye Saints," while on the other side the other two rendered, "O Ye Mountains High."

104Immediately he followed with these and other remarks: "Now, what do you think of that singing? Sounds like hell, doesn't it?" Then, he had them all sing together in perfect harmony.

"Now you people up here are working like that first song. Part are pulling one way and part another, and see the result. You have forgotten the Lord and how He has blessed you. When you settled here, there were little drizzling streams coming out of these canyons, hardly enough water to give a canary bird a drink. The Lord has increased the streams and multiplied your crops until you have prospered and become independent. Now you have forgotten Him. And there is contention among you, and you are pulling about the way that first song went."

105The leader of the apostate gang, who was at the meeting, must have felt these remarks were aimed directly at him, for every time the speaker made a new point, he would sink deeper into his seat. The next day he remarked to a group of his followers in broken accent, 'What Golden Kimball he say am not true. No da ain't true. But, I'm damn scart it is true."—From One Who Was Present.

A BLIZZARD STORY

About 1887 my brother Elias and I loaded a sleigh with provisions and started for Evanston, Wyoming, enroute to Salt Lake City, where Elias was to attend the Utah Legislature as a representative from Rich County. We took our mother along. Elias was on crutches, as he had a severe cut on the foot. We had four fine horses. It was snowing, but we were accustomed to snow storms. We left our home in Meadowville and, after we passed through Lake Town, we wended our way up the canyon. A severe blizzard, with a terrifying wind, set in. We plowed our way through banks of snow. We reached the top of the mountain; night set in and we discovered we were traveling in a circle as the horses could not face the storm. We found a cabin, owned by our friend, James Kearl, and entered. Tearing up the floor, we built a fire and camped for the night.

The next day we reached one of the largest cattle and horse ranches in Bear Lake. It was located on Bear River and owned by three cow-men. We drove to the ranch barn and were tendered a hospitality we have never forgotten. A very large, rough-looking man came outside, and wondered, using a dozen oaths, if we were sane to battle with such a blizzard in weather forty degrees below zero. We told him our mother was under the cover of the sleigh. He took our wonderful mother in his powerful arms (she laughing all the time) and carried her as if she was a child into the house, and placed her gently in a chair with a "God bless you, dear mother." His crudeness, his roughness, and, above all, his generous hospitality exceeded our expectations. He prepared a special bed for mother and treated her as tenderly as if she had been a baby. If she had been an angel, he couldn't have treated her better. He was one of the roughest men I ever met, but his kindness to us and the tenderness with which he treated our mother will linger in my memory as long as I live. Other ranchers along the way were kind and big-hearted, and also took care of us in much the same way. The roads were closed and the snow was so deep that it took us four long, weary days to make that fifty-two mile trip to Evanston, where we took the train for our old home at 36 East First North at Salt Lake, where I now live.

107A training of that kind kicks all fear out and you become as tough as a pine knot.

A SICK STORY

Over twenty-five years ago I was taken violently sick at 4 a.m. at my home, my wife and children being absent from home in California. I finally roused Brother Will Spence, my neighbor, who called in several friends nearby, including President George Reynolds, Judge Stewart, and Dr. Samuel Allen, our friend and family physician.

107Doctor found my pulse very low, and at once decided that I should go to the L. D. S. Hospital.

107An operation for appendicitis—that was the verdict. I discussed with the doctor the cost and finally reduced it from three hundred to seventy-five dollars and even then I thought it too high to just cut the skin and reach in for the appendix; it seemed to be a worthless thing at best.

107My family being away at the time, my anxiety was for their welfare and, not being so keen about dying, I admit I was frightened. So I concluded that it was safest to instruct Dr. Allen to choose three of the best physicians, and the four of them, the next morning, were to hold a consultation as to the wisdom of an operation. I felt quite sure four men of any profession could not agree. I was to pay each doctor ten dollars.

108In the evening of the day I found myself in the hospital. Apostle Orson F. Whitney came to see me. I said, "Orson, I desire you to bless me. I can't afford to make this great adventure at this time." Brother Whitney replied, "I came for that purpose, but had you not asked I would not have offered to bless you." His blessing was wonderful. I said to the doctor, "Give me a shot in the arm, so that I will not worry all night." I had a restless night. Towards morning the fever left and I knew the crisis had passed.

108At 8 a. m., the four doctors, true to their calling, gave me a going-over and concluded that the trouble, appendicitis, had passed. They all agreed that an operation was necessary later. One year later, I had the same pain and agony on the left side. Dr. Allen came. I said, "Surely, I haven't got two appendixes." He said, "No, it's colitis."

108Dr. Samuel Allen was one of my best friends, and he always regretted he had not operated on me. I am quite sure the operation would have been successful, but the shock might have finished me.

I now think of the only humorous incident in the Bible: "And Asa in the thirty and ninth year of his reign, as King, was diseased in his feet, until his disease was exceeding great; yet in his disease he sought not the Lord, but turned to the physician. And Asa slept with his fathers and died in the one and fortieth year of his reign."—II Chron. 16:12-13.

Holy Ghost, Gifts ofKimball, J. GoldenPRESIDENT KIMBALL'S PROPHECY

In 1929, in a certain outlying ward, they were trying to build a chapel—at least the bishop was. He was doing his best. The people were lagging behind. They had practically forsaken him. I had the contract to help them as builder. It was getting late in the season. The bishop was anxious to finish the chapel that year but was greatly discouraged. One day, I told him I would bring Brother Kimball from Salt Lake to warm the people up if he wanted me to. He responded instantly; so, at the earliest date I had him there.

109A special meeting had been called and J. Golden advertised. When the hour arrived, the old meeting-house was filled to overflowing; some were sitting in the windows, others could not get in. They were a pretty rough-looking crowd, in ginghams and overalls and homespuns—good people, of course. After songs and prayer and a short speech by a local man, Brother Kimball's turn came.

109"I'm glad to have the opportunity to speak to you people out here, because I believe I can speak your language. For twelve years I lived over in that Bear Lake country when men and horses were about as wild as you ever find them." He told them stories and experiences of that day and then recalled this one about Heber C. Kimball.

110"Father had told us to take our best horse—a beautiful riding horse, cream in color—over to the bishop's office and turn it in for tithing. We boys demurred. 'If we do this, father—'

110"'Do as I say, boys. Take that horse over there before my heart puckers up.'"

110"We obeyed."

110By this time, the people were getting warmed up to the occasion and greatly interested. "Now," continued J. Golden, "I'm going to prophesy. If you people will get behind your bishop, and help him put this thing over, I'll promise you, you will never miss one cent that you put into this building. Not only that, but it will raise the standard of your community, and you will buy new furniture and furnishings for your homes. And you will get along better and enjoy life more."

110The people rallied, got behind the bishop and pledged their full support both in cash and labor. Still the bishop wondered if it could be done. The date of dedication was set for December 30, less than six months away. He couldn't believe there was enough money among the members or time enough to complete the building.

The results were marvelous. Everyone pitched in. The building rose rapidly. It was finished on time—in fact, two weeks early. When it came to settling up the last of the bills, much to his amazement, the bishop found, upon careful checking at the bank, that there was eleven hundred dollars over.

111The chapel was dedicated. Again the people turned out in mass. Their standards of living were already improved and Brother Kimball's prophecy was fulfilled to the letter.—As Told by a Friend.
