Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

111CHAPTER XIV

112TRIBUTES FROM FRIENDS

HENRY H. BLOOD

(Governor of Utah 1933—)

112From my youth up, it has been my privilege to know President J. Golden Kimball. For half a century, he has been living and teaching those Christian principles of morality and religion which are so essential to our civilization. Upon these broad principles of righteous living we must order our lives as citizens and build our civic structure, if our government is to endure.

112Highly endowed with honesty, originality, frankness and other winning qualities, President Kimball's teachings have been unusually effective for general uplift among the people of our commonwealth. For his long and devoted service in the ministry, I greatly admire him. For his excellent contribution to citizenship, I convey to him the thanks and appreciation of the people of our State. I esteem highly this privilege of expressing my sentiments of highest regard for him while still he lives to know them.

ANTHONY W. IVINS

Dear Golden:—

112Today, you reach your eightieth milestone in the journey of life.

113It has been a long and winding trail toward the land of our dreams, namely, eternal life.

113I, too, have traveled over it nearly a year longer than you have. Our experiences have been somewhat similar.

113The Lord has been good to me, as I feel that He has been to you.

113I am writing this to tell you that you have my full confidence and esteem, and to pray that when you and I finish our mortal lives, which is not likely to be far distant, we may both be approved of the Great Judge before whom we must appear to be judged by our faith and works.

113Sister Ivins charged me to tell you she is one of your friends and admirers.

113Your brother,

113A. W. Ivins.

RUDGER CLAWSON

I have known President J. Golden Kimball for many years. We were boys together, and for a long period we have been associated in the councils of the Church.

Our duty has brought us together in the high privilege of frequent visits to the stakes of Zion for the purpose of preaching the Gospel of the Redeemer and of giving comfort and encouragement to the Latter-day Saints. President Kimball's special calling, as one of the First Council of Seventy and now as the President of that Council, has been to look after the interests of the seventies, which he has always done.

114My intimate acquaintance with President Kimball has given me an insight into his character. I do not hesitate in saying that he is a man of great integrity, a man who loves the Gospel and has borne a faithful testimony of its truth. He has made many friends in the Church, who love to see him and hear him speak in public. His health for a number of years past has not been the best apparently, yet he has not hesitated to meet the calls and fill the appointments given him.

114In conclusion, let me add that I think a great deal of President J. Golden Kimball, and can only wish that his life may be lengthened out for further usefulness and that the blessings of the Lord will ever be found in his habitation.

GEORGE ALBERT SMITH

(Telegraphed from Los Angeles)

114J. Golden Kimball was my mission president in the South. I learned to love him for his courage and kindness. His sense of humor drew men to him and his testimony of divinity of the Gospel of Jesus Christ inspired them. He is held in high esteem by thousands who appreciate his humility and humanity.

DAVID O. MC KAY

As I begin to write a brief tribute to my friend and fellow worker, President J. Golden Kimball, I fancy I can hear him say, "Speak of me as I am; nothing extenuate, nor set down aught in malice." In that wish, which however he would express in his own inimitable manner, we catch a glimpse of the real man. He seeks no undeserved honor, no unmerited praise.

115President Kimball is a distinctive character, principally so because of his originality, the source of which lies in sincerity. He believes honestly. He thinks independently. Out of his keenly sensitive nature there springs a humor which reflects his ability to see things in an unusual light or at an unexpected angle.

115He possesses many characteristics and virtues which distinguish him among his fellows, one of the most noble of which is his unfaltering trust in God and his unwavering loyalty to the Church. In all of my associations with him I have found him ever a congenial companion, a true and trusted friend. God bless him!

STEPHEN L. RICHARDS

For his genuine sincerity, his rugged honesty, his delightful frankness; for his broad tolerance, his kind, sympathetic nature and fine fellowship; and above all, for his deep and abiding faith in God and his loyalty and devotion to the Church and the people, I greatly love and admire J. Golden Kimball. He has the rare gift of presenting the Gospel in terms that the people understand it, and in such a unique way that they remember his teachings. For half a century he has been devoted to the work of the Master. I regard him as one of His worthy disciples and as an able advocate of truth and righteousness. May the Lord bless and prosper President Kimball and his family.

MELVIN J. BALLARD

Many years ago, in Cache Valley, as a Ward President of one of the Mutual Improvement Associations and later as a Stake Officer, I had my first opportunity to contact Brother Kimball and to labor with him. The M. I. A. was then undertaking the great mission of enlisting all the young people. His stirring appeals to the younger generation of the Church were responsible for the enrollment of hundreds of them in that section, both boys and girls.

116His great sympathy for young people, his entertaining style and method of arousing them awakened an interest in the great M. I. A. cause in northern Utah that resulted in leading hundreds of young people into the activity of that organization.

116Brother Kimball was then living at Logan, in the same ward where I lived. I had the pleasure of being his block teacher for several years. I always received a kind welcome in his home and was given every encouragement to continue my labor.

His loyalty to the Church, his sincerity and his deep conviction of the truth of Mormonism have made a lasting impression on great hosts of young people in my day, many of whom are now faithful and devoted workers in the Church.

117The Lord has said if one should labor all his days and succeed in bringing but one soul unto Him how great shall be the joy of that individual with that soul in the world to come. If one should succeed in bringing many souls unto Him the joy will be beyond mortal power to comprehend. Brother Kimball can rest in the assurance that he has been the instrument in the hands of God of bringing many precious souls to an awakened interest and love of the Lord's work.

RULON S. WELLS

"As a member of The First Council of the Seventy, what is your estimate of your senior President, J Golden Kimball?" Oh say! Can't you ask me something easier than that? To make an appraisal of his character, his worth, his philosophy is a prodigious undertaking. It simply can't be done. It completely defies analysis. I shall not undertake it. He says himself it requires an intelligent man to understand him. That's where I fall down. And yet I have observed some things about him.

Brother Kimball has many spiritual gifts, among which may be mentioned the gift of prophecy, the gift of healing, the gift of discernment of spirits, all of which have enabled him to render valuable service in his ministry and have won for him many appreciative and admiring friends. Many have been raised from their beds of affliction by the power of God through his ministrations. Through the gift of prophecy—a gift inherited from his prophetic father—many have been warned of dangers, both seen and unseen. The gift of discernment of spirits which is also a wonderful gift is one which he possesses in a marked degree. It has enabled him to make wise selections of men for positions of responsibility and to look into the hearts of men—always with unfeigned sympathy—and discover inherent integrity. Even when they have been on the verge of despair and about to give up the fight he has put new courage into their hearts and inspired them with high hope and ambition to carry on the good fight of faith. Brother Kimball is not argumentative, but he discerns the truth by intuition. He does not like to argue, but he meets specious sophistry with a thunderbolt of rebuke through the gift of discernment.

118His keen sense of the ludicrous has given him a wide reputation for humor; but his humor is natural, not studied. When he was once put on the program at a meeting of young people for a "humorous address" he made an utter failure of it, because he tried to prepare for it. If they had left him alone and simply asked him to talk, it would have been humorous to their hearts' content. Humor simply bubbles over in him.

In my long association with him as a member of The First Council of the Seventy, I have learned to love and admire him. I have unbounded confidence in his integrity and devotion to the work of God, and in my most intimate relations with him I have always found him and hold him to be a true friend and brother.

LEVI EDGAR YOUNG

President J. Golden Kimball stands alone as a unique figure. Intensely human, his heart and mind hold treasures of the rarest. Money, place, fashion have no place in his wishes and hopes. He leads his own life, and his intense individualism makes him stand apart. His father had those rare traits of character that stamped his life as an honest, sincere, and an intensely faithful man to his convictions of truth. His mother set her children an example of frugality and work, and spent her life in administering to the sick, and rearing her children in the "fear of the Lord." President Kimball had few opportunities to attend school. He was a child of pioneer parentage, and the first problem of the family was to obtain food and raiment. President Kimball's boyhood was spent in a home where tallow dips were used, and where clothes were made in the "living-room." His education came through the school of experience. He read the Bible, and the divine scriptures helped to mould his character. In his boyhood, he loved the great out-of-doors, and much of his early life was spent in herding cattle and riding the range. One day he rode his horse into a clump of quaken-aspen, and opened his heart to his Maker. Not long afterwards he was called to the Council of Seventy, in which position he has been an indefatigable worker.

120President Kimball is intensely individualistic. He has always proclaimed the sovereignty of the individual, and Lincoln-like, he has deep respect for the common man. If he hurts one's feelings, he never hesitates to right the wrong. He has his defects, of course, and he frankly confesses them. He never pretends to be what he is not. A sort of permanent happiness and contentment, radiate from him. He has had a wonderfully full life, and the expression of his great wit has brought joy to many hearts.

120His love for the Gospel of Jesus Christ our Lord is the most pronounced characteristic of his nature. He has ever been on the battle line for Truth. He has always traveled hopefully toward the goal, and with all his hardships and sorrows, he has enjoyed the journey of life.

120I count myself happy in knowing and being associated with such a servant of God. I know him to be one of the purest of human beings. May his life be prolonged in days of richest joy and sunshine.

ELIAS S. KIMBALL

Golden was never unreasonable in his demands, always willing to do his part and to give the other fellow a chance. As square and fair a man as I have ever known. Absolutely true to his friends and genuinely loyal and devoted to the authorities of the Church. He is nervous and high tempered and has made a mighty effort all his days to master himself. No man in the world knows him as well as I do. I love him with all my heart.

FRANK Y. TAYLOR

Like a great many others I have known and admired President J. Golden Kimball for a long time. He possesses many of the characteristics of his noted father. Like him, he understands the Gospel of Christ and has abiding faith in its divinity. Like his father, also, he possesses the singular and marked ability to teach the Gospel to others. He can say things in such a way that the people generally understand and remember his teachings. I regard him as one of the outstanding missionaries of his time, one who is loved and admired by many thousands in and out of the Church, one who will be long remembered for his love of the people and his undying devotion to the work and ministry of the Master. My intimate friendship and association with Brother Kimball has been a source of joy and satisfaction to me.

B. S. HINCKLEY

There is a spontaneity and an originality about J. Golden Kimball which none but those divinely touched with genius possess. His unique personality shines in his every utterance. Packed in his sparkling wit is often the deepest wisdom. Sympathy, pathos, and humor are firmly embedded in his soul. His high voice, his deep, religious convictions, and his rare humor quickly win any audience. Days of tragedy followed by periods of triumph make up the record of his eventful life. Having read the manuscript of this book, I do not hesitate to say that Claude Richards has capitalized these characteristics and presented them in an interesting and admirable manner. I rejoice in seeing Brother Kimball honored by this account of his life and labors while he lives and am glad to know that his life's history, his sayings and his sermons are to be thus preserved for the people.

FRANKLIN S. HARRIS

Everyone who has had an opportunity of meeting J. Golden Kimball has been impressed by his unusual personality. His originality of expression, his independence in thinking, his vigor in the defense of right, his hatred of sham, his loyalty to the Church, are all so characteristic of him that no one who knows him is in doubt as to where he stands. All are aware that any presentation of his ideas on a subject will be both vigorous and interesting, even if not always conventional.

We at Brigham Young University delight in having him come to the Institution and relate his experiences in entering the school and having his ideals raised and his ambition stirred. His experience is similar to that of thousands of others, but he tells the story in a way that makes it seem unique.

123J. Golden is a man who will be remembered in the affections of the people after many others have been forgotten. I am very glad that I have had the opportunity of knowing him.

JOHN HENRY EVANS

Bernard Shaw tells us, in one of those self-revealing prefaces to his plays, that an oculist pronounced him one of the rare persons with normal vision, and the great playwright characteristically applies this pronouncement to his mental and moral vision. I should like to apply both the statement and the extension to J. Golden Kimball.

123President Kimball, it appears to me, sees things as they are, rather than as he would like them to be or as they ought to be. This is an extremely rare quality. And he has the ability to express what he sees just about as he sees it—another rare quality, as men go.

But the essence of this normal vision and this normal expression is the sense of humor—which keeps the world from going mad. Mark Twain and Will Rogers, who also strip things naked, have not only a sense of humor but a nose for truth. J. Golden Kimball is our Mark Twain and Will Rogers. He tells of things as he sees them, and this is what makes for humor. Others change things before they describe them. President Kimball is the most individual of any Mormon—unless it is his father.

124God be praised for men who are different!

HUGH B. BROWN

"Happy is the man who has that in his soul which acts upon the dejected as April sunshine upon the roots of flowers. Gifts from the hand are silver and gold, but the heart gives that which neither silver nor gold can buy.

124"To be full of goodness, full of cheerfulness, of helpfulness, hope and understanding, causes a man to carry blessings of which he is himself as unconscious as a lamp is of its own shining. Such a one moves on human life as stars move on dark seas to bewildered mariners."—Henry Ward Beecher.

124J. Golden Kimball dares to be himself. His life is so simple and his words so direct that we never spend time trying to look through the surface to find the man, for there is no veneer—he is solid oak.

He is a philosopher and humorist, with a droll and scintillating way of expressing himself. He was trained in the University of Hard Knocks, and he has a vocabulary all his own. He has kept a sense of humor in the Church, and believes the "trip to heaven" should be a joyous one. Every group is made happier by his presencee, and when he leaves us the angels will greet him with a smile.

125He is one of the few remaining examples of the rugged West, as honest as a cactus, as tender as a rose. Through a long life of actual contact with, and deep understanding of his fellow-man, he has achieved the educated heart, which is always set in the direction of true kindness; it functions without deliberate thought.

125The young people of the Church love him because he is so human, so natural, so devoid of pretense.

125No man will ever fill the unique position held by J. Golden Kimball in the hearts of the people.

LOUISE Y. ROBISON

One of the colorful figures of our community, typifying the past and present, and uniting the best traditions of both, is J. Golden Kimball.

125He is of particular interest to women, as the chivalry of his nature gives him confidence in their powers, and enlists his sympathetic understanding. He believes in women! Mothers instinctively feel a trust in his counsel and advice, and an appreciation of his kindly interest in their sons and daughters, with whom he is especially influential.

His heroic struggle against physical disabilities, his determined effort to carry on, are living examples of fortitude. Though not so strong in body, he reflects the rugged strength of faith characteristic of his illustrious father. He stands a valiant, uncompromising defender of truth. Free from intolerance or bigotry, his faith, coupled with his courageous heart, has motivated him through the years. His hatred for any form of hypocrisy, his sympathy for frailties of humanity, his desire to help the weaker, his invaluable sense of humor have greatly endeared him to the people.

RUTH MAY FOX

I deem it a real privilege to be asked to pay a short tribute to President J. Golden Kimball, one of God's noblemen. I have always admired him for his frankness, his loyalty to the Church, and his fine geniality.

126In August, 1903, I had the pleasure of accompanying President Kimball through the southern settlements. We were away from home almost four weeks so that we became quite well acquainted. After leaving the railway our mode of travel was rather primitive compared with present day facilities. The authorities of one stake would send us about half way to the next stake by team where we would be met by another team to proceed on our journey. Noticing this arrangement I wondered, aloud, how we should get home. President Kimball answered in his characteristic way, "Sister Fox, don't worry, they always see that we get out."

Visiting Mutual Improvement Association Conventions in Panguitch, Kanab, St. George and Parowan was our chief objective, at least so far as I was concerned. We held between fifty and sixty meetings. At these meetings President Kimball made a great impression upon the young people. His work among them has always been very effective. I am sure he will never be forgotten.

127In one of his sermons President Kimball spoke of the prevailing custom of sending flowers to the funerals of deceased friends, and remarked that personally he would prefer that if anyone thought enough of him to buy flowers for his bier, he would rather have them while he was living. So as we rode along in the wagon while President Kimball was talking to the driver, I composed the following lines:

NOT WHEN I'M DEAD

If you have kindly words for me, O give them to me now,

127While the tempest raves about me and the storm beats on my brow;

127Not when I'm dead.

127If you your sweetest songs would sing about my silent bier,

127'Tis now I need your tender strains my drooping heart to cheer;

127Not when I'm dead.

127If lovely flowers you would strew upon my lowly bed,

128I need their dainty fragrance now to soothe my aching head;

128Not when I'm dead.

128And yet there is one little thing which I shall dearly prize,

128Far more than any solemn pomp that mortals can devise

128When I am dead.

128'Tis this that one of Zion's sons for whom I've labored here,

128Whose feet I may have guided right shall drop one grateful tear

128When I am dead.

128For this I consecrate my all, gladly my life lay down,

128That by the grace of God that tear may glitter in my crown,

128When I am dead.

MAY ANDERSON

I recall attending a conference-convention at one time in the Young and San Luis Stakes. Brother J. Golden Kimball was also assigned but was unable to make the strenuous trip. Word had reached the various communities in Colorado that Brother Kimball was coming and the people turned out en masse. Such disappointment as was registered when they found he was not there was one of the greatest tributes that I have ever seen paid to anyone.

The people love J. Golden Kimball. To them he is pure gold. They love to be near him and shake his hand. They love his integrity, his rugged humor, the testimony he bears. There is only one J. Golden Kimball and wherever he goes a common prayer is echoed in the hearts of his multitude of friends: "God bless that man."

A TRIBUTE IN OIL

In honor of President J. Golden Kimball's eightieth birthday, a group of his relatives and friends presented him with an oil painting of himself. The portrait, life-size and three-quarter length, was painted by Gordon Cope. From the Salt Lake Tribune, we quote these lines of comment:

129"The portrait is declared to be a striking image of the noted churchman who is known and admired throughout the West as a wit and philosopher. The artist is Gordon Cope, formerly of Salt Lake City, who came here from Denver especially for this work. Viewing the portrait sometime after his last sitting, Mr. Kimball is reported to have made the following characteristic remark: 'I didn't think it possible to do so much with such raw material.'"

The idea of making the portrait originated with his son, Max Kimball, and his nephew, Ranch S. Kimball. A committee was appointed, consisting of Benjamin L. Rich, Jessie R. S. Budge, and Ranch S. Kimball to contact President Kimball's many friends and accept contributions from them. The painting now hangs in President Kimball's home and is cherished by him and his family as a tribute of esteem and affection.

SHIRLEY PENROSE JONES

[On his eightieth birthday, June 9, 1933, under the leadership of Benjamin L. Rich, a group of business and professional men at Salt Lake City, admirers of J. Golden Kimball, complimented him with a dinner at the Hotel Utah. Indicative of his popularity, it is related that sixty men were invited to this function and eighty-two came. Following is one of the principal toasts.—Author's note.]

Occasionally a community produces a man of such lovable and genuine characteristics as to arouse in the hearts of all a possessive pride, as though each person in that community acquired an individual distinction by the very fact of that man's existence. He becomes a community asset, to be quoted on occasion when a final word is needed to end an argument, to be exemplified when in doubt of a course to follow, and to be extolled to the stranger as an example of local excellence. Such a community is ours, and such a man is our guest today. In honoring him we do honor to ourselves. Words are poor vehicles to convey our sentiments. Much more eloquent is the presence of this group on this, his natal day. Men have assembled from the various walks of life, with no thought of creed or other affiliation, to bear testimony by their presence to our belief that Brother J. Golden Kimball is in fact and deed our brother.

131As we all know, he was born in this city eighty years ago, in 1853, six years after the advent of the pioneers. He has seen our city grow from a frontier village of muddy streets and insignificant buildings to a modern metropolis, with conveniences and comforts as existed only in the courageous vision of such men as he. He has lived our history. The struggles to subdue the desert and tame it to the will of man are struggles of which he was and is a leading actor. When we travel our magnificent roads through valleys and mountains of unsurpassed beauty and grandeur, we see only the results of a dread. But those same journeys, to our guest, must bring pictures of days that tried the souls of men, of people who were ruled by faith, so that heartaches never became despair, and clouds never obscured the sun of that day. Thank God for the life and example of men like J. Golden Kimball.

At the early age of twenty-two he moved with his mother, then a widow, and her other children into Rich County, and in that cold outpost set to work to further extend the settlement of this community. In his youth and young manhood he was, first, a teamster, next, a rancher and cattle-raiser, then, a merchant; and finally, he was called to the pursuits that are his heritage by birth and character—a guide and teacher in the enrichment of life. He performed valiant service as a missionary for his church through years when his body was racked with fever, which could not daunt his spirit. He was called to the First Council of Seventy forty-one years ago, in 1892. For more than half a century his life has been devoted to the service of his fellow men, without thought of gain or profit to himself, except the joy that comes from bringing happiness into the lives of others. His name is a household word throughout this entire mountain region. His words of comfort and advice have been, and are, guideposts in the lives of thousands of our people. Many of us in this very room have frequently ordered our actions in compliance with his counsel.

132Brother Golden, as we affectionately know him, is a true product of the West, with a humor as dry as our desert sands but as refreshing as our canyon breezes, with a philosophy as beautiful as our twilights and as brilliant as our noon-day sun. He has endeared himself to us for the high quality of his mind, his patience, and straightforwardness. But above all he is a true and loyal friend.
