Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

133CHAPTER XV

133J. GOLDEN KIMBALL'S OWN FUNERAL SERMON

133Sentiments from J. G. Kimball, Sen., written down with a desire that they be read at the time of his funeral services.

133I am indeed proud in saying, I am a soldier of the Cross, a special witness for the Lord, being clothed upon with the spirit of my appointment and having the desire and being prepared to go to the front—when called—and be one of the soldiers on the firing lines.

133I say this with that kind of gladness and gratitude which admits of little pride. I say it because it has been said to me and expressed to me in silent pressures of the hand and uttered to me by eyes full of interest and pleasure.

133To say that all this makes me happy would not be to say all that I feel. I account it an honor in occupying a place in the hearts of the people, of being welcome in God's name into the affectionate confidence of the Latter-day Saints, and of my friends who are not of the Church. I believe this to be the greatest honor to be worked for and won under the stars. Were I permitted to live, I would desire to continue to perpetuate this communion with my God, my Redeemer, my people.

134To do this successfully, I know I must draw directly upon the world's experience and upon the results of my own individual thinking, acting, living. I know that no truth can be fully understood and appreciated by a soul that has not learned it in some way through the things he has suffered.

134The world cares little for theorists and theories. I come to the matured age of fifty-eight as a pilgrim with shoes worn and dusty with the walk on life's highway, with a body too small for my spirit.

134These feelings were not conceived in my mind, but they spring from the mixing and associating with the people. I now give to the people their own, and my soul cries out, "God save the people, not any one man, but the people." I have given to them all I have received—that which was in me came out of me; freely I received, freely I gave.

134May my God in His great justice and mercy forgive me my many mistakes, blunders and foolishness, together with my "twadling nonsense," and grant me pardon when all my transgressions are paid to the "uttermost farthing" and I am forgiven. He will then take me into a glory and kingdom suited to a humble, penitent sinner.

134I feel sometimes like the little freckle-faced, red-headed boy who was asked by his teacher, in Sunday School, to tell how thankful he was to the Lord: "Teacher, I don't know what to be thankful for; God purty nigh ruined me."

135I was chosen and sustained as worthy of being one of the general authorities of the Church, a member of the First Council of the Seventy. This has come to me, not through any of my seeking, but no doubt to do honor to our illustrious father and to perpetuate his memory amongst the people. Even though I may not have been called by direct revelation, I am sure I was chosen by the Lord's servants, who hold divine authority, and I have been sustained by the people in conference assembled.

135At a semi-annual conference of the Church held in April, 1892, I was set apart to this most humble calling by Apostle Francis M. Lyman. I have done fairly well and in a weak way have tried to be a faithful, loyal soldier; and while I am a very poor follower, yet to date I have not been an insurgent, but a progressive.

As to my patriotism, it calls to my mind a story. "During Sherman's famous march to the sea, General Longstreet saw just before him on the road—screened by a bush—a poor abject-looking mortal, engaged in a soliloquy. 'Here I am a poor miserable beggar. My shoes are gone, my clothes are almost gone; I'm hungry, I'm weary. My family have been killed or scattered and may be now wandering helpless and unprotected in a strange country. I love my country. Yes, I would—I would die—yes I would die willingly, if it were necessary, because I love my country. But if this war is ever over, I'll be d_________ if I ever love another country.'"

136I feel just such patriotism for my church and my people. I, too, have suffered much for my religion and I love my church. I, too, would die—willingly if necessary—but if this fight is ever over, I do not hanker for any more battles.

136Believing I am a soldier, I ask as an evidence of the gratitude of my comrades and people to be buried like a soldier.

136a. What was his character and what was his general influence, taken as a whole, through the course of years among his people?

136b. Did he have any special attraction for the narrow and intolerant?

136c. Was he tolerant, charitable, intelligent, unselfish, and self-sacrificing?

137d. Was the Golden Rule his great morality and his practical guide?

137e. Did he believe that justice means a free and equal chance of life's happiness to all, and that there can be no rest this side of justice?

137ANSWER: Yes, I believe in all this and have endeavored to train myself along these broad and generous lines. My failure in not reaching my goal has been due to my weakness and not to the fact that I did not believe it.

137I believe this great goal is to be won through the grace of God and by the influence of His Holy Spirit, by the morality of toleration, freedom of thought, brotherly love, and charity to all men—not the charity of alms-giving, but that charity which is forgiveness and love.

137My closing testimony is that I have unfaltering faith in God the Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, my Redeemer, and in the Holy Ghost.

137I am conscious and as far as I know anything, I know Joseph Smith was, and is, a Prophet of God and that this is the Church of Jesus Christ. And, please God, every step of my way shall be on high firm ground and in the open. I know not how else to fight.

My love, confidence and affection for my family cannot be questioned. They have been true, kind, and generous, and my impatience has made it somewhat difficult for them at times. But with it all, I love them to exceed all else, excepting my God and my Master.

138The above statement and sentiment must not be taken as an indication of insanity or premonition. My fad is to preach my own discourse, and then it will be satisfactory to the one most concerned.

J. G. KIMBALL.

March 8, 1912.
