Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

Tabernacle Talks

Abridged by Claude Richards and Approved by J. Golden Kimball

141INTRODUCTORY

141There was so much lively, interesting, and worthy material in the Talks that the task of reducing them to their present proportions became an arduous one. In justice to the speaker, be it said that many excellent passages were left out, in order to tempt the average reader, who, in the midst of a busy life, we assume, is neither overburdened with time nor has the inclination to read large books.

141A few talks have been eliminated—not many. The average talk has been cut about one-half. Because of so many eliminations it has been impossible in all cases to preserve a smooth reading of the text. When the reader encounters abrupt places, we trust he will overlook them. While some of these are the result of abridgment, others come from the characteristic disposition of the speaker to turn suddenly from one topic to another. His moving-picture mind explains this.

To remove ambiguities and make the meaning clear, it has been necessary to do considerable editing. While attention has been paid to grammar yet the greater effort has been to preserve the style and individuality of the speaker. Wherever there has been a conflict between grammatical construction and style, the latter has usually been given the right of way. To preserve the integrity of the individual talks it has been found necessary, occasionally, to repeat some of the speaker's ideas and utterances.

142These talks reflect the major effort and thought of a whole lifetime of an interesting, intelligent and gifted man, a man possessing a spiritual yet practical and humorous turn of mind, a man of keen observation and extensive and varied experience covering our day and the pioneer period preceding it, a man who has spent his strength diligently for half a century in the service of the Master, for the good of the people.

142Therefore, let us not pass too hurriedly over the things he has to say. His excellent teachings, enlivened by his native sense of humor and originality, surely are worthy of one or more thoughtful readings. In this day of mistaken values, chaos and temptation, may we not welcome the friendly teachings and counsel of inspired spiritual men like J. Golden Kimball?
