Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

142TALK ONE

143October, 1897

BLESSING OF REAL COMFORT

I feel very humble, my brethren and sisters. I have discovered in my short career that I don't amount to very much, that all that I have tried to do within myself I have failed in. The only blessing of real comfort that I have received is in laboring in the ministry. Some men are more easily tied than others, and, as far as I am concerned, I desire to be free in what I say, and I hope that I may be moved upon by the Holy Ghost. For I can testify to the children of men that I know what the Holy Ghost is, that is, I know what its influence is. I know that I have felt that joy, that peace, that satisfaction, that burning within me that comes from the influence of the Spirit of the Lord.

HOME MISSIONARY WORK

I have labored for the past six weeks in company with Apostle Lyman through the southern part of the state, largely in the interests of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations, and I discover in associating among the people that there is a great missionary work to be performed here at home. There are something over twenty-five thousand young men, from fourteen up to my age, and only a very small percentage of that number are laboring earnestly and ardently to gain information and knowledge pertaining to this great work. Talk about your missionary fields of labor, talk about the nations of the earth; I comprehend that the angel came with its message that the Gospel is to be preached to every nation, to every kindred, to every tongue and people; but I want to testify to you, my brethren and sisters, that the rising generation at home are being neglected. They are not being reached by the Priesthood of God; and if there is any place on the great earth where there needs an awakening and an uplifting, it is right here in Zion. And, I want to say to you, the fathers and the mothers are helpless, and they know not what to do.

I know the cause, too, and the sin will rest upon the parents. They have not followed this counsel, to instruct their children when they are young. President George Q. Cannon said we were in bondage, to a certain extent, because we had not followed counsel, and I want to testify that it is true. And I want to say there is a great sin resting upon some of the fathers and mothers, because they have not taught their children faith, repentance, baptism, and the reception of the Holy Ghost when they were eight years old. And they are now reaping the sorrow of their neglect. We need missionaries. I take the position that we need one hundred to start out with, to commence this mission here at home; and I don't know, before they get through with it, but they will have to preach on the street corners like the elders do in the states and in Europe.

WE MUST STUDY

In associating among the people, we discovered, and I want to testify to what one of the brethren spoke in reference to that matter, that our people are not a reading people. They do not diligently read the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. We have, however, been sustained by the people of the South, and in the Stakes of St. George, Kanab, Panguitch, and Parowan; we have met with a very kindly reception, and I believe there has been a reawakening.

We believe that men who are aged should study just as much as young men. I want to ask the Latter-day Saints if that is a true doctrine, that when a man gets old he should quit learning and stop studying, and cease to progress? I want to read you what the Lord has said in this line, speaking to Oliver Cowdery: "Behold, you have not understood. You have supposed that I would give it unto you when you took no thought save it was to ask." Have you misunderstood, my brethren and sisters? Have you fancied that all you have to do is to "ask and you shall receive, knock and it shall be opened unto you, and if you lack wisdom, ask of God who giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not," and that you can sit down and make no other effort? As one of the brethren expressed it: "I fancy that the minds of some of the people are chloroformed." And we have imagined that we would be saved in our ignorance, and when the Lord has said, "Whatever intelligence you attain unto in this life will rise with you in the resurrection."

146Now, He taught this lesson to Oliver Cowdery: "But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind. Then, you must ask me if it be right; and if it is right, I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore you shall feel that it is right."

146Now these are the last days spoken of by the prophets; these are the "perilous times." And I want to say to you that mountains of obstructions will be placed before this people, and if you have not been tried, you will be; if you have not been tested, you will be, before you gain eternal life. And before we pass our opinion unwisely, as we do, it is well for us to "study it out in our minds."

I am fearful that some of the Latter-day Saints simply come to the leaders and listen to the servants of God, and they never study; they never go to the written word, and compare it with the servants of God in their doctrines and teachings, and consequently they are unable to judge righteously, and they are losing confidence. Their confidence is being shaken, because they are unable to judge, because they have not first studied it out in their minds . . . because, as a people, we are mentally lazy. I will say that because I do not expect to preach here again for a long time.

A WONDERFUL PEOPLE

But I pray the Lord to bless this people. Why, you are, nevertheless, a wonderful people. The Lord has blessed you as He has blessed no other people. He has given you the Holy Ghost. Remember how particular He was with His apostles, with His servants that He sent out to preach the Gospel. He promised them the Holy Ghost, "whom the world cannot receive," and we are in a different situation from what the world is. As Paul says: "What! know ye not that ye are the temples of the Holy Ghost, and that ye are not your own; and if any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy, for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are."

THE SECOND GREATEST SIN

Now I want to say to you people, in soberness, and with consideration—I don't want to be an alarmist, I don't want to be a revivalist; but I want to say to you, the great sin that is creeping in among this people, together with other worldly sins, is the sin of adultery. This is creeping in amongst us, and we, seemingly, cannot help ourselves. But I want to say to you, there needs be an awakening. I want to tell you there needs to be a fear planted in the hearts of the young people. Take the Book of Mormon. Read what Alma said to his son Corianton, who had left the ministry, and had followed after the harlot, Isabel. He told him what a terrible crime adultery was, that it was next to the shedding of innocent blood. O, I am fearful that our young people do not comprehend that great sin that is creeping in amongst us; and, as the Prophet Joseph said, a man that commits adultery, and repents not according to God's word, cannot enter into the celestial kingdom of God. If he enters any kingdom, it will not be the celestial kingdom. I pray that our people may be moved upon to be a virtuous, to be an honest, to be a faithful people; this is the prayer of my heart, in the name of Jesus. Amen.
