Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

TALK TWO

149April, 1898

FINANCES AND FAITH

I have the idea, but it is not yet clothed. But I pray the Lord that He may move upon me, through your faith and prayers, to explain my views upon a certain subject. I am very much interested myself in the financial welfare of this people, because I realize from my own experience that when men are in financial difficulties, and their honesty is in question, and they are unable to fulfill their agreements, it is very difficult for honest men who are sensitive to the reproach of the children of men, to feel joyous and happy, and to appreciate the blessings with which they are surrounded. I want to say to you that the sun does not shine brightly to such men, the grass is not green, and sometimes, I fancy, they hardly feel that water runs down hill. It is a most terrible condition to be in.

EMPLOYMENT A BLESSING

One of the great difficulties that menace this people is lack of employment. I know how some of us worship gold and silver, but I tell you that is not so great a problem among this people as employment. I am not in much doubt that the time will be in these United States when the people will worship work more than they do money. And it is one of the demands that I make upon this people, that they see to it that the people of this Church are employed. If you have large farms, and you are poor and poverty stricken with so much land, see to it that the people are given employment. Then the people must see to it that they are willing to take the produce of the country as pay for their labor, and not ask the farmer to give them gold and silver, which it is very difficult for him to get.

I tell my brethren, "when you have not employment for me, say the word, and I will take my family by the hand, and I will again be a pioneer in the land." We have hundreds of brilliant young men, also, men with experience; but they are hanging around these streets and starving to death. Do you know what is the matter with us: There is a great deal of pride connected with it. It is not a difficult thing to live in a log hut if you have never had anything better, but it is a difficult thing to drop to a log house when you have been living in a castle. But our pride has got to be humbled. There are a great many of us that ought to be sent out. Talk about missionary work; they ought to call out of this city five hundred and send them on missions to colonize and build up the tens of thousands of acres that are in this great State of Utah. If the State of Utah is not good enough for you, go to Canada. That is a wonderful country, and you can get rich and prosper if you keep the commandments of the Lord. Then you can come back to Salt Lake City, and put on all the style you want to, if you pay for it.

ALL NOT WELL IN ZION

"And Zion cannot be built up unless it is by the principles of the laws of the celestial kingdom; otherwise I cannot receive her unto myself."

151"And my people must needs be chastened until they learn obedience, if it must needs be by the things which they suffer."

151Now, Zion will be redeemed, and I want to say to you, my brethren and sisters, that all is not well in Zion. But if you wish to be popular you want to say that all is well in Zion. The Lord requires it at the hands of this people that they pay their tithes and their offerings, and that they see to it that they impart of the abundance which the Lord has given, to those that need work, and give them employment.

WORK FOR ZION

Now I want to prophesy, as the son of a prophet, that if this people want to be blessed they must labor for Zion; for if you labor for money you shall perish. You are under covenant, and it is a demand that God makes of the people that they redeem Zion. You have got to be generous, and you have got to place all that you have and are upon the altar and learn to live the law of the celestial kingdom.

152"But," says one to me, "you would not preach that way four years ago when you had something." Well, if you have got to learn to preach the way I am doing, you will learn it just the way I learned it. You will pay for it. The Lord will take from you what you have, if you don't humble yourselves, and He will chasten you. You will be called upon to place all that you have and are upon the altar. And, if you do not have your feet right and know that this is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, when you are asked to give up your means, you will flounder and lose the faith. But if you have not got anything you will be just as Peter was. I am in the same fix; if I leave this Church, where in heaven will I go? That is the way I feel.

152BLESSINGS OR JUDGMENTS?

152I feel to bless the people. I feel that you are being blessed and that you will continue to be blessed as long as you keep the commandments of God. When you cease keeping the commandments of God, then the judgments of God will commence at the house of the Lord, and I pray that that may be averted. I pray that we may not pass through the experience that the people had in Kirtland because they transgressed the laws of God. May the Lord bless you. Amen.
