Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

152TALK THREE

153April, 1899

WONDERFUL PROMISES

Our people should follow the instructions that have been given them and keep out of debt. I call to mind a saying of the Lord: "I am bound when ye do what I say, but when ye do not what I say, then ye have no promise." He says to the young people: "He that seeketh me early shall find me, and he shall not be forsaken." The Lord has made great and wonderful promises to His people.

SHAKING HANDS

I desire to call your attention to an incident that occurred when I was laboring in the Southern States, in 1884. I went there in 1883. The year 1884 was the time of a sad experience in that mission. It was then that some of our elders lost their lives by mob violence. It seemed that there was bitterness on all hands. We had but few friends. I was at the office in Chattanooga under Elder Roberts at the time. I picked up a Chattanooga Times one morning, and I was very much delighted to see in print these words, speaking of Elder John Morgan. It said, "To shake his hand was to be his friend." I have never forgotten it. When you shook John Morgan's hand and he looked into your face, you always knew that you were his friend. John Morgan understood that principle.

154Some of our people are becoming careless in the shaking of hands. I have shaken hands with some men, when I would just as soon have put my hands into a bucket of ice water as to shake hands with them. They may have been friendly, but had no means of showing their feelings. Great sermons have been preached in this Church by the simple shaking of hands; and you who have been in holy places, you who have been in the holy temple, know what it means to shake hands.

154I witnessed a play in the theater at Los Angeles, and was very much taken up with it—Julius Caesar—and when I saw the mimic representatives of great Romans walk up and shake hands, I presumed every one in that large theater was impressed with the idea that it meant friendship.

But we have been too much carried away with temporal matters. When our elders come home—we have probably eight hundred who return every year—they ask me what is the matter with the people. They discover it whenever they shake hands with you. When you meet the elders that come home and shake hands with them, they will hardly let go of your hand, they are so friendly, and you can feel it in your hearts that they love you. They do it from the bottom of their hearts. You who have lost children know when a person comes up to you and sympathizes with you on account of your loss, taking you by the hand and looking you in the face, notwithstanding he may not utter a word, you feel that friendship, that sympathy that pierces to the innermost recesses of your hearts. If one who has passed through the terrible experience of losing his wife comes to sympathize with another man who has lost his wife, in shaking hands both experience a feeling of friendship and sympathy that cannot be expressed in words.

SYMPATHY AND LOVE

Brethren and sisters, we can afford to be sympathetic; we can afford of all people on the earth to be filled with sympathy and compassion. I am not concerned very much about what other religionists do. I am not concerned about the Christian Scientists; I have little to say against them. If they do any good that is their business, but no church or lodge can find a more successful way of making inroads among our people than by getting them to extend the hand of sympathy, love, and affection in their trials and tribulations. We who hold the priesthood—elders, seventies, teachers, and deacons—ought to perform our duties. Our hearts are not always as they should be; we do not always exhibit the sympathy, love, and affection that we ought. I am sorry to say that some of my acquaintances, some who are near and dear to me, have been won from our Church through love and sympathy.

STOP AND SHAKE HANDS

My brethren and sisters, I have this to say in conclusion: Even if you are in a hurry, stop and shake hands before going on, but do it right; have the spirit of God within you, and when you greet them say, "God bless you."

156I know a good old sister who is working for her living. She would not let the Church support her; she is too proud. She is over seventy years old. She said to me that when an apostle took her by the hand and said, "God bless you," it was worth more to her than all the money they could give her.

156I remember Apostle Erastus Snow, and I will never forget him as long as I live on the earth. He stopped long enough to take me by the hand as a boy, after my father was dead, and said, "God bless you." There are others that have done so, and they stand foremost in my mind, and I remember and esteem every one of them. We should learn to love and honor each other. We should have the spirit of God burning within our hearts. You can make more converts in this way than any other. God bless you. Amen.
