Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

156TALK FOUR

157April, 1901

ALL ENTITLED TO GOSPEL SPIRIT

I thank God, the Eternal Father, that we have young men, honored of the Lord, that can preach and testify just as well as apostles and prophets. I desire to say to the rising generation, you do not have to be apostles, you do not have to be presidents of stakes, nor bishops to enjoy the gifts and blessings pertaining to the Gospel of the Lord, Jesus Christ. And I say to you that some of you—and I may be among that number—place too much stress upon the positions that men hold in the Church. And we fancy in our weakness that we cannot be saved, that we cannot serve God, that we cannot be faithful and true and enjoy revelation from God unless we have high office in the Church. There is danger in exalted position, and where "much is given much is required." The poorest man in all Israel, though he may carry a hod and be dressed like a pauper, is entitled to revelation from God, and he is entitled to lay hands on the sick and have them recover through the power of prayer and faith.

COURAGEOUS MISSIONARIES

Judgment comes with age, as a rule—not always. We young men that have responsibilities placed upon us oftentimes have a great deal of courage, but may lack judgment. The point I want to get at is this: we must have some very brave and courageous men. Apostle Grant, with the assistants that will go with him, may open up a mission in Japan. Some apostle may be sent to Russia to open the door in that great nation, and it may be the privilege of some of us to go and get killed after the doors are opened. The Gospel will never be preached to every nation, kindred, tongue and people without lives being lost, nor without your eating "the bread of adversity" and drinking the "water of affliction." And we may not all be successful, but when a man is willing to lay down his life, and takes his life in his hands and labors for the Kingdom of God, he can do no more. And I tell you that great good will come out of it. I admire courage and bravery as well as judgment and wisdom. We have to have brave men and courageous men, and we young men have to learn, and the only way we can learn is by trying, like Brother Grant. My heart swelled within me when I heard him sing today.

FORGIVE MISTAKES

As long as a man has a righteous object he has a right to make an effort, and if he makes any mistakes, it is my duty to reach out to him my hand, even the hand of charity. And if you Latter-day Saints do not do it, and some of us young men fail because of your severe criticisms and your unkind statements, God will hold you responsible.

MYSTERIES VS. IGNORANCE

We have seen men handled because they waded into mysteries, and, of course, it was proper and right when they waded into mysteries and preached false doctrines that they should be handled. I can see the righteousness of it, but I wonder if any man has ever been handled in the kingdom of God for not knowing anything and for never trying to learn and to do things. I am in favor of some of them being handled right away. I pray the Lord to bless you. Amen.
