Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

159TALK FIVE

160October, 1901

FAITHLESS YOUTHS

I realize that there is a very great work for us to perform, not only among the nations of the earth preaching the gospel to every kindred, tongue, and people, but also among the young people of this Church. Only the other day, as I was walking down the street, I came to an old gentleman, who was tottering towards the grave, and, after I had shaken hands with him, he said, "Brother Kimball, I wish you would send a missionary to my home; I have three sons and several daughters that need to be labored with."

160A day or two after that, an aged gentleman came and introduced himself to me, and said he was a member of the Church of Jesus Christ. He paid his tithing, he said, and tried to do his duty. He had four sons and several daughters, and I believe that he said there was not one of them that had very much faith in the Church, and he wanted me to explain to him why it was. I rather evaded answering him, as I was not acquainted with him, with his environment, or with his home circle.

In associating with the young people I discover that this is not general; but there are many of our young people, who, for some reason, are bewildered and dazzled with the things of the world that are being introduced so rapidly among us. I can see only one course of safety for the young people of this Church, and that is to teach them until they have an abiding faith in God the Father, in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost.

MISSIONS BUILD FAITH

After this brother talked to me, I thought of your sons that are sent out to preach the Gospel. Some of them mere beardless boys, and yet when the call comes for them to go to the nations of the earth, father or mother may have had some doubts, but they were soon removed, and the boys came to the city, were set apart and received a blessing. The stenographer took the blessing and sent it to their home address. They received perhaps twenty minutes' instruction and were then sent forth to the world. I have seen a few of such boys go to Australia lately, and if my memory serves me, there have been over five hundred of your sons ordained seventies since the last October conference. We do not fear nor tremble for these boys. We tell them to be careful about some things. We advise them to see everything that is good in the world and try to understand it, but to avoid wine and women as they would the gates of hell. It is very seldom that any of them fall by the wayside. Only once in a great while do we hear of an elder going astray. I am more familiar with the Southern States Mission than any other, and though hundreds and hundreds of the elders have labored in the South, very few have fallen that I know of.

162Why can't we get our young people to have that same spirit at home? Even though the things of the world are introduced among us, why is it that we cannot stand on the same ground that our elders do in the nations of the earth? If we have faith and the Spirit of the Lord, the things of the world do not dazzle or tempt us.

PRIESTHOOD FIRST

I pray the Lord to bless you, that you may go to your homes and breathe the spirit of this conference into the hearts of the children of men with whom you associate, that there may be an awakening among the Priesthood of God. I desire to say to this great congregation that the Lord never intended His organized priesthood to fall in behind the auxiliary organizations of the Church. There should be a greater effort on the part of those who look after the priesthood quorums to see that they stand foremost and ahead of all the auxiliary organizations of the Church. I comprehend the great work that is being done by the Sunday School, by the Improvement Association, and by other associations, and I regret that it has to be said that some of our priesthood quorums are not doing their duty.

162May the Lord bless you. Amen.
