Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

162TALK SIX

163April, 1902

THE LORD QUALIFIES HIS SERVANTS

I feel, my brethren and sisters, that life is too short and our time is too brief to be spent in making apologies or excuses, or for expressing myself as being surprised at almost anything that happens pertaining to our calling in the holy Melchizedek Priesthood, for we never know where lightning will strike.

163We are not acquainted with those that will be released, or with those that will be sent to the nations of the earth, but we believe that the inspiration comes from God. I do know and testify that when a man is appointed to fill a place, notwithstanding the fact that he may not have all the qualifications, nor be endowed so richly as some other man may be, and the people may be surprised at the appointment, yet the Lord is able to qualify him. It is marvelous in my sight how men that are called by divine authority increase in wisdom and knowledge, how they progress, and how well they fill their positions when they have the spirit of their office and calling.

TURNING THE OTHER CHEEK

It takes a great deal of wisdom and courage to go among the children of men and have the finger of scorn pointed at you and be as unpopular as a Mormon elder is. Educated as we are, and breathing this mountain air for twenty years, it takes a little training before you can turn the other cheek and treat those kindly who spitefully use you. It takes a little education to learn how precious are the souls of the children of men in the sight of God. So we need some older men to put their hands on us younger boys and hold us down. We are a good deal like Peter. I was that way. I would have cut more than one of their ears off, if there had been someone to stick them on again. That is the spirit of young men at first, but after a while they moderate.

164You will be surprised how I will moderate in the next ten years, I will be as mild as a summer's morn, because I will commence then to look for death. But I expect to live a number of years yet, and I hope the fire won't entirely burn out of me. I had one of the apostles tell me, "Brother Kimball, if you don't quit making so much noise, you will burn out." "Well," said I, "I want to burn out, and give room for somebody else, as I believe some men live too long."

ROCK OF SALVATION

I desire to call your attention to a revelation, and I have tried to understand the part which I shall read:

165Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God;

165For, behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore He suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto Him.

165And He hath risen again from the dead, that He might bring all men unto Him, on conditions of repentance.

165And how great is His joy in the soul that repenteth.

165Wherefore you are called to cry repentance unto this people;

165And if it be so that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with Him in the kingdom of my Father?

165And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me?

165Behold, you have My Gospel before you, and My rock, and My salvation.

I believe with you, my brethren and sisters who have a testimony, that your feet are planted upon the rock of salvation, and that you know that Jesus is the Christ. I believe that you will be saved in the Kingdom of our Father. I believe that a greater part of you will be true, will be steadfast, will be firm, immovable, and unshaken. You are not dazzled nor bewildered by these allurements that are finding their way among this people. You have got past that. You no longer have on your shoulders young heads; you no longer care for society, worldly society; you no longer hunger after the things of the world. You have been able to stamp under your feet these appetities and these weaknesses that young men have not yet overcome. When you came into the world, men were not so bewildered with the things of the world. These things have come with luxury and riches.

MoralityKimball, J. GoldenSONS AND DAUGHTERS

Now, after having referred to you older brethren, how you are fortified and fastened, how faithful you are to keep the commandments of the Lord and pay your tithing; what about your sons and daughters? Are they converted? Are they fastened? Can you handle them? We are doing a great missionary work at home. In every stake of Zion home missionaries are sent out among the people to preach; and we preach, and we preach, and we preach, and we preach most eloquently. But, these boys are not there. Possibly not twenty percent of them are at your meetings when the home missionaries talk. Of course, there are some exceptions. Now, what are you doing about them?

We preach daytimes, and I believe ardently that we sleep too much nights. I remember Brother Lyman saying, "Young man, how old are you?" "I am over forty." He said, "I thought so, because you commence to hunt for an easy chair even now." At forty we commence to hunt for an easy chair, and so when night approaches, it seems that we parents all go to bed, that we may rest. I rather believe the idea that if the presidents of stakes and bishops of wards would appoint missionaries to walk the streets at night, there would be a marvelous work done in Zion. The devil does not do his dirty work in the daytime, when the sun shines, but he is getting so he does some here under the blazing electric light.

167Are we going to watch our children? I remember being in a far-off settlement not long ago, where they see few, if any, of the leading brethren, and yet they number over twelve hundred. They have a great many young people, and when I retired to my bed after the meeting I was kept awake all night long by the boys and girls running the streets of that settlement. I got up towards morning, looked at my watch, and it was then four a. m., and they were still roaming the streets. While it may have been harmless and they may have been pure in their intentions, I tell you, in the name of Israel's God, it is one of the criminal things that are going on in this land. The devil is breathing in the hearts of our young people, and the very air is stagnated in some of our larger cities with the spirit of immorality. No greater sin can find its way in the hearts of our young people.

I tell you, it is your duty and it is my duty to go out as missionaries; not to preach these things from the pulpit, not to talk to our sons and daughters publicly, but privately, and point out to them, in a proper way, the great and abominable evil of secret sin. Some of you in your far-off districts are not burdened with what we call civilization and the things of the world; but you are menaced, and the greatest danger that menaces you today is immorality and secret sin.

MISSIONARY COURTSHIPS

You know how we guard our missionaries. The elders yesterday pled with a number of missionaries till tears came to my eyes. "Don't allow any woman to take your honor. Don't allow any woman to take your arm. Keep them at arm's length. And as you expect to honorably fulfil your mission and have the Spirit of God burning in your hearts, see to it that there are no courtships, that there are no arrangements made of any kind to enter into matrimony; but come home clean and pure and sweet before the Lord." As one missionary said, when he returned home from his first mission, he was about to step over his mother's threshhold and his mother said, "Hold on, my son, have you come back to me as pure and as good as when you left?" He was able to say, "Yes, mother, I am pure; I am clean before the Lord;" and she threw her arms open and took her son in her embrace.

FORTIFY YOUTH

Brethren and sisters, are we going to fortify the youth of Israel and the daughters of Zion, that they can withstand these men who seem to think that it is their special mission and that they are justified in coming among our people and ruining our daughters and leading away our young men? God bless you. Amen.
