Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

TALK SEVEN

170April, 1903

WAYS OF MEN

The few moments I occupy I very much desire to enjoy the Spirit of the Lord. I realize that the ways of the Lord are not in harmony altogether with the ways of men. I have labored in the ministry long enough to know that should I be favored to enjoy the Holy Spirit and speak the things that the Lord shall give unto me; they will not be altogether in harmony with people who do not enjoy that spirit. I believe it is proper for us to be conservative and consistent in all that we say and do, but I confess to you that my time is too short on this occasion to prepare your minds for what I may say, for I have not an entire conception of just how I am going to come out in fifteen minutes from now.

BIBLE MISUNDERSTOOD

I have thought some little lately about the Bible, which we claim to be the word of God, "as far as it is translated correctly." Taking that statement into consideration, there are no people on the earth that quibble so little about the Bible as do the Latter-day Saints. I am strongly impressed with the idea that the Bible can be understood only by the same spirit with which it was written. If that statement be true, I am impressed with the idea that the Christian world have not got very much of it, or else they would understand it more alike. There are said to be six hundred or more denominations. I have never found out exactly how many.

WORD OF GOD

Now, we have the Book of Mormon, and if there is anything on earth that has made trouble for this people, it is that book. It is largely the means of costing the lives of the Prophet Joseph Smith, his brother Hyrum, and hundreds of others belonging to this Church. But I am prepared to testify that it contains the word of God. We have also the Book of Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price, which are accepted by this people as the revelations of God; and they have made an endless lot of trouble for this people, because they are the word of God. There is only "one of a city and two of a family" that are willing to accept them; so you need not think I am going to get discouraged because they do not believe all I say, and you need not think I am going to stop talking if permission be given me, because some people do not believe all I say.

POPULARIZE MORMON CHURCH

Brethren and sisters, I believe I will tell you how to popularize the Mormon Church. If you want to be popular, I can tell you how to be so. The "Josephite" church has started out in about the right line to accomplish their purpose, by cutting out a number of truths that Joseph Smith revealed to the Saints, and in this way they are trying to popularize themselves. Now, if you will stop sending out these fourteen hundred elders, testifying that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God, that we have apostles and prophets inspired of God, that we enjoy revelation, that the signs follow the believer, that the sick are healed by the laying on of hands, that we have divine authority from God; then you will be popular. Are you prepared to do it? If you will stop going into these temples and receiving your endowments and being married for time and all eternity, that will help a little.

If the Lord cannot take care of His Church and His people and look after their interests, then we have been mistaken. I tell you we have friends and we have men in the world who have the Spirit of God, who will rise up and protect this people. I am not numbered among those who think that we have no friends, for we have friends. But, brethren and sisters, you are not of the world, and therefore the world hateth you, speaking generally. If you want to be popular, stop doing the things that I have mentioned and deny their truth. But if you want to stay with this Church, be true to your covenants. The time will come when you will be—as you are now—a light set upon a hill. I tell you, all the devils in hell cannot destroy this Church. And the devil never has been entirely comfortable since that temple [the Salt Lake Temple] was completed.

THE SEVENTIES

I would like to call your attention to another subject. I happen to have a little information on paper this morning, which is rather unusual for me. I desire to call your attention to some of the labors of the First Council of the Seventy. Listening to all these presidents of stakes, you would think that their stakes were the only stakes in Zion; and I rather approve of that style. I believe that you ought to love that which is your own. I am learning that slowly. If you have got anything that is not presentable, for heaven's sake, do not say anything about it; someone will find it out soon enough.

There is nothing that has been done for years by the First Council, under the direction of the Presidency, that has done as much good as our inquiring after these brethren. I wish we had the time to inquire after every one of the seventies, especially those that are nearly dead. It would doubtless start their blood circulating, and teach these seventies the fact that they are witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ to the nations of the earth. Also that it is their privilege to preach the Gospel continually, and that they ought to be out of debt and prepared to go. . . . Out of 497 seventies only five declined to go on a mission; and I believe if we had fully understood their letters and had started the presidents to labor with them, there would not be found probably more than one out of the whole number who would decline to go. I tell you, it is a remarkable thing. The other Christian churches cannot show anything like it.

HELP MISSIONARIES

I have not time to talk much about missionary work. All I have to say, brethren, if you cannot go on missions; if you are too rich to go, or you have too much business, or you have positions in the Church that prevent you from going; then, for heaven's sake, help those who do go. The Church must be protected in its business, in its wards, its stakes, and its church schools. I believe in protection—if I am among the number protected; [laughter] but inasmuch as this Gospel must be preached, you men that stay home must help carry the burden, and not have our brethren mortgage their homes and sell out everything to do this work. There are not two rich seventies in the whole number we have reported to the missionary committee of the apostles. They are all poor men, and some of their letters would bring tears to your eyes, when they write to us explaining the little they have. But they say, "I am ready to go; I know God Almighty will bless us."

MISSION A BLESSING

I will rob you of a little time for the purpose of reading you what the Lord told my father, and I take it as a testimony to me that there is nothing that brings a greater blessing than preaching the Gospel to the nations of the earth.

175Far West, Apr. 6, 1839.

175A word from the Spirit of the Lord to My servant, Heber C. Kimball:

175Trouble not thyself about thy family, for they are in my hands. I will feed them, and clothe them, and make unto them friends. They never shall want for food, nor raiment, houses, nor lands, fathers nor mothers, brothers nor sisters, and peace shall rest upon them forever, if thou wilt be faithful and go forth and preach My Gospel to the nations of the earth.

175I stand before you as a living witness of its truth. I have traveled among this people for eleven years. I have received honors and blessings from among this people, because of my father. I have found fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters. I have found friends everywhere I have been among this people. And I attribute the greater part of it to the fact that my father fulfilled that commandment. His children have never wanted for bread, and I tell you, in the name of Israel's God, they never will. They will be mighty poor, but they will always have bread. God bless you. Amen.
