Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

179TALK NINE

180October, 1904

PRAY TO THE POINT

I feel a good deal, at this time, as the chaplain did in one of the Utah legislative assemblies when my father put him on oath. Father was a little acquainted with him. They had crossed the plains together, and father knew what a long and tedious prayer he usually offered, so father said, "Will you pray briefly and to the point." Well now, I feel that I will have to talk briefly and to the point.

TRUE CHURCH

I was born in this Church, and I thank God for it. It comprises everything that is good, everything that is pure, everything that is elevating, notwithstanding all that is said against it.

JESUS IS THE CHRIST

We must have a knowledge that Jesus is the Christ, or we cannot stand. Latter-day Saints who have failed are those who have not obtained a knowledge that Jesus is the Christ; all such are liable to apostatize. I am afraid there will be a lot of apostates, and that worries me.

CANNOT DESTROY CHURCH

You can't live on borrowed light any longer. This Church has passed through many close places, and, as my father said, it will pass through many other close places before victory and triumph are given to you or given to the Church. I know a good deal more about this Church than the man did, one of those strangers that came in our midst, who went on a hill here recently and stood in an ant bed, and, when the ants commenced to bite, he commenced to curse the Mormons. I suppose he thought they were Mormon ants, and he held us responsible for them.

181Now there are a lot of people talking about us, and we have a great deal of cheap notoriety, but I am not at all concerned about it. I am not worrying about it; I don't stand with bated breath for fear this Church will be destroyed. This is the work of God; this is the Church of Jesus Christ. There are not devils enough to destroy it, and it can't be destroyed by men. If it could have been destroyed, some, who claim to be members in the Church, would have destroyed it years ago. I don't care how much harm is committed by pretended members of this Church, they can't destroy it; they will destroy themselves. I care not how many apostates attempt it, they cannot destroy this Church.

APOSTATES UNRELIABLE

Now, I want to serve notice on all Catholic, Methodist and Presbyterian churches—I don't suppose they will take my advice; they never have done up to date, but I would like to continue giving them good advice—I would advise them never to receive a man into their church that has been a Latter-day Saint and apostatized from the Church. Such individuals will never make good Catholics, good Methodists, or good Presbyterians. They will be agitators, and make a deal of mischief in those churches, because they will be so restless and unsettled that no one near them will have any peace or rest. And they will get to asking a lot of questions. The first thing they will ask is, "Where do you get your authority from?" and that will worry you a little. And they will ask other hard questions, and make trouble and mischief. And then, they are no account, anyhow, as members of any church.

182You never saw an apostate in your life that was a Latter-day Saint and did right up to a certain time and then apostatized, that has ever settled down and been satisfied in any other church in the world. They are not even satisfied with spiritualism, notwithstanding they may talk with spirits and get a great amount of information. They won't stay with that sect.

182And, by the way, I would like to serve notice on the Republicans and Democrats that the individuals of whom I have been speaking will never be good Democrats or Republicans either; they will not stay with their party.

Now, I want to serve notice on apostates. I am willing to carry the olive branch in my hand when I associate with the children of men in the world. I have nothing but the kindliest feelings towards them; but when an apostate lifts up his voice against this people, when he makes dastardly charges against the Latter-day Saints, he lies, and I have no patience with him. I have breathed this mountain air so long that I feel inclined to discard a little of the Gospel and knock such men down, and repent afterwards. I want to say to an apostate, and to any man that has been born and bred in the Church, he is a coward to lift up his voice against 300,000 people [1904], with over 100,000 children among the number. If apostates had their way, the whole United States would be against us.

183Persons who have lived in this country and received all that they own from this people, and who lift their voices against us, are cowards. Whenever any man or woman wants to leave this Church, they have a right to do so, and it is our duty to treat them right, to extend to them every courtesy and kindness, and be their friend, if they refrain from lying and persecuting us. This is God's work, and, just as sure as He lives, and as we breathe and have a being, this work will come off triumphant. There may not be very many of us left, but, let the number be ever so few, it will succeed.

COUNSEL OF CHURCH AUTHORITIES

I want to say in conclusion, the only discipline I have had was by my own father, up to fifteen years of age. For twelve years after that time I was under no responsibility, but, since then, I have been in business of different kinds: I have been a farmer, a stock raiser, a real estate man, and an implement man. I knew Brigham Young almost as well as I knew my father. I knew Daniel H. Wells, a counselor of Brigham Young and associate of my father. I have known all these brethren down to President Smith, and can testify that all the counsel and advice I have received from them has been a savor of life unto my soul. It has been a godsend to me, and I am grateful that I have been favored because of my association with men of God, who have given me counsel, such counsel that, if I follow it, will bring me back into the presence of my Eternal Father.

NEVER SPEAK AGAINST THE WORK OF GOD

Now, that is my testimony to this congregation. If you have got anything to say in favor of this people, whether you are in the Church or out, say it fearlessly. My father said to one of his grandchildren, who is living in Arizona and didn't take any active part in the Church: "Billy, these are my words to you, don't you ever lift up your voice against this people." Speaking to me about my father's advice to him, he said, "Golden, I never have, and I thank God for it." I repeat the advice; never speak against the work of God, nor against His people. May the Lord bless you. Amen.
