Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

184TALK TEN

185April, 1905

BLOWS FOR BLOWS

I once read a beautiful article about anvils and hammers and I copied some of its sayings. But I have never used them, although I have carried the copy until it is nearly worn out. I now quote as follows: "Every man in the world who gives blows must take blows, and until a man becomes as good an anvil as he is a hammer, he fails to be thoroughly fitted for his work."

CharacterKimball, J. GoldenRESTRAINING PASSION

Now I grant, my brethren and sisters, that sometimes we have to endure many things, and I presume that if we live the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall have to endure all things; but it requires a very prayerful heart to enable us to endure some things. I realize that the Congress of the United States, and the committee on privileges and elections, have their duty to perform. I do not object to those things, for it is a doctrine of the Church that we sustain the law of the land, and we have done it. But the thing that I object to is, for every little gutter-snipe, that comes into the country, to think that he can kick and maul and abuse us.

I occasionally feel a little like Joe Rich did once when they abused his father, Apostle Charles C. Rich, who spent a great part of his life as a pioneer in that hard country of Bear Lake, who used to come over the mountains on snow shoes in order to attend conference, who used to grind his wheat in a little coffee mill in order to have bread, and whose wives and children lived in log houses with dirt roofs for many years. Joe went down to a certain newspaper office and demanded retraction. He told them if they didn't retract he would turn the whole family loose on them, and that he was the smallest one in the family and the biggest coward. The retraction came. I am not saying this to be sensational. I tell you, if it were not for that man of God, Joseph F. Smith, restraining his children, and they being obedient unto him, there would be some men horsewhipped today. But, he is a servant of God. I have known him all my life. I have known every man who has presided over this Church from President Brigham Young down, and I know they have been men of God.

WE MUST HAVE BACKBONE

We have no small mission to perform. I honor Joseph Smith the Prophet, for his bravery, for his courage, for his manliness. He had a message to deliver that was in conflict with sin and wickedness, and it came in conflict, also, with all the manmade religious organizations of the world. But God had revealed it to him, and he would not deny it, though it cost him his life. Do you think we can continue proclaiming this message—can we elders continue telling the world that God did appear to Joseph Smith, and that He did reveal these things, and expect they will receive us with open arms? Never. And, notwithstanding that it is our mission to treat them kindly, to carry the olive branch in our hand, to preach the Gospel and to deliver this message, at the same time, brethren and sisters, we must have backbone.

187I am going to read some more to you: "I think there is a contemptible, quiet path for all those who are afraid of the blows and hammers of opposing forces. There is an honorable fighting for any man who is ready to forget that he has a head to be battered and a name to be besmattered. Truth wants no champion who is not as ready to be struck as to strike for her."

187Any of these backboneless people, any who are afraid that God's work will not triumph, had better get in the background and let those that have courage stand in the front of the battle. Of course, I might be the first one to run, I have not been tried very much yet; but I know I will be tried if I stay in this Church. I know that I cannot live on borrowed light. You can talk and preach and expound until you are black in the face, but if you do not know that Jesus is the Christ you will never stay in this Church.

As far as I am concerned, I want to be broadminded enough to open my arms to the stranger, and to treat him kindly, but, I will not sustain a man who will lie and abuse and deride this people.

AUTHORITIES KIND

May God bless you people. May He bless the authorities of the Church. It is not often I bear my testimony, but I want to tell you today that I know this work is true. I know that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God. I honor and love him and his memory, although I never saw him. I have been acquainted with all the Prophets of God from the days of President Brigham Young down. They have been kind to me in my childhood and in my manhood. It does not matter much to me where the place is that they have gone to, but I do not want to go with any others because I would be lonesome. God bless you. Amen.
