Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

188TALK ELEVEN

189October, 1905

CHILBLAINS SERMON

Arising to speak to you at this time puts me in mind of a story I read not long ago. It was during the Civil War, when some soldiers were around a camp fire, trying to keep themselves from freezing to death. A preacher came along to hold services. He looked around among the soldiers, and said, "I will take for my text, Chilblains." So he instructed the soldiers what to do, which was to put soft soap in their shoes, place them on their feet and wait till their feet were healed. And then he would talk to them about the Lord the next time he came. You can't talk to people when they are uneasy, not if you are like I am. You can't preach to people when they want to go home. Now if any of you want to go, please go, and the rest of us will stay till we get through.

AFRAID OF JUSTICE

I am not going to announce any blood and thunder doctrine to you today. I have not been radical for four long months, not since I had appendicitis. I came very nearly being operated upon. I thought I was going to die for a few hours. People said to me, "Brother Kimball, you needn't be afraid; you'll get justice." "Well, I said, "that is what I am afraid of." Well now, the Latter-day Saints need not get frightened they will get justice. You have been fed on rich diet during this conference, and now I will give you a little coarse food to help you out.

HARDEST CHURCH TO STAY IN

I am not exercised about the triumph of this work. I am not lying awake nights any more, wondering how the Lord is going to do it. Notwithstanding the fact that I am laboring in the Church, I don't know what the Lord wants in all things. If I did I would be willing to try and carry it out. The Lord's ways are not as man's ways, and He does things so differently from the way we want to do them that many of us are oftentimes surprised, and it requires constant faith to stay in this Church. I believe it is the hardest church to stay in that there is on earth, because you have always got to keep exercising faith. I remember hearing of a man that apostatized from the Church, and he was asked what was the matter. He said, "Well, I have got tired exercising faith."

YOUR DUTY IN THE CHURCH

I say, we need not be anxious about the triumph of this work; we need not be so exercised about it that we will lie awake nights. But I tell you, every man and woman in this Church should be exercised and anxious about the salvation of the souls of the children of men, and about the preaching of this Gospel. Look at our Savior; think of the anxiety He had for the souls of men. Just think of the sleepless nights He must have spent. I cannot be converted to the idea that the Savior sweat great drops of blood because they were going to crucify Him. But, He so loved the souls of the children of men, and His sorrow was so great for them, that He sweat great drops of blood. Now, you need to get a little bit anxious, and go home and get a little healthful exercise, and not sleep too much. Lie awake a little and think about your duty in the Church.

DEBT

Now, brethren, the Lord bless you. You shouldn't get yourselves tied up by debt. Of these seventies, 8,000 men, I am sorry there is not more than one out of a hundred that is prepared to go on a mission, because of debt, or infirmities. When a man claims that he would lay down his life for this work, that he would place all that the Lord has given him on the altar, and you invite him to go on a mission, you sometimes find him full of sorrow and trouble, and in debt. It is the most inconsistent thing in the world.

MISSIONARIES TO PREPARE

I believe there was a time in the history of this Church when it was necessary to send all kinds of men to preach the Gospel. God magnified them, and made them marvelous; but I tell you He does not look upon ignorance now with any degree of allowance. There is no need of our priesthood being ignorant; there is no need of our priesthood going out as the fishermen went out. They ought to go out well equipped and fitted for the work of the Lord as special witnesses of Christ. I know what the Lord wants in this respect, just as well as if He gave me a direct revelation; and when missionaries are wanted they should be found in the seventies quorums instead of any other. The Lord bless you. Amen.
