Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

TALK TWELVE

193April, 1906

LONG FACES

In standing before the Latter-day Saints this afternoon, I desire to say those things that are timely, and to speak under the influence of the Holy Spirit. Notwithstanding the seriousness of the occasion, having met as a part of the great Annual Conference, we need not pull long faces and put on an air of self-righteousness, thinking it indicates faith and is more pleasing to the Lord. The Lord has said, "Cease from your light speeches and excess of laughter," but He surely is pleased with pleasant countenances and a happy people, although wit and humor may be out of place in houses of worship.

I read somewhere the following: "Many persons who never had a bright idea in their heads, or a generous sentiment in their hearts, assuming an air of owlish wisdom, affect to disdain wit and humor, having never heard of the great truth enunciated by Charles Lamb: 'A laugh is worth a hundred groans in any market.' The idea is propagated "that mental dryness is indicative of wisdom." I realize that my reputation for wisdom has been greatly injured by repeating jokes in my public utterances and that, because of my calling in the ministry, I should, in the estimation of some people, be as solemn as an owl.

194It seems to be the destiny of the children of men to suffer sickness, sorrow, pain, and poverty, and to die. With our most perfect organization, priesthood and authority, we still have troubles, and skeletons in our closets. It is considered a good thing to look wise, especially when not over-burdened with information.

AdversityKimball, J. GoldenIMPRISONED SERVANTS OF THE LORD

I desire to make a statement here in explanation of something that I said in the conference meeting on Friday.

I have learned that some of the greatest miracles and most marvelous events have happened to the servants of God when they were placed in jail for righteousness sake. Some of the greatest revelations that God has ever given in this age and dispensation were given to the Prophet of God when he was in jail, in trouble and difficulty. During his time of sorrow and loneliness, God the Father, came to him, by His Spirit, and he received marvelous revelations. I read in the Bible about Peter being imprisoned, and an angel of God coming to his rescue. He was taken through the great iron gates, and escaped when his enemies were desirous of taking his life. I read, also, about the Prophets of God in the days of the Book of Mormon history. Prisons were broken down and manifestations of God were made apparent to the servants of the Most High.

195An incident happened in the Southern States Mission, which I will relate. It transpired in the days of President John Morgan, and occurred at a time when the State of Tennessee passed a law that any man who advocated or preached polygamy was to be arrested and punished. Enemies to the elders entrapped the brethren into a discussion on this most unpopular subject, and the elders defended the principle from a Biblical standpoint. A complaint was filed, and the elders were arrested. They were short of room inside the jail; so the brethren, two in number, were confined in two steel cages on the outside, near to each other. The imprisoned servants of the Lord were not orators or singers. The people from far and near, hearing of Mormon elders being under arrest, gathered to see these peculiar individuals. The brethren sang hymns and testified of the truth of the Gospel, etc. It is claimed they had congregations of three hundred, and I have been told that the people had never heard such wonderful preaching and singing. The elders almost regretted receiving their freedom. So, I am almost inclined to advocate putting our elders in jail once in a while, when they are unable to get a hearing in any other way.

TRIALS OF THE SAINTS

Now, I will read to you to show that there will come sorrows to the Latter-day Saints, trials, and tests. Every man in this Church will be tested to the core; they will be proved as Abraham was proved, and when the Lord is satisfied that they love Him and will keep His commandments, then He will come to their rescue.

GREAT SIFTING TIME

I will quote to you a prophecy. In 1856, a little group of friends convened in the Endowment House, and were engaged in a conversation on the isolated condition of the Latter-day Saints:

196Yes [said Brother Heber, by which name he was so frequently called] "we think we are secure here in the chambers of the everlasting hills, where we can close those few doors of the canyons against mobs and persecution, the wicked and the vile who have always beset us with violence and robbery; but I want to say to you, my brethren, the time is coming when we will be mixed up in these now peaceful valleys to that extent that it will be difficult to tell the face of a saint from the face of an enemy to the people of God. Then, brethren, look out for the great sieve, for there will be a great sifting time, and many will fall, for I say unto you, there is a test, a test, a test coming, and who will be able to stand?

THE TEST

My mother has told me that the last time father took a walk down Main Street, after he was stricken with paralysis, he returned with difficulty back to his home, the residence which still stands on the hill, and he said to her, "Oh, the test, the test, the test, who will be able to stand?" Mother said, "What is the test?" He replied, "I don't know, but it is only those that know that Jesus is the Christ that can stand."

HumorKimball, J. GoldenNOW APOSTATIZE AND GO TO HELL

As I have said, this is the Church of Jesus Christ, and each of us has individual work in it. If the Latter-day Saints do not know that Jesus is the Christ, and that this is His Church, I tell you, in the name of the Lord, you will not stand; you will be among the number that fall.

197I remember hearing about a saying of President Young to a brother who was terribly tried. His case came before the High Council, and the council had decided against the man. You know it happens sometimes, when the decision is not in your favor, you feel disgruntled. And some leave the Church because of the actions of men; they feel they have been dealt with unjustly. Brother Brigham, on the occasion referred to, said to the brother in sarcasm, "Now apostatize and go to hell." And the brother ejaculated, "I won't do it; this is just as much my church as it is yours, and I am going to stay with it."

197Well, that is Mormonism. It is our church, as long as we keep the commandments of God; and we can be put out of it only through apostasy, rebellion, or criminal actions. Now, let us stay with it, and, like my brother Andrew, always tell good things about Zion and let other things alone. The Lord bless you. Amen.
