Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

TALK FOURTEEN

203April, 1907

SALVATION INDIVIDUAL WORK

I am a strong advocate of individuality and agency. I value it above everything that I can conceive of, except salvation. I am very doubtful if a man can be saved in the Kingdom of God who has no individuality, and does not assert his agency, because salvation is an individual work.

WAIVE RIGHT TO SIN

The chief point I have in mind at this time is that when we became members of the Church of Latter-day Saints we waived certain rights and privileges. At least that was my understanding when I became a member of the Church.

Now, as I said, I waived certain rights when I became a member of this Church; I waived the right of sin. I have my agency and individuality; but as long as I am a member of this Church, I waive the right to sin, to transgress. When you joined the Church, became members of it, you also waived the right to do a great many things. You have no right to commit adultery or to be immoral. You have waived the right to break the Word of Wisdom. And in many other things we have waived our rights, and sometimes I feel muzzled when I wrestle with my nature and human weaknesses. You know there is no other man just like men in all Israel and probably you are glad of it.

204SELF-RIGHTEOUSNESS

204I am having a pretty hard time wrestling with myself. I don't feel self-righteous, I feel more like that poor fellow who stood on the street corner and bowed his head and said, "O God, forgive me, a poor sinner." I feel confident, when I think about the matter carefully, that some people become self-righteous in their own estimation, because they keep one or two or more commandments, and then they commence to exercise "unrighteous dominion" when they find a transgressor in the Church. Now, Latter-day Saints, such people have "sinned and come short of the glory of God," and stand condemned before the Lord unless there is such a thing as repentance and forgiveness of sins.

SALVATION

It is a question, how long will it take for me to secure salvation? The Lord only knows; I don't: I am not competent to tell whether I will be saved or not. I am making an effort for salvation, and as I said, I waived a great many rights in order to become a member of the Church. I have trampled ambition under my feet, for I have an ambition, and it takes me all the time to keep my feet on it. I am sometimes afraid of my friends, because if one doesn't qualify every statement he makes, he may be like one man said of me in the North Country: "Well, he didn't say it, but he intended to, and if he will say to me that he did not intend to say it, then I will take back everything I said against him."

FEW ARE CHOSEN

I wish to properly express my thoughts and feelings on this occasion. I will read to you from the Doctrine and Covenants:

205"Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen, and why are they not chosen?"

205I have been surprised that I was chosen, but there will come another time of choosing, and I don't know whether I will be among the number then or not. You don't know, either.

FRUITS OF THE HOLY GHOST

Experience teaches me that when I have been angry, I am quite sure I did not have the Holy Ghost, and I was not in any proper condition to administer reproof. It took me quite a long time to learn that. When I became excited, fanatical, and over-zealous, I mistakenly thought it was the Spirit of the Lord, but have learned better, as the Holy Ghost does not operate that way. My testimony is that the internal fruits of the Holy Ghost are joy, peace, patience, long suffering, and kindness.

TRYING TO BE SAVED

Now, I am speaking of myself; I am not criticizing others; I am talking about principles. I stand before you a transgressor, but I am trying to be saved, and that is all God asks me to do. Any man who tries to do the right thing and continues to try, is not a failure in the sight of the Lord. Dreyfus, a Jew of the French Army, was falsely accused by his associates because of jealousy and hatred, and it resulted in his losing his appointment, being disgraced and banished. He was afterwards proven innocent and reinstated with honors. His experience and sorrow would not be as great or as serious as mine would be, if, for cause or otherwise, I was to lose my priesthood and appointment. Such things have occurred through sin, or apostasy, and sometimes it may be because men holding the priesthood have exercised unrighteous dominion, and have accepted statements made by tattlers, and thus became suspicious, prejudiced, and unfriendly.

GOD IS MERCIFUL

My brethren and sisters, I want you to be good to me, and help save me. If I can be saved it is an encouragement to every man, woman and child in Israel to make the effort. If you have weaknesses, try to overcome them, and if you fail, try again; and if you then fail, keep trying, for God is merciful to His children.

SALVATION

I have learned the lesson that nothing on earth would be a greater failure to me than to fail to keep my family in the Church. They were God's children before they were mine, and I think the Lord will look after their interests and save them in His own due time. If Golden Kimball can't be saved in the flesh, after all the struggles and efforts he has made—and I have made a few sacrifices—then I believe God will save him on the other side. And it may be that his earthly father will come to his rescue, and lift up his voice to God in behalf of his child and plead for his salvation. It may take a hundred years to save me, but if I get through in a thousand years it will be a most profitable investment.

207I have no fancied notions; I have gotten rid of tradition, and of a few false ideas that rested upon me. I do not expect to become a God, right away. No, it will take a long time; I am too ignorant. When I stand before my Maker, in the other world, I will be like some of those poor elders who have been laboring in missions; I will speak with a stammering tongue, and God will look upon me, no doubt, as a child, mediocre in intelligence compared with those who have preceded me.

207I pray the Lord to bless you. Amen.
