Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

207TALK FIFTEEN

208April, 1908

INTELLIGENCE IN PREACHING

I have been in California for a few weeks and I tell you I am in sympathy with Elder Robinson, and my heart goes out to the elders. If I had been called upon in Ocean Park to stand before the intelligent class of people there, I don't know what I would have said. We need intelligence, and pure knowledge, to preach the Gospel to the nations of the earth.

HATS OFF TO PIONEERS

This work is true. The character of this people is a marvel to me and it has a pathetic side to it. I have traveled among this people from Mexico to Canada, and I know whereof I speak. I say to the young and rising generation: I am willing to take off my hat to these horny-handed, white-headed, broken-down men who have made it possible for us to exist in this mountain country. I say, God bless these aged men.

If you want examples, any object lessons, go down to Saint George and see what it has cost to settle that country. It is a number of years since I was there, but I found ninety widows. Some of the best men in the whole earth have died to make that country habitable.

209Then I would like to take you on a trip down to Arizona, in the St. Johns country. I preached faith there once, but I want to tell you I haven't got enough faith to stay in such an undesirable country. You talk about good people; you talk about righteous people; I tell you there are people in this city who are not worthy to unlatch their shoestrings. That hard country, and their obedience to the Priesthood of God, has made those men great characters. You can't discourage them. They will build a dam across the Colorado River every five years, if it washes out the next day. That is their country; there, they worship God. Then you go up into the Big Horn country, then up into Canada, and then think what it has cost to make this country what it is.

209But, every time some of us weak-kneed young fellows encounter a difficulty we break for the woods, and we give up our rights and sell them for a little pottage. I tell you that the Almighty is not pleased with some of the rising generation. They stick up their noses at these homely men. It is such homely men and women of character who have made this country, and this Church, what it is today, and I say, God bless them.

TRANSGRESSORS MISERABLE

Brethren, I want to call your attention to one thing: I am a sort of transgressor. My father died when I was fifteen years old. I have not committed any crimes, but there are some things in my history that I regret. Environment has a great deal to do with a man, and men who have colonized these outlying districts do not look upon some habits as seriously as men who have never indulged in them; if they did, it would be an injustice to themselves. You never saw a man in your life do a wrong thing who was happy over it. You never saw men violate a commandment of God and feel jubilant over it, for when they get the Spirit of the Lord they feel miserable about that transgression.

SPIRIT OF REPENTANCE

I say to you Latter-day Saints, and I say it to myself: I have preached this Gospel for fifteen years, and I now understand the doctrine of repentance. A man can't repent simply because an apostle tells him to repent; he can't do it until he gets the spirit of repentance, which is a gift from God; and some of us don't get it very quickly. Some of us don't get the spirit of repentance and see things right until our hair is gray.

SALVATION COSTS ITS PRICE

Brethren, let us be tolerant; let us be kind and considerate. It is the proper thing to despise sin and wickedness; but I think it is wrong to despise the man that has a weakness and make him feel that he is good for nothing, and that there is not much chance for him. I think I can safely say to you Latter-day Saints: You will all be saved, every one of you; the only difference will be this, some will be saved sooner than others. Every man that has transgressed and done wrong must pay the penalty of his transgression, for salvation costs something, and you have to pay the price or you don't get it.

211Now, brethren, let us be kind and considerate to one another.

211The Lord bless you. Amen.
