Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

211TALK SIXTEEN

212April, 1909

JOSEPH A TRUE PROPHET

I have read about the Prophet Joseph Smith. I have the story of the Prophet, and it is a wonderful story for a boy to tell. About those two personages that came to him, also John the Baptist, Peter, James and John. To me, it is very wonderful. Do you believe it? If that is not true, Joseph Smith was the biggest fraud that ever came to a people on earth. There has never been a more sacrilegious thing uttered by man, if it is not true. Now, I say, do you believe it? Do I believe it? I believe everything that has been revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith. If any principle that has been revealed to the Prophet is not true, then it is all wrong, as far as I am concerned. There is no use of mincing over it. Every Latter-day Saint in the Church should receive every truth, or else none of it. I believe it all. I believe every word of it.

I believe all that God has revealed, as fast as I can understand and comprehend it; and I believe that God will reveal many great and important things. I am not sure if we will be prepared to receive all or not. Joseph Smith said the Lord had revealed things to him for which, if he had repeated them to the people they would have taken his life. It is a good thing he didn't; we have more truths and doctrine than we now live up to.

REPENTANCE

"We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men." I accept that with all my heart. A man must be honest, and he must be true, and he must be chaste and benevolent, virtuous, and continue doing good to all men. What can God do for a man who is not honest? You may baptize him every fifteen minutes, but if he does not repent, he will come up out of the water just as dishonest as ever. What can God do for a liar who refuses to repent? Can the Lord save him? He can't claim salvation. Baptizing him in water will not settle the trouble, unless you keep him under. [Laughter]

What can the Lord do with people who are not virtuous, unless they repent? You cannot change the laws of the Lord. Men may deceive men; they may deceive apostles; they may deceive the President of the Church; they may even get into the temple, but that would not make them virtuous. You may confer the Holy Ghost upon them by the laying on of hands, but the Holy Ghost does not remain with the unrepentant; it will not remain in an unclean tabernacle. To deceive men is easy, but I want to tell you in the name of Israel's God, and this thought should be burned into the souls of our sons and daughters, that unless they repent of all their sins and cease immoral practices, they cannot remain in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Holy Ghost will not stay with them; they will not have the testimony of Jesus. This doctrine is true.

INTOLERANCE

I have tried to be generous in my sentiments, and be on the right side. I have tried to be tolerant, not intolerant. I have tried to respect men's opinions, for I have discovered that we do not always see things alike. We may, as far as the Gospel is concerned, but we are a long way from it in other things. In temporal things we do not sufficiently respect each other's opinions. Are we going to sit in judgment upon men? I am not in favor of it. I am not in sympathy with men who are intolerant; I am afraid of them.

214Now, brethren, let us repent if we have got any bitterness in our hearts toward each other—let us be generous, and forgiving. No man has any influence or power for good when angry. It is "amen to the priesthood and the authority of that man when he uses unrighteous dominion," etc. It doesn't matter who he is. When a man has the Holy Ghost his heart is full of meekness; it is full of love unfeigned. He loves the souls of the children of men and he realizes how precious they are in the sight of God. May we as Latter-day Saints enjoy the fulness of the Holy Spirit, I ask it in the name of Jesus. Amen.
