Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

214TALK SEVENTEEN

215October, 1909

TEMPORAL SALVATION

Now, I want to confess to the people that I have been thinking along certain lines, and I came to the conclusion that if I were called upon, I would speak upon the temporal salvation of this people. Some of us—I plead guilty—have sold our inheritances for a "mess of pottage"; and in doing so we are without excuse, for we were warned by the servants of the Lord to hold secure our inheritances, as we were only stewards over the same.

A MIGHTY PEOPLE

I will now read something I have copied. On August 5th, 1842, the Prophet Joseph Smith prophesied that the Saints would continue to suffer much affliction and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains; some would apostatize; others would be put to death by their persecutors or lose their lives in consequence of exposure or disease; but, he said, "Some of you will live to go and assist in making settlements and building cities and will see the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains."

They had not been here very long before the gold fever broke out in California, and some of our people were tinctured very badly with the spirit of money getting. Now, listen to what President Brigham Young said—it was his admonition to the Saints who desired to go to California: "The true use of gold is for paving streets, covering houses and making culinary dishes. When the Saints shall have preached the Gospel, raised grain and built cities enough the Lord will open up the way for a supply of gold to the satisfaction of the people."

216I am very glad that the Prophet Brigham Young emphasized the true use of gold and silver. I have heard it preached hundreds of times—the effects of speculation among this people; that it would tend to break them up and lead them from raising grain, building cities, and making preparation for the tens of thousands of people who will desire to come to these mountains for safety.

LOSING OUR HERITAGE

We have our own people scattered all over the world, and which of you has land to divide among them? Are we properly supplied with grain? I say to the Latter-day Saints, that we are not doing our duty in regard to temporal affairs. We are not looking after the streams of water; we are not securing titles to land. So it is all over Utah; we are sleeping in our trail, and we are in a sort of Rip Van Winkle condition as to our rights—some of us.

SPECULATION

My brethren and sisters, I am a practical man, and I wish you to know that I have been a pioneer; I know what it costs to make a home. I fought my battles years ago, in as hard a country as has ever been settled by our people. I know it requires ten years of hard labor, and economy, to succeed as a pioneer. I desire it to go down in history to my posterity, that, while I have made a number of failures, I did not fail as a pioneer. When I left that country, I could have bought out a dozen men who had been raised and remained in Salt Lake City; I mean young men who worked behind the counter. But I lost it all through speculation. That is what I want to talk to you about. Speculation—there is nothing more dangerous to the people and to the Church of Latter-day Saints, unless it be immorality and wickedness. I point you back in history to Nauvoo. What did the spirit of speculation do? According to the history, it nearly destroyed the people.

Take Heber C. Kimball's family as an illustration. My father died in 1868. When his administrators divided up the estate there was not a single silver dollar given to any of his children, to my knowledge, but there was some property. Our father selected land on the side hill, among the rocks—he wanted to get away from the center of the city. He owned what is known as the Capitol Hill. He left his children that real estate. There was one lot that was given to my mother's family, and I owned one third of it. I received twenty-five thousand dollars, and I have been sorry twenty-five thousand times that I ever sold it. [Laughter] I am thankful we had sense enough to keep sufficient ground to bury our posterity on. We have paid taxes on it ever since I was fifteen years old, and I still hold it.

218What about the other property? There is now hardly a Kimball to be found on the Capitol Hill—unless it be those that are dead. Some of the Kimballs sold their lots at fifty dollars each; today the same lots are worth four thousand dollars. If Heber C. Kimball's family had kept their inheritance they would all be wealthy now. And what about the families of other pioneers who came here and fought this great battle? Many of their children are in very nearly the same predicament.

218I predict to the Latter-day Saints, as a watchman upon the towers, if you follow that foolish example you will "hew stone and draw water:" You can write that down.

218God bless you. Amen.
