Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

219TALK EIGHTEEN

219April, 1910

219To begin with, I came to this meeting prepared to speak, expecting to speak; and came provided with some information. Having done my part, the rest depends upon the Lord and His Spirit, and the attention that I receive from the people.

SPIRIT OF GOD

They say, we ought to have three kinds of speakers: One on premisement, one on argument, and one on arousement. Now, I have been on "arousement" for a great many years.

219I don't know whether I can interest you or not, but I am going to try, with the help of the Lord. I have a theme. This is something I hardly ever have. I never took a text in my life and stuck to it. This may be an occasion of that kind; but I am willing to say anything the Lord wants me to say, and I don't care what it costs. I have never been afraid of the children of men when I had the Spirit of God. I never was afraid of a mob in the Southern States when I had the Spirit of God, but I was scared pretty nearly to death after the Spirit left. It takes lots of courage to say always what you think. One trouble is, we think things sometimes we ought not to say.

REVELATION

I desire to talk to the people on revelation. The seventies have been studying revelation, and I have condensed the lessons. It is not original; I never read anything that is.

220What is the definition of revelation? "Revelation is the name of that act by which God makes communication to men." How was revelation received in this dispensation? My intention is to compare notes and see how we conform to the old methods of the prophets in receiving revelation. That is, in what manner was revelation received?

220The Prophet Joseph Smith received revelations in every way that the Lord communicates His mind and will to man. Like Moses, he knew the Lord face to face, stood in His very presence and heard His voice, as in the first communication the Lord made to him, usually called the Prophet's First Vision; as also in the vision given in the Kirtland Temple, where he and Oliver Cowdery saw the Lord standing on the breastwork of the pulpit, and heard Him speak to them.

220He received communications from angels, as in the case of Moroni, who revealed to him the Book of Mormon; John the Baptist, who restored the Aaronic Priesthood; and Peter, James and John who restored the Melchizedek Priesthood. Also, the communications from angels, mentioned in what is usually called the Kirtland Temple Visions. See Doc. and Cov. Sec. 110.

221He received communications through the Urim and Thummim, for by that means he translated the Book of Mormon, and received a number of the revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants; among others, sections 3, 6, 10, 11, 12, 14, 16, 17.

221He received divine intelligence by open visions, such as is contained in sections 76, and 107.

221He also received revelations through the inspiration of God operating upon his mind; and, indeed, the larger number of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants were received in this manner.

221Now then, how did they receive them in the days of the Bible? The world is so bitterly opposed to revelation, let us compare notes and we will see that the divers manners in which revelations were given in ancient times, and the various ways in which the prophets in olden times received revelations, agree with the various ways in which God communicated His mind and will to Joseph Smith. I quote the following from the "Annotated Bible," published in 1859:

The divine communications were spoken to the prophets in divers manners: God seems sometimes to have spoken to them in audible voice; occasionally appearing in the human form. At other times He made use of the ministry of angels, or made known His purposes by dreams. But, He most frequently revealed His truth to the prophets by producing that supernatural state of sentient, intellectual, and moral faculties which the scriptures call "Vision." Hence, prophetic annunciations are often called visions, that is, things seen; and the prophets themselves are called seers. Although the visions which the prophets beheld and the predictions of the future which they announced were wholly announced by the divine spirit, yet the form of the communications, the imagery in which it is clothed, the illustrations by which it is cleared up and impressed, the symbols employed to bring it more graphically before the mind—in short, all that may be considered as its garb and dress, depends upon the education, habits, association, feelings and the whole mental, intellectual and spiritual character of the prophet. Hence the style of some is purer, more sententious, more ornate, or more sublime than others.

222Also, the Rev. Joseph Armitage Robinson, D. D., Dean of Westminster and Chaplain of King Edward VII of England, respecting the manner in which the message of the Old Testament was received and communicated to man, said, as late as 1905:

222The message of the Old Testament was not written by the divine hand, nor dictated by an outward compulsion. It was planted in the hearts of men, and made to grow in a fruitful soil. And then they were required to express it in their own language after their natural methods and in accordance with the stage of knowledge which their time had reached. Their human faculties were purified and quickened by the divine Spirit; but they spoke to their time in the language of their time; they spoke a spiritual message, accommodated to the experience of their age, a message of faith in God and of righteousness as demanded by a righteous God.—Quoted from Seventy's Third Year Book, by B. H. Roberts.

JOSEPH SMITH A TRUE PROPHET

I have something I want to call your attention to. If this was the last sermon I would ever preach in the flesh, and the last testimony I would ever bear to this people, it is my desire to tell you what is ingrained in my whole being. I believe Joseph Smith was and is a Prophet of God, and I believe it as fervently and honestly as any man in all Israel. I may not have received the revelation and inspiration others have, but I have the testimony of its truth in every fiber of my being.

223Joseph Smith had revelations, and they are written and received by the Church. My testimony is that they are true. I have witnessed the fulfillment of many of them. I do not know how I could get a better testimony.

BRIGHAM YOUNG A BUILDER

But President Joseph Smith is dead, and Brother Brigham Young was his successor, and I have the same testimony as to him. I knew him from the time I was a small child, and I testify of his greatness and of his bigness. He was a different man from the Prophet Joseph Smith, who was the great architect of this work under the Almighty. Brother Brigham Young was a great builder, and he builded well and firmly, and as a Prophet of the Lord he continued where the Prophet Joseph ended. One reason why Brother Young was so great was that he had great men beside him, he had men who were tried as gold seven times, who never faltered or fell by the wayside; they held up his hands, no matter how much their hearts were tried. That is my testimony, and I knew nearly every one of them. President Brigham Young is also dead.

PRESIDENT TAYLOR

Then comes President Taylor, a most magnificent specimen of manhood, a man of God that I always honored. Never was I in his presence that his bigness and majesty did not impress me. His personality was wonderful. The first time I went into his presence was in answer to a call to the Southern States as an ambassador of the Gospel. I never could forget him or the impression that he made upon my soul. But he is dead.

PRESIDENT WILFORD WOODRUFF

Then came President Wilford Woodruff. I have personally stood by the side of that good man. Thank God his time was not so precious that he could not sit by me for a few moments—and when I rose to go, the testimony of the Spirit was the same; he surely was a Prophet of God. He is dead also.

PRESIDENT LORENZO SNOW

Then came President Lorenzo Snow—I have the same Spirit and the same testimony concerning him. No man was ever kinder to Golden Kimball than Lorenzo Snow. He put his arm around me before he died, and said, "I need you, I need your help, God bless you." That is the only time I have ever felt like a full grown man. I felt like I was eight feet tall, that God needed me. I have felt big only once, and that was the time when I thought God needed me in this great work.

PRESIDENT JOSEPH F. SMITH

We now have a living prophet, and his name is Joseph F. Smith. This may be my last discourse on this subject. I am not a man that caters to men; I have no ax to grind. I don't want any place only what God wishes to give me; all I expect is a salvation and possibly it will be a scratch if I get it. When I do get in I have paid the price, and am under obligation to no man on God's green earth, if I pay the Lord the price. My father paid full value, and his election was made sure. If I get the same salvation, I expect to pay the same price. I haven't paid it yet. I am entitled to only a little, and God will give me all that belongs to me.

President Joseph F. Smith is the prophet of this Church, and he is the man who is appointed. When the Lord wants to give this Church a revelation, or give it instructions, He will give it through Joseph F. Smith, the Prophet. He will not give it through me, and He will not give it through an apostle. The apostles are prophets, seers, and revelators, and as such we sustain them. God does not give His revelations through the Twelve for His Church; He gives them through His living prophet that is appointed, as the Prophet Joseph Smith was. I am satisfied I have got this thing figured out about right.

226In conclusion, there are a lot of things that we are troubled over. I have spent a few sleepless nights myself, regarding the doings and actions of men who were in authority, but have concluded I am not responsible for anything I may regard as irregularities. I must not lift up my "heel against the anointed and say they have sinned when they have not sinned before the Lord." If the Lord cannot care for His Church, what can I do?

226I am going to trust in the Lord, and I am going to trust in His Prophet, Joseph F. Smith. You look all over Israel. I have looked over it, and I know it from Canada to Mexico. We are God's people. Brother Joseph F. Smith is the biggest man in the Church today, and there is not a man in all Israel that has the record he has—a cleaner, a sweeter, a better record. He is the President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and God knows he has earned the place, and the Lord has preserved his life for the appointment.

APPOINTMENTS NOT ENOUGH

I have learned that appointment does not give a man knowledge. My calling gave me no knowledge at the time I was chosen and ordained one of the First Council of Seventy, but it gave me an appointment, opportunities, and many privileges. I have gained knowledge and information just the same as you have got yours. I have an appointment that you have not got, and anyone of you had better not try to get into my shoes; if you do, I will kick you out. [Laughter] Neither am I going to try to get in an apostle's shoes. I am going to let the apostles alone, further than to try to sustain them. As I said once, I say again to all Israel: If the Lord, through His servants, the prophets, places a child in the apostleship, with the help of God I will try to sustain him, if I can. Therefore, O Israel, we must sustain the living prophets. The dead we honor, but the living are chosen, ordained, appointed and sustained, and it is to the living we look for counsel, reproof, and instruction. The Lord bless you. Amen.
