Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

TALK NINETEEN

228October, 1910

PATIENCE OF THE LORD

In thinking about the mission of our Savior, I desire to give a little evidence for my faith in God the Father and in His Son, Jesus Christ.

228I love the Lord because of His great patience. When I think of His patience in creating this world in which we live, which they claim took six thousand years, that of itself appeals to me. When I think of the patience of the Father and His Son with me, one of His children; how, through His providence, His care and protection, and the whisperings of the Holy Spirit, that I have been able to do as well as I have, I feel to thank Him for His kindness unto me. Sometimes I marvel that I have done as well as I have.

The Lord is very patient with His people, with His children. I often think of the time when I was in the South, laboring as an elder in Virginia. The president of the conference in which I was appointed was called into Colorado to continue teaching the people. He shed tears, because he wanted to stay in the Southern States Mission, and "bind up the law and seal up the testimony"; he wanted to condemn all the people and close up the mission so the end would come. That was in 1883. We have had a great many elders who would have closed our missionary labors, as far as the world was concerned, but the Lord is not so short-sighted and impatient; He has all eternity, and He proposes to save His children, "excepting the sons of perdition." Some of us become very impatient with each other because we fancy we are better than others, and we become angry with our fellow-men because they will not do as well as we do.

229I love the Lord because He causes it to rain upon the just and the unjust, because the sun shines for them as brightly as it does for any of His children. And while He is just, He is merciful.

229I thank God the Eternal Father that up to the present I have had the spirit of repentance, and while it has kept me pretty busy repenting, I hope I will always have that spirit. If it were not for repentance and forgiveness, I would become discouraged and discontinue my labors.

OUR SAVIOR

I am going to read to you a little that has been culled from the Bible as to the mission of Christ. I would quote it, but I never dare quote scripture, for after I get through quoting you wouldn't recognize it. [Laughter] I am a little like father, when he used to quote scripture, he would say, "Well, if that isn't in the Bible, it ought to be in it." [Laughter] So it is not safe for me to quote. Speaking of the mission of our Savior:

230Is He not that Mighty Prophet that should come unto the world?

230At His birth the air was filled with angels and over Whose couch hung a celestial star.

230Before Whose infant feet the three wisest men of the world, representing the family of mankind, bowed in adoration and worshiped, as to God.

230This is He whom John the Baptist proclaimed the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world.

230At Whose baptism the heavens were opened above His head, and the Spirit of God descended upon Him in the form of a dove, while the voice of the Lord, like the voice of many thunders, proclaimed from the clouds, "This is my beloved son."

230At Whose words the tempest became still, the billowy waves placid, the winds hushed. Who healed the sick and leprous by a word; Who by a look reanimated the lifeless limb of the paralytic; raised the daughter of Jairus; healed the Centurion's servant; restored to life the son of Nain; cast out a legion of devils out of Beor, the Levite; restored the deaf and dumb; gave also to His apostles the same power to do miracles. Feeds at one time four thousand men, and at another time five thousand from a few pounds of bread or a few fishes which a lad could carry in a basket.

230Moses and Elias came from the regions of the blessed and held communion with the Savior.

230Who calls forth, from the tomb of corruption, Lazarus to life and health.

230Who, when praying, was answered by a voice from heaven in the hearing of many people. "I have glorified my name, and will glorify it again."

Was it not the Savior, at whose trial nothing could be found against Him and Who, when delivered to execution by Pilate to save himself and appease the Jews, was publicly declared to be an innocent man by the Procurator, who in calling for water and washing his hands and saying that he was clear of His blood for he found no fault in Him.

231Who was He, at whose crucifixion the heavens grew black as sackcloth, the sun withdrew its light, the stars shot from their spheres; the lightning leaped along the earth, the earth itself quaked, and the dead sprang from their graves.

231Who, on the third day, burst the bars of the tomb, received as He walked forth the homage of an archangel; Who appeared alive to His mother, to the women of Galilee, to Mary, Martha, and Lazarus, and to the apostles. Does not this prove Him the Christ, the Son of the living God?

231That to me is evidence, preponderous evidence; it satisfies me but as J. B. Holland said, in one of his writings:

231Better have faith in a fable which inspires to good deeds, conducts our powers to noble ends, makes us loving, gentle, and heroic, eradicates our selfishness, establishes within us the principle of benevolence and enables us to meet death with equanimity, if not with triumph in the hope of a glorious resurrection and a happy immortality, than the skepticism of kingly reason, which only needs to be carried to its legitimate issues to bestialize the human race and drape the earth in the blackness of Tartarus.

CLEAN HEARTS OF THIS PEOPLE

My brethren and sisters, I believe in this work. I believe in the Prophet Joseph Smith. I want to sustain the Priesthood of God. I love the people, and I say, God save the people. When I look over this body of men, I do not discover that you are very distinguished in appearance. Why, you are no better looking than I am, and I look pretty bad. [Laughter] I am only a remnant of what I ought to be. I am not very well groomed, and I do not look distinguished; neither do you. [Laughter] You can't boast very much about your appearance. We are a hard-working people, and we would not take a very good picture, unless you take the better side of us. But I tell you, in the name of the Lord, we have got clean hearts; we love the Lord; we love truthfulness; we desire to be honest, truthful, and virtuous. You can't judge us by our appearance. If you knew the hearts of this people, there would not be the bitterness there is against the Latter-day Saints.

LOYALTY AND INTEGRITY TO CHURCH

I pray the Lord to bless you. With all of my weakness, with all of my difficulties, I would like to see the color of the man's hair, and I would like to look into the eyes of the man that questions my loyalty and integrity to this Church. You may have to be patient and long-suffering with J. Golden Kimball, but don't you question my integrity. I think I have given some evidence of my faith, loyalty, and integrity. I learned it by being a stranger in a strange country. I learned it by traveling without purse or scrip, and I want to tell you, in the name of Israel's God, the Lord is amply able to provide for His servants. You do not have to "trust in the arm of flesh." The Lord has answered my prayers; He has opened up the way before me; He has raised up friends upon the right hand and upon the left. That is how I secured my knowledge and information. I know, just as well as I ever expect to know (until I see with my eyes) that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph is a Prophet of God, and that this is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I sustain the Church. I support as best I know how the Presidency of this Church, the Council of the Twelve, and the general authorities of the Church. The Lord bless you. Amen.
