Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

TALK TWENTY

234April, 1911

SALVATION

Now, why should we not have faith in God the Father and in Jesus Christ? We all have an equal chance; He is no respecter of persons; He is a God of truth. We never need be in doubt about those matters. I think some of us are mistaken; I think we have gone off wrong; I think that we expect salvation without doing very much to get it.

234It is all in vain for men to think that they merely need to have faith, and repent, and be baptized, and receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, and then their salvation is made sure. There never was a greater mistake. "It is in vain for persons to fancy to themselves that they are heirs with those, or can be heirs with those, who have offered their all in sacrifice, and by this means obtained faith in God, and favor with Him, so as to obtain eternal life, unless they, in like manner, offer unto Him the same sacrifice, and through that offering obtain the knowledge that they are accepted of Him."

For a man to lay down his all (his character and reputation, his honor, and applause, his good name among men, his houses, his lands, his brothers and sisters, his wife and children, and even his own life, counting all things but filth and dross for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ) requires more than mere belief that he is doing the will of God. It calls for an actual knowledge, does it not, Latter-day Saints? A man who gets off on this is in a very sad condition.

LUKEWARM MEMBERS

Some of us know how a man feels who hasn't that spirit—one who has become careless and indifferent. The Lord knows if there is any one I sympathize with it is a man who is not doing his duty, and who is a member of this Church, because I know how he feels. I am going to tell you how he feels, because I know whereof I speak. I have been in that place, in the history of life.

A man who considers his religion a slavery has not begun to comprehend the real nature of religion. To such men, religion is a life of crosses and mortifications. They find their duty unpleasant and onerous. It is to them a law of restraint and constraint. They are constantly oppressed with what they denominate a "sense of duty." It torments them with a consciousness of their inefficiency and with a multiplied perplexing doubt of the genuineness of their religious experiences. They feel themselves enchained within the bounds of a religious system. That is the feeling of every man who is careless, and every man who is indifferent. Are they happy in that condition? I say no; only those are happy who are doing their duty.

LOVE CHRIST

The question is, do we really love Christ? That is the whole question. I am made to feel more and more that the religion of the Latter-day Saints is to be tested in this generation. Our fathers died for the faith, and so with our mothers, and we are living on the faith of our fathers and mothers—a great many of us. We have never made the sacrifice, and we are unwilling to prepare ourselves for it.

236Now, brethren, I plead for fraternity; I plead for love of each other. If we can't find friends among the Latter-day Saints, and those who will speak a good word for us, even when we are "unwise," without putting in those infernal expressions, "Yes, he is a good man, but if—" I wish to the Lord you would leave those things out. I repeat, if we can't find friends among our own people where can we expect to find them? The Lord bless you. Amen.
