Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

236TALK TWENTY-ONE

237October, 1912

GIVE US MEN LIKE OUR FATHERS

If I were to put up an appeal to the Lord for the present generation, I would say, "Give us men, men like our fathers, and women like our mothers, men and women who had faith in God, whose religion was love and sacrifice, and who were willing to lay down everything for God." They were men who were clean, who were pure, who were courageous, and who were not afraid to do right when they knew it was right. Now, that is the kind of men we want. That is the kind of men we hope that our children will be.

HumorKimball, J. Golden237HALF-WAY MEN

But, there is another class of men, I call them half-way men; I pray God I may never be found among them. I would rather be dead than to be numbered among half-way men, persons who have plaster-cast expressions on their faces and are without hearts, without souls, without love and bigness. They are the hypocritical class, such as were found among men when Jesus was on the earth. They have the presumption and nerve to want everything on earth as a reward for their assumed generosity. They call it alms-giving or helping the poor; some call it religion, but that is a misnomer.

238That kind of people are a spineless class, selfrighteous, intolerant, and the cause of endless mischief. They never fight in the open. They are demagogues and place hunters. They are perched upon every anthill, croaking out their stump speeches for this or for that man to hold office. They never give it a thought whether such a man will do good for the people or not. They are parasites who feed and fatten upon the people. "They want us to beat in the brush while they bag the game." Some of this is not original, but it is mighty good. [Laughter] When it comes to self-sacrifice, fighting for the truth, they are like the dying man who was asked by the minister, "Will you denounce the devil and all his workings?" The dying man looked up in a feeble and distressed way and said, "Please don't ask me to do that. I am going to a strange country, and I don't want to make any enemies." [Laughter]

HumorKimball, J. GoldenFOR OR AGAINST GOD

"Rock-a-bye baby in the tree top" won't work out our problems. There is no use crying, "All is well in Zion," because it is not true. The question is, who is for God and who is against Him? This puts me in mind of another story. In the midst of an election in Denver, a little girl sat in a church with her suffragette mother, listening to a minister who was preaching with much earnestness and emphatic gestures. When he had finished, the little girl turned to her mother and asked: "Mother, was he for or against God?"

MORMONS A VALUABLE HERITAGE

The Mormon people are a valuable heritage to the race. We have had physical vigor, which must be one of the foundations for the mental strength of any lasting race of people. Our lives have been ruled by high impulses. There is only a generation or two between us and our pioneer fathers and mothers. It is physically impossible for this type of man to be produced in any other way than by developing the possibilities of this splendidly endowed earth. Buckskin men are not developed indoors. We cannot evolve men like Washington, Boone, George Rogers, David Crockett, Joseph Smith the Prophet, Brigham Young, or the other pioneers, under the present environment and educational system. Some one said, "We run our children through a course of education covering from eight to twelve years, then they are turned loose and called educated."

BONDAGE OF LUXURY

Now, my brethren and sisters, with the help of the Lord let us endeavor to uplift the present generation, that they may have breathed into them the spirit of their forefathers, that they may have courage to resist evil, live a better and cleaner life, find out what is right and then stay with it. Unless this generation will get the spirit of our forefathers, what can God do to preserve the Constitution? Unless the children of this nation rise up and get away from the bondage and serfdom of luxury, of ease, of comfort—you can't evolve true men with that kind of environment—it can't be done. That is the appeal I make to the present generation.

YELLOW STREAK

I tell you, God can do nothing with a half-way man. You never saw one of them in your life that gave evidence of a yellow streak in him that ever amounted to anything. I sent one of my sons to do a certain thing. He did not get what he went after, but he held up his colors and fought to a finish. There never has been a time in my life when I was so proud of my boy; he did not show the yellow streak. That is the way I feel towards the Kingdom of God.

TESTED MEN

I don't know of a man in all the world that I could sustain easier than the man who has fought his way up these mountains and over the valleys, through hardships, sufferings, and privations, like the President of this Church has. If any man on this earth has a right to his position today, and has earned it, he is the man, and there are others with him.

241I was conversing with a prominent stranger yesterday, and he told me he was prejudiced when he came here, and I said: "I wish you had known our leading men. I wish you had been acquainted with Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball; you would have liked them." He said, "Do you think so?" I replied, "I know you would or else you are not a man like I am." [Laughter]

241I pray God to bless you, my brethren and sisters. I may be near the finish of my labor, but let it come and let come weal or woe, life or death; if God will give me His Spirit, and I retain the courage of my convictions; I will be true to God and defend the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Lord bless you. Amen.
