Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

241TALK TWENTY-TWO

242April, 1913

FAMILY RESPONSIBILITY

There is a great responsibility resting upon us fathers, and upon the mothers, and I do not think there has ever been a time in my life when I have felt the responsibility to be so weighty and great upon me in all my labors in the Church as it is at the present time with my own family. They are not many in number. But there are enough of them, and about all I can handle.

242I think you will find somewhere in the Old Testament that "the fathers have eaten a sour grape and the children's teeth are set on edge." I have to confess to you that I have eaten some sour grapes in my day, and there is a problem regarding my children. And while I am interested in my children and family, I have similar interest for your children and families. I will read some scripture that I thought of today. I have heard it many times; it is found in Matthew, 8th chapter and 11th and 12th verses:

242And I say unto you, that many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven.

242But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

PARENTAGE AND SALVATION

I am very proud of my parentage. I do not think any one appreciates his parentage more than I do. But, I want to say to the Latter-day Saints that pride in parentage won't save you. If we get salvation, we must keep the commandments, and serve the Lord. Knowledge pertaining to the Gospel of Jesus Christ does not come through ordination, nor by appointment, nor by lineage, nor through father and mother, though they are helpful. But no matter who my father and mother were, or how devoted and faithful they have been; no matter how much work they have accomplished, and how much Gospel they have preached to the children of men; I tell you if Heber C. Kimball's children are saved in the Kingdom they must keep the commandments of God, or they won't be saved. If they don't accomplish it here, I am glad to know they will have another chance.

LAXITY TOWARD CHILDREN

I don't want to be radical, but I think we are in great danger; I think it is wrong for us to sit down quietly and feel satisfied that "All is well in Zion," that our children and children's children are not in constant danger. There was a time in the peaceful valleys of these mountains when we were as one great patriarchal family, when it seemed practically safe for our children to run hither and thither, when it was just as safe in this great city of Salt Lake as it is in your distant country places to leave your doors open. I was born right up here on the hill and have known this city all my life; it is not safe anymore.

244There are no people, I think, in the known world, where there is more laxity and freedom given to the children than there is among the Latter-day Saints. I want to warn the people that there is great danger on every hand. I would just as soon think of putting my daughters in a den of lions as to send them to Salt Lake without some one to look after them. When I say that, I am not saying anything against the people of Salt Lake. I am not saying there is not as good a class of people in Salt Lake, as good Latter-day Saints, and as pure a lot of people as can be found in the world. But, I tell you there is no longer safety for your children, if you don't look after them, I don't care who you are, apostle, or prophet, evangelist, pastor, or teacher. The responsibility rests upon us to look after our children, and I appreciate the responsibility.

TEACH CHILDREN GOOD PRINCIPLES

My heart has not been broken yet over my children, but I realize the danger; and whenever one of my boys goes away I am concerned; I am full of anxiety, I have little peace or rest of body. All in the world I can do with my boy, my oldest boy, who is away now at work, because I cannot get him work here—and that is a responsibility resting upon us, to provide employment here for our boys and girls, so that we won't have to send them away off; we should regard that as a part of our religion;—all in the world I can do for my boy is to teach him good principles. I do a great deal of writing. And I just put a little good counsel in here and there, and hope he will catch it, and get his feet anchored, and realize the danger that menaces him on every side.

PRIVATE WORSHIP

I believe in public worship; it is part of our religion; it is part of the revelation to this people that they shall attend to their public worship. But I don't believe that public worship is the only worship acceptable to our Heavenly Father. It is along that line I would like to talk to you a few moments, that is, about private worship.

Jesus lays great stress on private devotion. "When thou prayest," says our Master, "enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret." The reason this thought has come to me is because of my own household. It is not because I am intending to criticize your home, or render judgment as to the way in which you manage your household, but because I have a household of my own. The question is as to private devotion. Now, Isaac's closet was a field, David's closet was his bed chamber, the Lord's closet was the mountain, Peter's closet was the house-top. Now, the question is, can God be nearer to us while we are praying in solitude than when praying in congregations? Do we need to go to church to find God?

PRAYER IS NECESSARY

Some say, why is prayer necessary, since God presumably knows, without being told, the wishes of all men? God assuredly does know the wishes in the hearts of all men. Is not the impulse to pray a natural one, springing from love for the Lord? And is that impulse given to all of God's children? Yes, if the person loves the Lord he will have a great desire to communicate with Him. But if this love is lacking, is it not almost useless to force it?

PRAY FROM THE HEART

Now, there is the question. I am trying to get my children to pray. When I was a boy, my father did most of the praying in the home, and when I got to manhood I did not know just how or what to pray for. In fact, I did not know very much about the Lord, because my father died when I was fifteen years old. But I can remember how he prayed, and I have been sorry, many times, that I can't pray like my father did; for he seemed on those occasions to be in personal communication with God. There seemed to be a friendliness between my father and God, and when you heard him pray you would actually think the Lord was right there, and that father was talking to Him.

247Can you pray that way? Are you on friendly terms with the Lord? I don't mean that we should get too friendly and try to take advantage, like children do with parents, but that we should manifest reverence and love for the Lord, asking only for what we need, and not for what we want. I think if you will just ask the Lord for what you need each day, and you will believe that the Lord is near and can answer your prayers, then there may be friendship between you and God. Well, then, learn to love the Lord.

LOVE FOR THE LORD

But, how is this love to be cultivated? Now, there is the question, can we sit down and teach our children? How are you going to cultivate love for the Lord? In other words, how is this love to be obtained?

247If you cannot understand what God has done for you, and you cannot learn to love God; then you cannot pray to Him. I may be wrong in stating that you can't pray. You might practice until you can, but you don't feel satisfied after you have got through praying, and you don't feel like your prayers have ascended to the Father, because your prayers are not built on love and gratitude.

Now, how are you going to cultivate love for God? You don't know much about Him. He has not communicated much to you. Perhaps some of our children have never had a prayer answered. We must study, think, reason, try to comprehend the goodness and the wisdom of God, and the knowledge you obtain will help you to appreciate what God has done. You cannot then fail to love Him, if you can only get impressed with what God has done for you.

GOD SHOWS NO FAVORITISM

I love God for one thing, if nothing else: That He gives to every one of His children, black or white, bond or free, an equal chance. I like equality of opportunity, and whenever parents make a favorite of a child, I feel sorry for the favorite. If you want to destroy your family, show favoritism, and do not give every child an equal chance. We parents have got to learn that lesson. Not to favor the child because we love it, but favor each and every child alike; that is a sacred obligation. God does that with all of His children, and if there is any disadvantage or any wrong, we do it against each other—God does not do it.

SIMPLE PRAYERS

Prayer can be made in a simple, humble manner, without using a multitude of words. A person does not love the Lord just because He created him, or because He has given him health or wealth. Your love may become weakened when illness and sorrow come to you. I hear people pray, "I thank thee, Lord, for health." They ought to be thankful; it is the greatest blessing we can have.

249DO YOU FORGET GOD IN YOUR TRIALS?

249But what do you do when you are sick? Do you forget God? What do you do when you accumulate a little means? I haven't been in poverty all of my life; neither have I been raised with a silver spoon in my mouth. I went out and fought my battles in the North Country. I know what it costs to earn your bread by the sweat of your brow. I was mighty grateful for what I acquired, because I worked for it. I never grafted men for it, but I lost it. Now, have I forgotten God, because I lost it? Is my love and gratitude to God on so small a foundation that just as soon as I lose my health or wealth, I will forget my Maker?

249I have had a little experience along that line, when I went into the South and got poisoned from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet with malaria. I have now got appendicitis on both sides. Am I going to forget God? Am I going to say that God has not been good to me? Why, no; I feel that I have been favored above the whole Kimball race; I have got opportunities and privileges some of them have never had. Am I going to forsake my God? No, I have learned to love Him—not as well as my father loved Him, perhaps, but I am learning to love Him.

Now, what do you love God for? We should love the Lord for justice, for His perfection and mercy, because He manifests His love by giving His children an equal chance in life's labor. We should ask for what we need, and find pleasure and spiritual enjoyment in it.

LEARN TO PRAY

I know that we have got to teach our children to pray. I remember an incident that happened upon the ill-fated Titanic. Those people were in distress on that great ocean—I have never seen the ocean, but I have always been afraid of it. I read about a group of them that climbed onto a raft, some of them rich and wealthy, some of them as good people as ever lived, and they wanted to pray. The band was playing, and the end was about to close upon them. They wanted to offer the Lord's Prayer, but they did not know it; and some one had to lead them, and they followed in saying the Lord's Prayer. They did not know how or what to ask for. They were so frightened, perhaps, and so unaccustomed to pray that they could only repeat the Lord's Prayer, and some one had to lead them. Now, I would like to learn how to pray before I get in such an emergency.

I want to ask you Latter-day Saints if you can have private devotion in the home unless you are agreed and unless you have everything in order? Do you ever try to pray in the morning when the children have only fifteen minutes to get to school? I thank the Lord there is one place where my children are always on time; whether they get their breakfast or not, they get to school. Did you ever know children to lose their breakfast to get to prayers? The father almost needs the patience of Job to get a family together for morning prayer. That is pretty plain talk, but you seem to understand what I mean. I guess you have tried it.

PRIVATE DEVOTION

Don't forget private devotion; learn to pray in your home and get in communication with God, as my father did, right up there on Gordon avenue. In that little bit of room there, my father communicated with God, and God answered him. I have got it in writing. I am a living witness that it has been fulfilled.

GOD COMMUNICATES WITH HIS CHILDREN

I will tell you a story, and then I will quit. Father had men working for him for a good many years, and he had one he called Colonel Smith. It was in the days of hardships and poverty, and men had great difficulty. They employed a great many people, the brethren did; that was a part of their religion. He employed the colonel, who had been a soldier in Great Britain. And on one occasion he went to father for a pair of shoes, and I guess father felt pretty cross, and answered him a little abruptly, perhaps. So the colonel went home feeling bad, and when he prayed that night, he made a complaint to God against father, saying that "Thy servant, Heber," was not treating him right.

252When he came past that little place on Gordon avenue, next morning, father came out and said, "Robert, what did you complain against me for? You come in and get your shoes, and don't do it again?" Now, how did he know that Colonel Robert Smith, who lived away down in the Nineteenth ward, had filed a complaint against him? Don't you think that we can get on friendly terms with God? Not on familiar terms, but friendly terms? I tell you, God will answer your prayers. If there was any one thing I knew better than another, when I was traveling in the South, it was that God answers prayers and softens the hearts of people towards you. May the Lord bless you. Amen.
