Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

252TALK TWENTY-THREE

253April, 1914

CLEAN TOWN CONTEST

I am very thankful this morning, notwithstanding the condition of my physical body, that I have been busily engaged cleaning up my own dooryard. I could not get the boy to do it, so I got busy and did it myself. [Laughter] I am pretty near dead tired as a result of it; but I am grateful for this suggestion to the Latter-day Saints, as to the Clean Town Contest.

In our beautiful Utah, many of the homes and farms are old-fashioned. There is very little intense farming. Some people declare that nearly everybody is slipshod; barns, houses, out-buildings are fast going to ruin. The front yards are weedgrown; the fences down and hid by weeds; no flowers, no lawns, no vegetable gardens, no family orchards, or if there is, the trees are old, sickly, and neglected. The fact is, no more beautiful valley, no better place has God's people ever found. No people have been more greatly favored during the last year as to climate. The past winter has been unexcelled, it has been just lovely. There is no need to go to California, or to the East, North, or South. I have made enquiries, and am posted. As the saying is, we have all countries and climates "skinned to death."

NOT AFRAID OF WORK

What we need is old-time enthusiasm. We should make a strong appeal to the rising generation and get the boys and girls to use their heads, and go to work with their hands. We need practical education, ambition, push. The whole family ought to work, none should be ashamed of work; but all should roll up their sleeves and dig. The key to success is: "We're not afraid of work." There should be no aged father or mother bent with hard work, who could say: "Our boys and girls are educated so much that they go away from the home and farm and forget us." We appeal to their children to give them a lift occasionally. Let the cry go out to all and create a desire among the citizens of our cities and towns to clean up and beautify the old homesteads and surroundings. Some of our homes, outbuildings and fences need whitewashing awfully bad.

BEAUTIFUL HOMES

I visited my mother's home town in Hopewell, New Jersey, in 1884; and I found there was no home, no outbuilding, no fence that was not painted, or whitewashed.

Now, brethren and sisters, wake up and make a good try-out in following this suggestion. No greater blessing can come to this people than a thorough and general cleaning of homes and surroundings.

255The Lord bless you all. Amen.
