Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

260TALK TWENTY-FIVE

261October, 1917

THIRST AFTER RIGHTEOUSNESS

I am not accustomed to speak in audiences out of doors. I have always had them closed in where they could not get away. [Laughter] Brethren and sisters and friends, I want to bless you people, in the name of the Lord; for he surely ought to bless a people who hunger and thirst after righteousness enough to stand up as you have stood and listen to the word of the Lord.

261WHY FEAR DEATH?

Why fear death? That is what I am talking about to myself all the time. People have been looking for it in my case for a considerable length of time, but I have fooled them up to date; and I am trying to learn not to fear death. A great man said when he went down with the ship. "Why fear death? It is the most beautiful adventure of life." He must have been exalted by a spiritual enthusiasm such as elders have when they go out into the world in the service of the Lord. They feel as Christ felt when he said, "Think not of your life, of what you shall eat, or of what you shall drink, or of your body and what you shall put on." I want to say, on the side, that is about all we are thinking about—at least some of us.

SUFFER TO FIND FAITH

My brethren and sisters, the short time I occupy I want to say to you that my knowledge is very limited, and it does not take me very long to tell it; but what I do know, I know as well as any man in this Church from the least to the greatest. Why do I know it? Because I have learned it through the things which I have suffered. We have to suffer sometimes to find things out, until our hearts are twisted, before we are meek and humble and have faith in God.

ON THE LORD'S SIDE

I remember reading a story. The incident happened during the Civil War, when a large committee of Christian ministers came to Washington to wait on President Abraham Lincoln. After they had performed their duties, one of the Christian ministers turned to President Lincoln, and he said, "I hope the Lord is on our side." That is what all these nations are hoping, that the Lord is on their side. And President Lincoln said, "Well, I am not much concerned about the Lord being on our side," which was quite a shock to the ministers. "I am not concerned about that. What I am most concerned about is whether we are on the Lord's side." That is what I want you to be concerned about, you men who hold the holy priesthood; you want to remember, in this great rush and hurry, not to be too much taken up with man's business, but you want to be exercised more about "our Father's business."

BEAUTY OF HUMAN LIFE

I am going to ask you a few questions, and will let you answer them. If you don't know enough to answer them, then you don't know as much as I do. [Laughter] I am going to ask you this question: Do you know of anything—you can think about your money, your wives, and children, and everything else—but do you know of anything in all this beautiful world more important than human life? If you do, just hold up your hands.

SALVATION THE GREATEST GIFT

I am going to ask you another question: Do you know of any gift in all this world, or blessing, that is greater than salvation? No, because God said in the revelation that "salvation is the greatest gift of God to His children." These are reasons why you ought to be in the service of the Lord. That is why these presidents of missions and elders are blessed. And that is why we are able to come home as I did from the South in 1884—and it is one of the greatest truths I ever told in my life, although I never had as hard a time in all my life as I had in the South, and when I think of it now, I actually shudder—and yet I came home to you people and I looked you in the face and I told you it was the happiest time of all my life, and I never lied, either. That is what you get for being in the service of the Lord.

THE LAST DAYS

As a servant of the Lord, I only want to repeat what the servants of God have said: "These are the last days, spoken of by the prophets, when perilous times shall come."

CONSTRUCTIVE LEADERSHIP

There has never been a time such as the present in the history of the world, when men ought to be talking big things, thinking big things, doing big things, and overcoming their selfishness. It is a day of destruction, and leaders must be raised up who are constructive. Constructive work sometimes means destructive—you tear down to build up; you change the old for the new. Leaders must have a knowledge of mankind in order that the Lord's plans may be carried out.

264The German nation is one of the greatest nations today when we consider her social and industrial condition, although it is founded on militarism.

CHURCH A PERFECT ORGANIZATION

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as it has been organized through the Prophet Joseph Smith, is more perfectly organized and greater than any other organization upon the earth.

265When you contemplate this great organization you find prophets and inspiration which is not founded on militarism, but brotherhood, fraternity, and "love-one-another," which is in accordance with the teachings of Jesus Christ. The great test was: "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one for another."

265If you have not love for one another you have not the spirit of the Gospel.

265May the Lord bless you. Amen.
