Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

266TALK TWENTY-SIX

266April, 1918

266This is the first time in twenty-five years of missionary service that I have been honored to preside at a public meeting connected with the Semiannual Conference of the Church, and I would like to preside with a good deal of dignity, and have tried to do so.

WRITTEN DISCOURSES COLD

I am a little nervous when given an opportunity to speak, knowing that what I say will be taken down by a stenographer, and when my discourse is written in cold type, it doesn't read well or sound good to me, as it has but little spirit, and no feeling in it. I am now speaking of my discourses.

NOT UNDERSTOOD BY ALL

My purpose is not to discourse on wonderful things that I have achieved and experienced, but my wish and desire is to reach the hearts of men. I only wish I were better understood; but unless men are of my temperament and see things as I see them with a moving-picture mind, they can not comprehend things in the way I do.

SALVATION

I may not stand blameless before God at the last day, but I am not afraid to meet my God and be judged by the Lord as to my desires, efforts and works. I understand the Gospel of Jesus Christ well enough to know that God is perfect and deals out justice and mercy to His children; Jesus Christ is the door to the sheep-fold, and with all my many imperfections and weaknesses, if I am invited by the Master to come in at the door, all men who try to block my way will get run over and pushed aside.

HAS RESPONDED TO CALL

I do not trust in man, but I honor and respect men who hold the Priesthood of God. I haven't given my life for this work, but have shown forth a willingness to place the little I have on the altar. I haven't been called, nor asked to do anything, that I have not responded to. No appointment has been given me that I have not filled, in my way, and to the best of my ability.

267I can do anything I am set apart to do, if I have the spirit of my appointment and am humble and prayerful.

SPIRIT OF PROPHECY

I know the sick are healed through the laying on of hands, as well as any man in all Israel, as I have witnessed the healing of the sick. I know we have the spirit of prophecy, for I have tried it out, and it works all right, if you get the spirit of prophecy.

TRUST THE LORD

If you can grasp my meaning you will know exactly how I feel towards the Church and the priesthood. The Lord knows I love the Church, her people, and my country, and I have no fear that the Lord cannot overrule and overturn nations and people, until they shall repent and serve him. The Lord has taken care of me, and I have learned to trust Him, as He is a good Master, and He is full of mercy, justice, kindness and love.

JOY OF SAVING A SOUL

Brethren and sisters, this work is true, for I have worked and labored in it until I know of its truth. I am now going to ask you a question: "Do you know of anything in all this great universe that is dearer to the Father than a human soul?" You don't, do you? Of course, you don't, as the Lord said in the Doctrine and Covenants, "And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring save it be one soul unto Me, how great will be your joy with him in the Kingdom of My Father."

ADVERTISE THINGS OF GOD

To be saved in the Kingdom of God is the greatest of all the gifts of God; for there is no gift greater than the gift of salvation. Then "soul hunting" is of far greater importance than spending one's life in money seeking and the accumulation of wealth. I can see that the things of God must be made more interesting than the things of the world, that the things of God must be better advertised than the material things of the world.

BLESS THE CHOIR

I almost forgot the one thing I desired to say, and that is: God bless the choir, the singers and the musicians. I know as well as I know anything that the Lord will bless Brother Evan Stephens; and as a servant of the Lord, I promise him he shall have the Holy Spirit to comfort and console him, and he shall not be lonely or desolate among this people. God bless all these sweet singers he is training. Little do you people know what it costs in time, effort, and study to acquire the art to sing. If we as a people put forth a tithe of the effort they do to sing, in studying the word of God, we would be the most intelligent people in the world. The Lord bless you. Amen.
