Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

269TALK TWENTY-SEVEN

270October, 1918

SPIRIT OF GOD

I often wonder when you do have the Spirit of God. I used to think I had it in the Southern States, when I became excited and sensational, and my face was red, and the cords of my neck swollen—I thought then, in my ignorance, that it was the Holy Ghost. I learned differently afterwards. I am sure that was not the Spirit of God. I have learned since that the Spirit of God gives you joy and peace and patience and long-suffering and gentleness, and you have the spirit of forgiveness and you love the souls of the children of men. I have learned that the Holy Ghost is the spirit of prophecy and the spirit of revelation.

270I think of my father—our father, the father of a great race of people—he prophesied once somewhere on these temple grounds, when the people were in poverty, when they were almost disheartened, and things looked so dark and dreary before them. Heber C. Kimball prophesied that goods would be sold as cheaply in Salt Lake City as in New York. After he sat down, he said to Brigham Young, "Well, Brother Brigham, I have done it now."

270Brother Brigham said, "Never mind, Heber, let it go."

271They did not, either one of them, believe it. [Laughter]

271After the meeting adjourned, Apostle Charles C. Rich, I am told, went up to Heber C. Kimball, and he said, "Heber, I don't believe a word you said."

271Heber said: "Neither do I." [Laughter] But he rounded it out: "But God hath spoken."

271It was not Heber at all; it was God who spoke through Heber as a prophet. A short time after, the prophecy was literally fulfilled.

271So that sometimes, and very often, the servants of God speak by the Spirit of God, but some of the people haven't got the same spirit, and do not believe the servants of God. Now, brethren, I want to express to you this thought, that it is just as necessary for you Latter-day Saints to have the Spirit of God as it is for the apostles and the seventies and the presidents of stakes and the bishops. For when you speak, or when the servants of God speak under the influence of the Holy Spirit, it is the word of God to the Latter-day Saints. I do not care whether you like the mannerism or the crudity of the speaker. That does not make any difference whatever; it is the word of God to you.

TRUE SERVANTS OF GOD

The Lord said, not only to the seventies but to the Priesthood of God: "If you desire to serve God, you are called to the work." I have that desire burning in my heart like a living fire, and so has every other man who holds the Priesthood of God and has the spirit of his appointment. Again, in that same revelation, the Lord tells us what qualifies us for the work. It is not money. What is it? It is faith, hope, charity and love, with an eye single to the glory of God, and any man who holds the Priesthood of God, who has those gifts, is qualified and fitted for the work. All he needs is to be called to the work by those holding divine authority.

GREATEST GIFT IS SALVATION

In conclusion: I have worked in the Church, perhaps not as well as I might have done, but I have staked everything on it. As I told a man one day, I had fifty-two cards in the beginning. I never played cards in my life—only smut. But to illustrate: In the beginning I had fifty-two of them—that is a deck, I think. Some of you seventies are better informed, perhaps, than I, but at the present time I have only one card left. Do you know what I have staked it on? Eternal life; and if I fail in that I have failed in everything. Why? Because "salvation is the greatest gift of God to His children." Of all the gifts and all the blessings that God can give to His children, the "greatest gift is salvation."

HUNDREDFOLD PROMISED SERVANTS OF GOD

If you leave your father and if you leave your mother, your wife and your children, and your flocks and your herds, and all that you have, and go out as a witness for God, He has promised you an hundredfold. All the investments I ever made in my life, except the one of two Liberty Bonds, have been failures. All I got out of them was experience; the other fellow got the money. [Laughter] But this investment we have started for, the Lord has promised us an hundredfold, and I pray God that the Spirit may burn in the hearts of the Priesthood of God that every man shall understand for himself, as I understand for myself, that the Priesthood of God is "inseparably connected with heaven." That is what places us in communication with our God.

PROPHETS OF GOD

I know, as well as I know anything, that this is the Kingdom of God, that this is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God. I have always sustained the Prophets of God, and I never talked with one of the Presidency of the Church that I did not rise to my feet and know that they were Prophets of God. The Lord bless you. Amen.
