Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

278TALK THIRTY

279April, 1921

NOT YET DEAD

My brethren and sisters, I have been hanging on the hook so long during this conference that I am nearly exhausted. I have had some wonderful thoughts, but have waited so long they have nearly all oozed out of me.

279When I came in the Tabernacle yesterday afternoon, I was met by one of my old missionary friends. He said, "Hello, Golden, I thought you were dead." Now, I want to notify my friends (and I have some good friends—I have tested them out; I know them) not to worry about me. When I am dead—and it is an awful job to get there, I have found that out—when I die, I have made arrangements for a brass band. I like the idea of lots of noise and confusion, people inquiring, "Who is that?" "Why, Kimball's dead." Then the people won't worry any more about me.

A MIGHTY GOOD WORLD

My brethren and sisters, I attribute my partial recovery (and I hope I will continue to improve) very largely to the kindness and sympathy of my brethren, the Presidency of the Church, the Council of the Twelve, and the First Council of the Seventy and other friends. I came home last October to attend conference and was taken sick, and remained at home nearly two months. When I got around and thought of my brethren and their kindness and sympathy for me, I want to tell you, brethren, I felt this was a mighty good world. I have repeated hundreds and hundreds of times, while I was sick, the words of Frohman when he went down to his death. He said, "Why fear death? It is the most beautiful adventure of life." I want to tell Frohman I have not got that in me yet. I think this is a pretty good world. I think I am safer here among my brethren who know me, although we have had an awfully hard time getting acquainted.

FAITH TO BE HEALED

Brethren, I have had a pretty lonely time. I have had a pretty hard struggle. I haven't suffered much pain. I have got a pretty good brain, but it has not been big enough to handle my body; I have tried to direct and control my body, but it wouldn't obey. I have been administered to by some of the best men in this Church; no better men ever lived than the men who have administered to me; but I am sorry to say, and ashamed to say, I did not have the faith to be healed. There is not a man in this Church who knows any better than I do that God the Father and Jesus Christ, the Redeemer, are the great Physicians. I have unfaltering, unwavering faith in God the Father and in His Son, Jesus Christ.

281I have got the gift to heal others. I have seen wonderful healings. Few men have seen more, unless they were better men. I have witnessed all kinds of diseases healed, but I could not get the faith to be healed. I failed. I just had enough faith to keep alive—that is all. I talked with President Grant, and I thought climate would help me; I was a little short of faith, so I tried climate for nine months. As I told you, I came back last October sick and I went back again and tried climate again. Now I am on my feet.

SERUM AT FIVE DOLLARS A SHOT

I went to a specialist; I had an X-ray taken of my lungs; I was scared to death he would find something, but I thought I would test him out. My family wanted to know what was the matter. Well, I found one of my batteries somewhat damaged; that is, they told me so. Then he shot me full of serum and full of iron and strychnia, at five dollars a shot. They pretty near broke my heart when I got through with that specialist.

281I did not want to go to him, but to please my family I went. They are very anxious for me to live, for some reason. I hardly know what it is. I have been awfully neglectful of them. My family have been secondary to my work.

ABOUT FAMILIES

I hope the brethren will be awfully careful what they say about families. I hope they will be very tender of men's feelings when they talk about our children and about parents being responsible for their children—that their sins will rest upon them. God knows, I have got all I can carry without packing anyone else. Now you want to be awfully careful and awfully tender of those things, because in the wisdom of God, He will gather our children together. They are God's children. My children are God's children. God is just as much responsible for my children as I am.

282Now, brethren, I want to say to you—I do not know whether you know it or not—there are a lot of things you do not know that you ought to be told—if there are any people who are neglected in the Church of Jesus Christ, it is the families of the leaders of the Church. They go out and tell you how to take care of your families and they are away from home and their families take care of themselves. You want to be careful.

HUNGRY FOR THE WORD OF GOD

Brethren and sisters, when I am satisfied, everybody is satisfied. I can see a hole in a doughnut. I have always grieved over a doughnut. My mother was a doughnut maker. When she showed me those doughnuts, I grieved over the holes. Some of the people say there is no hole in a doughnut, but I never could agree with them. I always see the hole and forget about the doughnut. I think we have some faults and some failings. I have been worried a little. While I have been absent I was afraid that we might get too material. I have been a little afraid of God's people and myself, afraid that we would trust too much in money and forget God, and I came to this conference hungry, hungry for the word of God.

283While in San Francisco, I attended the Latter-day Saint Church on Sundays, I took part in the worship of the people. I have watched those young elders carefully, for over a year, off and on, and have seen them develop and grow and become men. But I was hungry for the words of Ruth. I never quoted them before; maybe I cannot now. She said:

283Whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge; thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God:

283Where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried.

283That expressed my feelings.

WE ARE GOD'S PEOPLE

I have never felt better, I never felt surer, in all of my ministry for over twenty-eight years in this Church, that we are God's people, that God is sustaining President Grant as prophet, seer and revelator. He is sustaining his Counselors and the Twelve Apostles.

PRAY FOR THE AUTHORITIES

By the way, in conclusion, I would like to admonish you people not to pray only for the Presidency and the Twelve, but once in a while pray for the First Council. I don't know of any other council that needs it worse. We need your help, we need your assistance, we need your faith to prepare that great body of seventies to fulfill their appointment in this Church. I know as well as I know that this is my right hand that if you call that body of priesthood to the foreign ministry, they will go. If you will call them and get behind them, I promise you in the name of the Lord they will go. I know it. God bless you. Amen.
