Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

284TALK THIRTY-ONE

285October, 1921

CHERISHED ASSOCIATIONS

Now, brethren and sisters, I shall address you for a short period of time, only a few minutes—although it seems a long time to you, and does to me; certainly it will before I get through. My voice has been heard among this people for nearly thirty years. I think I have been in the ministry here at home for nearly that length of time. I would not give my experience and the association I have had with the brethren of the authorities for all the riches in the world.

TRYING FOR HONEST MIND

I hope, brethren and sisters, that during these thirty years, I have created an impression in your minds—at least I have tried to do that—that I am trying to be honest. I am trying to be truthful. I am trying to be sincere and loyal and unafraid. There is nothing that I desire more, outside of the Spirit of God, the honoring of the priesthood, and the sustaining of this work, than to have an honest mind.

It seems to me during the past few years that the minds of many are warped. We do not think honest; we do not hear straight, nor do we see straight. I am sure, from the experience I have had in the Church, that the Lord can do very little for a man who persists in being dishonest and untruthful. And, of course, it goes without saying that no man or woman in the Church of Jesus Christ can be immoral and have the Spirit of God to be with them.

286I read in the Doctrine and Covenants the message that was given to the elders in early days. The Lord said: "But with some I am not well pleased." Now, what was their trouble? "Because they will not open their mouths, but hide the talent which I have given unto them because of the fear of man. Woe unto such, for mine anger is kindled against them, and it shall come to pass if they are not more faithful unto me it shall be taken away even that which they have."

CHAFF ONLY REMEMBERED

I realize, my brethren and sisters, that during the past thirty years I have said some foolish things. I have, in my own way, given the people a good deal of chaff to get them to take a little wheat, but some of them haven't got sense enough to pick the wheat out from the chaff. If a man in this Church ever does say a foolish thing, they will remember it to the very day of their death; and it is the only thing some of them do remember.

BURN ALL BUT CHURCH WORKS

I found out some things by reading the Doctrine and Covenants—which, by the way, I do read. I am familiar with the Bible a little, and the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price. I have wished, sometimes, that there would be a big fire and burn all the rest of the books so that we would read these books more.

287I don't believe the man lives, unless God inspires him, who can ever breathe into a book what you can get out of the Bible, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price. That is my testimony. Joseph Smith said that a man will live nearer to the Gospel of Christ reading the Book of Mormon than any other book that has ever been written.

THE BEST BIBLE

Now, brethren, I do not want to say anything to hurt anyone's feelings about books that are written. I read the Bible through once, and when I got through I said: "I will never tackle it again in the flesh;" but I have read in it and I am acquainted with it and I have marked it. I would not give my Bible for all the Bibles in the world, because it is the only Bible I can find anything in.

DEBT THE WORST HELL

I believe in all that President Grant said. I preached it years ago, after I went broke, with just as much vehemence as he ever did in his life. I preached until I was almost exhausted. I remember a sermon. I think it was a very wonderful discourse, too. I was up in Smithfield at a conference, and I preached to the people on the subject of debt. I had just been through the mill of the gods, and they ground me to powder. I went "over the hill to the poor house," and I think I was able to tell them a pathetic story; they sold me out, just like they would sell cattle; and yet I was in the missionary field at that. I told my story and told it very plaintively; and there was a salesman at this meeting. I saw him the other day at one of our conference meetings. That made me think of it. He was a salesman of the Co-op Wagon and Machine Company. After I preached my discourse I met this man and he said: "Brother Kimball, that is the best sermon I ever heard. I never sold as many implements in my life as I did after you preached that sermon." Think of it, after I had warned the people and forwarned them, that to be in debt was to be in hell—I don't know much about hell, but that is the worst hell I have ever been in—to be in debt.

LORD BLESSES THOSE WHO TRUST IN HIM—WE FORGET THE LORD

I thought I would like to read some scriptures as a closing of my remarks: I am sure I can make it in two minutes. It is something my father read. In reading from his old Book of Mormon, that was published or printed in 1830, I found this page almost out, and I wondered what it was. This is what I found. It was just such a condition that we are now in. They had had war, and they had had famine, and then they went to the prophet and appealed to the Lord, so that the famine was withdrawn, and it says: "That ended the eighty and fifth year." In thirteen years that people fell down two or three times, and yet they were God's people.

289This is what he said. I want to read it to you and impress you, if I can, with this one thought:

289And thus we can behold how false and also the unsteadiness of the hearts of the children of men; yea, we can see the Lord in His great infinite goodness doth bless and prosper those who put their trust in Him. Yea, and we may see at the very time when He doth prosper His people, yea in the increase of their fields, their flocks and their herds, and in gold, and in silver, and in all manner of precious things of every kind and art; sparing their lives, and delivering them out of the hands of their enemies that they should not declare wars against them; yea, and in fine, doing all things for the welfare and happiness of His people; yea, then is the time.

Now, that strikes me as a strange thing. After God had done all that for his children, and it could not be written any better if it were written of this people, how God had blessed them—"then is the time that they do harden their hearts, and do forget the Lord their God and do trample under their feet the Holy One—yea, and this because of their ease, and their exceedingly great prosperity.

290"And thus we see that except the Lord doth chasten His people with many afflictions, yea, except He doth visit them with death and with terror and with famine and with all manner of pestilence, they will not remember Him."

OUR HEARTS HARDENED AGAINST GOD

We are just like all other children of God in all other dispensations. Notwithstanding the fact that we are a chosen people for a special purpose, our hearts have been hardened and we have forgotten our God—some of us.

THANKFUL FOR BLESSINGS

Now, brethren and sisters, I am glad; I thank my God that He chastened me. I thank God that I have had the love and affection of my brethren. I thank God that I am alive. I know the Gospel is true. I know it because I learned it through adversity and through suffering and through hardships. I never learned it because I was Heber C. Kimball's son—because I was the son of a prophet. I learned it just as he learned it. I may not have paid as big a price as my father did, but I have paid for pretty nearly everything I have. I have paid well for it, but I am satisfied. I sustain the brethren of the authorities, and I uphold their hands. I never felt better in all my ministry in this Church than I do today. I thank God the sun shines. I thank God the grass is green, and the water runs down hill, as it did not for a long while. The Lord bless you. Amen.
