Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

TALK THIRTY-TWO

292October, 1922

JEX FAMILY

Before I say anything else, I have something on my mind I want to get rid of. I call attention to this picture—you cannot see it very well at so long a distance. We have on this platform Brother William Jex. He was a great friend of my father's, and if he could not think of anything else to say he began to talk about Heber C. Kimball. This good man is ninety-two years old. He is a patriarch. He lives in Spanish Fork.

292I read the notation written under the picture he handed me. He did not imagine I would read it. This picture shows "a part of the family"—there is a multitude of Jexes, this picture being only a part of the family "of William and Eliza Jex, taken at the annual family reunion held January 1, 1914." Thirty-eight members of the family then living were not present—could not get them all in!

"William and Eliza Goodson Jex were married in England, February 22, 1854." That is one year after I was born. I am now going to tell you what damage they have done since. They embarked on a vessel bound for America. "The family now consists of the aged couple, eleven children, 115 grandchildren, 151 great grandchildren, and five of the fifth generation, making a total, on October 1, 1921, of 360—including sixty-four who have become members of the family by marriage. Seventy-four of these have died."

293Now comes the climax. "The Jex Family has spent altogether seventy-six years in the foreign missionary service, preaching the gospel, at an expense of seventy thousand dollars of their own means, over and above all their time for which they received no compensation."

293I call that faith and works. It puts me in mind of what my father said in talking in early days about this people. He said: "This people will multiply and increase until we will hardly know where to put them." Father told the Gentiles, "You will never be able to kill them off." Brother Jex has taken part in fulfilling this prophecy.

SICKNESS AND FAITH

It is not my purpose to talk very much. I haven't an outdoor voice. I have been trying to be sick for a couple of years, and I have rather fizzled out at it. I feel a good deal like the story I read the other day. "Some fellow was sitting on the pier that reached out into the ocean—and he fell in, and he holloed, 'Help! help! I can't swim.' And an old fellow was sitting on the pier fishing, and he said: 'Neither can I, but I wouldn't brag about it.'" I don't want to brag about sickness, because it is a kind of disgrace to get sick in this Church and not have faith to be healed.

294I have seen the sick healed under my administration. I have witnessed nearly all kinds of diseases cured. And I will say right here, as far as God is concerned, and Jesus Christ, there is no disease that is incurable if faith is exercised. I know that I have the key, that I hold the priesthood, and there isn't a man in all the world to make me believe that I have not got it.

KEYS OF GOD'S KINGDOM

I feel aroused sometimes and the palms of my hands just itch to take hold of the jawbone of an ass and beat these things into dull men's skulls; I would do it, too, if I only had the jaw-bone. This is what I want to read to you. I want you to think about it. It is nothing new. But I want you to think about it as I have thought about it; for I have read it dozens of times, and that is one big reason I am a member of this Church. If I did not believe what I am going to read, I would quit the Church tomorrow.

294These are the Prophet Joseph Smith's own words of instruction to the apostles, at the last meeting held prior to their leaving on missions. You remember when that was, when they went to England and to other places. He said:

Brethren, I have desired to see the temple built. I will never live to see it, but you will. I have sealed upon your heads all the keys of the Kingdom of God. I have sealed upon you every key, power, principle, that the God of heaven has revealed to me. [You see we received all the keys.] Now, no matter where I may go or what I may do, the Kingdom rests upon you. [See? He fixed that; he knew something about what was going to happen.]

295President Wilford Woodruff, who was one of the most wonderful men I ever knew, was a man who talked to me occasionally; I never arose after a five-minutes' talk that I did not know that he was a Prophet of God. He made these remarks at a Mutual Improvement conference, held June 2, 1889:

295Do you wonder why we, as apostles, could not have understood that the Prophet of God was going to be taken from us? Neither could the apostles in the days of Jesus Christ understand what the Savior meant when he told them, "I am going away; if I do not go away, the Comforter will not come."

295Joseph Smith made these impressive remarks on the same occasion, "Ye apostles of the Lamb of God, my brethren, upon your shoulders this Kingdom rests; you have got to round up your shoulders and bear off this Kingdom. If you do not do it, you will be damned." [And so will the rest of us if we do not do our duty.]

295President Brigham Young said, after the martyrdom of the Prophet, "Thank God, the keys of the Kingdom are here."

295President Wilford Woodruff continued:

The keys of the Kingdom will remain with the Church until the coming of the Son of Man, which means until the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ in the clouds of heaven to reward every man according to his deeds done in the flesh. There have always been manifested among a certain coterie of men a feeling that Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, and others who have been presidents of the Church were not the right men to lead the Church. [President Woodruff made this broad remark:] I say to all Israel, I say it to the whole world, that the God of Israel, who organized this Church and Kingdom, never ordained any president or presidency to lead the Church astray.

296I am glad of that, so that we need not worry about the Church. God knows we have enough other things to worry about. Go home and go to sleep; God will never allow them to lead us astray.

WHY REVELATIONS HAVE CEASED

The question has been asked many times (now I have heard this until I am tired and lame all up the back), "Why it is the apostles who are standing as prophets, seers and revelators do not have revelations?" The answer is given by President Woodruff, and I would like to have this truth soak into you. "I hold in my hand a book of revelations" [meaning the Doctrine and Covenants] "which contains enough revelations to lead this Church into the celestial Kingdom of God."

HumorKimball, J. GoldenAUDIENCE WENT

I am about through. You are the best outstanding crowd I ever talked to in my life. You know how it is; we get people to talk to inside, and lock them in so they can't get out! I remember being up North. I said, "All you people that want to go, go;" and they nearly all went, and I didn't blame them.

297God bless you. Amen.
