Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

297TALK THIRTY-THREE

298April, 1923

BREVITY IN SERMONS

To begin with, if the brethren and sisters desire me to run smoothly and make no breaks, it will be advisable to keep awake until I finish my speech, as it requires exceeding faith to put into practice what you preach, and it calls for much faith to believe what you teach. For me to be my natural self is somewhat dangerous, and to be original would cause the very air to resound with criticism. I fully realize that brevity and "to the point" should be added to the virtues. Horace Greeley used to say that the way to write a good editorial was to write it to the best of your ability, then cut it in two in the middle, and print the last half. I am going to follow this suggestion.

INSPIRATION BY HOLY GHOST

I do not think as a people we have any special use for presidents of stakes or bishops of wards who are not directed by inspiration. Without the guidance of the Holy Spirit we cannot fill our appointment.

SEARCH REVELATIONS

I have been thinking of a subject for a considerable length of time, and I have the idea fixed and fastened in my mind. If we as Latter-day Saints will do our own thinking and search the revelations of the Lord, it will help us out of many of our difficulties.

FAITH IN THE SPIRITUAL

What is in the future? How far can we see ahead of us? Some of us cannot see the length of our noses, but the prophets have warned us of the danger that menaces us. We must be prepared and get our feet planted upon the ground, because we don't know (I don't know) what test is ahead of us. The Gospel of Jesus Christ has had to be preached with tears and beseechings, sufferings, adversity, and persecution from one generation to another. No generation accepted it; because their belief in material power was so dense that they lost faith in the spiritual. We have to talk of the temporal. Temporal things have to be attended to, or we all would starve to death. But we must not place the temporal before the spiritual, for if we do, we can look out for disaster and trouble. No men can save the nation or a people when they get the temporal first and forget the spiritual. I went on a mission for two years, and I came home and I loved everybody, but I hadn't been home long before I partook of the environment.

FEAR OF THE FUTURE—NEED TO FIND GOD

No thinking man or woman can be free from deep forebodings, however optimistic we try to keep ourselves, with this crisis in world history. Fear has crept into the hearts of men. You talk to them, and see for yourselves. I think many of the Latter-day Saints are greatly frightened. You don't know what is going to happen. Time must be close at hand when we shall need a living testimony and knowledge for ourselves that God lives and that Jesus Christ is the Savior of the world. Have we found God? Have we found Him strong enough, so that we are stripped to the skin? Then we cry out: "I will rejoice in God. I will joy in the God of salvation." Elias Kimball and I worked for the Lord, and we gave the very best effort we had while in the Southern States, and when we came back we went over the hill to the poor house. We hadn't a penny left, but we loved God. We had found Him, and I still rejoice in God.

THE LORD WILL BE KIND

I hope the Lord will be kind to me and not leave me to forsake Him. I don't think He will, unless I do wrong, but no one knows how safe he is. My father said that his election had been made sure, and that just before his death an angel appeared to him and told Heber C. Kimball, "Your work is finished." His work was completed, his election was made sure. We don't hear much about that nowadays.

FAITH IN GOD REQUIRES WORK

I pray in your behalf that you will not allow yourselves to be shaken, but if you desire to have faith in God and in this Church you have got to work, and you have got to make sacrifice. And the time will come, just as sure as you live and breathe and have a being, when you will not only say that you are willing to place all upon the altar, but you will do it. I am ready now. I haven't got very much, but everything goes. I will stake my all.

301The Lord bless you. Amen.
