Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

301TALK THIRTY-FOUR

302April, 1924

GUIDANCE BY HOLY SPIRIT

Every man or woman who is called to a position of this kind has a great desire to be guided and influenced by the Holy Spirit. I have had a great deal of experience during my life in a public way, but never at any time did I feel more uncertain and doubtful as to my success in speaking to the people than I do at the present time. I have had all kinds of experiences in talking to people. When I thought I had the Spirit of the Lord, some of the people did not think so. So that you can never tell; and if you say there is such a man living upon the earth, however inspired he may be or however good a man he may be, who can please and satisfy all people, I question whether that man ever lived. I know mighty well I am not such a man.

AROUSE PEOPLE TO CHURCH WORK

I cannot think of a thing that I ever heard that will be new to you; but if you can be awakened and return to your people and arouse them, then this has been a great conference. I had that feeling while I was away. I have not had as much physical force as I desire. I am a little low on vitality. I run out of gasoline every little while.

AUTHORITIES KIND

The authorities have been very kind to me; they have been most considerate, and I feel very appreciative. I have a letter, that I value more than gold and silver, signed by the Presidency of this Church. They closed their letter to me saying: "You have our love, our confidence, and our blessing." I do not know whether I am appreciative—I think I am. The Presidency never will know how much good that did me. Not that I was in doubt, not that I was in uncertainty about the matter, but I love my people and their leaders.

GOD SAVE THE PEOPLE

I always say, God save the people, for if it were not for people, we would not need this great Church. I do not know what God would do if He had no people. I have said it before, and I say it again. I was with an apostle on a trip in the South, and we found a bishop without any people. He wept, and came to the apostle to know what to do. "Well, you will have to stay here until some people come to you." All the people he had was his wife—and anybody that can preside over his wife, I take my hat off to him.

THAT STILL, SMALL VOICE

I found God, God answered my prayers, and God softened the hearts of the people, and they fed me and they gave me a place to lay my head. That is the same Spirit, the same guiding Spirit that our elders have, these young "kid-boys" that you are sending out all over the world. They are blessed and set apart, and that Spirit is with them. I remember when I was presiding over the Southern States Mission, that for two years of that time I brought home two emigrations a year. And when I went to the President's office to report, that great Prophet, the President of the Church, Wilford Woodruff, who was interested in me, said: "Brother Kimball, sit down a minute." We only had a few minutes—it didn't take five minutes. He told me more than once: "Now, Brother Kimball, I have had visions, I have had revelations, I have seen angels, but the greatest of all is that still, small voice." Any elder who has gone out and kept the commandments of God knows he has heard that voice behind him saying: "This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right and when ye turn to the left."

IN THE KEEPING OF THE FATHER

My brethren and sisters, I am not disposed to occupy any more of your time. I love God's people; I am willing to live and die with God's people, come weal or woe, come life or death. I have a prayer that I offer sometimes when I walk by the wayside, and I say: "I now place myself and all my affairs"—I haven't got any affairs, however—"in the kind care and keeping of the Father, with a loving trust, knowing that all things are working for my best good." Like you, I have committed many blunders; like thousands of people, tragedy has come to our home without any fault of ours; but we love our children, and I am now learning to pray: "O God the eternal Father, I thank thee that the children Thou gavest me are Thy children."

305Now the Lord bless you, in the name and through the power of Jesus Christ, Amen.
