Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

311TALK THIRTY-SIX

312April, 1925

WILLING TO SERVE THE LORD

There has never been a time in my life when I felt better spiritually and more willing to do my duty and serve the Lord and labor for His cause and for His interests. I pray God that the time shall never come in my life when I shall fear the face of man. The Lord at one time in the early history of the Church, in a revelation reproved the elders because they would not open their mouths and use the talents which He had given unto them.

NOT ALL ALIKE

I appreciate the fact that we are not all alike. I have not been reared in the same pasture as some men have in this day and generation. Neither do I speak the same language, but I try to make myself understood.

HumorKimball, J. Golden312WHY DO I LIVE?

312I often ask the question, "Why do I live?" That puts me in mind of a story by Eugene Field, that master of tender verse. He tells the story of a young man, an ambitious poet, who sent him a poem, "Why do I live?" And Field immediately answered, "Because you sent your poem by mail."

HealingsKimball, J. GoldenTHE GREATER PHYSICIAN

During the time of my poor health my family were very much concerned. They wanted me to go through a physical examination. Nothing in the world frightens me like a scientific examination. I went to the clinic of the Stanford University, to a young physician of some considerable renown. I passed through an examination—the X-ray, and all that stuff. This young doctor did not believe in God, man or the devil; I found that out. I told him I was a Mormon.

313He said, "You will never get any better."

313I said, "O, yes, I will. I have a greater physician than you are."

313He said, "Who is he?"

313And I said, "The Lord Jesus Christ."

313He said, "There's nothing in it."

313He was drowned last year and I am still alive."

FAITH IN JOSEPH SMITH

Whenever I am called to speak in the Tabernacle, I always put up the danger signal, "Safety first," because I am always in danger.

Now, brethren and sisters, in all solemnity I want to read to you a little. I am sure I will be safe if I stick to the text. I was acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith, only through the testimony of my father. No man in this Church had greater faith, greater respect, and did greater honor to the Prophet of God than Heber C. Kimball. His knees never trembled, his hand never shook, he never failed to sustain the Prophet of God.

A CHOSEN PEOPLE

I desire to read to you something, not new, not startling—the idea that we are the chosen people of God. Joseph Smith, the Prophet of the living God, organized the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and the members became the chosen people of God to perform a great and lasting service for mankind.

314To preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ, they were entrusted with a mission which carried with it suffering, sacrifice, sorrow, hatred, and persecution. But the message brings to the human family, if they will have faith in God, repent of their sins, and be baptized by immersion, and have hands laid upon them by the authorized servants of God for the reception of the Holy Ghost—there will come to them joy, happiness, virtue, goodness, and godliness.

314To accept this mission is to fill a high place in the world's history. To be a chosen people we have gone forth through trials, tribulations, suffering, sorrow, hate and agony, sacrifice and humiliation, and have humbly and faithfully performed the heavy, responsible tasks laid upon us by Jesus Christ for the good of His Father's children. Surely we ought to be blessed, rewarded and entitled to recognition.

A chosen people should not indulge in the thought that God's whole attention is absorbed in watching over and caring for a favored few. Let the righteous of all nations rejoice in God's grace and exult in His justice, which means that the righteous of all other nations have a share in the teachings of the Kingdom of God and His righteousness.

HumorKimball, J. GoldenHealingsKimball, J. GoldenTOO YOUNG TO DIE

I know I have spent a good deal of time, brethren, in trying to live. About Christmas, 1923, I thought I was dying. I had a hemorrhage of the lungs, and I bled quantities of blood. I thought I had scarcely a pint left in me. I sent for my wife and handed her the keys to my safety box and said, "Here is the key to my safety box; there is nothing in it. God bless you." I then sent for a great specialist to examine me and see what was the matter.

315He examined me and said, "How old are you?"

315I said, "I am seventy years old."

315"Well," he said, "I thought you were forty-seven."

315I replied, "If that is the way you look at it, I am going to get out of here," and I did.

CHRIST'S TEACHINGS WILL RULE

Christ was the Son of God and His teachings will rule this world. "Rejoice and be exceedingly glad" on this return of the season of promise, this opening of another year.

316God bless you, my brethren and sisters, God bless His Church forever, and His servants, and may God inspire them to be prophets, seers and revelators unto the children of men, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
