Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

316TALK THIRTY-SEVEN

317April, 1926

SPIRIT QUALIFIES FOR SERVICE

I have had some experience, along with my brethren in the Church, and while I may not have accomplished everything that I was appointed to do to the very best advantage, I desire to say to you that I have never been appointed to do a single thing in this Church but that, when I got the spirit of my appointment, I was qualified and fitted to assume that responsibility.

INSPIRATION AND REVELATION

Brethren, I want to read to you. I do not read very often except to myself. When I find a good idea—which is not very often—I write it down. When you get an idea, write it down. That is what the Prophet Joseph tried to teach this people. When the Lord gives you a sudden idea, write it down, and then watch it. If it comes from God, through His Spirit, it is inspiration; and when it comes true, that is revelation. Try to remember that.

SEEK THE LORD EARLY

I am now going to read to you something that I have tried to make work—though I am not making very great progress. I have written it down partly because I have a poor memory, like my father. The Prophet Joseph Smith told father, when he tried to teach him grammar, "Heber, if you don't repeat that, I'll whip you."

318Father said, "Well, Brother Joseph, you will have to whip me; I can't repeat it."

318Joseph said, "I would just as leave whip a child as you."

318The quotations I am about to read are such that I might repeat them a million times, and never live up to them, and I am afraid some of us Latter-day Saints read a good deal, but do not think and put it into our every day life: "He that seeketh the Lord early shall find Him, and shall not be forsaken." No wonder we are trying to teach our children. Some of us did not seek the Lord until we became old. It is a mighty good thing to begin early.

FaithKimball, J. GoldenTHE LORD SHEPHERD OF MISSIONARIES

"The Lord is my shepherd." Do you believe that? "The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want." Then why worry your head off for fear you will go to the poor house? But that is where some of you will go if you don't wake up. Because the Lord "tempers the wind to the shorn lamb." Haven't I testified of that? In all my wanderings in the South, God led me to the doors of the honest in heart, and they fed me and gave me a place to lay my head.

319And that is what I am telling our elders, these young boys going on missions. I am trying, when I set them apart, to impress them that the Lord is their shepherd and they shall not want. One good mother stated that her son wrote her and said:

319"I have only three dollars, and if you do not send me some money I will be licking the paste off the signboards."

319And the mother came to me somewhat disturbed and said: "Brother Kimball, what shall I do?"

319I said, "Let him lick paste for a while; he will find the Lord, but he never will with his pockets full of money."

WITHOUT PURSE OR SCRIP

I have repeatedly told the Mormon elders that they never found God yet with their pockets full of money. I do not say that you do not have to have money, but you do not worry much when you know where to get the money, where you are going to sleep, and where you are going to eat. I know mighty well that I would not worry the Lord if I had a five dollar bill in my pocket; I would go and get something to eat and have the agony over. I do not think the Lord respects a Mormon elder who will howl and whine around when he has money in his pocket and is hungry. If he does, he ought to starve; that is my doctrine.

YE THAT ARE HEAVY LADEN

"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy-laden." God knows that we have thousands in this Church who have labored and are weary. And there are thousands of people in this Church, mothers and old men, the best people God ever created, who never had a banquet or a chicken dinner in their lives unless they cooked it themselves. No wonder they get weary—they are made to feel they are no longer wanted. "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." And that is the only place you can get real rest.

FEAR DOES NOT COME FROM GOD

As I tell our missionaries, do not let doubt and fear creep into your hearts, for God never planted in one of His children the spirit of fear; it does not come from God. For when you have faith in God, you have no fear, you have no doubt; you know. But you will have trials and be tested; you will eat the bread of adversity and drink the water of affliction. That is the only thing that will keep you humble. You have to knock some Mormons down every little while to keep them in the Church. It is too bad that we as Latter-day Saints cannot be prospered without some of us getting arrogant and proud and forgetting God.

YOU CANNOT DECEIVE GOD

Surely God reads our hearts; you cannot deceive God. You can deceive a bishop, sometimes, not all the time; you can deceive a president of a stake, not all the time; you may deceive the apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ, not all the time; but you cannot deceive God any of the time. And don't ever try it.

GOD HEALS THE FAITHFUL

Brethren and sisters, the time is up. I have only gotten started. Why don't you read these things and write them down, like our fathers and mothers did of old, and think about them and make them work? And when you are sick, have faith and be healed. Christ never diagnosed a case in His life; Christ never asked a woman what was the matter; He never asked her what kind of a disease she had.

321I know as I know I live and breathe, although I may never feel its power, that authority has been vested in me, as I have seen people healed—not many, it is true—but some were healed as soon as I took my hands off their heads. Yet doctors have said that those diseases were incurable, but people have been healed nevertheless. They tell me that epileptic fits are incurable.

I cannot cite you so many cases, but I can point you to a poor widow, who lived in the sage-brush, in Idaho, that came to me after a conference. The bishop of the ward and I administered to that good old woman, and she never had a fit after. I can cite you to a poor old widow in the North Country who had a cancer. She had fasted for three days, and came to the same conference, and something said to her, "That is the man." I do not think I amount to much, but we administered to that poor old widow, and God healed her. I have had splendid success with widows; especially when they were in poverty! But I have never had any success with rich people. I do not know why. Maybe it is because they have but little faith.

THINK OF GOD

May the Lord bless you. Think of God. How many of us think of God thirty minutes out of twenty-four hours? There is not one out of five hundred that actually thinks of God and his Son, Jesus Christ, thirty minutes a day. I try to; but the first thing I know, my mind wanders off on something else. My brethren and sisters, God bless you and be with you and help this people, I pray, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
