Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

332TALK THIRTY-NINE

333April, 1927

AMBITION TO SERVE GOD

I am very desirous that what I may say to you good people will be under the influence of the Holy Spirit.

333I have been in the service for a long time. If I have ever been vain—and no doubt I have been—I think men are really more vain than women, and that is a hard blow!—I have no ambition at the close of my life other than to serve God, keep His commandments, give service, and do my duty.

SPEAKER MUST FEEL HIS MESSAGE

I do not know that I have ever had a greater desire in delivering a message to the people that the Lord will burn into their hearts. After years of experience, I have learned that it is not what you say that counts, it is what you feel. It is not what the speaker delivers, it is what he thinks.

SAINTS MUST DO OWN THINKING

If Latter-day Saints are to fulfill their destiny among the children of men, they must do their own thinking. Men and women and children in this Church, if they keep the commandments of God and are under the influence of the Holy Ghost, are entitled to inspiration, to revelation, to dreams and visions, for their own salvation. But that is as far as you can go. And any person who thinks he is living so close to God that he can direct this Church, unless he repents he will apostatize, as surely as God lives. God never gave us inspiration and revelation to take the place of the Prophet of the living God.

FORWARD VISION

I am a great believer in looking forward, not backward. I am not a believer in looking backward, except for wisdom and for the experience that others have had. With me, it is the future.

A NATIVE SON

I am about to read something to you. You know I am a native; I guess I look like it, too; don't I? I was born in these valleys, up here on the hill, six years after the pioneers arrived. I do not remember much about their hardships and about the famine, but I certainly look like I had passed through the famine! I recall that the first thing these great men did, President Brigham Young and his followers, was to select their inheritances. Heber C. Kimball had the privilege of taking one of these city blocks. And now his posterity are a race of people that we think numbers more than two thousand. He went up on the hill, dug the rocks out, and built a stone wall around the block. And I was kept inside of it on Sundays. And I hate rock walls yet!

MOST BEAUTIFUL OF CITIES

I will read to you from a talk I made in San Francisco about four years ago. I have never delivered it or read it since. I desire to find out what you think about it. It is about "The Most Beautiful of Cities," and it begins with a quotation.

335Kenneth L. Roberts said: "There is frequently a peacefulness and tranquillity about various ancient things like old furniture and old books and old clothes and old cities, provided they were good before they began to grow old, that tend to soothe the minds of those who associate with them."

335I read Brisbane's comments as he passed through Salt Lake, and, being a native, I branded him as a poor humorist.

335"I am told, in a mild-mannered way," said he, "that Salt Lake City would have had a population of 500,000 people, if 350,000 had not gone to California. They have a process of cleaning out the city of all growlers and kickers. They smoke 'em out and then the atmosphere clears, the sun shines, the grass turns green and the flowers grow, and they honestly can claim Salt Lake to be 'the Most Beautiful of Cities.'"

SALT LAKE CITY

The following excerpts were taken from an article entitled "The West as I saw Her." I read the article while in California, and if I had not written it down, I never would have had it, because I am like you people, I only hold a pint and I soon run out. The article was written by Shaw Desmond, Irish author and publisher, in the March number of Scribner's Magazine. The article is based on the writer's experience gathered during three visits to America in which he spent nearly a year, lecturing in the chief cities and covering some fifty thousand miles:

336There is a City of Dreams in America as little known, so far as I have read her guide-books, as one of Rider Haggard's Lost Cities of Africa. Nobody that I have met in America knows anything about this city, and this especially applies to those who say they have visited it.

336It is easily the most beautiful city I have seen on the North American continent. I think it must be one of the most beautiful cities in the world, and the way to it in mid-winter is hard and cold and cruel; then, all at once, it burst upon me, "my city beautiful." I was running into Salt Lake. Once more I, with whom the Indians had ridden along the invisible trail by the side of which the iron rails had been laid, seen by the eye of imagination, was looking at a tented wagon, at the "prairie-schooner" of the old days, about it a body of silent men, with mouths of leather and jaws of steel as they broke through the last pass in the mountains to find the land of promise laid out before them with the snowcapped mountains eternally sentinelling, [Do you feel that? I feel that in every fibre of my being] inside which they were to build their city, the city to be the most beautiful of the cities of the continent.

I discovered a quiet respect for the Mormons by their Gentile friends, a constant and everflowing tribute to Mormon industry, Mormon art, Mormon initiative. The Mormons, I discovered, were not 100 but 110 per cent Americans, obvious by their loyalty to the American flag, proud of their American citizenship, and proving it all by shedding their blood under Uncle Sam in the great war. [By the way, the Kimballs were just as loyal, for Heber C. Kimball had thirty grandsons in the world war. I am happy to say that not one of them was killed—and they did not run, either.]

337I hold no brief for the Mormon outlook [says this Irish poet] but in a rather lengthy stay in Salt Lake, during which I was afforded unexampled opportunities of investigation free from "suggestions," I accumulated enough genuine data, checked from Gentile sources, to cause a revelation of the real Mormon, whenever it is given to the world. I made hosts of friends at Salt Lake, where I lectured to all sorts and conditions of men and women, from the Chamber of Commerce to a lecture under the auspices of the University of Utah. I came to the city without expectations, I left it with the picture of its icy snows under the dawn's descending, as I lay in my room with its glass walls, left with the memory for all time of its broad streets, of its giant organ, upon which my Mormon friend permitted me to play, of its white Mormon temple, its lake of the dead and the limitless sage and salt surrounding it. It remains for me a remembrance unforgettable.

Did you ever hear a Mormon talk like that? Did you ever hear a Mormon damn this country? Well, I want to advise them to quit it. Every Mormon, son and daughter, ought to lift up his praise to God that He led those great prophets and their people to a place of safety. Think of it for one minute, my father, among the rest, was driven from his home five times! No wonder they felt to praise God and dedicate this place to His service.

BONDAGE AND DEBT

A new generation has arisen! The people seem so content, so free from all concern; but like the Jews in the days of Joseph, they can be hurled from their high position into the bitterness of slavery. And we are going into slavery and bondage and debt, as fast as we can go!

DANGER FOR NEW GENERATION

We older men think the story should be told of our pioneer fathers and mothers and the faith of our ancestors and we write a book, preach a sermon or two, and think our task is ended.

338This new generation that has arisen have discovered over night that a new world has been born and that the United States of America is about to assume the responsibility of saving the world, and they are content and satisfied.

338At no time in the history of the Latter-day Saint people has there been greater danger for the new generation. The danger comes from ease, idleness, and luxury, as there never was a time when the people were spending their means so prodigiously as now and ever reaching out after material things.

338The prodigal dollar seems to be swallowing all that is great and noble with some of the new and rising generation.

FALLING SPIRITUAL EFFORTS

To my mind many of the Mormon people are becoming content and self-satisfied. They show evidence of falling down in their spiritual efforts. I know it takes courage to say it. I know that if we say anything to criticize our people, they are disturbed. Well, they need to be disturbed. What they need is a little dynamite! It seems to me a great deal of that which has been gained by faith, adversity, sacrifice, and years of hard work is being let loose of by the thoughtless and careless.

LIVING ON FAITH OF ANCESTORS

Our fathers and mothers died for the faith and we are living on the faith of our pioneer ancestors. But behold! another generation has arisen, and in the very instant of our self-content the silence is broken by our being hurled from our mighty purpose.

MIGHTY CHURCH LEADERS

Joseph Smith, the mighty prophet, was chosen of God to send forth the message of salvation to the children of men—he was martyred—but that was not the end. It was the beginning of this great work.

President Brigham Young rightfully succeeded him, and his followers with him fled to the Rocky Mountains. Brigham Young led the way for the first trekers of adventuresome spirits in the year 1847, and they were the original builders in what Daniel Webster christened "The Great American Desert."

340On entering the Salt Lake Valley, Divine Intelligence at once manifested itself. "This is the place." Why, to some people that has become a chestnut, a hoary chestnut! But it was inspiration from God. "This is the place." There beat in the heart of this great man—he was a master, a Prophet of God—a great load of care, the destiny of his people! How I have suffered for just being the father of a family and feeling responsible for the destiny of my children! And here was a great prophet, with the destiny of a great people.

AN EDEN OUT OF THE DESERT

One has to believe to understand the destiny, object, and purpose of this people. The leaders understood and believed; they knew; God revealed it to them. President Brigham Young and his followers said, "We will make this barren waste bloom and furnish clean, unsullied wealth for thousands of poor people from all over the world, who have been crushed under the juggernaut of our Christian civilization. We are going to plant them under the shadow of the Rocky Mountains. We will create an Eden out of the desert. We will lay out townsites, cities, and build churches and schoolhouses, and raise wheat and vegetables. God's children shall be converted to the Gospel of Jesus Christ and be given land. They shall have a chance for life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. They shall know their toil will bring them some returns, so that they can have a home and a hope for the future."

341It was a big thought, a great idea, manifested by Divine Intelligence. He was a prophet. He had a vision of the future. These great leaders did not want the land and water for themselves; they wanted men to be God's agents—stewards for God and hold the land in trust as a sacred inheritance. This land was to belong to the lowly of the earth and to be saved for the hewers of stone and the drawers of water.

341I think of my father, who had his inheritance, and owned the land where most of the Capitol grounds are and away off to the left. I remember that he took these poor English people that had emigrated from Europe, and took them upon the hill, showed them a lot, and asked them if they would build a home. They said they would; and the lot cost them $2.50. Heber C. Kimball and the brethren never speculated and made money off the people. Any charges to the contrary are false.

341These valleys in the mountains were to be made to bloom and blossom for the poor, whose hope is the land that gave them birth and life, the land that would receive them in its bosom when they died and made a safe return to their home.

Just take the time to think of the thousands of acres of lonely, thirsty land waiting for centuries to be reclaimed from the ruins of ages. They saw in vision green fields and farms, just as Joseph Smith prophesied it would be. "It is the place where you'll find all the things your souls are hungering for, where the people will own big farms, with green fields of wheat and grass, with purple blossoms and long rows of fruit trees and vegetables." Is that true? It should be true, and that was the intent and purpose of our leaders. My father pleaded with his family, almost as he would plead for life, to keep their inheritance. I am the only one of them left on the block, and I am trying to sell, too! [Laughter]

342"All will be most beautiful, in the Desert!" Through those words I can get a vision. I have a moving-picture mind. It was a vision, a dream come true. Nobody was there to despoil their dream.

A new generation has arisen. Think of your pioneer fathers and mothers who built better than they knew. Think of the men, women, and children toiling in sweat shops, with little food; families without money, without hope and without fuel, facing cold winters in these great cities. Think of these people who have been gathered to a barren empire which our ancestors have transformed into an Eden—a land of liberty, a home for the oppressed of God's children, where they can have life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness and can worship God according to the dictates of their own conscience. The stranger has found his way amongst us and many of us have "sold our inheritance for a mess of pottage" and are seeking elsewhere for more ease, more idleness, more luxury. In this once lonely, sage-covered, wind-swept valley there should be erected a granite monument and written thereon this epitaph:

343"Who seeks for heaven alone to save his soul,

343May keep the path, but will not reach the goal,

343While he who walks in love may wander far,

343Yet God will bring him where the blessed are."

343—Henry Van Dyke.

WILL DESIRE A HOME IN ZION

* * * On that occasion, looking upon those people in the San Francisco chapel, I prophesied (you know I am a son of a prophet), and our young elder, Joseph E. Larkin, wrote:

343A prophecy made by President J. Golden Kimball of the First Council of Seventy, at a meeting held in the San Francisco L. D. S. chapel, March 16, 1924, and is, as near as I remember, as follows:

343I prophesy that before many of you go to the other side you will have a burning desire in your hearts to return to the places where the leaders of the Church have counseled the Saints to settle, and you will give anything in the world to have a home there.

343Brethren and sisters, I am told that North and South America is Zion, but with all of its beauty and splendor and wonderful opportunities, there is no place in the world as safe for the Latter-day Saints as where God's servants had their inheritance. God bless you. Amen.
