Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

343TALK FORTY

344April, 1928

LOYALTY AND SALVATION

As far as I am concerned, my brethren and sisters, I feel that it is victory or death. I haven't a vision of any kind whatsoever. I have no ambition to achieve honors, and I have only one viewpoint, and that is salvation. I desire most fervently to walk in the footsteps of my father and to emulate, as far as I am capable, his example, and to be one among the number who are loyal and true and faithful to the Church.

344You know I am rather peculiar in my thoughts and imaginations. I get to thinking along certain lines. I pick up ideas here and there. They are not original. I haven't been able to get hold of anything original for a long time.

PASSION FOR CHURCH WORK

All the passion I have had for the past forty years I have put into this work, with all the mistakes and blunders, and my spirit has worn out my body. As I grow older, I become more silent, with a desire to be alone. To me, one glimpse of immortality would mean that death would lose all its fear and would hasten my desire to go home. As someone has said: "Why fear death? It is the most beautiful adventure of life."

345WHAT LIES BEYOND?

345What is the good of all this education and science if it cannot tell us that there is a survival after death? What is the good of it all if it cannot answer a simple question like that? Science seems not to know what lies beyond the "no man's land," so we must turn our faces and our desires to God for an answer.

GREAT MEN SIMPLE

It has been remarked very often that when we meet a really big man, we almost invariably find a simple man, devoid of pride and arrogance. One reason lies in the fact that every man holding a big position knows in his own soul, if he be honest, that there are forces entirely outside of himself that have led him onward to do big things. The man of the world calls it luck, just a series of accidents; but Latter-day Saints feel that great men and good women succeed because the front door of their intelligence is always open to inspiration and because of their dogged determination and effort to carry out what God has inspired them to do.

MIGHTY PIONEERS

When I read of those 143 pioneers who landed in this valley on July 24, 1847, and in one short month accomplished more for the beginning of a great work than other men have accomplished in a lifetime, I marvel at it. I can remember reading a discourse preached by President Brigham Young at the funeral of Jedediah M. Grant, wherein he said: "This man who lies before you accomplished more in ten years than some men accomplish in one hundred."

HEBER C. KIMBALL

Heber Chase Kimball was born in Sheldon, Vermont, June 14, 1801. When he was eleven years old, his parents removed to West Bloomfield, New York, where his father, who was a blacksmith, established a large shop in which Heber was taught blacksmithing. At the age of nineteen, he was thrown upon his own resources, his father having failed in business. Heber was assisted somewhat by his elder brother, Charles, who taught him the potter's trade. Heber suffered severe poverty to the extent of actual hunger at this time, but it was largely brought about by his shyness and timidity. . . .

346Referring to the vision of the legion of evil spirits in England, on the opening of the mission, Joseph Smith said, "Brother Heber, at that time you were nigh unto the Lord; there was only a veil between you and Him. The nearer a person approaches to the Lord, the greater power does the devil manifest.". . .

On returning to Winter Quarters, Brigham Young was chosen and sustained as the President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, with Heber C. Kimball as his first counselor, in the fall of 1847, a position my father occupied until his death in June, 1868.

347I honor my father for his faith, courage, and integrity to God the Father and to his Son, Jesus Christ. He was one of the first chosen apostles that never desired the Prophet's place—his hands never shook, his knees never trembled and he was true and steadfast to the Church and to the Prophet Joseph Smith. . . .

347Brother Brigham, Heber and others were enroute to Kirtland. Heber had chills and fever and was very ill. A doctor said he would give him something to relieve him. The doctor was drunk and gave Heber a tablespoonful of morphine. He reeled and fell to the floor. Some of the brethren wept and said, "We will never see Heber again." Brother Brigham cared for him. Heber said: "Don't be scared. You brethren go ahead, for Brother Brigham and I will reach Kirtland before you will," and they did. . . .

He built homes for his wives and children, two flour mills, a carding machine mill, molasses mills, a linseed oil mill, school buildings, barns, cobblestone walls. He beautified gardens and farms, laid out his inheritance, and laid out city blocks and named the streets. He located hundreds of people who built homes, and he never speculated.

348During the famine of 1856 which was likened unto the famine of Egypt, Heber.C. Kimball played a part like unto that of Joseph of old. He had prophesied of the famine. He, by his providence and foresight and anticipation of the famine, had saved his grain, filled his bins and storehouse, and he fed a hungry multitude, kindred, strangers, and all who looked to him for succor. His own family were put upon short rations, though he had thousands of bushels of wheat with bran, shorts, corn, and barley in abundance. Several hundred bushels of wheat were loaned to President Young to help feed the hungry and the poor of Salt Lake City.

348Bishop John B. Maiben gives an interesting link in the historic chain at the time of the famine. "Some individuals who had flour sold it at $25 to $30 a 100 pounds. Not so with Heber, for at no time did he charge more than $6 a 100 pounds, then the standard tithing-office price. He distributed in various amounts, from five to fifty pounds to the poor, amounting in all to about thirty thousand pounds. His acts of generosity, mercy, and charity during this time of sore distress are worthy of the man. He kept an open house and fed from twenty-five to one hundred poor people at his tables daily with bread, flour, and other necessities that were worth their weight in gold."

It is related that during the famine, a brother, sorely in need of bread, came to President Kimball for counsel as to how to procure it. "Go and marry a wife," was Heber's terse reply after feeding the brother. The man thought Brother Kimball must be out of his mind, but when he thought of his prophetic character, he resolved to obey counsel. He wondered where such a woman was and, thinking of a widow with several children, he got busy and proposed. As widows generally do, she accepted him. In that widow's house was laid up a six-months' store of provisions. She surely grub-staked him. Meeting Brother Kimball soon after, this prosperous man of a family said: "Well, Brother Heber, I followed your advice." "Yes," said the man of God, "and you found bread."

In August, 1853, Heber addressed the Saints in the Salt Lake Tabernacle: "I know you will prosper and live in peace in the mountains of Great Salt Lake and be perfectly independent. You will live in peace and God will be your defense. The Lord can turn the nations, as I can an obedient horse. They are governed and controlled by the Almighty. There are a few other things I wanted to say: Take care of your grain, for it is of more worth to you than gold and silver." This theme he stressed for the next three years, but they heeded him not and they suffered the consequence. He further said later: "I would like to see the people manufacture their own clothing, machinery, knives, forks, and everything else, for the day will come when we will be under the necessity of doing it, for trouble and perplexity, war and famine, bloodshed and fire, thundering and lightning will roll upon the nations of the earth, insomuch that we cannot get to them nor they to us."

350Brother Brigham said: "This is the place." Brother Heber said: "Here it is on high. It is the best country I ever saw."

350At family prayers, just a little while before his death, he remarked that the Angel Moroni had visited him the night before and had informed him that his work on this earth was finished and he would soon be taken. He died the morning of June 22, 1868.

350God bless you one and all. I sustain and uphold the hands of the priesthood, and I desire, as you do, to be saved and exalted in the presence of God, which, if I know anything, I know must be the greatest gift of God to His children. God bless you. Amen.
