Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

TALK FORTY-TWO

353October, 1929

HOPE FOR SALVATION

I desire to say to you that my life is being crystallized into a very few things that are important to me. The great hope that I have is to be saved in the Kingdom of God. I have a great desire to be true and faithful and devoted in my work, to be honest, frank, and straight-forward with the people. I know of no other way. I can see no other outlook, and I have no other desire than to sustain the Priesthood of God, to uphold those whom we sustain as prophets, seers, and revelators in the Church of Christ. If there is not safety in this, there is no safety for the Latter-day Saint people.

BREVITY IN SERMONS

I have never in all my travels and teachings among the people been told what to say. I realize the importance of this occasion. I understand what time means. At the conference six months ago I was fortunate in being called upon, and I occupied three minutes. To my surprise I was complimented everywhere I went. People say it was the best sermon I ever preached. Of course, had I believed what they said to me I would close now; but I have what I think is a message—at least I desire to call your attention to a certain matter that transpired with me this year.

OREGON TRAIL MEMORIAL

About the fourteenth or fifteenth of August, Dr. George W. Middleton, together with Elder Levi Edgar Young, the doctor's son, and myself (I was an invited guest) went by auto to Casper, Wyoming, 515 miles distant from Salt Lake City. The purpose of the meeting which we there attended was to honor the pioneers. It was held under the auspices of the Oregon Trail Memorial Association.

HONOR THE PIONEERS

It is my purpose to enlarge upon this Oregon Trail subject. Never before, strange to say (and I was born soon after the people arrived in this valley) did I get the spirit of what it all meant. I have never understood, I have never comprehended what it all meant to our fathers and mothers, the pioneers. But I confess to you that I have had that feeling burning within my bosom, that desire to do honor to those great men and great women who made it possible in this day for us to enjoy all the comforts of life.

354I quote from Professor Driggs:

We are brought a little closer to the tragic cause of it all when we realize that fully twenty thousand lost their lives in an effort to reach the Golden West. They had no means of marking the graves of the dead in those prairie stretches. Only one grave out of all of the twenty thousand, so far as we know, is surely marked. I refer here to the grave of a pioneer mother near Scott's Bluff, Nebraska. When Rebecca Winters passed away one of the company had the forethought to pick up an old wagon tire that lay along the trail. Bending it into an oval he set the tire within the grave. On the top of the tire was chiseled the mother's name and age. A party of surveyors laying out the railroad along the North Platte happened by mere chance to run their line right over the mother's grave. Then the surveyors, with a touch of sympathy that is beautiful to think of, went back for twenty miles and changed the line of survey, that it might miss the mother's grave.

355There is a story—it is beautiful—I love to make an effort to tell it. The history of the West sounds like tales from the Arabian Nights; but as far as I know, only parts of it have ever been told.

355Dr. Driggs asks: "Will the warp hold? It will hold provided we keep alive the sacred stories of the pioneer builders of this nation in the hearts of American boys and girls."

355Coincident with the Mormon Pioneer movement, their prophet prophesied they would go to the Rocky Mountains, and, in a way, they were forced to go west. They started out not for conquest, not intent upon spoil, but to worship God, build up cities, do mighty deeds, and build for greater happiness.

GREAT SPIRITUAL LEADERS

Had it not been for great spiritual leaders, this barren wilderness could never have been peopled in so short a time; and it would not have gained much momentum had it not been for immigration. It would appear that this people threw themselves almost blindly into what would seem to the natural man impossible. But under the leadership of inspired men they accomplished the unbelievable.

356We must not forget to remind the next generations of the glorious strength of faith, hope, courage, and the love of God they possessed.

PIONEERS DISAPPEARING

Try to remember that the pioneer, no matter of what race, is fast disappearing. Often he is a tragic figure. History is leaving him behind. Few of us are so gifted as to be able to attract and to converse intelligently with our own children. A parent must be a genius to tell of the days of their strength, the days of their suffering, sorrows, and defeats, and yet make clear how they won glorious victories.

The next generation cannot feel, neither can they understand, sense, or appreciate what it all means, surrounded as they are with ease, comforts and luxuries. They are unmindful, and it should be burned into their souls and memories to respect the doting pioneer, tottering with old age—to remember their minds are stored with the richest experience and historic lore.

357We have no way of testing and proving the next generation, through trials, sacrifices, and suffering; neither can we force these historical truths upon them, and to reason would seem fruitless. It is said: "People shape their lives largely the way we are today living."

357I have thought a great deal about our fathers and mothers and their great object, and I have wondered what it was that the Latter-day Saint people had—the desire, the ambition, the faith, and the hope—that enabled them to sacrifice, suffer, and die for the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

RESTORATION OF THE GOSPEL

I am made to understand what their great objective was. Something new had transpired. God the Father and Jesus Christ, the Son, had appeared to that young man Joseph; and also the Everlasting Gospel, a knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus Christ and the power of God unto salvation, had been revealed. The restoration of the Gospel, the restoring of the priesthood with all its keys and its powers and authorities were conferred upon these men; also the eternity of the marriage covenant, including a plurality of wives. The bringing forth of the Book of Mormon, the redemption of Zion, the building up the City of Jerusalem, and the gathering of the Ten Tribes—these were the great objectives that were placed before our fathers and mothers.

358I often think of my mother. She was a very practical woman, a woman who lived by faith, a woman who had suffered and sacrificed, a woman who had left her whole race of people. She was the only one we know of who has ever been converted from her immediate family. Mother had that great vision of the celestial glory, of becoming a queen. And surely she is a queen, because when I visited her people I brought to her over one hundred names of her ancestors, and we went into the temple at Logan and did the work for that good mother of ours.

358That was the idea; that was the great vision that they had of the future. And that was why they were sustained in their suffering, in their sacrifices, in their troubles, and in their tragedies.

HELP FULFIL PROPHECIES

My dear brethren and sisters, what is our objective? That question has been put to me more than once. Our objective is to carry out the will of God and through the direction of His servants, the prophets, to fulfil every prophecy and every revelation that we find written in the Doctrine and Covenants. For surely God will not forsake His people if they will repent of their sins. It is needless for me to say more.

SERVANTS OF GOD PROSPERED

For the past week or so I have read the Book of Mormon through, and I was surprised how deeply interested I became in the people who inhabited this continent. I discovered that whenever they served God and kept His commandments they prospered in the land; and whenever they failed (and I hope we will never fail) then came their destruction until that people became extinct.

359I pray God to bless you. I pray God to be with each and all of us, for I do not believe that a man can remain faithful in this Church and devoted and true to his covenants who fails to keep the commandments and who has not a testimony that Jesus is the Christ. To this end I pray that the blessings of the Lord may rest upon us, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.
