Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

359TALK FORTY-THREE

360April, 1930

BURNING DESIRE TO SERVE GOD

I am very grateful to the Lord that I am permitted to be present on this occasion. I feel that I am among my friends, and have always tried to feel that way. I have only one great big desire, and that is to live until I have filled and completed my mission here upon the earth. The revelations tell us that if we desire to serve the Lord we are called to the work. I have a burning desire in my heart to follow in the footsteps of my father, and to be loyal and true and faithful, and to be found among the number that sustain God's work and uphold the hands of His Holy Priesthood.

JOSEPH A GREAT PROPHET

I realize, in part only, the great responsibility that is resting on the Presidency of this Church and the Council of the Twelve and all those who take part in this great work. I believe Joseph Smith is one of the greatest prophets that have ever lived. I believe in his prophecies and revelations. While I may be among the number that would like to rush things on a little to see how they are coming out in Jackson County and all that, I am sure that all will be literally fulfilled in the due time of the Lord.

PRESIDENT GRANT

Whenever the Lord wants to speak to His people He knows whom to talk to. I have known President Grant during my labors in the First Council. I have slept with him and talked with him, but I haven't slept with him since he has been President of the Church. I know of no better man. I am not one of those who cater to men. I sustain them and uphold them, but I have learned that they are human. I sustain and uphold, with all my heart and soul, President Heber J. Grant as the Prophet of God. It was only two months ago that a young lawyer—I suppose he considers himself one of the brilliant young lawyers—undertook to criticize severely the President of the Church. I was somewhat disturbed. I said, "I am going to take out my watch and give you five minutes to name a better man." I haven't heard from him yet. I want to say to you, in full faith and confidence, no man has ever earned his place as the Prophet of God, through loyalty, faithfulness, devotion and sacrifice, more than President Heber J. Grant.

VITALITY OF THE CHURCH

I have a matter that I would like to read to you. It will take me only a few minutes:

It is a very old, old story; but it never needed retelling so much as in this present hour: His name was Joseph, and he was carried away from home, and found himself in Egypt, a strange, new land. Because he was good looking and intelligent and a hard worker he rose rapidly until he became prime minister. Excepting the king, there was no other man in Egypt more influential or more celebrated. His relatives learned with interest of his rise. They followed into Egypt, and with his help they, too, prospered and were likewise influential. It looked as though they were permanently provided for, as though nothing could happen to dislodge them. But in a single generation—yes, in a little fraction of a generation—the unbelievable occurred. The people who were so contented, so free from all concern, were hurled from their high position into the bitterness of slavery. The thing that had happened to them is recorded in a single sentence: "Joseph died."

362That has not been the case with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Joseph the Prophet died, but the Church has continued to progress and advance and will until it completes its mission.

362God bless you. Amen.
