Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

362TALK FORTY-FOUR

363October, 1930

PROPHECIES OF HEBER C. KIMBALL

I claim not to be a prophet, but I am a son of a prophet, and I expect to give you evidence that shall be left with you—that Heber C. Kimball was a Prophet of God. President Brigham Young on more than one occasion said: "Heber is my prophet, and I love to hear him prophesy."

363In May, 1868—that is sixty-two years ago—he said:

363After a while the Gentiles will gather in Salt Lake City by the thousands, and this will be among the wicked cities of the world.

363He said also:

363An army of elders will be sent to the four quarters of the earth to search out the righteous and warn the wicked of coming events.

363All kinds of religions will be started and miracles performed that will deceive the very elect, if such a thing were possible.

363Persecution comes next, and all Latter-day Saints will be tested to the limit.

363Many will apostatize, and others will stand still, not knowing what to do.

363Before the Temple reaches the square our brethren will be imprisoned until the penitentiary shall be full, and some of them will be removed to other penitentiaries.

364Mothers will weep for their husbands, and children will cry for their fathers. Some will die, and sorrow will fill the hearts of the Latter-day Saints.

364When the Temple roof is on, the persecution will lessen, but when the Temple is completed the power of the Evil One will be shut out.

364The prayers of the Saints will then be heard. The sick will be taken there and healed.

364The Spirit of God will rest upon the people, and work for the dead will be continued night and day.

364The judgments of God will be poured out upon the wicked, to the extent that our elders from far and near will be called home; or in other words, the Gospel will be taken from the Gentiles, and later on will be carried to the Jews.

364The western boundaries of the State of Missouri will be swept so clean of its inhabitants that as President Young tells us, "when we return to that place there will not be as much as a yellow dog to wag his tail."

364Before that day comes, however, the Saints will be put to the test that will try the very best of them.

364The pressure will become so great that the righteous among us will cry unto the Lord day and night until deliverance comes.

364In 1856—that is seventy-four years ago—a small group of friends convened in the house of the Lord, called the Endowment House. The conversation was about the isolated condition of the Latter-day Saints.

"Yes," said Brother Heber, "we think we are secure here in the chambers of these everlasting hills, where we can close the doors of the canyons against mobs and persecutors, the wicked and the vile, who have always beset us with violence and robbery, but I want to say to you, my brethren, the time is coming when we will be mixed up in these now peaceful valleys to that extent that it will be difficult to tell the face of a saint from the face of an enemy against the people of God.

365"Then is the time to look out for the great sieve, for there will be a great sifting time, and many will fall.

365"For I say unto you there is a test, a Test, a TEST coming."

365He further said:

365This Church has before it many close places through which it will have to pass before the work of God is crowned with glory.

365The difficulties will be of such a character that the man or woman who does not possess a personal knowledge or witness will fall. If you have not got this testimony, you must live right and call upon the Lord, and cease not until you obtain it.

365Remember these sayings: The time will come when no man or woman will be able to endure on borrowed light. Each will have to be guided by the light within himself. If you do not have the knowledge that Jesus is the Christ, how can you stand?

365Do you believe it?

365President George Q. Cannon said, after Heber C. Kimball's death: "Heber Chase Kimball was one of the greatest men of this age." He continued: "No man, perhaps, Joseph Smith excepted, who has belonged to the Church in this generation, ever possessed the gift of prophecy to a greater degree than he."

366On the morning of the 22nd of June, 1868, he died. At the funeral President Brigham Young said: "Heber was a man of as much integrity, I presume, as any man who ever lived on the earth—a man of faith, a man of benevolence, a man of truth."

366On the evening of January 12, 1862, the Lord made it known to Heber C. Kimball that he should not be removed from his place as First Counselor while he lived in the flesh.

SPIRIT OF PROPHECY

Now, my brethren and sisters, I am here to testify that the spirit of prophecy is in this Church. Any man who has a testimony that Jesus is the Christ has the spirit of prophecy, and I know that we have living prophets. Whenever the Lord desires, and it is His will to speak through His prophets, I have no fear and no doubt, as far as I am concerned, that they have the courage and the faith to speak the words of God.

I HONOR MY FATHER

Now, brethren, that is how I feel about it. I take pride in being a son of my father, and as long as I live I shall never fail to honor my father and his successors, and try to be as loyal and true and steadfast in the faith as they have been. I am the only one that can destroy my faith in this work. God bless you. Amen.
