Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

366TALK FORTY-FIVE

367April, 1931

AUTHORITIES INSPIRE CONFIDENCE

I realize the responsibility coming to any person who is called to speak to this people. I have sat on the "anxious bench" now for two days, and I feel this morning that everything I have heard, or read, or know, has oozed out of me. I want you to know that I antedate in age and in service, as one of the First Council of Seventy, all of the Council of the Twelve who sit in front of me. I feel honored and have always felt honored to associate with the General Authorities of the Church. I desire to say to the people, the presidents of Stakes and their counselors, the high councilors, the bishops and their counselors, you have always extended to me the greatest courtesy and respect. And whenever I have attended a conference and returned home I have felt that I amounted to something. But after I wandered around here in Salt Lake I sort of lost that feeling, sometimes, and felt like a stranger among strangers.

Temple WorkKimball, J. GoldenENDOWMENT

I desire to refer back to a time when I was about thirteen years of age, when Heber C. Kimball sent word to me and my brother, Joseph Kimball, who is now in the Church Office Building, to come to his office. When we arrived there, mere boys, he said to us: "If you want your father's blessing you be at the endowment house in the morning and have your endowments."

368Of course, we were frightened nearly to death. I do not know how people feel when they are going to be executed, but I suppose that is the sort of feeling I had, not knowing and having no conception of what it all meant. However, we were there and we had our endowments. I did not remember much that transpired, but I was awed, and the impression was burned into my soul of the sacredness of that place, and the sacredness of the covenants which I entered into when almost a child. When I was fifteen years old our father passed away, and we were left, as many children are left, to wander and fight our battles as best we could.

UNDER OBLIGATIONS TO GOD

Now the point I want to reach if I can, if the Lord will give me His Spirit, is just this: Heber C. Kimball made the following statement which deeply impressed me: "I would that all men and women who enter these holy temples could be made to understand that we are placed under obligations to God." Whenever we are permitted to enter the holy temples and perform those ordinances we make covenants with the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

369I cannot conceive of a more sacred covenant made by mortal man. That is the impression I desire to impart to you good people, especially those who hold the holy priesthood. I think it is high time that every man who is so honored of God should understand his office and calling. I understand my calling as one of the First Council, a Seventy in the Church of Jesus Christ.

READ THE BIBLE

It is not my province nor intention to preach. I have something here that I would like to read to you but time will not permit. It is scripture; it is the word of God, and I would advise myself and every other man and woman in this Church to read the Bible. It is not read as much as it should be. The same is true of the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. You will find within the lids of those great books many prophecies and revelations. And if you will go to God and ask Him in humility if these things are true He will give you the testimony, and you will know. God bless you. Amen.
