Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball: The Story of a Unique Personality ( 1934)

381TALK FORTY-EIGHT

382October, 1933

ANXIOUS FOR INSPIRATION

I presume that in the past forty-one years I have trained the Latter-day Saints, in this Tabernacle, so they are always somewhat anxious as to what success I will have. During this time I have always been anxious, having only one desire; and that is, to say something, under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, that would be for my good and for your good. The Lord knows my desires, and I pray will give to me His Holy Spirit.

382I shall not attempt to preach a lengthy discourse. I realize that time is quite a factor in a general conference, especially as President Grant is noted for wanting as many of the brethren to speak as possible.

ASSOCIATES IN THE COUNCIL

It might be well to inform you that I was ordained one of the First Council of the Seventy, October 8th, 1892. When I became a member of the council there were such men as Seymour B. Young, Christian D. Fjeldsted, John Morgan, Brigham H. Roberts and George Reynolds, who were among the greatest missionaries of our day. I have associated with them a great many years, and in thinking of them since Brother Roberts passed away, I could not help but feel that they were men of God, that no mistake was made, that they were called by revelation. All of these brethren have gone home. I am the only one living that was associated with them. After the date of my ordination, Rulon S. Wells, Edward Stevenson and Joseph W. McMurrin filled vacancies within about five years.

383I think there is no man living in the flesh that knew Elder Roberts any better than I did. There was an affection, a friendship, formed in the missionary field that exceeds any love I have ever known, outside of my own family.

FRIENDSHIP BETWEEN MISSIONARIES

A missionary friend, Charles Welch, called on me yesterday. He is now a patriarch in the Bighorn stake. He was formerly a counselor to the president of the stake. He came to my home yesterday to see me. I traveled with him one year under Elder Roberts' presidency in Virginia. I know of no better man than Brother Charles Welch. He was a young man when I was laboring with him fifty years ago, but he told me yesterday he is now seventy-three years old. Ours is a keen friendship, a brotherhood that will last through life, and will continue in the other world. Why? Because he never forsook me. He was to be trusted. I was sick, and he ministered to me, and was so kind and patient. I had boils—called carbuncles, if you know what a carbuncle is. I don't know what kind of boils Job had, but if he had carbuncles I have full sympathy for him. They started on one of my wrists and they followed me all the way up and down. The last one I had was on my knee. We had reached Burke's Garden at that time, after traveling nearly one thousand miles, without purse and scrip.

384I am trying to make clear to you, if I can, the friendship that we Mormon elders have for one another. I may not be gifted in coupling together all of those beautiful sentiments and words, but friendship, of the kind I am talking about, cannot be told in words. Brother Welch said to me: "Golden, I have come six hundred miles to this conference, and one of my big objects is to see you."

Missionary WorkKimball, J. GoldenPRESIDENT BRIGHAM H. ROBERTS

The first time I ever saw Elder Roberts was either in Cincinnati or St. Louis. He had been chosen as president of the Southern States Mission to succeed John Morgan. I left for Chattanooga, Tennessee, with twenty-seven elders, assigned to the Southern States. There were all kinds of elders in the company; farmers, cowboys, few educated—a pretty hard looking crowd, and I was one of that kind. The elders preached, and talked, and sang; and advertised loudly their calling as preachers. I kept still for once in my life; I hardly opened my mouth. I saw a gentleman get on the train. I can visualize that man now. I didn't know who he was. He knew we were a band of Mormon elders. The elders soon commenced a discussion and argument with the stranger, and before he got through they were in grave doubt about their message of salvation. He gave them a training that they never forgot. That man proved to be President B. H. Roberts.

SECRETARY TO PRESIDENT ROBERTS

On arriving at Chattanooga, I was appointed to labor in Virginia with Elder Landon Rich. I traveled for one year under his direction. President Roberts called me to the office the second year—1884. I slept with him. I talked with him. He trusted me, and I never betrayed him. He confided in me, the only time in his life, about his own affairs, his family, etc. We occupied one room—used as office and sleeping quarters. We paid twenty-five dollars a month for rent and board. It was hotter than hades most of the time. I was his secretary. He walked the floor and dictated (and I wrote long-hand) volumes and stored away a fund of information.

KANE CREEK MASSACRE

I was with Brother Roberts at the time of the Kane Creek Massacre. I was at Shady Grove and was the first to get the information of the killing of Elders Gibbs, Berry and the Condor boys, and of their burial. I was with Brother Roberts when he went out into a cornfield to disguise as a farm laborer. We kneeled down and prayed, and we discussed the matter and were satisfied that we should secure the bodies. I said:

386"Brother Roberts, let me go. They know you in that section. You have preached there. They will kill you. Let me go."

386He said, "No, I am the president of the mission. The Lord will take care of me."

A GREAT LIGHT HAS GONE OUT OF MY LIFE

Eight members of the First Council have died since I was ordained on October 8, 1892, and there isn't one of that number who was so close to me as Brigham H. Roberts. I never felt more lonely or helpless, in a way, than I do now. Brother Roberts has been my mentor; he has been my teacher; he has been my chronicler. I was relieved of reading the great histories; I didn't have to read a whole library searching for information. What did I have to do? When anything troubled me about the history of the Church or scripture, I went to Brother Roberts. He had the most wonderful mind and memory of any human being I have ever known, right up to the very last. A great light has gone out in my life. I will soon follow.

DAVID AND JONATHAN
