B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

Preface

"A COMPREHENSIVE HISTORY OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS" is the "History of the Mormon Church" that was published in the Americana from June 1909 to July 1915, now revised by the author and brought up to date of April 6th, 1930, A. D.

The Americana was a monthly periodical published by the "American Historical Society" of New York, of which Mr. David I. Nelke, at the time, was president. The Americana had succeeded a bimonthly journal, known as the American Historical Magazine, published by the same society, and of a character indicated by its title.

The circumstances which led to the publication of the "History of the Mormon Church" in the Americana may be of some interest. A gentleman in New York, formerly a practicing lawyer in Salt Lake City, wrote a series of four articles on the "Origin of the Book of Mormon," revamping with some variations the old and time-worn "Solomon Spaulding Theory" of the book's origin. These articles appeared in the American Historical Magazine from the September number of 1906, to the May number for 1907. Believing that the publication of this series of articles—written with some skill and great pretensions at exhaustiveness—afforded an opportunity for disposing once for all of the "Spaulding Theory" of origin for the Book of Mormon, the author of this History asked the publishers of the American Historical Magazine for the privilege of answering this series of articles. This was granted, and the answer was published in four numbers of the magazine, from September, 1908, to March, 1909.

When the final number of this brief series was published, the writer was surprised to receive an invitation from Mr. David I. Nelke, the president of the Historical Society, to write a detailed "History of the Mormon Church," for publication in the American Historical Magazine. It was pointed out to the publishers that this might be a much larger undertaking than they realized. But they insisted, and expressed a willingness to enlarge the magazine and change it from a bimonthly to a monthly periodical in order to make room for the History; and this without suggestion of terms or compensation for publishing the articles beyond the stipulation that the manuscript of the work should be prepared without expense to the publishers, and that the cost of producing the plates for illustrations should be met by the church. This was agreed to. Whereupon the Historical Magazine was changed to The Americana, and from a bimonthly to a monthly magazine, and the "History of the Mormon Church" ran through six years of the periodical, from July, 1909, to July, 1915, averaging about forty-two pages per month.

The reason for changing the name of this work from "The History of the Mormon Church" to A Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, does not grow out of any serious objection to the title "Mormon Church," since what was intended as a derisive appellation has long since lost its odium, and for familiar and popular use there is little objection to the word "Mormon." Hence in The Americana articles the title "History of the Mormon Church" was used. But now that the History appears in a more permanent form, in six volumes, it is thought to be sufficiently pretentious to bear the official title of the church, given to her by revelation from God—"The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints;" "for thus shall my church be called in the last days," said the Lord. [^1]

The prefix "Comprehensive" was suggested by an incidental reference to the work in the annual "Christmas Greeting" of the First Presidency to the church members in all the world, for the year 1915. When referring to the things achieved in the church that year the Presidency said of the work then recently completed in the Americana:

"The Comprehensive History of the Mormon Church, by Elder B. H. Roberts, * * * and published in The Americana, is completed to recent date, and will form six large volumes when bound in book form, containing data and details collated in forcible style, most comprehensive and valuable for reference."

Hence the addition of "Comprehensive" in the present title.

Frankly, this History is pro- Church of the Latter-day Saints. Not, however, in the sense that the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius is pro-Christian. In that work the author deliberately announces his intention to ignore those things disadvantageous to the Christian cause, and dwell upon those only which glorify it. [^2] This results in special pleading, not history.

Nor is this History pro-Church of the Latter-day Saints in the sense that Joseph Milner's History of the Church of Christ (4 Vols.) is pro-Christian; for he announces in his Introduction that as there have been persons from the time of our Savior whose disposition and lives have been formed by the rules of the New Testament, it is the lives of these men that he proposes to write as the history of the church; not their rites, ceremonies, or their religious controversies. "Nothing but what appears to me to belong to Christ's kingdom," he says, "shall be admitted: genuine piety is the only thing which I intend to celebrate." Such writing, of course, however excellent it may be for some purposes, is not "church history," but merely a history of piety within the church. Not in this sense, then, is this work pro-Church of the Latter-day Saints. The position is not assumed that the men of the New Dispensation—its prophets, apostles, presidencies, and other leaders—are without faults or infallible, rather they are treated as men of like passions with their fellow men. Bearing indeed a heavenly treasure, no less a thing than delegated authority from God to teach the gospel and administer its ordinances of salvation to the children of men; to gather modern Israel from among the nations of the earth, and establish Zion; to perfect the lives of those who receive the truth the church proclaims, and prepare the world for its coming Lord, the rightful King of all the earth, Jesus the resurrected and glorified Christ. But while the officers and members of the church possess this spiritual "treasure," they carried it in earthen vessels; and that earthliness, with their human limitations, was plainly manifested on many occasions and in various ways, both in personal conduct and in collective deportment. But back of all that, and it should never be lost sight of, is the supreme fact—and it was a controlling element in all their proceedings—that they occupied such relations with God that they were, on occasion, moved upon to speak and act as God would speak and act. And when they spoke and acted as prompted by the inspiration of God, then what they said and what they did was the word and will of God, and the power of God unto salvation. [^3] This the writer has sought to bear in mind; as well as on the other hand to keep aware of the human limitations of these men in considering their work. No essential events in the history of the church in the New Dispensation of the gospel have been omitted because they might be considered detrimental to the reputation of either the leaders of the church or of its membership. Where conflicting evidence to a fact or state of facts was found to exist, and the evidence favorable to the church has been adopted in the text, the per contra evidence has been given either in modification of the text, or given in full in the footnotes; and where clearly reprehensible measures and policies have been adopted, these have been considered with the freedom that true historical writing must ever exercise.

It need not be said that this course has laid a heavy burden upon the writer of this History. It is always a difficult task to hold the scales of justice at even balance when weighing the deeds of men. It becomes doubly more so when dealing with men engaged in a movement that one believes had its origin with God, and that its leaders on occasion act under the inspiration of God. Under such conditions to so state events as to be historically exact, and yet, on the other hand, so treat the course of events as not to destroy faith in these men, nor in their work, becomes a task of supreme delicacy; and one that tries the soul and the skill of the historian. The only way such a task can be accomplished, in the judgment of the writer, is to frankly state events as they occurred, in full consideration of all related circumstances, allowing the line of condemnation or of justification to fall where it may; being confident that in the sum of things justice will follow truth; and God will be glorified in his work, no matter what may befall individuals, or groups of individuals. This the writer freely confesses has been the purpose of his work—not the vindication of men before the bar of history, but the justification of the ways of God to man; and to prove that God is true, though all men have to be condemned as weaklings or even liars.

Let not this remark, however, be regarded as implying too great a censure upon the leading men of the New Dispensation. While many of them fell into grievous sins, and all of them at times plainly manifested errors of judgment and limitations in their conceptions of the greatness and grandeur of the work in which they were engaged, yet doubtless they were the best men to be had for the work, since they were chosen either directly of God, or else by a divinely appointed authority, and in either case called of God, and ordained to bring forth the work. And sure it is that good men and faithful have been found in sufficient number, and of such capacity, when helped of God, to proceed with the work of the Lord in the earth, and God has given it increase.

The manuscript of this work as it was prepared for the monthly numbers of The Americana was read to a committee of leading elders of the church, eminent for their experience and knowledge of the doctrines and the history of the church. This that the writer might have the benefit of their suggestions in his work. They were appointed by the First Presidency of the church. These elders were Hyrum M. Smith, Orson F. Whitney, and Joseph Fielding Smith, all were members of the Council of the Twelve Apostles; and Joseph Fielding Smith is now (1929) the Church Historian and Recorder. Midway in the work Elder Hyrum M. Smith was called to preside over the European Mission, and the veteran editor of periodicals and protagonist of the church, Elder Charles W. Penrose, second counselor in the First Presidency, was appointed to fill the vacancy thus made in the committee. Mention is made of the appointment of these brethren that the writer may here express his appreciation of the patient hearing which they gave to the reading of the manuscript of so large a work, and also to acknowledge his indebtedness to them for valuable suggestions. In fairness to these brethren, however, no less than to the writer, it ought to be said that the committee in no way became responsible for the work either as a whole, or for any part of it; and the work has undergone some slight revision for the present printing. The key in which the History is pitched, the treatment of the incidents and episodes that make up the sum of it—for all this the author assumes full and complete responsibility, and shares it with no other.

So introduced let the History stand as we trust it will be found, a comprehensive and true statement of the things that have occurred in the development of the New Dispensation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ in these last days. That it is entirely free from errors no one with a knowledge of bookmaking would expect; but so far as the author's ability and industry and care could preserve it from error, either of fact-statement or of deduction, it is free from errors of which the author could be conscious.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Eph. i:8-10.
[^2] I Peter i:18-20.
[^3] Rev. xiii:8.
