B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

Introduction

THE HISTORY OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS is also the history of the opening and progress of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times; and as that dispensation bears an important relation to all dispensations which have preceded it, let us here ascertain in what that relationship consists. By doing so we shall have a better appreciation of the full import of those events which make up the history of the church.

A DISPENSATION AND SUCCESSIVE DISPENSATIONS

A dispensation, without reference to any specific application or limitation of the term, is the act of dealing out or distributing; such as the dispensation of justice by courts, the dispensation of blessings by the hand of Providence. Theologically a dispensation is defined as one of the several systems or bodies of law in which at different periods God has revealed his mind and will to man, such as the Patriarchal dispensation, the Mosaic dispensation, or the Christian dispensation. The word is also sometimes applied to the periods of time during which the said laws obtain. That is, the period from Adam to Noah is usually called the Patriarchal dispensation. From Noah to the calling of Abraham, the Noachian; and from Abraham to the calling of Moses, the Abrahamic dispensation. But the word as connected with the gospel of Jesus Christ means the opening of the heavens to men; the giving out or dispensing to them the word of God; the revealing to men in whole or in part the principles and ordinances of the gospel; the conferring of divine authority upon certain chosen ones, by which they are empowered to act in the name, that is, in the authority of God, and for him. That is a dispensation as relating to the gospel; and the "Dispensation of the Fulness of Times" is that which includes all others and gathers to itself all things which bear any relation whatsoever to the work of God in our world. Also it is the last dispensation, the one in which will be gathered together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him. [^1] It is the dispensation which will see fulfilled all the decrees of God respecting the salvation of men and the redemption of the earth itself; and bears such relation to all other dispensations of the gospel as the ocean does to all earth's streams. It receives and unites them all in itself.

That there have been many dispensations of the gospel, many times that divine authority has been conferred upon men, is apparent from the scripture narrative of such events. And yet, strange as it may seem, in the face of such scripture narratives, there are those among professing Christians who hold that the gospel had no earlier origin than the time of Messiah's ministry in the flesh. As a matter of fact, however, the gospel of Jesus Christ has existed from the very earliest ages of the world. There are, indeed, certain passages of scripture which lead us to believe that even before the earth was made or ever man was placed upon it the gospel had been formulated and was understood by the spirits which inhabited the kingdom of the Father; and who, in course of time, would be blessed with a probation on the earth—an earth-life. If this be not true, of what significance is the scripture which speaks of Jesus as the Lamb ordained before the foundation of the world, but revealed in his day for the salvation of men? [^2] What of the "Lamb slain from the foundation of the world?" [^3] And further: "They that dwell on the earth shall wonder, whose names were not written in the Book of Life from the foundation of the world." [^4] "Where wast thou," asked the Lord of Job, "when I laid the foundations of the earth? * * * When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" [^5]

There is evidence in these expressions found in scripture that before the foundations of the earth were laid the sacrifice necessary to the redemption of men was understood, and the "Lamb" for the sacrifice was chosen, Jesus, the Messiah. There is evidence in these expressions from scripture of the pre-existence of the spirits of men, and the names of some of them at least were written in the "Book of Life" from the foundation of the world, and it is not unlikely that the shouting of all the sons of God for joy, at the creation of the earth was in consequence of the prospects which opened before these spirits because of the earth-life and the salvation that would come to them through the gospel—even in the prospects of that "eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, promised before the world began." [^6]

ANTIQUITY OF THE GOSPEL: REVEALED TO ADAM

The gospel, then, is of great antiquity. Older than the hills, older than the earth; for in the heavenly kingdom was it formulated before the foundations of the earth were laid. Nor were men left in ignorance of the plan of their redemption until the coming of the Messiah in the flesh. From the first that plan was known. The scripture annals accepted by the Hebrew and Christian world—the Old Testament and the New Testament, are imperfect on that head, doubtless, but enough exists even in these scriptures to indicate the existence of a knowledge of the fact of the atonement and of the redemption of man through means of it. Abel, the son of Adam, is the first we read of in the Jewish scriptures as offering "the firstlings of his flock" as a sacrifice unto God. How came he to offer sacrifice of the firstlings of his flock? Doubtless behind Abel's sacrifice, as behind similar offerings in subsequent ages, stood the fact of the Christ's atonement. [^7] In it was figured forth the means of man's redemption—through a sacrifice, and that the sacrifice of the first-born. But where learned Abel to offer sacrifice if not from his father Adam? It is reasonably certain that Adam as well as Abel offered sacrifices, in like manner and for the same intent; and to Adam, though the Jewish scriptures are silent respecting it, God must have revealed both the necessity of offering sacrifice and the great thing of which it was but the symbol. And here, to some advantage, may be quoted a passage from the writings of Moses, as revealed to Joseph Smith, in December, 1830. From what was then made known to the great latter-day Prophet of the writings of Moses, it appears that our book of Genesis does not contain all that was revealed to Moses respecting the revelations of God to Adam, and to his children of the first generation. According to this more complete account of the revelation to Moses, after Adam was driven from Eden, God gave commandments both to him and his wife, that they should worship the Lord their God, and should offer the firstlings of their flocks for an offering unto the Lord, and Adam was obedient unto the commandment:

"And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why doest thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me. And then the angel spake, saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth. Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son for evermore." [^8]

After some time elapsed and men multiplied in the earth and wickedness increased; after Abel, the righteous, was slain, and Cain was a vagabond in the earth for the murder; after Lamech had also become a murderer and satan had great power among the disobedient—then, it is written:

"And God cursed the earth with a sore curse, and was angry with the wicked, with all the sons of men whom he had made; for they would not hearken unto his voice, nor believe on his [to be] Only Begotten Son, even him whom he declared should come in the meridian of time, who was prepared from before the foundation of the world. And thus the gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost. And thus all things were confirmed unto Adam, by an holy ordinance, and the gospel preached, and a decree sent forth, that it should be in the world, until the end thereof." [^9]

ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ANCIENT CHURCH

As the gospel was thus preached there were those among the children of Adam who obeyed it, and a record of those men was kept, and they constituted the ancient church of God. Enoch was of the number of righteous ones, and a preacher of righteousness. In these revealed writings of Moses he is represented in the course of his ministry as referring to the manner in which the gospel was taught to Adam:

"And he said unto them: Because that Adam fell, we are, and by his fall came death; and we are made partakers of misery and woe. Behold satan hath come among the children of men, and tempteth them to worship him; and men have become carnal, sensual, and devilish, and are shut out from the presence of God. But God hath made known unto our fathers that all men must repent. And he called upon our father Adam by his own voice, saying: I am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh. [i. e. begot them spirits]. And he also said unto him [Adam]: If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine [to be] Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you." [^10]

Adam was obedient to these commandments of the Lord, and taught them to his children, many of whom believed them, obeyed and became the sons of God.

Enoch, we are told, "walked with God: and he was not; for God took him." [^11] Paul, in speaking of him says: "By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and was not found, because God had translated him." [^12] But the writings of Moses, as revealed to Joseph Smith, give information that not only was Enoch translated, but the saints inhabiting his city, into which he had gathered his people; and this city was called Zion: "and it came to pass that Zion was not, for God received it up into his own bosom; and from thence went forth the saying, 'Zion is fled'." [^13]

THE GOSPEL AND THE LAW

Thus the gospel was taught to the ancients. Noah was a preacher of it as well as Enoch. So, too, was Melchizedek, priest of the Most High God, King of Salem, who met Abraham in his day and blessed him. [^14] Paul, the apostle of the Gentiles, bears unmistakable testimony to the fact, as we shall see, that the gospel was preached unto Abraham; and also that it was offered to Israel under Moses before "the law of carnal commandments" was given. "I would not that ye should be ignorant," he says, "how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea; and did all eat the same spiritual meat; and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ." [^15]

Referring again to the fact of the presentation of the gospel to ancient Israel, Paul says that the gospel was preached unto ancient Israel, as well as unto Israel in his day; but the preaching of the gospel to ancient Israel was not profitable to them, because they received it not in faith, and as a result displeased God by their unbelief, and the rebellious perished in the wilderness. [^16]

Paul's great controversy with the Christian Jews was in relation to the superiority of the gospel to the law of Moses. Many of the Christian Jews while accepting Jesus of Nazareth as the promised Messiah still held to the law with something like superstitious reverence, and could not be persuaded that the gospel superseded the law, and was, in fact, a fulfillment of all its types and symbols. This controversy culminated in Paul's now celebrated letter to the Galatians, wherein he says:

"Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham. And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed. * * * Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He sayeth not and to seeds, as of many; but as of one, and to thy seed, which is Christ. And this I say, that the covenant, that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the law, which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disannul that it should make the promise of none effect. * * * Wherefore then serveth the law [i. e. the law of Moses]? It was added because of transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise was made; and it was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator. * * * Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster. For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus." [^17]

FROM MOSES TO JOHN THE BAPTIST AND MESSIAH

In greater clearness, however, than in these sayings of Paul gathered up from his writings like scattered rays of light from a prism's reflection, the antiquity of the gospel, as far as it concerns ancient Israel, is stated in a revelation of God to the Prophet of the New Dispensation, Joseph Smith. And not only the antiquity of the gospel, but in greater clearness also are stated the reasons why, after the gospel was first preached to ancient Israel, the law of carnal commandments was "added," or given in its place, to act as a schoolmaster to bring Israel unto Christ. And by the knowledge imparted in that revelation the time between the Mosaic dispensation and the coming of John the Baptist, to prepare the way for the coming of Christ, is spanned by a statement so rational, that the truth of it cannot be reasonably questioned. Speaking of the Melchizedek priesthood and its powers in administering the ordinances of the gospel, and how it came to disappear as an organization in Israel, the passage in question says:

"This greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God; therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest; and without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh, for without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live. Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God; but they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence, therefore the Lord in his wrath (for his anger was kindled against them) swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory. Therefore he took Moses out of their midst, and the holy priesthood also; and the lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel; which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and the law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath, caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John, whom God raised up, being filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb; for he was baptized while he was yet in his childhood, and was ordained by the angel of God at the time he was eight days old unto this power to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord, in whose hand is given all power." [^18]

As before remarked, this passage spans the interval of time between Moses and John the Baptist, and gives a fuller explanation than can be found in the writings of Paul or elsewhere, for the reason why and in what manner the law supplanted the gospel; and what measure of the priesthood remained with Israel unto the coming of John; in what the mission of John consisted, and in what manner he was qualified to fulfill that mission.

It should be remarked, however, that while the Lord took Moses out of the midst of ancient Israel, and the holy Melchizedek priesthood also, as an organization, it is evident that subsequently special dispensations of that priesthood were given to individual prophets, such as Samuel, Nathan, Elijah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel: for these men exercised powers and enjoyed privileges which belong exclusively to the Melchizedek priesthood.

THE DISPENSATION OF THE MERIDIAN OF TIME.

With the period between Moses and John the Baptist spanned, we come to the Dispensation of the Meridian of Time. This dispensation begins with the preaching of John the Baptist in the wilderness. It was made glorious by the personal ministry of Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of God; by his suffering and death, for the redemption of mankind; by his glorious resurrection from the dead; by his subsequent ministry among his followers, and his final ascension into heaven to the throne of his Father; by the faithful ministry of his apostles, by whom the good tidings of man's salvation were published to the world: by the establishment of the church as the agency through which the gospel was to be more widely proclaimed, and those who accepted the gospel were more thoroughly instructed in its doctrines, and guarded from error. An inspired volume of scripture, the New Testament, was also brought into existence, from the teachings of the inspired apostles, in which the great fundamental truths of the gospel were embodied and cast into a form more comprehensible, and to which men could appeal through ages to come, as an authoritative statement, not only of what Jesus said and what he did, but also a statement of what doctrines are to be believed; what precepts to be practiced; what ordinances to be observed in order to obtain salvation. By thus embodying the chief doctrines of Christ in a volume of scripture that should live forever, and be published in all the languages of the world, provision was made for such a dissemination of the knowledge of God, that the world would never again be wholly without that knowledge; and though the church might become corrupted, as it afterwards did; though men ambitious of distinction and power might usurp authority and establish churches, in which they taught for doctrines the commandments of men, as they certainly did; still in this volume of scripture men henceforth would have at hand a standard of truth by which to test the utterances of would-be teachers, while at the same time it would keep above the horizon of a world's knowledge the great truths of the gospel—the existence and character of God; the manifestation of him through the person, nature and attributes of Jesus of Nazareth; the relationship existing between God and man; the fall of man; and the redemption provided for him in the atonement of Jesus Christ. All this was achieved in the Dispensation of the Meridian of Time; a mighty work accomplished by the Son of God and his associates; a work sealed not only by the blood of Jesus Christ, but by the blood also of many faithful witnesses, which shall make their testimony of force in the world.

THE "DISPENSATION OF THE MERIDIAN OF TIME" AND THE "DISPENSATION OF THE FULNESS OF TIMES" CONTRASTED

Owing to the phraseology of certain passages of scripture, making reference to the coming of Messiah in the flesh, and to the work of God in those days, the "Dispensation of the Meridian of Time" is often mistaken for the "Dispensation of the Fulness of Times." In St. Mark's Gospel, for instance, John the Baptist is represented as saying: "The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel." [^19] The words in italics are usually understood to make reference to the "Dispensation of the Fulness of Times." Again it is written: "But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law." [^20] The words "when the fulness of the time was come," are supposed to refer to the "Dispensation of the Fulness of Times." [^21] Other passages of scripture referring to the days of Messiah's personal ministry among men in the flesh, speak of them as the "last days." Paul in the opening sentence of his letter to the Hebrews does this: "God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things." [^22] So St. John, in addressing the saints in his day: "Little children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that anti-Christ shall come, even now are there many anti-Christ's; whereby we know that it is the last time." [^23] These with one other special passage of scripture to be separately considered, constitute the authority upon which the "Meridian Dispensation" is confounded with the "Dispensation of the Fulness of Times." And yet all these passages are susceptible of quite a different and more natural rendering. Without controversy it will be conceded that the Lord had an appointed time for his Son Jesus to come to earth in the flesh and perform the mission that had been assigned to him; to suffer; to die; to arise again from the dead. And when the fulness of this time was come, God indeed sent forth his Son into the world. As for those inspired writers who speak of the "last days," and the "last times"—they speak relatively; that is, with reference to former days and times; and, of course, the days and times in which they lived to them were "the last days" of the earth's temporal existence; they were not "the last days" in the general sense at all, as there have been now some two thousand years of days since then. They were not the "last days" that are understood as immediately preceding the glorious coming of the Son of God in power and in great glory to reign on the earth.

JOEL'S PROPHECY OF THE DISPENSATION OF "THE LAST DAYS."

Of the special passage referred to above, and which I said would receive separate consideration, is St. Peter's quotation from the Prophet Joel concerning the outpouring of the Spirit of God upon "all flesh in the last days." This quotation from Joel is regarded as identifying the days in which the apostle was speaking as "the last days;" and the dispensation in which he was living as the dispensation of the last days, and of the fulness of times. The conditions existing when St. Peter was speaking, and the prophecy of Joel, however, admit of no such interpretation. The circumstances were as follows: The Holy Ghost in an extraordinary manner rested upon the apostles and gave them the power of speaking in other languages than those they had learned. Some in the listening multitude attributed this singular manifestation to "drunkenness," whereupon St. Peter arose and refuted the slander, saying: "These are not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day. But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel; and it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams: and on my servants and on my handmaidens I will pour out in those days of my Spirit; and they shall prophesy: and I will show wonders in heaven above, and signs in the earth beneath; blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke: the sun shall be turned into darkness and the moon into blood, before that great and notable day of the Lord come: and it shall come to pass that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved." [^24] "For," to finish the passage as it stands in Joel, but which is not in St. Peter's quotation—"For in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call." [^25]

Because St. Peter, referring to the Spirit that was resting upon the twelve apostles, said, "this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel," etc., the very general opinion prevails that Joel's prophecy was then fulfilled; and hence the last days were come. This is an entire misapprehension of the purpose of St. Peter in making the quotation; as also of the quoted passage itself. Beyond all controversy St. Peter meant only: This Spirit which you now see resting upon these apostles of Jesus of Nazareth, is that same Spirit which the prophet Joel says will, in the last days, be poured out upon all flesh. Obviously he did not mean that this occasion of the apostles receiving the Holy Ghost was a complete fulfillment of Joel's prediction. To insist upon such an exegesis would be to charge the chief of the apostles with palpable ignorance of the meaning of Joel's prophecy. On the occasion in question the Holy Ghost was poured out upon the twelve apostles, who were given the power to speak in various tongues; Joel's prophecy, for its complete fulfillment, requires that the Spirit of the Lord, the Holy Ghost, shall be poured out upon all flesh; and undoubtedly refers to that time which shall come in the blessed millennium when the enmity shall not only cease between man and man, but even between the beasts of the forests and of the fields; and between man and beast, as described by Isaiah in the following language:

"The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf, and the young lion, and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the suckling child shall play on the hole of the asp; and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice's den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." [^26]

Compare these conditions so vividly described with what Joel himself says of the period when the Spirit of the Lord shall be poured out upon all flesh, and it will at once be clear that the two prophets are dealing with the same period, and not only dealing with the same period, but that the period itself is certainly far beyond in time the days of St. Peter; in fact is still in the future; for the sun has not yet been turned into blackness; nor the moon into blood; nor have the stars withdrawn their shining. It is obvious that the events upon the Day of Pentecost did not fulfill the terms of this prophecy, except in those particulars already pointed out. The mention in this prophecy, however, of those special signs which Jesus refers to as immediately preceding his own second and glorious coming, clearly demonstrate that Joel was speaking of the last days indeed, and not of a circumstance that occurred in connection with a period more properly designated as the "Meridian of Time." Immediately following his prediction of the outpouring of God's Spirit upon "all flesh" Joel represents the Lord as saying: "And I will show wonders in the heavens, and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come." [^27] And later: "The sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their shining. The Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth shall shake: but the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel." [^28]

Compare this with the Savior's description of conditions in the earth that will precede his own second coming:

"Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken: and then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven: and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. And he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other." [^29]

The same wonders in heaven and earth; the same changes in sun, and moon, and stars; the same promises of the gathering of God's people as are found in the prophecy of Joel. There can be no question, then, but that the prophecy of Joel refers to the same "last days" that Jesus here alludes to—the days of the coming of the Son of Man in glory—and not to the days of St. Peter and the other apostles in the "Meridian of Time."

The sum of the matter then is, that St. Peter was not living in the "last days;" that the prophecy of Joel was not in its entirety fulfilled in the outpouring of the Holy Ghost upon the apostles on the Day of Pentecost; that at no time subsequent to the days of the aforesaid apostles has there existed such conditions in the earth as amount to a fulfillment of Joel's prophecy; therefore at some time future from the days of the apostles, we may look forward to a universal outpouring of the Holy Ghost upon "all flesh," resulting in a universal peace and widespread knowledge of God, brought about, unquestionably, by a subsequent dispensation of the gospel from that in which St. Peter wrought.

ST. PETER'S PROPHECY OF A DISPENSATION FUTURE FROM HIS OWN TIME

Of such a dispensation referred to in the closing lines of the preceding paragraph, St. Peter speaks of, and describes in his discourse to the Jews who gathered about himself and St. John on the occasion of his expounding by what power the man impotent in his feet had been healed. It was by faith in the Christ that the man had been made whole. But the Jews had denied "the Holy One and the Just," and had killed "the Prince of Life;" through ignorance had they done it, as also had their rulers. "But those things which God before had shewed by the mouth of all his prophets that Christ should suffer, he hath so fulfilled." "Repent ye therefore," continued St. Peter, "and be converted that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; and he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: whom the heaven must receive until the Times of Restitution of All Things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." [^30]

We emphasize the foregoing by recapitulation, in substance, namely: There is to be, subsequent to the days of St. Peter and his associate apostles, a "time of the restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began." A time "of refreshing from the presence of the Lord," when it may be hoped that Judah's eyes will be opened to the fact that Israel's Messiah is Jesus of Nazareth, whom they and their rulers had crucified. A "time" when God would again send Jesus Christ who before had been preached unto them; but whom, meanwhile, "the heaven must retain until the restitution of all things," of which the prophets had spoken since the world began.

There can be no question but this contemplates a further and a fuller dispensation of the things of God future from the days in which St. Peter was then living and working. A time that would witness all things restored to earth that had been spoken of by all the prophets since the world began. A time when God would again send Jesus Christ who before had been preached unto the Jews; but whom, meanwhile, the heaven must receive and retain until the time of this "refreshing"—renewal of communication by revelation and visitation of angels, etc.—shall come from the presence of the Lord.

ST. PAUL'S PROPHECY OF THE SAME FUTURE DISPENSATION

It is to this same time also that St. Paul must refer when he speaks of God as having made known to the believers of his time the mystery of God's will "according to his good pleasure," which he had purposed in himself—how "that in the dispensation of the fulness of times, he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are in earth; even in him. In whom also we have ordained an inheritance." [^31] That the time of the gathering together in one all things in Christ, both things which are in heaven and which are in earth, in a dispensation that shall be known as the "Dispensation of the Fulness of Times," and "the times of restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the mouths of all his holy prophets since the world began," were to be at a time future from the times in which both of the apostles respectively lived, admits of no doubt. Beyond their day there awaited a still greater day which would witness the gathering together in one all the dispensations that ever have been, uniting into one all the successive dispensations, making them all parts of one dispensation, really vitalized by the coming in the flesh and the sacrifice by crucifixion, and the resurrection from the dead of the Christ in the Meridian of Time, but to be brought to a triumphant conclusion and completion in the "Dispensation of the Fulness of Times" when all things are gathered together in Christ—"even in him."

ST. JOHN'S PROPHECY OF A DISPENSATION FUTURE FROM HIS OWN TIME

It was such a dispensation—i.e. one subsequent to apostolic times—that St. John doubtless alludes to in his Book of Revelation when he says:

"And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come; and worship him that made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters." [^32]

Again, by way of recapitulation: In the hour of God's judgment—i.e. in the last, and the very last days, the inhabitants of the world will be without the gospel, even every nation, kindred, tongue and people, or why the need of sending forth an angel to proclaim it anew in "the hour of God's judgment;" and so universally, if it was already on the earth in the "hour of God's judgment?" And why the need of calling upon every nation, kindred, tongue and people to fear God and give glory to him, and worship the creator of "heaven and earth, and the seas, and the fountains of waters," if they were already doing those things? Evidently the nature of this predicted coming forth of the gospel by the ministration of an angel in the hour of God's judgment—in the last days truly—would indicate that the world would not be fearing the true God, nor worshipping the Creator in the last days, hence the calling of the world back to the worship of the true God, by a new and universal preaching of "the everlasting gospel"—the one and only and eternal gospel; for there is but one. [^33]

It is of peculiar force this predicting by one of the apostles of the Christ, the coming of a New Dispensation of the gospel (the one and only and "everlasting gospel") subsequent to the apostolic age; and for that reason I use it here and in this manner, as being of the highest importance.

SUPPOSED FINALITY OF THE DISPENSATION OF THE MERIDIAN OF TIME

I apprehend that the difficulty of establishing the conception of a dispensation to come subsequently to what men call apostolic times, will arise from the fact that it has been quite generally taught that the dispensation in which the redemptive work of the Christ was wrought—was born, suffered, crucified, and resurrected—was to be the final dispensation; the completion of the work of God as to revelation, the visitation of angels, the giving out of scripture, the coming of authorized prophets of God—all this, it is alleged, ceased with the apostles of the Christ, or the apostolic times. This is held, and is taught by all the divisions and sub-divisions of christendom, the Greek and the Roman catholic communions, and all the Protestant sects. To herald a New Dispensation, then, subsequent to apostolic times, however clearly predicted in the scripture, is to antagonize the teaching of all christendom. It amounts to proclaiming a universal apostasy from the Christian faith in the times of the apostles, or immediately subsequent thereto, if a New Dispensation is now to be proclaimed. Such an apostasy, of course, may not be admitted by those who believe in the finality of the dispensation of the apostolic age; but it must be affirmed by those who are heralds of a New Dispensation, since there is no occasion for such a dispensation if, the old, or the dispensation of apostolic times was completed and made to be continuous in full existence of life and authority thence forward.

Such, however, is not the case. It is evident from the general trend of scripture that the dispensation of apostolic times was not the final one, as we have already seen above. The fact of an universal "falling away" from the true Christian faith as established in apostolic times, is too apparent, too easily established as truth, to admit of doubt. It will not be necessary to go into that here, however, at great length. [^34] It will be sufficient in this Introduction to give the anouncement which God makes of the "Christian" world's status with reference to the gospel and to the church of Christ.

STATUS OF "CHRISTENDOM"—GOD'S ARRAIGNMENT

It is a most startling announcement with which the Prophet Joseph Smith begins his message to the world. Concerning the question, he asked God—"Which of all the sects is right, and which shall I join?" he says:

"I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong, and the personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight: that those professors were all corrupt; that 'they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrines the commandments of men: having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof'." [^35]

This is a tremendous arraignment of all christendom. It charges a condition of universal apostasy from God, of a "Christianity" that was dwelling in a fancied security of being the farthest removed from the possibility of such a charge; each division of the so-called Christian church felicitating itself with the flattering unction that its own particular society possessed the enlightened fulness of the Christian religion. While the boldness of this declaration of the young Prophet is astounding, upon reflection it must be conceded that just such a condition of affairs in the religious world is consistent with the work he, under the direction of divine Providence, was about to inaugurate. Nothing less than a complete apostasy from the Christian religion would warrant the establishment of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Of sects there were already enough in existence. Division and subdivision had already created of confusion more than enough, and there was no possible excuse for the introduction of a new Christian sect. But if men through apostasy had corrupted the Christian religion and lost divine authority to administer the ordinances of the gospel, it was of the utmost importance that a New Dispensation of the true Christian religion should be given to the world. It should also be observed at this point, that Joseph Smith, then but a youth, was not himself pronouncing judgment upon the status of christendom. It was not he who declared the sects to be all wrong, their creeds an abomination, and the professors thereof corrupt. He of all persons, both on account of his extreme youthfulness and his lack of general information, was among the least qualified to pronounce upon such a question. Indeed, he himself, confesses his unfitness for such an office. His seeking knowledge from God upon this very question—"which of all the sects is right?" is a confession of his own inability to determine the matter. No human wisdom was sufficient to answer that question. No man in all the world was so pre-eminent as to be justified in proclaiming the acceptance of one church in preference to another. Divine knowledge and wisdom alone was sufficient to pass judgment upon such a question; and there is a peculiar force in the circumstance that the announcement which Joseph Smith makes with reference to this subject is not formulated by him nor by any other man, but is given to him of God. God has been the judge of "fallen christendom," Joseph Smith but his mesenger, to herald that judgment to the world, the incoming of a New Dispensation of the gospel, and the re-establishment of the Church of Jesus Christ.

Footnotes

Volume I

Volume One of the Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, carries the story of the New Dispensation of the gospel from an account of the ancestry of its Prophet, Joseph Smith, through all the incidents of its unfolding to the cruel expulsion of the saints from the state of Missouri, winter and spring of 1839. The chief incidents of the volume deal with the origins of the movement: the necessity of this the New Dispensation (Introduction); the first vision; the coming forth of the Book of Mormon; the organization of the church; the western movement of the church; the location of Zion; the expulsion from Jackson county; the debacle at Kirtland; the expulsion from Missouri; the extension of the work into Canada and England, and Hyde's mission to Palestine; with all the rich doctrinal development which attended these external affairs of the organization. To name, even, some of the outstanding events treated in this volume, is to emphasize the importance of it; and it is hoped, of course, that the incidents that make up this section of the History, and the comments upon them, in the course of their unfolding, will supply authenticated material of high value for all possible information, and righteous deduction that may be founded upon that information.

Century One

---
Notas:
[^1] This was a patriotic organization that grew out of the "provincial congress" movement, that had John Hancock for president. Dr. Joseph Warren, the hero of Bunker Hill, was chairman of the committee. It was made the duty of the committee to collect military stores, with power to call out the militia (Fiske's American Revolution, I., Cambridge edition, p. 129; History of the United States, Morris, p. 189); in a word, to prepare for the impending revolution. Feeling surprised that the "Committee of Safety" should have been perpetuated in Topsfield, according to the town records—from which the above information was obtained—a letter was written to Mr. George Francis Dow, secretary of the Topsfield Historical Society, which elicited the following answer, bearing date of April 28th, 1909:
[^2] Civil Government, Fiske, p. 26.
[^3] Massachusetts Archives, vol. clvii, page 519.
[^4] These lines were found on the person of Thomas Dudley, who was the author of them, at the time of his death. Dudley, it will be remembered, was associated with John Winthrop, as Deputy Governor of Massachusetts. (Beginnings of New England, Fiske, p. 125).
[^5] Address at Topsfield, Massachusetts, New York, 1851, p. 25, quoted by Riley's Founder of Mormonism, note, p. 63.
[^6] The original, in 1872, was in the hands of the son of Jacob Town, then the town clerk of Topsfield; who, while not willing to part with the original, permitted a copy to be taken for the "Mormon" church historian by George Albert Smith, grandson of Asael, which copy is now on file at the Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^7] Asael Smith of Topsfield, Joseph F. Smith, Jun., from Topsfield Historical Collections, vol. viii.
[^8] Beginning—"Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!"
[^9] The original copy of this article, which is in a well preserved condition, is now in the possession of the Smith family. It was read and well understood by Asael's family many years before his death and no doubt had a great influence over them in their actions for good. (Asael Smith of Topsfield, Joseph F. Smith, Jun., from the Topsfield Historical Collections, vol. viii).
[^10] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith; Improvement Era, edition, published at Salt Lake City, 1902, with an Introduction by Joseph F. Smith, President of the L. D. S. Church and nephew of the Prophet.
[^11] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. x. As it will be necessary to make frequent reference to this book, it is proper to say that it was originally published under the title Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith the Prophet and his Progenitors for Many Generations, by Lucy Smith, mother of the Prophet, published by Orson Pratt, Liverpool, England. In the Preface to the edition published in England, Orson Pratt says that these "Biographical Sketches" "were mostly written previous to the death of the Prophet, and under his personal inspection." In this matter Elder Pratt was misled, as Lucy Smith did not begin dictating these memoirs until the fall of 1844, after the murder of her two sons, Joseph and Hyrum, at Carthage, Illinois. The work was completed in 1845. Mrs. Martha Jane Knowlton Coray was "Mother Smith's" amanuensis; and made two copies of the work, one of which she left with Lucy Smith, and the other she took to Utah and deposited it in the hands of President Brigham Young. The copy left with Lucy Smith fell into the hands of her son Wm. Smith, thence into the hands of one Isaac Sheen, who sold it to Orson Pratt in 1852, when the latter was en route to England on a mission, and called upon Sheen in Illinois. There were some slight inaccuracies in the English edition, the work not being carefully edited, or Mother Smith's recollections correlated with established historical data. In consequence of these errors, and also being displeased with the procedure of Elder Pratt in publishing so important a work without consultation or knowledge of either the presidency of the church or the twelve apostles, President Brigham Young ordered the edition suppressed. A new edition of the book, however, was published by the Improvement Era in 1902 at Salt Lake City, with the sanction and approval of President Joseph F. Smith, nephew of the Prophet, who wrote an Introduction to the work setting forth the above facts. But instead of the ponderous title of the first edition the more simple one History of the Prophet Joseph, by his Mother, Lucy Smith, is used and by such title it will be referred to in this History.
[^12] Ginseng:—A herb of the genus Aralia, having a root of aromatic and stimulant properties, in great esteem in China. The true Manchurian ginseng of China is A. Ginseng. A. quinaue folia of the eastern United States (doubtless the species grown in Vermont) is closely akin to it, and is exported to China in large quantities. (Funk & Wagnalls Standard Dictionary). In recent years the industry of raising ginseng root has been taken up in Oregon. There is always a good market at high prices for this product, and an immense amount of the herb can be grown on a small piece of ground.
[^13] 13. Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses, ch. vii:69.
[^14] 14. Heb. vii:1.
[^15] 15. II Cor. x:1-4.
[^16] 16. Heb. iii:14-19 and iv:1-2. This cites the close of one chapter and the opening verses of another, but it should be remembered that Paul did not divide his epistles into chapter and verses; and this awkward division is but one of many that exist in the scriptures in their current versions.
[^17] 17. Gal. iii.
[^18] 18. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxiv:19-28.
[^19] 19. St. Mark i:15.
[^20] 20. Gal. iv:4.
[^21] 21. It is significant that in the phrases "when the fulness of the time had come," and "the time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand," "time" is written in the singular; whereas in speaking of the "Dispensation of the Fulness of Times"—the plural form is used; denoting that the incidents are quite distinct: and the plural form, in the latter case, is quite in keeping with the idea that a number of dispensations are involved to be gathered into one. (See Eph. 1:9, 10.)
[^22] 22. Heb. i:1, 2.
[^23] 23. I John ii:18.
[^24] 24. Acts. ii:15-21.
[^25] 25. Joel ii:28-32.
[^26] 26. Isaiah xi:6-9.
[^27] 27. Joel ii:30, 31.
[^28] 28. Ibid iii:15, 16.
[^29] 29. St. Matt. xxiv:29-31.
[^30] 30. Acts iii:1-21.
[^31] 31. Eph. i:9, 10.
[^32] 32. Rev. xiv:6, 7.
[^33] 33. Gal. i:6-9.
[^34] 34. The subject is somewhat elaborately treated (chiefly historically) in the Introduction to the six volumed History of the Church, Period I, being the carefully edited and annotated annals of the history of the church supplied from the Journal History (Mss) kept by the Prophet of the New Dispensation from the commencement of the Prophet's work up to the time of his death. The first volume was published in 1902, the sixth in 1912. There is a treatise on the subject—The Great Apostasy, by Dr. James E. Talmage of the quorum of the twelve apostles, 1909. Also a recent work by the author of this History, The Falling Away, or the World's Loss of the Christian Religion and Church, sixteen Radio Addresses, 1929.
[^35] 35. History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 6.
