B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER I

THE ANCESTRY OF JOSEPH SMITH, THE PROPHET

THE History of the Church of Jesus Christ in the New Dispensation properly begins with an account of the ancestry of Joseph Smith, the Prophet. This in view of efforts to account for the Prophet of the New Dispensation and what are regarded as his "more or less abnormal performances," in bringing into existence the Book of Mormon, and founding the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The study of his ancestry becomes important, since no pains are spared in making systematic pathological studies of that ancestry in the hope of finding some abnormalities that would justify the theory that the Prophet's revelations were but hallucinations, the product of a mind diseased. It may be well, therefore, to state what is known of the line of men from whom the Prophet descended, as also to inquire concerning his maternal ancestors.

I. THE SMITHS OF TOPSFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS

On the paternal side the ancestry of Joseph Smith can be traced only to Robert Smith, who is known to have come from England to America in 1638, when about fifteen years of age. Nothing is known of the antecedents of Robert in England. After his arrival in America he settled in Essex country, Massachusetts, where he married Mary French, by whom he had ten children. Robert is accredited with having begun life in a humble way; with having won the esteem of his neighbors; and with having prospered fairly well as to material things. He purchased two hundred and eight acres of land located partly in Boxford township, partly in Topsfield. He was usually spoken of as "Robert Smith of Boxford," but sometimes of "Topsfield." He was esteemed as a quiet, unassuming man; interested in the welfare of Boxford, and generous to the needy. It was from this man that the Prophet descended through the following line:

—Samuel (I) third son of the above Robert;

—Samuel (II) first son of the above Samuel;

—Asael, second son of the above Samuel (II);

—and Joseph, (second son of the above Asael) father of the Prophet,

Samuel Smith (I), son of the aforesaid Robert Smith, was born January 26th, 1666. He was a carpenter by trade and married Rebecca Curtis, daughter of John Curtis; and to them were born nine children, two sons and seven daughters. Twenty-three days before his death Robert Smith made his will, which bears the date of August 7th, 1693, in which he appointed his wife Mary and Samuel (I) his executors. But later and at the request of both mother and children, Samuel (I) became sole administrator of his father's estate, a substantial testimony of the family's confidence in his ability and integrity. The letter of administration was issued from Judge Jonathan Corwin, October 3rd, 1698. After the settlement of the estate, Samuel (I) moved from Boxford to Topsfield where he became an influential member of society. While a carpenter by trade, he was also a land owner, and held several offices of trust. He died July 12th, 1748.

Samuel Smith (II), first son of the above Samuel Smith (I), was born January 26th, 1714. He inherited from his father the homestead in Topsfield, and married, first, Priscilla Gould, by whom he had five children. After her demise he married, second, her cousin of the same name. From the number of public offices Samuel (II) filled and the length of time he served in them, it is evident that he was a man of education and enterprise, prominent in the affairs of Topsfield, and active in the affairs of the state. From the public records of Topsfield it appears that he was grand juryman in 1760; in 1770, road supervisor; in 1779, 1780, 1783, 1784, and 1785 he was on the Committee of Safety. [^1]

From 1771 to 1777, and again in 1781 and 1782 Samuel (II) was assessor and selectman in Topsfield, declining the honor in 1783. He was moderator of the Topsfield town meetings—chosen by the ballots of the people at each meeting [^2]—in 1758, 1759, 1760, 1762, 1764, 1766, 1767, 1768, 1769, 1770, 1771, 1772, 1773, 1774, 1775, 1778, 1779, 1780, 1782, and 1783; recognizer of debts in 1777, 1778, 1779, 1780, 1782, and 1783; representative to the General Court (H. of R.) in 1764, 1765, 1766, 1767, 1768, 1769, 1770, 1772, 1777, 1778, and 1781; town clerk in 1774, 1776, and 1777; delegate to the provincial congress at Concord, October 11, 1774; and again January 19, 1775. He was chairman of the local "Tea Committee," and thus had some part in that movement which more than any other of the preliminary steps of resistance to Great Britain's encroachments upon the rights of the colonies, gave good earnest of the greater resistance so soon to follow.

In the Massachusetts Archives [^3] is found the following entry:

"Province of the Massachusetts Bay. To the honorable the General Court, Committee Accounts, now sitting at Watertown:

"The selectmen of Topsfield hereby exhibit for allowance the account of the powder and lead that the said selectmen delivered out of the town stock, to the minute men and others, to the number of 32, in the whole—and all of the town. It being what they expended in the engagement with the ministerial troops, on their retreat from Concord on the 19th day of April last, viz: One quarter of a pound of powder to each man, amounting in the whole to eight pounds of powder; and also to each man 12 leaden bullets, amounting in weight to 17 pounds. By order of the selectmen of Topsfield.

Topsfield, April 11, 1776. Pr. Sam'l Smith."

Samuel (II) was active throughout the Revolutionary War, and was known as "Captain Samuel Smith," a title he received from service in the militia. He died November 14, 1785, in the ninth year of the Independence of the United States, to obtain which independence he had devoted courageous and efficient service. On his death he left an estate valued at five hundred and forty-four English pounds, which roughly estimated would be equivalent to $2,700. His obituary published in the Salem Gazette of 22nd of November, 1785, said of him:—

"Died.—At Topsfield, on Monday the 14th instant, Samuel Smith, Esq., aged 72.—So amiable and worthy a character as he evidently appeared, both in public and private, will render the memory of him ever precious. For a number of years he represented the town in the General Court, where he was esteemed a man of integrity and uprightness. His usefulness among those with "whom he was more immediately conversant was eminent. He was a sincere friend to the liberties of his country, and a strenuous advocate for the doctrine of Christianity."

"The memory of the just is blessed."

Asael Smith, second son of the above Samuel Smith (II), was born 7th of March, 1744. His early life was spent in Topsfield, and at twenty-three he married Mary Duty, of Windham, New Hampshire, in which place he lived for some time, thence moving successively to Dunbarton, and Manchester in the same state. During the American Revolution he served, though with less distinction than his father, in the American army.

On the death of his father, Samuel Smith (II), Asael returned to the old homestead at Topsfield, which he had inherited. At Topsfield, Asael was made to feel the pressure of sectarian intolerance. It is evident that he had strong inclination himself toward that system of doctrine known as universalism—the belief that all souls will finally be saved, that good will finally triumph, universally and permanently.

He was a man of strong convictions in religion, courageous, outspoken, but tolerant withal; and held to the view, not so popular then as it afterwards became, that men should be free to worship God according to the dictates of their own consciences. These views brought upon him the displeasure of the severely orthodox, who, at that time were swayed by the spirit that regarded toleration with the suspicion, so well expressed in the following quartrain:

"Let men of God in courts and churches watch

O'er such as do a Toleration hatch,

Lest that ill egg bring forth a cockatrice

To poison all in heresy and vice." [^4]

This long had been the spirit dominant in New England, and therefore when Asael Smith made free to express his unorthodox opinions, and further emphasized these by giving shelter in his home to a despised and persecuted Quaker, it brought such displeasure of the community upon him that he resolved to leave Topsfield, the home of his fathers, and seek a more congenial society. He went first to northern New Hampshire, thence to Tunbridge, Vermont, where with the aid of his sons he cleared a large farm of virgin forest. In the later years of his life he made his home with his son Silas at Stockholm, St. Lawrence county, New York, where he died October 31st, 1830, in his eighty-sixth year.

It is necessary to deal further with the character of this ancestor of the Prophet, since he is much relied upon by the "hallucination theorists" to prove the physical and mental defects which they feign Joseph Smith, the Prophet, inherited from his forefathers. It has been said that Asael had a physical deformity, that one shoulder was higher than the other. Nehemiah Cleveland, in an address at Topsfield, on the occasion of the two hundredth anniversary of the town's incorporation, alluded to this supposed defect by saying: "This man, like 'Ammon's great son, one shoulder had too high,' and hence usually bore the significant and complimentary (!) designation of "Crooked Neck Smith'." One may easily discern the bias of the speaker, as he adds: "He was so free in his opinions on religious subjects, that some regarded his sentiments as more distorted than his neck." [^5] The facts in relation to this physical "deformity" are, that while a small child Asael's neck was severely burned, the cords contracted, drawing the neck to one side, and rendering it stiff. This misfortune the malice of those whom he offended by the freedom of his religious opinions seized upon as an "abnormality" that later was pressed into service to account for supposed mental abnormalities in his grand-son, founder of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. As to the "distortion" of Asael's mind, two documents of his exist which reflect the quality of his mind so clearly, that the reader will need no other evidence to establish the soundness of his understanding, the clearness of his intellect, or the refinement of his nature, than their perusal.

The first of these documents is a letter written by Asael Smith after his removal from Topsfield, commonwealth of Massachusetts, [^6] and reads as follows:

ASAEL SMITH'S LETTER TO MR. JACOB TOWN

"Tunbridge, Jan. 14th, 1796.

"Respected Sir:—Having a favorable opportunity, altho' on very short notice, I with joy and gratitude embrace it, returning herewith my most hearty thanks for your respect shown in your favor of the 30th of November, by Mr. Willes, which I view as a singular specimen of friendship, which has very little been practiced by any of my friends in Topsfield, altho' often requested.

"My family are all, through the goodness of the Divine Benediction, in a tolerable good state of health, and desire to be remembered to you and to all inquiring friends.

"I have set me up a house since Mr. Willes was here and expect to remove into it next spring, and to begin again on an entire new farm, and my son Joseph will live on the old farm (if this that has been but four years occupied can be called old), and carry it on at the halves, which half I hope will nearly furnish my family with food, whilst I with my four youngest sons shall endeavor to bring to another farm, etc.

"As to news, I have nothing, as I know of, worth noticing, except that grain has taken a sudden rise amongst us, about one-third.

"As to the 'Jacobin party,' they are not very numerous here or, if they are they are pretty still; there are some in this state, viz., in Bennington, who, like other children crying for a rattle, have blared out against their rulers, in hopes to wrest from them, if possible, what they esteem the plaything of power and trust. But they have been pretty well whipped and have become tolerably quiet again, and I am in hopes, if they live to arrive to the years of discretion, when the empire of reason shall take place, that they will then become good members of society, notwithstanding their noisy, nauseous behavior in their childhood, for which they were neither capable of hearing or giving any reason.

"For my part, I am so willing to trust the government of the world in the hands of the Supreme Ruler of universal nature, that I do not at present wish to try to wrest it out of His hands, and I have so much confidence in His abilities to teach our senators wisdom, that I do not think it worth while for me to interpose, from the little stock of knowledge that He has favored me with, in the affair, either one way or the other. He has conducted us through a glorious Revolution and has brought us into the promised land of peace and liberty, and I believe that He is about to bring all the world into the same beatitude in His own time and way; which, altho' His ways may appear never so inconsistent to our blind reason, yet may be perfectly consistent with His designs. And I believe that the stone is now cut out of the mountain without hands, spoken of by Daniel, and has smitten the image upon his feet, by which the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver and the gold, viz., all the monarchial and ecclesiastical tyranny will be broken to pieces and become as the chaff of the summer thrashing floor, the wind shall carry them all away, that there shall be no place found for them.

"Give my best regards to your parents and tell them that I have taken up with the eleventh commandment, that the negro taught to the minister, which was thus—

"The minister asked the negro how many commandments there were, his answer was 'eleben, sir.' 'Aye,' replied the other, 'what is the eleventh? That is one I never heard of.' 'The eleventh commandment, sir, is mind your own business.'

"So I choose to do, and give myself but little concern about what passes in the political world.

"Give my best regards to Dr. Meriam, Mr. Willes, Joseph Dorman, and Mr. Cree, and tell Mr. Cree I thank him for his respects and hope he will accept of mine. Write to me as often and as large as you can and oblige your sincere friend and well wisher.

(Signed) Asael Smith.

Mr. Jacob Town, Jun."

The second document is an intended posthumous address to his family. This brave, silent man, who had suffered because of his opinions, is conscious that he "is not free of speech," even under any circumstances, but especially not free of speech "when sick or sad." And not knowing what leisure he might have in the hour of death, or how soon death might overtake him, he writes this "address" some thirty years before his demise, in which he "speaks his heart" to his beloved ones, and wishes them to cherish the product. Though it was the intention of the writer of the document not to have it delivered to the family until after his demise, yet, owing perhaps to the unexpected prolongation of his life after he had written it, its existence became known to and was read by the family before the death of its author. The original writing, in a good state of preservation, is now in the possession of a branch of his family in Salt Lake City, Utah, by whom it is treasured, as well it might be, as a sacred heirloom. [^7]

ASAEL SMITH'S ADDRESS TO HIS FAMILY

"A few words of advice which I leave to you, my dear wife and children, whom I expect ere long to leave:

"My Dear Selfs—I know not what leisure I shall have at the hour of my death to speak to you, and as you all know that I am not free in speech, especially when sick or sad; and therefore now do speak my heart to you, and would wish you to hear me speaking to you as long as you live (when my tongue shall be mouldered to dust in the silent tomb) in this my writing which I divide among you all.

"And first to you, my dear wife, I do with all the strength and power that is in me, thank you for your kindness and faithfulness to me, beseeching God who is the husband of the widow, to take care of you and not to leave you nor forsake you, or never suffer you to leave nor forsake Him, nor His ways. Put your whole trust solely in Him, He never did nor never will forsake any that trusted in Him. One thing, however, I would add, if you should marry again, remember what I have undergone by a stepmother, and do not estrange your husband from his own children or kindred, lest you draw on him and on yourself a great sin. So I do resign you into the everlasting arms of the great Husband of husbands, the Lord Jesus Christ.

"And now my dear children let me pour out my heart to you and speak first to you of immortality in your souls. Trifle not in this point; the soul is immortal; you have to deal with an infinite Majesty; you go upon life and death; therefore in this point be serious. Do all to God in a serious manner; when you think of Him, speak of Him, pray to Him, or in any way make your addresses to His great Majesty, be in good earnest. Trifle not with His name nor with His attributes, nor call Him to witness to any thing but is absolute truth; nor then, but when sound reason on serious consideration requires it. And as to religion, I would not wish to point any particular form to you; but first I would wish you to search the Scriptures and consult sound reason and see if they (which I take to be two witnesses that stand by the God of the whole earth) are not sufficient to evince to you that religion is a necessary theme. Then I would wish you to study the nature of religion, and see whether it consists in outward formalities, or in the hidden man of the heart; whether you can by outward forms, rites and ordinances, save yourselves, or whether there is a necessity of your having help from any other hand than your own. If you find that you stand in need of a Savior, Christ saith: 'Look unto me and be ye saved all ye ends of the earth;' then look to Him, and if you find from Scripture and sound reason that Christ hath come into the world to save sinners, then examine what it was that caused Him to leave the center of consummate happiness to suffer as He did—whether it was to save mankind because they were sinners and could not save themselves; or, whether He came to save mankind because they had repented of their sins, so as to be forgiven on the score of their repentance. If you find that He came to save sinners merely because they were such, then try if there is any other [sinner] so great that He cannot save him; but mind that you admit no others as evidences but the two that God hath appointed, viz., Scripture and sound reason. And if these two witness that you are one whit better by nature than the worst heathen in the darkest corner of the deserts of Arabia, then conclude that God hath been partial towards you and hath furnished you with a better nature than others; and that consequently, He is not just to all mankind. But if these two witnesses testify to you that God is just to all and His tender mercies are over all His works; then believe them, and if you can believe that Christ came to save sinners and not the righteous Pharisees, or self-righteous; that sinners must be saved by the righteousness of Christ alone, without mixing any of their own righteousness with His, then you will see that He can as well save all as any. And there is no respect of persons with God, who will have all mankind to be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth, viz., 'that there is one God and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.' And when you believe this you will enter into His rest, and when you enter into His rest you will know what that rest is, and not before. And having gotten this evidence that God is true, be still adding to your evidence and enjoy your present assurance. Do all to your God as to your father, for His love is ten thousand times greater towards you than ever any earthly father's could be to his offspring.

"In the next place strive for those graces, most which concern your places and conditions and strive most against those failings which most threaten you. But above everything avoid a melancholy disposition, that is a humor that admits of any temptation and is capable of any impression and distemper; shun as death this humor which will work you to all unthankfulness against God, unlovingness to men and unnaturalness to yourself and one another.

"Do not talk and make noise to get the name of forward men, but do the thing and do it in a way that is fair and honest, which you can live and die by and rise and reign by; therefore, my children do more than you talk of, in point of religion; satisfy your own consciences in what you do; all men you shall never satisfy, nay, some will not be satisfied though they be convinced.

"As for Your Calling—Any honest calling will honor you if you honor that. It is better to be a rich cobbler than a poor merchant; a rich farmer than a poor preacher; and never be discouraged though sometimes your schemes should not succeed according to your wishes.

"Persevere in the way of well-doing and you may hope for success. For myself (who had never your parts nor helps), I never found anything too hard for me in my calling, but discouragement and unbelief. If I was discouraged and did not believe I could do a thing, I never could; therefore, when you think anything is too hard for you, do not undertake it.

"As to Your Company—Abandon all infectious, self-serving companions; when once you have found them false, trust them no more. Sort with such as are able to do or receive good. Solomon gives you the best counsel for this in many places. Read the Proverbs and remember him in this: Forsake not an old friend; be friendly and faithful to your friends. Never trouble nor trust friends unless there be a necessity, and lastly be long in closing with friends and loth to lose them upon experience of them.

"As to Your Marriages—I do not think it worth while to say much about them, for I believe God hath created the persons for each other and that nature will find its own.

"But for Your Children—Make it your chiefest work to bring them up in the ways of virtue that they may be useful in their generation. Give them if possible a good education; if nature hath made no difference do you make none in your affections, countinances nor portions; partiality this way begets envy, hatred, strife, and contention.

"And as for Yourself Within Yourselves—My desire hath been to carry an even hand towards you all and I have labored to reduce you as near as I could, all circumstances considered, to an equality; and, therefore, my last request and charge is, that you will live together in an undivided bond of love. You are many of you, and if you join together as one man, you need not want anything. What counsel, what comfort, what money, what friends may you not help yourselves unto, if you will all as one contribute your aids.

"Wherefore, my dear children, I pray, beseech, and adjure you by all the relations and dearness that hath ever been betwixt us and by the heart-rending pangs of a dying father whose soul hath been ever bound in the bundle of life with yours, that you know one another. Visit as you may each other. Comfort, counsel, relieve, succor, help and admonish one another; and, while your mother lives, meet her, if possible, once every year. When she is dead, pitch on some other place, if it may be your elder brother's house; or if you cannot meet, send to and hear from each other yearly and oftener if you can; and when you have neither father nor mother left, be so many fathers and mothers to each other, so you shall understand the blessings mentioned in the 133 Psalm. [^8]

"As to Your Estates—Be not troubled that you are below your kindred; get more wisdom, humility and virtue and you are above them, only do this. Deal with your hearts to make them less; begin low, join together to help one another; rest upon the promises which are many and precious this way. Love mercy and have mercy on yourselves and one another, and I know, I know, I say, and I am confident in it, that if you will trust God in His own way He will make comfortable provisions for you. Make no more objections but trust Him.

"For the public—Bless God that you live in a land of liberty and bear yourselves dutifully and conscionably towards the authority under which you live. See God's providence in the appointment of the Federal Constitution and hold union and order precious jewels. And for the Church of Christ; neither set her above her Husband nor below her children; give her that honor, obedience and respect that is her due. And if you will be my children and heirs of my comfort in my dying age, be neither anothers, nor factions of any party, or factions of novelty; it is true that this is not a rising way, but it is a free, fair, comfortable way for a man to follow his own judgment without wavering to either hand. I make no doubt but you will hear diverse opinions concerning me both before and after I shall sleep in silence; but do not be troubled at that. I did what in my circumstances seemed best for me for the present; however, the event hath not in some points answered my expectations; yet I have learned to measure things by another rule than events, and satisfy myself in this that I did all for the best, as I thought, and if I had not so much foresight as some others I cannot help it.

"Sure am I, my Savior, Christ, is perfect, and never will fail in one circumstance. To Him I commit your souls, bodies, estates, names, characters, lives, deaths and all, and myself, waiting when He shall change my vile body and make it like His own most glorious body. And wish to leave to you every thing I have in this world but my faults, and them I take with me to the grave, there to be buried in everlasting oblivion; but leaving my virtues, if ever I had any, to revive and live in you, Amen; so come Lord Jesus; come quickly, Amen.

"The above was written April 10, 1799, and left for my dearly beloved wife and children to view after my decease. [^9]

[Signed] Asael Smith."

Making due allowance for some provincialisms, and in one or two places lack of precision of expression, we have in these two papers documents that one would be glad to find that an ancestor of his had written and left as a family heritage. While as a replica of Asael Smith's mind, character, and manners, they certainly reveal him to be a serious minded man, yet of a pleasant humor, and polite manners. A man of noble independence of mind, yet of child-like humility. Of unbounded faith and trust in the wisdom of Providence and in his over-ruling hand in the affairs of nations. Loyal to his country, and full of faith in the stability of the American government, under the over-ruling providences of God. A family solicitude, most admirable; a knowledge of both the problems of life and the best means of their solution. This is not the language of adulation, but merely the summing up of the contents of these two documents.

JOSEPH SMITH, SEN., FATHER OF THE PROPHET

Joseph Smith, son of the above Asael Smith, and father of the Prophet, was born at Topsfield, Massachusetts, July 12, 1771. He accompanied his father first to northern New Hampshire, thence to Tunbridge, Vermont, where he assisted in clearing a farm of which, four years after it was first cleared, he took possession to cultivate on the "half share" system, common to those times in New England; while his father and four other sons went on clearing other lands. Here he married Lucy Mack, daughter of Solomon Mack of Gilsum, Cheshire county, New Hampshire. The young people met during the repeated visits of Lucy to her brother, Stephen Mack, who was engaged in the mercantile and tinning business with John Mudget at Tunbridge. The marriage took place on the 24th of January, 1796.

Soon after the marriage as the young people were starting on a visit to the bride's parents, at Gilsum, the matter of making Lucy a wedding present became a subject of conversation. "Well," said Mr. Mudget, "Lucy ought to have something worth naming, and I will give her just as much as you will;" this to Stephen Mack. "Done," said the brother, "I will give her five hundred dollars in cash." "Good," said the other, "and I will give her five hundred dollars more." They drew a check for one thousand dollars upon their bankers, and Lucy had been provided with her dowry. [^10] "This check," says Lucy, "I laid aside, as I had other means by me sufficient to purchase my house-keeping furniture." [^11]

Six years Joseph Smith cultivated his farm at Tunbridge—Lucy calls it a "handsome farm;" and then the ambitious pair determined upon a business career in merchandising. The Tunbridge farm was rented and the family removed to Randolph, where in a short time Joseph Smith learned of the large profits in raising ginseng root, the medicinal properties of which were highly prized in China. [^12] Joseph invested all the means he could command in this enterprise; and evidently was successful, since a local merchant of Royalton offered him three thousand dollars for the first quantity he had prepared for shipment. As this was about two-thirds the current value of the product, Joseph determined upon finding an exporter independently, and for this purpose visited New York City. Finally he and Mr. Stevens shipped their ginseng in the same vessel for China, where evidently it sold to great advantage: but through the rascality of Mr. Steven's son, who, according to mutual agreement, went with the cargo to China, Joseph Smith received no returns whatever from this venture. The younger Stevens, after his return told a plausible story of failure to sell the ginseng cargo, but he at once employed eight or ten men and prepared to go into the business of crystalizing ginseng root on a large scale. Young Stevens' embezzlement of the Smith proceeds of the cargo sent to China began to come to light, however; thereupon he fled to Canada, and that was the last the Smiths heard of him. Meantime Joseph Smith's affairs were desperate. He had risked all his means on this ginseng venture; and he had lost about two thousand dollars in bad debts while merchandizing. He was owing eighteen hundred dollars to Boston merchants, payment of which he expected to meet from the proceeds of his China shipment of ginseng. The only resource left was the Tunbridge farm. This was sold for eight hundred dollars, about half of its value; and Lucy bravely brought forth her wedding dowry of one thousand dollars; and this, with the proceeds from the sale of the farm, met Joseph's obligations to the Boston merchants.

After disposing of his farm at Tunbridge, Joseph Smith lived a short time at Royalton, and thence moved to Sharon—the distances not great—Windsor county. Here Joseph rented a farm of his wife's father, Solomon Mack, which he cultivated in the summer, and taught school in the winter. By dint of the father following the two occupations, the affairs of the family began to improve and take on an air of comfort. And here, on the old Mack farm, among the hills of Sharon township, in the beautiful White River Valley, Joseph, the future Prophet of the New Dispensation, was born on the 23rd of December, 1805.

Footnotes

"Committees of Correspondence were organized as early as May, 1764. The first one being in Massachusetts. At the beginning the correspondence concerned a federation of colonies, but as the Revolution drew near the towns appointed 'Committees of Correspondence' to keep in touch with the central committee located at Boston. This central committee early in 1775 was styled 'The Committee of Safety and Correspondence for Boston,' and similar committees in all the other towns in the province shortly began to adopt the name 'Committee of Safety.' That "Topsfield's Committee" continued to be elected until March, 1785, is not surprising. The war was not over until the spring of 1783 and political conditions were in a very unsettled situation for several years. The committee was in a way the mouthpiece of the central agency at Boston, and in turn represented the influence and political power of the town, as a unit in the government of the state."

There was also an edition of this book published at Plano, Ill., 1880, by what is known as the "Reorganized Church." It follows the English edition published by Orson Pratt. The notes in its Preface and a footnote on page 90-91 bear out the statements above set forth. All the editions are identical in chapter numbering hence the chapters are given in references instead of pages.

---
Notas:
[^1] American Ancestry, vol. ii, p. 76. Five Colonial Families, vol. i, p. 343.
[^2] Five Colonial Families, vol. i, Appendix. See also History of the Town of Gilsum. N. H., p. 357. Here also is given the family tradition by Wm. Mack of Stanstead, Canada—"I have heard my father say he never knew a Mack convicted of any crime."
[^3] This date is the one given in Five Colonial Families, Lucy Smith gives the date of birth September 26, 1735. The date of the text is most probably the right one, since Solomon Mack's Narrative states that he left his "master" at twenty-one, to enlist in the service of his country, and describes an engagement with the enemy at Half Way Brook in 1755. If Lucy Smith's date were the right one, it would have been 1756 before Solomon enlisted. The author of the History of the Town of Gilsum, however. (Silvanus Hayward—1881) gives Lucy Smith's date for the birth of Solomon Mack. (p. 357).
[^4] The passage recalls the lines of Burns:
[^5] The Story of the Mormons, Alexander Linn, MacMillan Company, 1902 ch. ii. The Founder of Mormonism, I. Woodbridge Riley, Dodd, Mead & Co., 1902 p. 64, note.
[^6] Founder of Mormonism, Riley, pp. 63-5. "He served also in the Revolutions * * * He was afterwards severely crippled by the falling of a tree and is remembered as riding about town on a side saddle." (History of the Town of Gilsum, p. 207).
[^7] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xii. History of the Town of Gilsum, N. H. "Jason Mack, oldest son of Solomon, became a Christian Minister, and preached for many years in Vermont and New York."
[^8] "Without firing a gun or waiting for a gun to be fired by the enemy, Hull hoisted the signal of surrender—a white table-cloth—and gave up the fort and town, and with them the control of the territory of Michigan, to the enemy. This act filled the whole country with indignation. Hull was declared to be another Benedict Arnold; he was tried by court-martial, convicted of cowardice, sentenced to be shot. The President, however, pardoned him, on account of his services during the Revolution." (History of United States, Morris, pp. 274-5.) A later generation has somewhat modified the harsh judgment passed upon General Hull by his contemporaries.
[^9] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. iv.
[^10] Ibid, ch. v.
[^11] Ibid, ch vi.
[^12] History of the Town of Gilsum, N. H. "His father lived with him for some years. He was captain in the militia and served the town as select man." p. 207.
