B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER II

THE ANCESTRY OF JOSEPH SMITH, THE PROPHET, (CONT'D.)

ON THE maternal side the Prophet's ancestry cannot be traced beyond John Mack, who was born in 1653, in Inverness, Scotland. He came to America about 1680, and settled in Lyme, Connecticut, 1734. [^1] The Prophet Joseph Smith descended from this man in the following line:

II. THE MACKS OF NEW ENGLAND

—Ebenezer Mack, son of the above John Mack;

—Solomon Mack, son of the above Ebenezer Mack;

—Lucy Mack, daughter of Solomon Mack, and mother of the Prophet.

John Mack, the Scotch immigrant of 1680, was the original and early settler of that name in the colony of Connecticut, and the ancestor of the early Macks of that state. In the History of Five Colonial Families, of which the Mack family is one, the following occurs:

"It is thought that the Mack family dropped their original name, retaining the prefix only, thereby being better able to escape persecution on account of their religious belief. It is said that part of their coat-of-arms was a boar's head. The Scotch families of McDougal and McTavish have as parts of their coats-of-arms a boar's head erased. One branch of the family thinks that the original name was McDermon." [^2]

Ebenezer Mack was born at Lyme, December 8th, 1697; and became pastor of the Second Congregational church at that place. He was a man of considerable property and lived in good style, commanding the respect and attention usually accorded those engaged in his calling, and who follow habits of strict morality. But after enjoying these advantages for a time, misfortunes overtook Ebenezer Mack and the family, once so comfortably situated, was scattered.

SOLOMON MACK

Solomon Mack was born at Lyme, Connecticut, September 15th, 1732. [^3] When misfortune befell his father's family, Solomon was but four years of age. He was apprenticed to a farmer of the neighborhood, and experienced the hardships of an "apprenticed hand"—all too common in New England in those times, and afterwards—long hours of incessant toil, cold neglect, with no schooling, and but little opportunity for self improvement. Not until he attained his majority was Solomon Mack set free from this semi-bondage. Then he entered the service of his majesty, King George II, the French and Indian War being at its height. He saw active service during the next four years, being in a number of important engagements with the French and Indians about Lake George; at Fort Edward, Fort William Henry, Ticonderoga and Crown Point. At the last named place in the spring of 1759 Solomon Mack received his discharge; and the same year he married Lydia Gates, the daughter of Nathan Gates of East Haddam, Connecticut. Lydia was a school teacher. Solomon speaks of her as an "accomplished young woman;" and later in his Narrative justifies the description by a further reference to her in the most complimentary terms, in connection with the rearing of their family. The money that accumulated in Solomon's hands by four year's service in the army was invested in lands in Grandville, Washington county, New York, east of Lake George, and near the Vermont line. Part of the settler's contract was to build a number of log houses on the land he had purchased. About this time Solomon had the misfortune to cut his leg and he was disabled for work throughout the summer. The man whom he employed to build the aforesaid log houses, and whom he paid in advance, absconded with the money, the part of the contract pertaining to building the houses was not fulfilled, and consequently the land with the investment was lost. After this the family settled in Marlow, Cheshire county, New Hampshire. "No other than a desolate, dreary wilderness," is Solomon's description of it, "only four families within forty miles." But here the talents and virtues of Lydia, his wife, shone out. The pair now had four children, and the husband says:

LYDIA GATES

"Here I was thrown into a situation to appreciate more fully the talents and virtues of my excellent wife; for, as our children were deprived of schools, she assumed the charge of their education, and performed the duties of an instructress as none, save a mother, is capable of. Precepts accompanied with examples such as hers, were calculated to make impressions on the minds of the young, never to be forgotten. She, besides instructing them in the various branches of an ordinary education, was in the habit of calling them together both morning and evening, and teaching them to pray; meanwhile urging upon them the necessity of love towards each other, as well as devotional feeling towards him who made them. In this manner my first children became confirmed in habits of piety, gentleness, and reflection, which afforded great assistance in guiding those who came after them, into the same happy channel. The education of my children would have been a more difficult task if they had not inherited much of their mother's excellent disposition." [^4]

This lady, it should be remembered, was the maternal grandmother of Joseph Smith, the Prophet.

In 1776 Solomon Mack enlisted in the American army, serving for some time in the land forces, but subsequently with his two sons, Jason and Stephen, he served in a privateering expedition under Captain Havens. After serving his country for four years he returned to Gilsum, New Hampshire. Owing to exposure and the hardships of his early life Solomon Mack's health failed him in his later years; he was feeble and much afflicted with rheumatism. In making journeys about the country in those days he rode on horseback, and for his greater comfort used a woman's saddle—a circumstance pressed into service to emphasize the existence of an "abnormality" in one of the ancestors of Joseph Smith! [^5]

The circumstance that he was subject to occasional lapses into unconsciousness is made to do service in the same manner. This defect was occasioned by a severe injury in the head caused by a falling tree upon him in middle life; so, too, some hallucinations of extreme old age attended with failing health. [^6] Yet this old, Revolutionary soldier, bequeathed to the country, whose liberties and institutions he had risked his life to establish, a noble family. His two sons, Jason and Stephen, both served their country in the American Revolution. Jason, who is described as "a studious and manly boy," was of a religious turn of mind, even in his youth, and became a preacher of the gospel and a social reformer. The chief scene of his activities was in New Brunswick, where he purchased a tract of land upon which he settled some thirty families of the poorer class, and taught them how to become self-supporting; supervising their temporal labors as well as ministering to their spiritual comfort. In such labor the greater part of his life was spent. [^7]

STEPHEN MACK

Stephen Mack who, as we have already seen, was engaged in the mercantile and tinning business at Tunbridge, Vermont, finally extended his enterprises westward as far as Detroit, Michigan. He was in Detroit in 1812 at the time of Hull's surrender, and had been appointed to the command of a company of troops as captain, although generally called "Major Mack." When subsequently—and shortly after his appointment as captain—he was ordered by his superior officers to surrender, he was so highly indignant that he broke his sword across his knee and threw it into the lake, saying he would never submit to the disgraceful compromise. [^8] By the year 1820, according to the written statement of Horace Stanley, Stephen Mack was the proprietor of a large mercantile establishment in Detroit—large for those days, employing six clerks. Besides this establishment he had a number of stores in various parts of Michigan and Ohio. At his own expense he built a turn-pike road from Detroit to Pontiac where he owned a large farm upon which he lived. In 1828 he was a member of the council of the territory of Michigan. All this would indicate that Stephen Mack was a man of intelligence, judgment, enterprise, and successful withal. When he died he left his family an estate of $50,000, without incumbrance, which, in those days, was a large fortune. [^9]

Lovisa and Lovina Mack, daughters of Solomon, died in early womanhood. Both being of a deeply religious nature they had some experiences in spiritual manifestations and bodily "healings" regarded at the time as bordering on the miraculous, but which now, in the larger experience of Christian life, including the claims of "Christian Science," and of the "Immanuel Movement," would scarcely be looked upon as ultra remarkable.

Lydia Mack, the third daughter of Solomon Mack, was less religiously inclined than her sisters. Of her it is said: "She seemed to float more with the stream of common events. * * * She sought riches and obtained them: yet in the day of prosperity she remembered the poor, for she dealt out her substance to the needy with a liberal hand to the end of her days, and died the object of their affection." [^10]

Daniel, the third son of Solomon Mack, is described as "worldly minded, but not vicious," and was noted for two things: daring and philanthropy. In proof of the first trait he is credited with rescuing three men from drowning in one adventure, at the risk of his own life." [^11]

Solomon Mack (II), the fourth son of Solomon (I), was born in the town of Gilsum, New Hampshire, where also he married. He was known as "Captain" Solomon Mack of Gilsum. He stayed close to his home town, traveling no farther than to Boston, to which city for some time his business called him about twice a year. But in the rocky hills of the old New Hampshire town, prosperity responded to his industry and business acumen and he was held in honor by the local community in which he lived and died, surrounded by the dignity of a large family. [^12]

With Lucy Mack added, of whom something has already been said, and more remains to say—such was the family that Solomon Mack, maternal grand-father of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, gave to his country. This veteran soldier of two wars, the French and Indian War, and the War of the American Revolution—especially when it is remembered that in the latter war two of his sons fought by his side—may be pardoned the vanity of thinking that his life warranted the publication of a brief autobiography, even if, owing to an entire absence of opportunity for schooling in youth, the Narrative was faulty in literary style, imperfect in orthography and grammar, and included some "hymns" of doubtful poetic value. [^13]

CHARGES AGAINST JOSEPH SMITH'S ANCESTRY

Three things are commonly charged against the ancestors of Joseph Smith, the Prophet: "restlessness," "illiteracy," and "credulity." [^14] The statement of facts on the ancestry of Joseph Smith, drawn from trust-worthy sources of information, and relating to both his paternal and maternal ancestry, as far as it can be traced, may be relied upon to refute all three of these charges, so far as it is necessary to refute them; for to a certain extent these qualities may be admitted without prejudice either to Joseph Smith or his ancestors. For instance, as to

"Restlessness:" On the paternal side it can only be alleged as to Asael Smith and Joseph Smith, Sen., grandfather and father, respectively, of the Prophet. The former removed from Topsfield to northern New Hampshire, thence to Tunbridge, Vermont, where he engaged with his sons in clearing farms; and in his old age moved to Stockholm, St. Lawrence county, New York, where he might spend the closing days of a long and arduous life in the midst of his children and grandchildren. As to the "restlessness" of Joseph Smith, Sen., previous to the commencement of his son Joseph's career, as founder of a church, it was manifested only in several removals covering no great distances in Vermont, and New Hampshire; and thence, the longest distance of all, to Palmyra, New York. As to the restlessness of the Macks, it may not be alleged against any of them, except it may be Solomon Mack, maternal grand-father of the Prophet. And even in him only during the period of the French and Indian War, and the war of the American Revolution. Apart from his movements in that period, and one voyage to Liverpool, England, the limits of his "wanderings" were marked by Cheshire county, New Hampshire, and Windsor county, Vermont—located at no great distance apart across the state line. And what is there in this "restlessness" that was reprehensible? And why should it subject these men to the spiteful epithets of "tramp" [^15] and "vagabond"? [^16] It was only such "restlessness" as sought to better industrial conditions by change of habitat; and the soil of New England, sterile at best, and the uncertainty of the climate in the hill country of Vermont and New Hampshire, at least justified if they did not compel the removals. It was the "restlessness" that sent the people of New England, Pennsylvania and Maryland through the gateway to the west provided by the head waters of the Ohio, into the Western Reserve; and the people of Virginia and the South Atlantic States, over the Appalachian Mountains into Kentucky and Tennessee; and finally westward to the Pacific coast. It was the "restlessness' that led Americans to take possession of their heritage—was this reprehensible?

The biographers of Lincoln have to meet this same charge of a "restless," migratory spirit in the great president's immediate ancestors; and Mr. Henry C. Whitney, in his biographical treatise—Lincoln the Citizen, published 1907, in defense of the migrations of the Lincoln family, says: "Migration is an American institution. Instances are not rare of men who have actually lived in a dozen different states; and California, Oregon, and Washington are largely peopled by men who commenced their tours of migration in the Atlantic States, and by slow approaches ultimately reached the ultimate limits of western civilization. The Marshall family, whence came the great Justice of the United States Supreme Court, John Marshall, could be charged with the same 'fault' if such it be. Thomas Marshall, father of John Marshall, left the ancestral farm in Westmoreland county, abandoned it in fact; and settled in Prince William county farther up the Potomac; thence a few years later, he moved into a valley of the Blue Ridge mountains. Years later came another "restlessness' which carried Thomas Marshall over the Blue Ridge into the far distant new settlements of Kentucky. And what of it? [^17] Thomas Marshall, Andrew Jackson, William Henry Harrison, James K. Polk, Zachary Taylor, Andrew Johnson, Ulysses S. Grant, and Benjamin Harrison were emigrants." [^18]

"Illiteracy:" This may not be strictly charged upon any of the Prophet's ancestry except, perhaps, on Solomon Mack. Certainly not upon the Smiths of Topsfield, the two Samuels and Asael; for the evidence that refutes the charge is before the reader in these chapters. Certainly illiteracy may not be charged upon Joseph Smith, Sen., father of the Prophet, for he taught school in Sharon; notwithstanding which Linn says of him: "The father and several of the boys could not read!" [^19] And while Riley admits the school teaching, he seeks to minimize the fact by saying: "How much knowledge this would imply is conjectural. The course of study in a Vermont district school at the beginning of the last century did not consist of much more than reading, writing and arithmetic." [^20]

The remark is not objectionable. It is safe to say that the educational equipment of school teachers in Vermont and New York was limited; and Mr. Riley himself in a subsequent passage to the one just quoted, gives a sufficient explanation of such limitations:

"Of the founders of Vermont it was said that few were versed in the rules of grammar. A like state of affairs existed on the frontiers of New York, where the average school attendance was but three months in the year and where, at the time of the writing of the Book of Mormon, there were not two academies to a county. Moreover in their toils in the backwoods the boys were needed at home. * * * Along with these shortcomings in education went an equal scarcity of books: every house had its Bible, but of general reading there was a woeful lack. If at this time it cost a day's wages to carry a letter from Boston to Cincinnati, books could not have been widely circulated by mail." [^21]

But one whose knowledge extended to "the three R's," who read the Bible, [^22] and doubtless other books, ought not to be classed as illiterate. Such illiteracy, then, as may be, in a limited way, attributed to the ancestors of the Prophet, or himself, was that enforced upon them by environment, by lack of opportunity, by the fault of the times, of their location, and of their fortunes; not a deliberate choice of illiteracy in the midst of opportunities to have it otherwise; and hence they bear the charge sans reproach.

Credulity: Yes; the Prophet's ancestors were credulous in that some of them believed that they were healed of bodily ailments by the power of faith in God. Others had dreams, as their neighbors had, that they could refer to no other than the spiritual forces of this God's world. In common with their neighbors they lived in a spiritual world as well as in a material one; they experienced much that they could not understand, and after the manner of their times and the locality in which they lived, they attributed the phenomena of this spiritual world to God or satan!—the names that stood to them for good and evil forces. It may be admitted that some of them believed in fortune telling, in warlocks and witches—though, to their credit be it said, they are not found among those who burned the witches, or who oppressed others for their religious opinions, or for the lack of religious convictions—all this may be admitted. Indeed it is scarcely conceivable how one could live in New England in those years and not have shared in such beliefs. To be credulous in such things was to be normal people. To have been incredulous in such matters in that age and locality, would have stamped them abnormal. And then, it might be pertinent to ask those who now sneer at the "credulity" of past ages, if their "philosophy" has driven the phenomena of mind, or spirit from the realm of man's experience? Or have they merely satisfied themselves with what seems to them a more rational explanation of the sources of these phenomena? And are they quite certain that they have reached the last analysis of such phenomena? If not, does not the truly scientific spirit, which is the boast of our age, require that they be a little modest before speaking too contemptuously this word "credulity"? Then for Christian people, who sneer at the "credulity" that in modern times believes in dreams, in healing of bodily infirmities through faith-power, in angel visitations, spirit voices and promptings, amounting sometimes to revelations—for them there are the origins of Christianity to reconcile with their unaccountable scorn of that "credulity" which merely accepts the reality of just such things as those that are associated with Christian origins. Are not we of this age believing more than our ancestors? Let the bulky tomes of the Society for Psychological Research answer. All our hard-headed science, our philosophy, our universal enlightenment, our thought-to-be-skeptical-age, cannot drive out the "supernatural" realities from human life. "Credulity" is not necessarily a badge of ignorance. A truly enlightened age is going to be more thoroughly credulous than an age of darkness. It will not always be an apt saying—"the slighter intelligences are much given to convictions;" nor this, "those who know a few things, believe a great many." Those of the enlightened age to be, now dawning—those of profound intelligence—will have the firmer and larger convictions; those who know many things, will believe very many more. And that which men now and in the past have sneeringly called "credulity," may yet stand, as often it has stood in the past, for rational faith in the spiritual realities of life. Of this truth, England's foremost scientist of this age, Sir Oliver Lodge, whose belief in and widely expressed confidence in the reality of spiritual phenomena is well known, may well be taken as an illustration of the remarks.

Footnotes

"I've scarce heard aught describ'd sae weel,

What generous, manly bosoms feel."

"Stephen Mack, second son of Solomon, enlisted in the Revolutionary army at the age of fourteen, and was promoted to Brigadier General." (p. 207).

Also History of the Prophet Joseph. Lucy Smith, chs. vii and ix.

A Narrative of the Life of Solomon Mack, Containing an Account of the Many Severe Accidents he met with during a long series of years, together with the extraordinary manner in which he was converted to the Christian Faith. To which is added a number of "Hymns," composed on the death of several of his relations. Windsor: Printed at the expense of the author."

---
Notas:
[^1] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xv.
[^2] Ibid, ch. xv.
[^3] Ibid, ch. xvi. The fever sore in shoulder and leg, requiring the painful surgical operation alluded to in the text, is called the "ancestral ulceration," by Riley in his Founder of Mormonism, p. 65, for which remark, neither in his own collections of "ancestral ailments," attributed to the Smiths and Macks, or elsewhere, is there any justification. The immediate cause for the gathering in shoulder and leg is found is the effect of the typhus fever upon the lad's system; and this, I am assured by medical authority, is not unusual.
[^4] "Rusty clothes of a vagabond," is the full language of Riley; which he justifies on the authority of W. D. Purple's editorial in the Norwich, New York, Union, April 28, 1877, who claims to have taken notes on an alleged trial of Joseph Smith, Sen., for vagrancy before Albert Nelly, J. P. (Founder of Mormonism, p. 26).
[^5] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xvii.
[^6] Some confusion exists as to the length of time before the family moved from the town of Palmyra to the home on the farm. From Lucy Smith's account History of the Prophet Joseph, ch. xvii, it would be in the second year after their arrival from Vermont; according to the Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism, by Pomeroy Tucker-Appleton and Co., N. Y., 1867, p. 12, "two and a half years;" according to Linn's The Story of the Mormons, p. 11, "three and a half years;" Joseph Smith, the Prophet, in his autobiographical journal puts the time of removal as being abut four years after his father's arrival in Palmyra; History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 2. It is uncertain by how much time the senior Joseph Smith preceded his family to Palmyra; doubtless it was several months. The Prophet speaks of the time between the arrival at Palmyra and the removal to Manchester township indefinitely; and Tucker writes of it as a recollection after an elapse of fifty years. Lucy Smith's statement is likely to be the most accurate.
[^7] History of the Prophet Joseph, by Lucy Smith, ch. xix. The above facts were disclosed by an autopsy on the body, permitted by the family at the desire of the four attendant physicians. An anti-Mormon writer in Littell's Living Age (Vol. xxx—of the whole series—p. 429, Aug. 1851) refers to this sad experience of the Smith family in these terms: "Alvah [Alvin], however spiritual he may have been, had a carnal appetite; ate too many green turnips, sickened, and died."
[^8] History of the Church, vol. v, p. 247. This work that will be frequently cited in these pages is published in six volumes, 1902-1912, Deseret News, Salt Lake City. It covers the period of the church history in the New Dispensation, from the birth of the Prophet Joseph Smith, up to the time of his martyrdom. It is a compilation in the form of personal journal annals, as far as that form could be followed by the Prophet Joseph Smith, who began the work in the spring of 1838. John Whitmer had been church historian up to that time, but had by now left the church, taking with him the data he had collected for its history, refusing to surrender them (See vol. iii, pp. 15, 16), thus making necessary the compilation and narrative of the Prophet, which forms the history in question. As already stated the aforesaid history is in the form of personal journal annals, accompanied by numerous documents which make it practically a documentary history of the church for the period covered, since all documents of importance, including nearly all the revelations received by the Prophet, are introduced in their chronological order. The first part of this history appeared in the Times and Seasons, published at Nauvoo, beginning in vol. iii, p. 726, date of March 15, 1842, and continuing in short installments up to the last issue of that periodical, vol. vi, p. 726, date of Feb. 15, 1846; and bringing the narrative of events up to August, 1834. The publication of the history was picked up by the Deseret News (vol. ii, No. 1—date of Nov. 15, 1851), from the point where the Times and Seasons had left it, thence carrying it forward to the death of the Prophet, and to the succession of the twelve apostles to the leadership of the church. This history from the beginning of it was republished in the Millennial Star, a Latter-day Saint periodical begun in England, 1840, and continued until the present time, (1929). It will be found in a supplement to volume xiv of the Millennial Star, and thence through that volume to volume xxv, p. 280. This highly valuable journal and documentary history scattered through these periodicals, was finally published by the church, as stated at the beginning of this note, in the six volumes mentioned, being edited and annotated by the writer of this present History, and with an extended introduction to each volume by the same writer. The title of it in the six-volume form was changed to the History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Period I. History of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, by Himself. This work will be referred to in this present History as The History of the Church, Period I.
[^9] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xx.
[^10] Statement of William Smith, brother of the Prophet, Zion's Ensign, Independence, Mo., copied into Deseret News, of January 20, 1894.
[^11] Interview with Wm. Smith, Zion's Ensign, Independence, Mo., copied into Deseret News of January 20, 1894.
[^12] Interviews with Old Palmyra and Manchester Residents with Reference to the Character of the Smith Family, by E. L. and Wm. H. Kelley, published in The Saints Herald, Plano, Ill., June 1, 1881.
[^13] Founder of Mormonism, p. 39-40.
[^14] Early Common Schools in New York, p. 167. Report of Commissioner of Education, 1897, p. 224.
[^15] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xix.
[^16] Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism, p. 16.
[^17] Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism, p. 17.
[^18] Ibid, pp. 16, 17. This view scarcely agrees with another anti-"Mormon" writer, who claims personal knowledge of the Prophet in those early days, viz.: Daniel Hendrix, who says: "Yet Joe had a jovial, easy, don't-care way about him that made him a lot of warm friends." (See letter to the St. Louis Globe Democrat, February 2, 1897, quoted by Linn in his Story of the Mormons, p. 13). This agrees admirably with what the Prophet has said of himself as pertaining to those days: "I was guilty of levity, and sometimes associated with jovial company. * * * But this will not seem very strange to any one who recollects my youth, and is acquainted with my native, cheery temperament." (See History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, pp. 9, 10.) This scarcely is the description of a boy who was "never known to laugh."
[^19] Early Days of Mormonism, Kennedy, p. 15.
[^20] Founder of Mormonism, p. 25.
[^21] Founder of Mormonism, pp. 41-42.
[^22] See chapter iii, this History.
