B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER III

THE BOYHOOD OF JOSEPH SMITH

DURING Joseph Smith's early childhood there were removals of the family from Sharon to Tunbridge, and thence to Royalton; but nevertheless these were years of prosperity. In 1811 the family settled in Lebanon, Grafton county, New Hampshire, just over the Vermont line, in the beautiful valley of the Connecticut river. Here the parents hoped for even larger prosperity than had come from their labors in the past. "Here we settled ourselves down," says Lucy Smith, "and began to contemplate with joy and satisfaction the prosperity which had attended our recent exertions; and we doubled our diligence, in order to obtain more of this world's goods, with a view of assisting our children when they should need it; and, as is quite natural, we looked forward to the decline of life and were providing for its wants as well as striving to procure those things which contribute much to the comfort of old age." [^1]

THE STRICKEN FAMILY—HEROISM OF JOSEPH

Hyrum Smith, the second son, was sent to an academy in Hanover, a few miles north from Lebanon; and the other children of sufficient age, to the nearer common school in Lebanon. The affairs of the family were in this happy condition when an epidemic of typhus fever passed over the neighborhood. The Smiths were sorely afflicted by the fever. Hyrum was stricken while in school in Hanover, and brought home; and all the children one after the other fell victims to the scourge. Sophronia, a daughter, narrowly escaped dying; the mother attributes her recovery to the blessing of God obtained through prayer. [^2] Joseph recovered from the fever, but some two weeks after his recovery was suddenly seized with a severe pain in his shoulder. A wrong diagnosis by the physician attributed the trouble to a sprain, when in reality there had been none; but after two weeks of suffering there developed between the breast and shoulder a fever sore which, on being lanced, discharged large quantities of pus. The pain then shifted into the leg, causing great suffering; and so continued from bad to worse despite the efforts of physicians, until finally amputation was decided upon by the surgeons, and was only avoided by the protests and determination of the lad himself and the mother. An operation was performed, however, by a large piece of one of the bones between the knee and ankle being removed. Of course the operation was performed with the crude instruments of the times, without the use of anesthetics; and as the boy refused to take stimulants or to be tied down to the bed, the manner in which he passed through the trying ordeal was a rare exhibition of pluck and power of endurance. After the operation the lad quickly recovered, and was sent to Salem, Massachusetts, to the home of his uncle, Jesse Smith, in the hope that the sea air would help in his restoration to perfect health, a hope that was not disappointed. [^3]

REMOVAL TO PALMYRA, N. Y.

Something like a year of sickness played havoc with the fortunes of the family of Joseph Smith, Sen., and they removed to Norwich in the state of Vermont—just over the state line, and some ten or twelve miles distant from Lebanon. Here three successive crop failures still further reduced the fortunes of the family. Meantime, Joseph Smith, Sen., having heard of the richer lands and milder climate of western New York, determined upon removing to that state. After negotiating a settlement of his financial affairs between his debtors and creditors, he departed, in company with a Mr. Howard, for Palmyra, New York. In due time a team was sent back to Norwich for his wife and the family of children, now numbering eight. On the eve of the family's departure some creditors, refusing to abide by the settlement arranged before the father left Vermont, came forward now and presented their claims, which Lucy Smith, by extraordinary exertions succeeded in satisfying. After a painful separation from her mother at Royalton—the former Lydia Gates, so tenderly praised by Solomon Mack—Lucy Smith and her family made their way to Palmyra, New York, where they were welcomed by the father, and all rejoiced in the reunion of the family.

It was a serious condition that confronted this family on its arrival in Palmyra. More than a year of sickness, followed by three successive crop failures—not because of idleness or lack of skill in husbandry, but through drought or frosts, causes beyond their control—together with the necessary expense of removing from New Hampshire to Palmyra, a distance of some three hundred miles, had exhausted all their resources, and they were penniless. It need create no special wonderment that the elder Smith at this period is described as being "of gaunt and haggard visage," and wearing "rusty clothes." [^4] A family consultation resulted in the determination to unite their efforts in purchasing a tract of one hundred acres of land some two miles south of Palmyra, on the north border of Manchester township, belonging to minor heirs of the Everson estate, whose agent resided at Canandaigua, Ontario county. "In a year," says Lucy Smith, "we made nearly all of the first payment, erected a log house, and commenced clearing. I believe something like thirty acres of land were made ready for cultivation the first year." [^5] Meanwhile, to meet the immediate necessities of the family, the male members engaged in occasional day's work among the neighboring farmers or in the town; while the mother, skilled in handpainting oil-cloth covers for tables and stands, etc., met a large part of the family expenses.

THE SMITH'S IN MANCHESTER TOWNSHIP—ALVIN

Finally the family moved from the town of palmyra, to the new log house on the farm, [^6] in Manchester township, and though the house was a humble one—consisting of two rooms on the ground floor and a like number in an attic, to which there was soon afterwards added a bedroom-wing of sawed slabs—the family was able to resume conditions of independent methods of life to which it had been accustomed. In a very few years a more commodious frame house was planned and the erection of it begun. This enterprise was more especially the conception of Alvin, the oldest son of the family, then about twenty-five years of age. To the neighbors who watched the progress of the new house, he often said: "I am going to have a nice, pleasant room for father and mother to sit in, and everything arranged for their comfort. They shall not work any more as they have done." But Alvin never lived to see the house completed. In the middle of November, 1824, he was taken ill and died, not of bilious colic of which he was stricken down, but of an over-dose of calomel which lodged in the upper intestines, gangrened, and produced death, despite the efforts of four physicians called to attend the case. [^7] In after years in speaking of his brother Alvin, the Prophet referred to him "as a very handsome man, and of great strength." [^8] The mother speaks of him as "a youth of singular goodness of disposition, kind and amiable." [^9]

THE NEW HOME

The new house was finally completed and the family took possession of it. The amount of cleared land gradually increased from thirty to sixty acres, and there were from twelve to fifteen hundred sugar trees on the place from which sap was gathered in the spring and converted into molasses and sugar. [^10] The farm thus redeemed from a wilderness and a commodious house built upon it, attracted the attention of the covetous. All the payments as agreed upon with the agents of the Everson estate, except the last, had been made, when a change of agents took place. To the new agent misrepresentations were made as to the movements and intention of the Smiths. The departure of Joseph Smith, Sen., and his son Joseph from home in order to raise the money for the payment of the last installment—having made arrangements with a Mr. Josiah Stoal and a Mr. Joseph Knight for the sale of their wheat crop, with that end in view—was converted into a "running away;" while Hyrum was accused of cutting down the sugar orchard, hauling away the rails, burning them, and doing no end of mischief to the farm. Under these circumstances the place was sold outright by the new agent to other parties—one of them a Mr. Stoddard, who had been the chief carpenter in building the new house for the Smiths—and a deed given for the same. These would-be purchasers, however, did not altogether succeed in their designs, since by the exertions of the Smith family the unjust purchase was canceled and the title lodged with the high sheriff of the county, a Mr. Durfee. The Smiths continued to occupy the home and cultivate the farm until they removed to Ohio, in 1831, but they never completed the title to the property.

THE SMITH'S CHRISTIAN HOME

During the five years, however, that this commodious house—still in a good state of preservation, as will be seen by the engraving of it accompanying this chapter—sheltered the Smiths. It was the home of a Christian family, too, as also was the more humble log house first erected on the Smith farm, although none of the family formed any connection with the sectarian churches about them until 1820. The question "which of the sects shall we join," had been a problem in the Smith household even before their removal from Vermont. Lucy Smith was baptized in that state by a minister who was willing to leave to her the question of choosing the sect she would join, and to a time subsequent to her baptism. During the family's residence in Tunbridge, Lucy's desire to be identified with some one or other of the churches became acute; but, owing to the disagreeable feeling which such a step seemed likely to engender among their friends, and especially with the eldest brother of Joseph Smith, Sen.—Jesse Smith,—she abandoned, for the time being, her desire. In 1820, however, when the religious revival that swept through the Western Reserve and New York state reached Palmyra, she determined upon membership in the Presbyterian church, and in this was followed by her sons Hyrum and Samuel Harrison, and by her daughter Sophronia. Joseph Smith, the future Prophet of the New Dispensation, inclined to the Methodist persuasion, but did not join their church. The father held aloof from formal connection with any of the sects, but was none the less a staunch, Christian man. "Were your folks religiously inclined before Joseph saw the angel," inquired one of William Smith, brother of the Prophet? This in 1893, when William Smith was a very aged man. "Yes," he answered. "We always had family prayers since I can remember. I well remember father used to carry his spectacles in his vest pocket, and when we boys saw him feel for his 'specs,' we knew that was a signal to get ready for prayer, and if we did not notice it mother would say, 'William,' or whoever was the negligent one, 'get ready for prayers.' After the prayer we had a song we would sing; I remember part of it yet.

'Another day has passed and gone,

We lay our garments by.'" [^11]

It was this circumstance of Bible reading in the home which doubtless led one who was for some years neighbor to the Smiths,—Dr. John Stafford, of Rochester, New York,—to say that Joseph Smith, Jun., was quite illiterate until after the Smiths "began to have school at their house;" and then "he improved greatly." "Did they have school in their own house?" Doctor Stafford was asked. "Yes, sir," he answered, "they had school in their house and studied the Bible." "Who was their teacher?" the Doctor was asked. "They did not have any teacher; they taught themselves." [^12]

THE WESTERN WILDERNESS OF NEW YORK STATE—1820

It was in these places, Palmyra and Manchester, and in the midst of these family struggles for existence and these sorrows, that the boyhood of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, was spent. Western and much even of central New York was a wilderness in those years. Rochester, some twenty miles to the northwest of Palmyra, in 1815, consisted of but two or three log houses. The region was known as "the western wilderness," and two years before the arrival of the Smiths the Indians had "desolated the whole Niagara frontier." [^13] Educational advantages were meager. Up to the revision of the state constitution in 1822, each school district had but twenty dollars per annum from the state, and it was with some difficulty that a three months term of the common schools could be run by state and local taxation. [^14] Moreover, the affairs of the family in the early years of its residence at Palmyra, required the services of even the lad Joseph to assist in its maintenance, so that he was largely deprived even of the small opportunities afforded by the school system of the state; and books, as already noted, were few and difficult to obtain. Small need of wonder, then, if the book-learning of young Smith was limited. Still he learned to read passing well, he could write and had some knowledge of numbers; it is confessed by his mother that he was less inclined to the perusal of books, than the other children of the family, but "was more given to deep study and meditation." [^15]

ALLEGED BOYHOOD CHARACTERISTICS

A number of anti-"Mormon" writers unconsciously corroborate this view of his being given to deep study and meditation. Tucker, who perhaps has written the most prejudiced account of the Prophet's boyhood days, says: "Taciturnity was among his characteristic idiosyncracies, and he seldom spoke to any one outside of his intimate associates except when first addressed by another. * * * He nevertheless evidenced the rapid development of a thinking, plodding, evil-brewing mental composition." [^16] Of his reading Tucker also remarks: "Joseph, moreover, as he grew in years had learned to read comprehensively, in which qualification he was far in advance of his elder brother and even his father." [^17] As this comparison is made as to his brother Alvin, who died in 1824, it gives us a view of the Prophet in his later "teens," from seventeen to nineteen. Tucker also adds: "He was, however, proverbially good natured, very rarely if ever indulging in any combative spirit toward any one, whatever might be the provocation, and yet was never known to laugh." [^18] Another anti-"Mormon" writer speaking of the Prophet's boyhood, says: "His mind was retentive; he was possessed of a rude eloquence of speech, and had that rare power of expression that to the stranger or simple would seem the outward form of a sincere belief within." [^19]

Leaving out the visions and revelations received by Joseph Smith in his youth—beginning in his fifteenth year, and which are reserved for separate treatment—his boyhood was commonplace enough, and his life very similar to the lives of thousands of American boys of that generation, reared in the borders of an ever expanding frontier.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See affidavits in E. D. Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 1834, where the statement is frequently repeated, ch. xvii; also Tucker's Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism, p. 16, and after them nearly all anti-"Mormon" writers, who repeat their fulminations ad nauseam.
[^2] Tucker was the first to put out this view of the Smith family, 1867; see Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism, pp. 12, 14; and after him Kennedy, Linn and others have repeated it. Even Alexander Stevens in so dignified a work as his History of the United States, 1883, p. 548, following Tucker, repeats in substance what Tucker and Kennedy have published on this subject. He states, however, that, it is not within his recollection if these charges were ever sustained by "judicial investigation." (Tucker, p. 15.)
[^3] Tucker, 1867, Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism, p. 15. Also Kennedy, following Tucker, Early Days of Mormonism, pp. 10, 11.
[^4] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 19.
[^5] He died, November 13, 1893, at Osterdock, Iowa; Saints Herald, vol. xl, p. 787.
[^6] Zion's Ensign, Independence. Missouri, copied into Deseret News, January 20.1894.
[^7] Ibid.
[^8] Riley, in his Founder of Mormonism, p. 66, discredits them, saying: "No reliance is to be placed in the multiplied affidavits of jealous neighbors, who swore on oath that there was much intoxication among the Smiths; people in those days had the affidavit habit." Riley, however, claims to believe the charge of intemperance on other grounds. Even Kennedy balks a little at some of the rawness of these affidavits. Commenting on a conjoint affidavit signed by sixty-two residents of Palmyra, which he quotes at second hand from Kidder's Mormonism and the Mormons, in which the statement is made that Joseph Smith, Sen., and his son Joseph were, in particular, considered entirely destitute of moral character, and addicted to vicious habits,"—he says: "Some portion of this may have been dictated by envy, malice, or that form of righteousness which controls men at times when their neighbors have been more successful than themselves, but the allegations had a foundation in fact. (Early Days of Mormonsm, p. 17.)
[^9] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, pp. 352, 355, and note.
[^10] Ibid, vol. ii, pp. 47, 49 and note. The trial was held before Mr. Birchard, J. P., in Chardon, Ohio, in April, 1834.
[^11] Conjoint affidavit of fifty-three citizens of Palmyra and vicinity, Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, first edition, pp. 261-2.
[^12] The "Word of Wisdom," was given in February, 1833. The part of the revelation bearing upon the use of strong drinks and tobacco is as follows:
[^13] Demosthenes, oration on The Duties of the State.
[^14] Tucker, Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism, p. 14.
[^15] Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism, by Pomeroy Tucker, p. 15.
[^16] Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism, by Pomeroy Tucker, p. 12.
[^17] Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism, p. 17.
[^18] Ibid, pp. 16, 17. This view scarcely agrees with another anti-"Mormon" writer, who claims personal knowledge of the Prophet in those early days, viz.: Daniel Hendrix, who says: "Yet Joe had a jovial, easy, don't-care way about him that made him a lot of warm friends." (See letter to the St. Louis Globe Democrat, February 2, 1897, quoted by Linn in his Story of the Mormons, p. 13). This agrees admirably with what the Prophet has said of himself as pertaining to those days: "I was guilty of levity, and sometimes associated with jovial company. * * * But this will not seem very strange to any one who recollects my youth, and is acquainted with my native, cheery temperament." (See History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, pp. 9, 10.) This scarcely is the description of a boy who was "never known to laugh."
[^19] Early Days of Mormonism, Kennedy, p. 15.
