B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER VI

FIRST VISION OF JOSEPH SMITH: CONSIDERATION OF

UNDOUBTEDLY Joseph Smith sought wisdom on the question of questions of his day, when he decided to follow the injunction of St. James, to ask God for wisdom—viz., which of all the churches is God's church? Without controversy, if God still had a church on the earth, one in which he had deposited the revealed truth respecting religion, making known what was necessary to believe and what was necessary to do to obtain salvation; and if God had given to that church divine commission to teach that truth and administer the prescribed sacraments essential to salvation, then the chiefest quest of man should be to find that church; and, finding it, yield obedience to it respecting those things whereof it is made administrator, as unto God. For if there is such a church, and the inspiration of God dwell in it, then to obey that church, is to obey God. And what she tells him to do, without doubt, is the only thing to do—"the wisest, fittest thing to do—the thing which it will in all ways behoove man, with right, royal thankfulness, and nothing doubting, to do." [^1]

THE AUTHORITY OF THE CHURCH

From of old, and by the Master himself, men were commanded to hearken unto the church; and if one neglected to hear the church he was to become as "an heathen man and a publican," [^2] unto the church. The church which the Christ founded is declared to be the house of the living God—"the pillar and ground of the truth." [^3] In her was lodged the power to bind on earth and in heaven; to loose on earth and in heaven. [^4] "There is but one inquiry to be made," says a Roman catholic authority, "namely, which is the true church? * * * It is clear as the noon-day light, that by solving this one question, which is the true church?—you will at once solve every question of religious controversy that ever has been, or that ever can be agitated." [^5] Of course Dr. John Milner invokes this doctrine in behalf of the claims of the Roman catholic church, which he insists is the true and only church of God; which claims the Greek church, and all Protestant churches refuse to allow. But while the Greek church, and all the Protestant churches will not allow the special claims of Dr. Milner in behalf of the Roman church, many of them, and especially the Greek and English churches, and all churches of the same communion with them, are in accord with his principle as to the efficacy of the authority of the church, if only that church can once be determined upon. Dr. John H. Hopkins, Bishop of Vermont, in his elaborate answer to Dr. Milner, specifically admits the above principle, but denies its exclusive application to the Roman church. [^6] It is a matter of interest, and also adds importance to this History to know that Joseph Smith began his prophetic career with a question so weighty, so universally recognized as important. His question, under all the circumstances, was worthy of the splendid answer it received.

THE HARSHNESS WITH WHICH THE NEW DISPENSATION OPENS ITS MESSAGE TO THE WORLD

The declaration with which the New Dispensation opens its message to the world will doubtless be regarded as a singularly harsh one: The churches are all wrong; they teach for doctrine the commandments of men; their creeds are an abomination unto God; their professors are all corrupt. Respecting the churches and the creeds, such a condition as is described through this first utterance of Joseph Smith could alone justify such a work as the Church of the Latter-day Saints professes to be—viz., a New Dispensation of the gospel of Jesus Christ, a re-establishment of the "Church of Christ" in the earth. But respecting the last clause of the message—"those professors are all corrupt," it should not be taken as referring to the whole body of Christians; but rather as referring to the teachers of their creeds—the "professors;" that term not being used in the sense of "confessors" of the creeds, who merely accept doctrine from the teachings of the "professors"—the following and not the leaders.

This distinction is justified from the immediate context of the passage: "they (the "professors") draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me; they (the "professors") teach for doctrine the commandments of men." This context clearly proves that the charge of "corruption" is limited at least to the "teachers," not to the whole body of Christians. Moreover, I am convinced myself that the declaration is still further limited to the "professors" who founded, and by that act taught to the world the creeds that are an "abomination" in the sight of God—a fact not at all difficult of belief, or of proof, upon an analysis of the creeds themselves. And those who originally could form such conceptions of God and man, and the purpose of human existence, as the creeds teach, were certainly men of warped understanding, men of perverted, or "corrupted" minds. But as to the whole body of Christians, we know that there were at the time of the opening of this New Dispensation of the gospel, and now, many who were not only not corrupt, except for the ordinary sins and weaknesses or "corruption" of our human nature—but virtuous men and women, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, seeking after God, and hindered from finding him only by the abominable creeds formulated by the "professors" of the passage here considered.

It should also be remarked that in Latter-day Saint thought it is not Joseph Smith, nor the Latter-day Saint church that pronounces this judgment upon the "Christian" churches." Joseph Smith confessedly was incompetent to determine which was the true church of God. He of all persons both on account of his extreme youthfulness and his lack of general information, was among the least qualified to pronounce judgment upon such a question. His seeking knowledge from God upon this very question—"which of all the sects is right?" is a confession of his own inability to determine the matter. No human wisdom was sufficient to answer that question. No man in all the world was so preeminent as to be justified in proclaiming out of his own wisdom the divine acceptance of one church in preference to another, or God's rejection of them all. Divine wisdom alone was sufficient to pass judgment upon such a question as that. And there is peculiar force in the circumstance that the announcement which Joseph Smith makes with reference to this subject is not formulated by him nor by any other man, but is given to him of God. God has been the judge of the status of modern christendom, Joseph Smith but his messenger, to herald that judgment to the world.

RECENT CONFIRMATION OF THE DECREE PROMULGATED BY JOSEPH SMITH CONCERNING THE STATUS OF MODERN CHURCHES

It is somewhat remarkable that only a few years ago there came from a most unexpected quarter, an emphatic confirmation of what Joseph Smith in substance promulgated a century ago. There was going on at that time throughout the world, a most interesting discussion as to the power and efficiency of "christianity" as represented through the modern "Christian" churches. First to be noted was the "modernist movement" within the Roman catholic church. It was a movement which primarily demands a larger intellectual liberty within that church for its adherents; but its effects, indirectly, was much broader than that, since it concerns itself with the whole question of readjusting the Christian attitude towards modern knowledge. Primarily, however, it is described as "a clear call for the rejuvenation of Roman catholicism:"

"The modernists * * * believe that the church [Roman catholic] can harmonize its teachings with the thought of this age. The most ancient church can survive by becoming the most modern." [^7] The ambitious designs of the "modernists" may further be learned by the following questions and the answer made to them:

AGITATION WITHIN THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

"At this moment, (1908) pregnant with all sorts of moral revolution, when the intellectual world still alienated from Christ and his church, progresses in a hundred ways towards some indefinable renewal of spirit, we ask ourselves frankly: Is there in the Catholic church—in that great organism in which the religious spirit of the gospel has come to embody itself—is there a power of conquest or simply a conservative instinct? Does she still hide in the secret complexities of her wonderful organization capacities for winning adherents, or is her vitality threatened by the germs of a speedy decay? Is her mission henceforth to be limited to a suspicious vigilance over the rule and simple faith of her rapidly dwindling followers, or will she rouse herself to the reacquisition of that social influence which she has lost through long years of listless self-isolation? For ourselves, we have long since answered this critical question. We have ever watched the aspirations of the contemporary mind with sympathetic interest; our hearts have beaten in unison with its glowing enthusiasm for the new ideals of universal brotherhood; and we have seen in all its movements the symptoms of a glorious revival of religion. * * * Speaking the language of our age, and thinking its thought, we have tried to bring it into touch with the teachings of Catholicism, that through such contact their profound mutual affinities might be made evident. We cannot believe that the church will ultimately reject our programme as mischievous." [^8]

The office then of mediator between the old, mediaeval Roman church and the modern intellectual world is the one the modernists would fill. But this call for rejuvenation of the Roman church—this demand for reforms—these questions involving an alternative of rejuvenation or decay, presupposes a deadness; a need for reform; an out-of-harmony existence with modern truth, as developed by modern discovery and thought? What is it all but a partial discovery and admission of that truth announced by Joseph Smith well nigh a century ago, viz., that all the churches—including the Roman catholic church—are wrong, that their creeds are an abomination in the sight of God?

Let no one suppose it is a matter of small importance—this "modernist" movement—a mere "crackling of thorns under the pot." One, somewhat in sympathy with the movement, declares it to be in some respects the most important religious movement since the great "reformation" of the sixteenth century; for it is not confined to the Roman catholic church, but is world-wide in its sweep, influencing more or less all Christian churches, and in a measure all the great religions of the world. "Modernism is, essentially, the spirit of the modern age, and especially the resultant of the many forces which have been working with extraordinary complexity and intricacy during the previous century, and which are rapidly approaching a climax that probably will produce one of the greatest revolutions and reformations of history." [^9]

"The battle between Modernism and the Papacy," our author declares, "is raging all over the Christian world." The importance of the conflict may be estimated, in part, from the action of the pope with reference to it. In September of 1908 there issued from St. Peter's at Rome, the Encyclical Letter of Pope Pius X, "On the Doctrine of the Modernist;" a document that makes about one hundred pages of printed matter. Besides reviewing and denouncing the supposed errors of the "modernist," the most drastic ecclesiastic punishments were fulminated by the vatican against them; and in every diocese a council of vigilance was ordered to be established to carry out the repressive measures decided upon. The result of these restrictive measures are enumerated by a writer in the North American Review in the following passage:

"The despotic attempts of the Curia to crush it have been vain. Some of the most eminent Catholic scholars have been put under the ban, others have been excommunicated; numbers have been suspended from their priestly functions. Many more have been removed from important positions of usefulness to other less important positions where it was supposed they could do little harm. Great numbers have been simply silenced. What does this all amount to, however, but attempts to smother a flame which still burns fiercely? The attempts to scatter it only increase the number of conflagrations. There are signs that a reaction has already begun. Some of the most distinguished prelates of Italy, France and Germany have rebuked the most offensive spies and detractors of their brethren, whom this sad controversy has brought to the front. Even the Pope is said to have uttered words of caution. The public press of the world is boiling with indignation because of the arrogant dictation, and impertinent interference with their affairs, of Monsignore Benigni, the protege of Cardinal Merry del Val, and his 'Corrispondenza Roman.' There is profound dissatisfaction with the present situation of the church all over the Christian world, and on the part of some of the most distinguished Cardinals and prelates." [^10]

AMERICAN COLLEGES AND THE CHURCHES

Even more emphatic than the "modernist" movement within the Roman catholic church is the voice from the American colleges condemning all the churches, Protestant as well as Roman catholic. The Cosmopolitan Magazine in the year 1909, published four articles by Harold Bolce on the present trend of university teaching in the United States, and "the revelation," as the author remarks, "profoundly stirred America." Summed up in the editor's introductory note to Mr. Bolce's article in the July number, the attitude of many university teachers is this: That "while subscribing to doctrines akin to those of 'Christian Science,' 'New Thought,' and the 'Emmanuel Movement,' they are in favor of studying the forces of the spiritual world in a cold, scientific manner. Orthodox Christian dogma is regarded as at variance with its own principles and is interpreted in a new and revolutionary light." [^11]

In the Introductory note to Mr. Bolce's article in the August Cosmopolitan, the editor says:

"It has been shown in the series of articles beginning with 'Blasting at the Rock of Ages' that our great universities repudiate the dogma and orthodoxy of the established church, and proclaim a new religion divested of Biblical and church creed. Why do the most profound scholars in our institutions of learning undertake this revolutionary work? What do they hope to accomplish? The answer is here. The schoolmen have placed christianity in a scholar's crucible. They are determined upon reducing sacred institutions to scientific tests. The college men approach the subject with the greatest reverence. It is false to characterize them as atheists or iconoclasts. They assert that what we need is not less of God but more of God. They prophesy the introduction into the world of a system of belief superior to the christianity of the ages. Their whole attack is against what they define as dissipated mediaeval myths as embodied in the Holy Writ." [^12]

"The colleges say that the church, through its fear of new truth, has at all times been an obstacle to progress," says Mr. Bolce. "Dr. Andrew D. White, formerly president of Cornell University, says that the church, in its apprehension of the progress of learning, persecuted Roger Bacon, and by so doing, 'did more harm to christianity and the world than has been done as a result of all the efforts of all the atheists who have ever lived.' Professor Borden P. Bowne, of Boston University, Professor Frank Sargent Hoffman, of Union College, and scores of others say that the church is the last to come into the possession of truth; that it often lags behind even in the matter of the progressive conscience of the time; that it has had to recede from its position in every field of science; and that it is still receding and must continue to make way for the progress of truth in spiritual matters. For many professors assert that the church, as revealed by the outcry over the disclosures of what the universities teach, is still engaged in the effort to strangle thought. * * * And as the opposition to truth, as it is claimed, is still the role of religious bodies, the inescapable duty of unfettered institutions of learning is to give the world a new revelation. The professors believe that civilization is under the domination of many false doctrines, and that the fact that these are held sacred is no reason why they should be preserved." [^13]

CRITICISM OF "OLD REVIVAL" METHOD'S

Relative to the methods of the churches in propaganda by means of revival services—methods that have been much reformed since the boyhood days of Joseph Smith—the following passage occurs:

"Professor Boris Sidis, of the Pathological Institute of New York, who recently concluded a series of psychological experiments at Harvard, is ruthlessly arrayed against popular religion as expressed in revivals, and his findings have been endorsed by Professor William James in an introduction to the former's published report. If there is in American university teachings a more fearless doctrine than the following as put forth by Professor Sidis and countenanced by Harvard's leading philosopher, I have not yet encountered it: Well may President Jordan of Stanford University exclaim: 'Whiskey, cocaine and alcohol bring temporary insanity, and so does a revival of religion—one of those religious revivals in which men lose their reason and self-control. This is simply a form of drunkenness no more worthy of respect than the drunkenness that lies in the gutter!' 'Professor Jordan,' comments the Harvard psychologist, as a result of his investigations, 'was too mild in his expression. Religious revivalism is a social bane; it is more dangerous to the life of society than drunkenness. As a sot, man falls below the brute; as a revivalist he sinks lower than the sot'." [^14]

These colleges not only believe the churches are wrong now, but that they have been wrong for centuries. On this point Mr. Bolce remarks:

"The present crusade of the colleges is surcharged with the conviction that the churches and church thought are not only behind the times, but that they have throughout the centuries been an obstacle to human advance, and are even now the last barrier keeping man out of his true spiritual kingdom. They say that man has earned the right to know the truth, the truth that will make him free; and that man's ignorance of his power in a world of spirit, where he could, if he would, be master, with all the harmony, health, happiness, and abundance that that mastery implies, is the secret of the centuries of travail, hatred, wars, and crimes that have cursed the world. This then, is the announced justification of the college arraignment of many cherished institutions. The old indictment, drawn up by irreverent critics against the church is repeated with a new force and a new meaning. It is pointed out that it was religious Jerusalem, not pagan Rome, that clamored for the crucifixion.

"Motley and Draper and other historians have been cited in support of the teachings that the church in many ages murdered more people than it saved. And these victims were burned alive, strangled, or beheaded, not for crimes committed, but in some cases for reading the scriptures, or looking askance at a graven image, or smiling at an idolatrous procession as it passed. * * * But the college men are not blind to what the church has accomplished. In this phase of the subject they are peculiarly catholic. But it is taught now in practically all the departments of philosophy in the great universities that a new revelation is quickening this age, and that it is not only the right, but the duty of the colleges to stand, if they can, as interpreters of the acceptable year of the Lord. Professor R. M. Wendley, of the University of Michigan, teaches that we have every reason to anticipate great changes in christianity. The world of thought is in progress of such profound alteration that orthodox belief can scarcely escape the transforming effects of the new idea of God. Hundreds of thousands of young men and young women in America are coming under the influence of the new university philosophy, and instead of being apologetic for the teaching that the God of the colleges is greater than the God of the church, the university philosophers look forward with composure and even elation to the ultimate surrender of what they regard as discredited beliefs." [^15]

Joseph Smith's following may be pardoned if they find in this attitude of the "modernists" and the American colleges, confirmation of the truth of the great message with which the career of their Prophet began—"The churches are all wrong."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Wentworth Letter," in the History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, p. 536 et seq.
[^2] This is from a letter to Oliver Cowdery on learning that Cowdery was about to publish an account of the Rise and Progress of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, and is published in the Latter-day Saints' Messenger and Advocate, vol. i, No. 3, December, 1834. It will also be found in History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 10, note.
[^3] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, pp. 9-10.
[^4] Malachi, iii:1-4.
[^5] Compare with Malachi, ch. iv.
[^6] "For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you.
[^7] This statement respecting the two stones laying cross-wise in the bottom of the box is from the Prophet's personal narrative, History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 16. In Cowdery's Letters, No. viii, it is said that the plates rested on "three small pillars composed of the same description of cement used on the edges." The Prophet's narrative is most likely to be accurate, hence is followed in the text.
[^8] The warrant for these statements respecting Joseph Smith's first visit to Cumorah, the reflections he indulged while going there, and many of the details of the above narrative is from a published account of those matters by Oliver Cowdery, the Prophet's friend and associate in translating the Book of Mormon; also "the Second Elder" in the church. Cowdery's account appears in a series of Eight Letters published first in the Latter-day Saints' Messenger and Advocate, Kirtland, Ohio, 1834-5, vols. i and ii. In an introductory note to the series of letters the author of them says: "That our narrative may be correct, and particularly the introduction, it is proper to inform our patrons, that our brother Joseph Smith, Jun., has offered to assist us. Indeed, there are many items connected with the fore part of this subject that render his labor indispensable. With his labor and with authentic documents now in our possession, we hope to render this a pleasing and agreeable narrative." Joseph Smith's association with Cowdery in the production of these Letters make them, as to the facts involved, practically the personal narrative of Joseph Smith. The Letters have several times been reproduced in L. D. S. periodicals, the latest of which is the Improvement Era, vol. ii, 1899.
[^9] It may be said by the skeptical, however, that no one knew of the existence of this prophecy in the boyhood days of Joseph Smith, except his immediate family and friends; and the predictions may have been put forth after Joseph Smith began to emerge from that obscurity which makes the prediction remarkable. A very natural and well taken objection. But the account of the predictions, with the predictions themselves, were published in the Latter-day Saints' Messenger and Advocate for October, 1835; at a time when Joseph Smith had but little notoriety even in his own country; when his message had not been heard of in other countries (save Canada, and even there to a very limited extent); and when the Book of Mormon was published only in the English language and quite generally ridiculed and rejected. Under these circumstances, and going no further back than the date of the predictions appearing in print—October, 1835—they still constitute a remarkable prophecy.
[^10] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xix.
[^11] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 16.
[^12] "Alvin manifested, if such could be the case, greater zeal and anxiety in regard to the record [i. e. the Book of Mormon] that had been shown to Joseph, than any of the rest of the family; in consequence of which [after Alvin's death] we could not bear to hear anything said upon the subject. Whenever Joseph spoke of the record, it would immediately bring Alvin to our minds, with all his zeal, and with all his kindness; and, when we looked to his place, and realized that he was gone from it, to return no more in this life, we all with one accord wept over our irretrievable loss, and we could 'not be comforted, because he was not.'" (History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xx.)
[^13] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 17.
[^14] St. Luke, xxiv:39.
[^15] Ibid, verses 41-43.
