B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER VII

THE VISITATION OF THE ANGEL MORONI TO JOSEPH SMITH

THERE was an interval of more than three years between the first vision of Joseph Smith and a second manifestation in the same kind. Three years! That is a long interval in such matters. Had Joseph Smith been a mere enthusiast, self-deceived, and his vision sujectively induced, would he have waited so long before another manifestation was secured? The length of time between his visions strongly argues for the reality of the first one. Had it not been real he would not have waited three years for the fulfillment of the promise made by the Divine Personages of his first vision, viz., that "the fulness of the gospel would at some future time be made known to him." [^1]

THE TRYING INTERVAL OF THREE YEARS

Those three years were trying ones to the young Prophet. By telling his vision and speaking of the truth God had revealed to him he had thrown down a tremendous challenge to the sectarian world—they were all wrong—their creeds an abomination! Little peace after that for him. Yet what was he to do? He had learned a great truth. There must be by divine proclamation a clearing away of creedal rubbish accumulated through mediaeval and modern ages before there could be place for a restoration of the gospel of the Christ, a re-establishment of his church. In the interim between this announcement of a world in error and the beginning of the restoration of the gospel, the Prophet must needs suffer. The natural forces involved in the situation made that inevitable. Local sectarian hatred was awakened. Any one who knows how intensely bitter, bigoted, and cruel sectarian hatred can be, will appreciate how unpleasant young Smith's life was made during the passing of those years. That interval of three years carried him from his fifteenth to his eighteenth year—the perilous period of youth. The period that should be guarded by sympathetic teachers, by helpful social environment. Of all this the young Prophet had but little or none save for the sympathetic interest and love of his own family. In a manner he stood isolated in the community. He was a marked youth—the Visionary! Small wonder if he fell into boyish errors, and formed somewhat undesirable associations. This he confesses:

"During this time, as is common to most, or all youths, I fell into many vices and follies; but as my accusers are, and have been forward to accuse me of being guilty of gross and outrageous violation of the peace and good order of the community, I take the occasion to remark that, though as I have said above, 'as is common to most, or all youths, I fell into many vices and follies,' I have not, neither can it be sustained, in truth, been guilty of wronging or injuring any man or society of men; and those imperfections to which I allude, and for which I have often had occasion to lament, were a light, and too often, vain mind, exhibiting a foolish and trifling conversation. * * * I do not, nor never have, pretended to be any other than a man 'subject to passion,' and liable, without the assisting grace of the Savior, to deviate from that perfect path in which all men are commanded to walk." [^2]

CONFESSION OF ERRORS

On another occasion he adds to the foregoing acknowledgment of errors, the following:

"I was guilty of levity, and sometimes associated with jovial company, etc., not consistent with that character which ought to be maintained by one who was called of God as I had been. But this will not seem very strange to any one who recollects my youth, and is acquainted with my native, cheery temperament." [^3]

These youthful errors were a source of frequent sorrow to the Prophet. "In consequence of these things," he writes, "I often felt condemned for my weakness and imperfections." In such a mood as this he retired to bed on the evening of the twenty-first of September, 1823. The family were still living in the log house they had first erected on their farm, as the larger frame house, afterwards occupied by them, was not built until 1824-5. This log house had a low garret divided into two apartments, and it was doubtless to one of these apartments that the Prophet retired. He betook himself to prayer and supplication to God for forgiveness of all his sins and follies; and also pleaded for a manifestation that would make known to him his standing before the Lord. There was a heart-yearning to know if the youthful follies had alienated him from God. He felt confident that he would receive a manifestation, but would it be one of reproof and rejection, or one of pardon and further instruction? He was not long left in doubt. For while yet in the act of praying the room gradually began to be filled with light—white, radiant light; in the midst of which appeared a most resplendent personage, whose "countenance was truly like lightning." Naturally emotions of awe and fear at first seized upon the Prophet, but these were soon dispelled. The personage called the youth by name and announced himself to be the angel Moroni, sent from the presence of God with a message to the effect that God had a work for him (Joseph) to do; that his name would be had for good and evil among all nations, kindreds and tongues; that it would be both good and evil spoken of among all people.

EXISTENCE OF THE BOOK OF MORMON REVEALED

At this point in his message the angel told the Prophet that a book was deposited in a hill not far distant, written upon gold plates, giving an abridged history of the former inhabitants of the American continents, and an account of their origin. He also said that the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ was contained in this book as delivered by the Savior to the ancient inhabitants of America; that with this record were two stones held in silver bows and fastened to a breast-plate, constituting "Urim and Thummim," or "Interpreters." The possession and use of these stones constituted men "Seers" in ancient times, and God had prepared these for the purpose of translating the before mentioned book. After communicating this information Moroni commenced quoting prophecies from the Old Testament, beginning with the third chapter of Malachi, most likely the first part of the chapter, as that deals with the coming of the messenger to prepare the way for the glorious coming of the Messiah, [^4] a theme a propos to the developing mission of the Prophet.

He also quoted the fourth chapter of the same prophecy, varying the language a little. Instead of quoting the first verse as it appears in King James' version, he quoted it as follows:

"For, behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble; for they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch."

And the fifth verse thus:

"Behold, I will reveal unto you the priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord."

He also quoted the next verse differently:

"And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers; if it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming." [^5]

THE ANCIENT PROPHETS QUOTED

Moroni quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, which opens with the prophecy respecting the future coming of the Messiah to judgment, and follows with the prediction relating to the future gathering together of God's Israel accompanied by a mighty display of divine power. He also quoted the third chapter of Acts, twenty-second and twenty- third verses as they stand in the English New Testament. [^6] Moroni said the "Prophet" there alluded to, whom God would raise up unto Israel, and who must be hearkened unto in all things, was the Christ; but the day had not yet come when they who would not hear his voice "should be cut off from the midst of the people;" but that day would soon come. He also quoted the second chapter of Joel from the twenty-eighth to the last verse, which deals with the promise of God that he would pour out his spirit upon all flesh, until old men would dream dreams, and young men would see visions; that predicts also the coming of the great and terrible day of the Lord, but promises that whosoever will call upon his name shall be delivered; for in Mount Zion and Jerusalem shall be deliverance. Other scriptures were quoted and many explanations given; but specifically the Prophet has not recorded anything beyond what is here set down. He was commanded that when the ancient American record, or Book of Mormon, would be given to him for translation, he must not show the plates, or the interpreters, or the breast-plate to any persons except those to whom he would be commanded to show them. This under penalty of his own "destruction." While conversing upon these matters, the young Prophet's vision was quickened and he beheld the hill in which the Nephite record was deposited, and so distinct was the vision that he easily recognized the place the next day on visiting it.

After making these communications the light in the room seemed to concentrate about the personage of Moroni until the room was left dark except immediately around him; and then the Prophet saw what seemed to him a conduit open and the angel ascended from his presence.

SECOND AND THIRD APPEARANCE OF MORONI

While yet musing upon the strangeness of this vision, to Joseph's astonishment the room was again gradually filled with light and the whole vision from first to last, including message and conversation, was repeated; and again the angel withdrew. Withdrew, however, only to make a third visitation and to relate again the things he had formerly said; and to add to this important precaution to the Prophet: Joseph would be tempted on account of the indigent circumstances of his father's family to obtain the plates for the purpose of acquiring riches. "This," said the Prophet, "he forbade me; saying that I must have no other object in view in getting the plates but to glorify God; and I must not be influenced by any other motive than that of building his (God's) kingdom. Otherwise I could not get them." At the third withdrawal of the angel, signs of approaching day appeared, so that these visions and interviews had occupied practically all the night.

The physical and mental strain upon the Prophet because of these experiences of that eventful night was doubtless great; and plainly manifested in his appearance the next day. On going to the field with his father and elder brother Alvin for the purpose of harvesting their grain, he found himself so far exhausted as to be unable to proceed with his part of the work. Observing which Alvin, the elder brother, gently spurred him on by saying, "we must not slacken our hands, or we will not be able to complete our task." The father, however, observing the weakness and occasional abstraction of Joseph, and discovering that he was very pale, thought him ill, and insisted upon his going to the house to receive attention from his mother.

One thing which was the cause of the Prophet's abstraction was, beyond doubt, the struggle going on in his mind between fear and duty. Moroni in his communications of the night before had commanded him to relate his visions to his father; but the Prophet feared his father might doubt the truth of the story, and hence up to this time had refrained from making the communication. Still remaining silent with reference to his vision, Joseph started for home; but in attempting to get over a fence, on leaving the field, his strength entirely failed him, and he fell unconscious to the ground. The first thing of which he was conscious on coming to himself was that he was in the presence of the messenger of the night before, who was standing over him, surrounded with the same effulgent light, and calling him by name. The things of the previous night were repeated, and at their conclusion the angel demanded to know why the Prophet had not followed his instruction to tell his father the vision; and Joseph replied, "I was afraid my father would not believe me." On which Moroni said, "He will believe every word you say to him." Thus strengthened the Prophet sought his father and related his visions, whereupon Joseph Smith, Sen., assured his son that the visions were of God, and enjoined him to obey the messenger absolutely.

THE HILL RAMAH—CUMORAH

Encouraged by this repetition of the vision of the previous night, and strengthened by the assurances of his father that the visitation was of God, Joseph repaired that same day to the hill he had seen in vision, the place where the sacred record was concealed, some two miles distant from the Smith home. The hill is about four miles south of the town of Palmyra, in Wayne county. It stands on the east side of the Canandaigua road, and is the most conspicuous land mark in all that section of New York. In the Book of Mormon the hill is known as Ramah, and Cumorah, referred to more frequently, however, by the latter name. Approaching Cumorah from the north, you are confronted by the bold face of the hill, which rises quite abruptly from the common level of the surrounding country; and as the east and west slopes of the hill, as viewed from the north, are about equal and regular, it looks from a distance as if it might be a huge conical shaped mound. Ascending its steep north side to the summit dispels the illusion, for one finds that he has but climbed the abrupt north end of a ridge of hill having its greatest extent from north to south, and which from its very narrow summit broadens and slopes gently to the southward until it sinks to the level of the common country. The east side of the hill is now ploughed, but the west side is untouched by the husbandman; and about two or three hundred yards from the north end there is on the west side a small, scattered grove of young trees, with here and there a decaying stump of a large tree to bear witness that the hill was once covered with a heavy growth of timber. Unquestionably Cumorah is the most distinct land mark in all that section of country, the highest hill, and the most commanding in what I should describe as an extensive plain sloping northward, filled with numerous irregular hills, but which in the main have their greatest extent, like Cumorah, from north to south; and which, also like Cumorah, are generally highest at the north end.

THE RECORD IN VIEW

Many and varied were the reflections of young Smith as he approached this hill on the occasion of his first visit. Ascending it, and going to the spot where in vision he had seen the ancient record was buried—"On the west side, not far from the top"—he saw the crowning surface of the stone box in which it was deposited. Removing the grass and soil which covered the edges of the stone, and securing a lever and placing it under the edge, with a little exertion he raised it up—there before him were the gold plates, bound together by three rings passing through the back of them, the breastplate, the two transparent stones set in silver bows and fastened to the breastplate—all as stated by the personage who had revealed their existence to him. The box in which the sacred things were deposited was formed by laying stones together in some kind of cement. In the bottom were laid two stones crosswise of the box, and on these lay the plates and the other things. [^7]

Naturally Joseph stretched forth his hands to take out the treasure, when to his surprise he experienced a shock which seemed to paralyze his strength. A second and third attempt resulted in the same way, save that the repeated shocks, whatever their nature might be, increased in severity, and rendered him hopelessly weak and unable to lay hold of the record. "Why can I not obtain this book," he exclaimed. "Because you have not kept the commandments of the Lord," said a voice near by, and looking up the youth beheld standing by him the messenger of the previous night and of that morning. On the instant the mind of the young Prophet went back to the conversation of the night before, in which he had been told that he must "have no other object in view in getting the plates but to glorify God, and must not be influenced by any other motive than that of building up his kingdom"—otherwise he could not get this record.

This instruction the Prophet had not followed. In that walk from his father's home to the hill Cumorah, he had indulged in all sorts of reveries as to the possible results of obtaining this record. A record on gold plates! Wealth beyond all his boyish dreams, sufficient for himself and his family! And with wealth, release from want, both of himself and his friends, and in its place ease and comfort, and importance of station in the world! These had been his reflections while on the way to Cumorah, [^8] until on his arrival there he was obsessed by them so far that all thought of the glory of God, the restoration of a knowledge of the gospel to the world, the gathering of scattered Israel, of which the coming forth of this ancient record was to be the prelude and sign, the founding of the kingdom of God for the salvation of man—all this had been forgotten by the young and inexperienced Prophet, and the desire for a share in the kingdoms of this world—wealth, ease, influence, station, had for the moment possessed him—and there the possibility of it all lay within his reach in that rude stone box, and yet he had not the power to clutch it!

"Why can I not obtain this book?"

"Because you have not kept the commandments of the Lord!"

That stern pronouncement had a sobering effect. The glory of the kingdoms of this world for Joseph Smith vanished. He stood humbled before his preceptor, for such, surely, Moroni had become. Swift repentance followed; his vision cleared; he was once more en report with the spiritual things of God's kingdom; once more the prophetic powers of his soul were awakened—he was again the Prophet! "The heavens were opened and the glory of the Lord shone round about, and rested upon him." "While thus he stood gazing and admiring, the angel said, 'Look!' and as he thus spake Joseph beheld the 'Prince of Darkness,' surrounded by his innumerable train of associates. All this passed before him, and the heavenly messenger said:"

THE VISION OF DARKNESS—REASON FOR IT

"All this is shown, the good and the evil, the holy and impure, the glory of God and the power of darkness, that you may know hereafter the two powers and never be influenced or overcome by that wicked one. Behold, whatever entices and leads to good and to do good, is of God; and whatever does not is of that wicked one: it is he that fills the hearts of men with evil, to walk in darkness and blaspheme God; and you may learn from henceforth, that his ways are to destruction, but the way of holiness is peace and rest. You now see why you could not obtain this record; that the commandment was strict, and that if ever these sacred things are obtained they must be [obtained] by prayer and faithfulness in obeying the Lord. They are not deposited here for the sake of accumulating gain and wealth for the glory of this world; they were sealed by the prayer of faith, and because of the knowledge which they contain they are of no worth among the children of men, only for their knowledge. On them is contained the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ, as it was given to his people on this land [America], and when it shall be brought forth by the power of God it shall be carried to the Gentiles, of whom many will receive it, and afterwards will the seed of Israel be brought into the fold of their Redeemer by obeying it also.

"Those who kept the commandments of the Lord on this land, through the prayer of faith obtained the promise, that if their descendants should transgress and fall away, a record should be kept and in the last days come to their children. These things are sacred, and must be kept so, for the promise of the Lord concerning them must be fulfilled. No man can obtain them if his heart is impure, because they contain that which is sacred; and besides, should they be entrusted to unholy hands the knowledge could not come to the world, because they cannot be interpreted by the learning of this generation; consequently they would be considered of no worth, only as precious metal. Therefore, remember, that they are to be translated by the gift and power of God. By them will the Lord work a great and a marvelous work: the wisdom of the wise shall become as naught, and the understanding of the prudent shall be hid, and because the power of God shall be displayed those who profess to know the truth but walk in deceit, shall tremble with anger; but with signs and with wonders, with gifts and with healings, with the manifestations of the power of God, and with the Holy Ghost, shall the hearts of the faithful be comforted. You have beheld the power of God manifested and the power of satan: and you see that there is nothing that is desirable in the works of darkness; that they cannot bring happiness; that those who are overcome therewith are miserable, while on the other hand the righteous are blessed with peace in the kingdom of God where joy unspeakable surrounds them. * * *

"I give unto you another sign, and when it comes to pass then know that the Lord is God and that he will fulfill his purposes, and that the knowledge which this record contains will go to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people under the whole heaven. This is the sign: When these things begin to be known, that is, when it is known that the Lord has shown you these things, the workers of iniquity will seek your overthrow; they will circulate falsehoods to destroy your reputation, and also will seek to take your life; but remember this, if you are faithful, and shall hereafter continue to keep the commandments of the Lord, you shall be preserved to bring these things forth; for in due time he will again give you a commandment to come and take them. * * * Your name shall be known among the nations, for the work which the Lord will perform by your hands shall cause the righteous to rejoice and the wicked to rage; with one it shall be had in honor, and with the other in reproach; yet, with these it shall be a terror because of the great and marvelous work which shall follow the coming forth of this fulness of the gospel." [^9]

THE "FOUR YEARS" FOR INSTRUCTION

Before departing from him the angel told Joseph Smith that the record would not then be given to him for translation, neither would it be given to him until four years from that time—until, in fact, the Prophet "had learned to keep the commandments of God—not only until he was willing, but until he was able to do it. [^10] Joseph was also commanded to come to that same place, Cumorah, at the expiration of another year, and so each year following until the time had come for the plates to be delivered to him for translation, Moroni promising to meet him there on these occasions to give him further instructions. "Accordingly," says the Prophet, "as I had been commanded, I went at the end of each year, and at each time I found the same messenger there, and received instruction and intelligence from him at each of our interviews, respecting what the Lord was going to do, and how and in what manner his kingdom was to be conducted in the last days." [^11]

The Prophet has not given a more extended description of these annual interviews than is here set down; but undoubtedly the knowledge obtained in them was subsequently inter-woven in the doctrine and organization of the church.

On returning home from his first visit to Cumorah, the Prophet took his family into his confidence, and related the events that had taken place; but enjoined secrecy upon them in relation to the subject, that they might not unnecessarily bring persecution upon themselves.

THE DEATH OF ALVIN SMITH

The four years that must intervene before the plates would be given into the hands of the Prophet for translation was an eventful period for the Smith family. About a year after the first visit of Joseph to Cumorah, Alvin, the eldest brother died. A most estimable character he was; by his death the family lost one of its main supports, and the young Prophet a most constant friend; for of all the family no member of it had more faith in the mission to which Joseph had been called than Alvin had, or more thoroughly believed the reality of those things the Prophet had seen and heard." [^12]

The male members of the Smith family were still under the necessity of occasionally obtaining work outside of cultivating their own farm, in order to sustain themselves and meet the payments on their land. Hence they were sometimes at home and sometimes abroad. About a year after the death of Alvin, in October, 1825, to be exact, Joseph engaged to work for an elderly gentleman, Josiah Stoal, of Bainbridge, Chenango county, in the south part of New York state. Bainbridge is located on the west bank of the Susquehanna river, and some forty miles south, or down the river, in the township of Harmony, Susquehanna county, Pennsylvania. Near Bainbridge was an extensive cave, artificially formed some said, others that it was of a natural formation. In any event a local legend had it that it was an old mine formerly worked by Spaniards; and that they had concealed within it much of the treasure they had discovered, and could not take away, and hence had concealed it within the cave.

THE REPUTATION OF "MONEY DIGGER"

Mr. Stoal believed this legend and had employed men to explore the cave for the treasure. Having heard of Joseph Smith's gift of seership, he came to the Smith residence to employ him in this undertaking. Joseph hired out to Mr. Stoal and went with him and the rest of his men to Harmony, Pennsylvania, where for something like a month they vainly sought to find the "hidden treasure." At the end of that time, and acting under the advice of Joseph Smith, Mr. Stoal gave up the quest. It is mainly from this circumstance that the reputation of "money digger" was fastened upon the Prophet. Although Mr. Stoal gave up the search for the "Spanish treasure," Joseph continued for some time in his employment.

While laboring for Mr. Stoal in Harmony, Joseph had been put to board in the family of a Mr. Isaac Hale, somewhat noted, locally, as a hunter; and here he met Emma Hale, daughter of Isaac. Mutual love was the result of their meeting, and finally they were married on the eighteenth of January, 1827, while Joseph was still in the employ of Mr. Stoal. [^13]

The report that Joseph Smith had received a revelation had followed him into Pennsylvania, and as he steadfastly adhered to the reality of that revelation, prejudice and persecution followed him more or less into every neighborhood. Owing to these circumstances the Hale family was considerably prejudiced against him and opposed his marriage with Emma. He was, therefore, under the necessity of taking her elsewhere for the ceremony, and was married at the home of Squire Tarbil, in South Bainbridge, Chenango county, New York. It is usually charged by anti-"Mormon" writers that Joseph Smith "stole his wife," but since she was born on July 10, 1804, and therefore at the time of her marriage was in her twenty-third year, and under the law mistress of her own actions, it is a little difficult to see where the charge of "stealing" or "abduction" can be made to hold good.

Immediately after his marriage, Joseph quit the employ of Mr. Stoal and went to his father's home and farmed with him the following season, the summer of 1827. Another consideration which doubtless governed his action in removing to Palmyra township was the fact that the time was approaching—the twenty-second of September, 1827—when the plates of the Book of Mormon were to be given into his hands for the translation, and he, doubtless, desired to be in the vicinity of Cumorah.

NOTE

THE OBJECTIVE REALITY OF JOSEPH SMITH'S VISIONS

Did the visions of Joseph Smith have objective reality, or were they purely subjective, mere creations of the mind? This question has been extensively debated. Of course, from the Latter-day Saint point of view, the visions had objective reality. That is to say, the Divine Personages of the first vision were tangible, bodily Persons. One of them, in fact, was the risen Christ, who, when he arose from the dead left a tomb empty; who, to some of his doubting disciples, on appearing to a number of them after his resurrection, said: "Handle me and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bone as ye see me have." [^14] And who in further attestation of the reality of his bodily existence ate of a fish and honey-comb in the presence of these same disciples. [^15] And we have warrant even in the Athanasian Creed that "such as the Father is, such is the Son;" and conversely it follows of necessity that as the Son is, so is the Father. Hence the Father a tangible reality, a personage of flesh and bone as indeed was and is the Christ.

Of Moroni, the angel of the second and subsequent visions, treated in this chapter, the Prophet himself, in answering the question "how and where did you obtain the Book of Mormon," said: "Moroni * * * being dead and raised again therefrom, appeared unto me and told me where they [the plates containing the record] were, and gave me direction how to obtain them." [^16] So that Moroni was a tangible personage, as much so as the risen Christ was.

The gold plates of the Book of Mormon were also a tangible reality, sensible to touch as to sight. They had length, breadth, thickness and weight; as testified to by those who afterwards, as we shall see, saw, and handled, and "hefted" them. [^17]

Of course holding to the objective reality of the personages of these early visions, commits Joseph Smith and his following to the objective reality of God; and to the belief in the existence of a plurality of Divine Intelligences in the universe. This fact has, from the beginning, laid the church open to the charge of "materialism" and "pluralistic" conceptions of the universe. Obviously these questions are too large for discussion in a mere note, and especially at a time when the doctrine in these pages is, as yet, so inadequately developed. But here I may say, while halting merely to note the fact that these early visions of the Prophet commit the church to the doctrine of the objective reality of Deity, and to the existence of a plurality of Divine Intelligences, I disclaim that the church believes in or accepts the doctrine of "materialism," as that doctrine is popularly conceived and expounded. And in the doctrine of the existence of a plurality of Divine Intelligences in the universe, there is to be a modification also, namely, that while regarding such Intelligences as the grand creating and governing forces of the world, the "absolute" of other faiths and philosophies, so far as the "absolute" can be posited—while regarding such Intelligences as "self acting beings," they nevertheless form a "unity"; the "free harmony," of Professor William James, of Harvard, in contradistinction to the "solid block" of other philosophers. [^18] The "Many, though indeed One," of Professor Howison (University of California),—the "one Nature in manifold persons." [^19] David's "congregation of the mighty," where God "judgeth among the Gods." [^20]

This much to forestall hasty judgment on the part of the readers of this History, until a more systematic development of Latter-day Saint concepts can be unfolded in these chapters.

Footnotes

"And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people."

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Knight, Jun., son of the above, Joseph Knight, Sen., in a Biographical Sketch (Ms) filed in the Historian's Office, Aug. 16, 1862, tells of the removal of his father, Joseph Knight, Sen., from Vermont, and of his purchasing a farm in Broome county, "twenty miles above the Great Bend," having reference to the "great bend" the Susquehannah river makes where it dips down into northern Pennsylvania thence flows back again into New York state. "My father bought three other farms and hired many hands. In 1827 he hired Joseph Smith. Joseph and I worked and slept together. My father said Joseph was the best hand he ever hired. We found him a boy of truth; he was about 21 years of age. I think it was in November he made known to my father and I that he had seen a vision, that a personage had appeared to him and told him where there was a 'gold book' of ancient date buried, and if he would follow the directions of the angel he could get it. We were told it in secret * * * My father and I believed what he told us. I think we were the first [to believe] after his father's family." Joseph Knight. Jun., confirms Lucy Smith's account of the use of his father's horse and wagon by the Prophet when going for the plates, and of Joseph Knight, Sen., being present at the Smith residence when the Prophet brought the plates home, all detailed in the body of this chapter. He is most probably wrong as to the date, November, 1827, being the time when Joseph Smith worked for Joseph Knight, Sen., as Joseph Smith farmed with his own father at Palmyra that year. Joseph's living at Knight's would doubtless be the previous year, 1826, which would be when he was twenty-one years of age, as stated by Joseph Knight, Jun.
[^2] Lucy Smith relates the following as the final admonition of Moroni to the young Prophet as he took charge of the sacred record: "Now you have got the record into your own hands, and you are but a man, therefore, you will have to be watchful and faithful to your trust, or you will be overpowered by wicked men; for they will lay every plan and scheme that is possible to get it away from you, and if you do not take heed continually, they will succeed. While it was in my hands, I could keep it, and no man had power to take it away; but now I give it up to you. Beware, and look well to your ways, and you shall have power to retain it, until the time for it to be translated." (History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xxiii.)
[^3] The family, and even Emma Smith, seem to have been left to conjecture as to the Prophet having secured the plates on the morning of the 22nd of September. Several days after that date, and when Joseph had gone to a job of work in Macedon, and neighborhood excitement ran high as to taking the plates from the Prophet's possession. Lucy Smith remarks respecting the family's anxieties in the matter—"We supposed that Joseph had taken the plates, and hid them somewhere, and we were apprehensive that our enemies might discover the place of deposit." (History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xxiii). And when Emma Smith was asked by Joseph Smith, Sen., if Joseph had taken the plates from their place of deposit, or if she was able to tell where they were, she replied that she could not tell where they were, or whether they were removed from their place. Informed of the threats made in the neighborhood about taking the "gold bible" from Joseph, she answered that "she supposed if Joseph was to get the 'record,' he would get it, and that they (his enemies) would not be able to prevent him." To which the elder Joseph answered: "Yes, he will, if he is watchful and obedient; but remember that for a small thing Esau lost his birthright and his blessing. It may be so with Joseph." (Ibid). All which makes it clear that the Prophet had not taken his family and their friends into his confidence as to his having the plates in his possession.
[^4] Among those well known in the scientific and philosophical world who stand sponsors for the realities of premonition, inspiration, prevision, telepathy, thought transference and the like may be mentioned Sir Oliver Lodge, F. R. S., one of the foremost Englishmen of science and philosophy; Camille Flammarion, the noted French astronomer; the Right Hon. Gerald W. Balfour, (see the Hibbert Journal for January, 1909); W. H. Stead, journalist, traveler, and lecturer, founder of the Review of Reviews; Thomson J. Hudson, Ph. D., LL.D., author of The Law of Psychic Phenomena, and three other works on that line of thought; and William James, late of Harvard, whose most recent works are Pragmatism, A Pluralistic Universe, and his last work The Meaning of Truth, a "sequel" to Pragmatism.
[^5] See II Tim. iii:8; c. f. Exodus ch. vii. The Targum of Jonathan inserted their names in Exodus vii:11.
[^6] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xxiii.
[^7] Farmer's "smock," a coarse loose outer garment worn by farm-hands and laborers in those days, reaching from the neck to below the knees.
[^8] See note 1 at the end of this chapter.
[^9] See chapter iii this History.
[^10] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xxiv. I am careful to give these details for the reason, first, that they will tend to make for the truth of the history being written; particularization of time, place and manner—details, usually being the method of truth, generalities, merely, usually the method of falsehood: second, because the statement of the details, as the history develops, will correct many misrepresentations, made either by careless, not to say reckless, writers, or evil disposed persons, and dismiss the presumed absurdities built upon their statements, such for instance as the misrepresentations of John Hyde, who from the measurement of the old plates reaches the conclusion that their weight would be something like two hundred pounds, and then adds: "Besides these plates, he [Joseph Smith] had, according to his third story, a breast-plate of brass, Laban's sword, the crystal interpreters, the 'brass ball with spindles,' 'director' of Lehi. Yet he packs this horse load, keeps these large and awkward shaped things completely concealed, and, at the same time, beats off and out-runs two empty-handed men a distance of two miles." (Hyde's Mormonism, Its Leaders and Designs, pp. 243-4, published 1857, W. P. Fetridge & Co., N. Y.) Clark Braden, of the "Christian" (Campbellite) church, in his Book of Mormon debate with E. L. Kelley, of the "Reorganized Church," repeats and gratuitously enlarges on Hyde's misrepresentations. (See Braden-Kelly Debate, 1883, p. 181). The weight of the plates was doubtless considerable, being of gold, and each plate six by eight inches in width and length, and the whole volume six inches thick. But the actual circumstance of Joseph getting them home presents no such difficulties as those conjured up by Hyde. In the third place these details belong to a history of the "Mormon" church, of any pretentions to completeness; and also because, if the claims of "Mormonism" can be refuted, it will be largely through the intelligent investigation of these very details; so that every way their consideration is important.
[^11] Statement in Wentworth Letter, History of the Church, Period I, vol. iv, p. 538.
[^12] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xxiv.
[^13] The fact of the August visit and the invitation of Isaac Hale to Joseph to make his home in Harmony is learned from the statement of Peter Ingersol who was employed by Joseph to take himself and wife to Harmony and return with Emma's household effects. The visit is also mentioned in a statement made by Isaac Hale, but in both cases it is mixed up with many misapprehensions and misrepresentations of the Prophet and his proceedings. Both statements will be found in Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, ch. xvii.
[^14] Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, p. 18.
[^15] New Witnesses for God, vol. ii, p. 316.
[^16] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xxiii.
[^17] New Witnesses for God, vol. ii pp. 315-6, where full statement of Stoal is given and its value as evidence considered.
[^18] The original of Mrs. Campbell's letter is on file in the Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City, Package iv.
[^19] Ibid, p. 93.
[^20] Psalms, 82.
