B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER VIII

THE MANNER IN WHICH THE BOOK OF MORMON WAS OBTAINED—THOSE IN THE CONFIDENCE OF THE PROPHET

JOSEPH SMITH had doubtless taken both Josiah Stoal of Bainbridge, Chenango county, New York, and Joseph Knight, Sen., of Colesville, Broome county, New York, into his confidence concerning the time at which the Book of Mormon would be delivered to him for translation. Of Mr. Stoal, the employer of Joseph Smith we have already spoken. Joseph Knight, Sen., was a prosperous farmer and mill owner in Broome county, New York; he also had employed the Prophet at various times, [^1] and at the Knight home Joseph was a frequent visitor even during the time he was in the employ of Mr. Stoal. These two gentlemen, near neighbors, though separated by a county line, were guests at the Smith home in Palmyra at the time the Prophet obtained the Nephite plates, having arrived on the 20th of September, 1827. The presence of these guests naturally increased the domestic anxieties and work of Lucy Smith, so much so that she had not retired by midnight of the 21st. Soon after midnight, the morning of the 22nd, her son Joseph surprised her by suddenly coming from his chamber and inquiring if she had a chest with a lock and key. Suspecting what use the Prophet desired to make of it, she was somewhat agitated as she could not supply the article. Her son, however, assured her he could get along for the present without the chest, and leaving the house he hitched Mr. Knight's horse to the spring wagon. Presently the Prophet's wife, Emma, passed through the room dressed for driving, and departed with Joseph, presumedly for the hill Cumorah. It is not known what part Emma Smith took in the proceedings of the early hours of the 22nd day of September, as neither herself nor the Prophet have left one word on record concerning the matter, and these details are known only through the recital of Lucy Smith. It seems, however, that Joseph made his way to the hill Cumorah, and in the presence of Moroni obtained the Nephite record, the breast-plate and Urim and Thummim. [^2]

Owing to his having no suitable place in which to deposit the plates at his home, the Prophet concealed them, temporarily, in the woods some two or three miles distant. He found a fallen birch log that was much decayed, though the bark was well preserved and tough—as is frequently the case with that kind of tree, as all know who are acquainted with it. Carefully cutting the bark and removing sufficient of the decayed wood to admit of the plates, they were deposited in the cavity, the bark was drawn together again, and as far as possible all signs of the log having been disturbed obliterated.

THE URIM AND THUMMIM POSSESSED BY THE PROPHET

Meantime at the Smith home considerable excitement prevailed. Mr. Knight early in the morning discovered that both his horse and wagon were gone, and he suspected that some rogue had stolen them. Lucy Smith volunteered no information as to Joseph having made use of the horse and wagon, but tried to pacify Mr. Knight with the idea that they were but temporarily out of the way. The Prophet returned home in due time, and taking his mother aside showed to her the Urim and Thummim which he had evidently detached from the breast-plate and concealed on his own person when depositing the plates, as described above. He seems to have kept the instrument constantly about him after that time, as by means of it he could at will be made aware of approaching danger to the record. It appears, however, that Joseph on returning home made no explanations to his father, Mr. Stoal, Mr. Knight, or even to his mother about having obtained the plates. [^3] The elder Smith must shortly afterwards have suspected the fact, and so, too, in some way, the local community did, as much excitement and neighborhood gossip prevailed concerning the Prophet having the plates in his possession, and schemes were hatching to wrest the sacred treasure from him.

OTHER PSYCHICS THAN THE PROPHET

The fact was that Joseph Smith was not the only psychic in the vicinity of Palmyra. Men will say in scoffing explanation and in fancied refutation of the things here to be stated that the early decades of the 19th century were noted as a period of great superstition, and western New York was a locality where ignorance prevailed—and ignorance and superstition are always concomitant existences: so much so that where you find one condition the other is sure to be lying about at no great distance. And this ignorance, of which is born too frequently, it must be admitted, preposterous beliefs in things called miraculous; and which distorts all that it touches—the existence of ignorance, I say, is supposed to be a full explanation of the data on which superstition builds its edifice. In other words the proved existence of ignorance in any given case of what is called spiritual experience or supernatural manifestation or psychic phenomena, is held too often to be equivalent to a denial of the existence of any data whatsoever for the distorted account which the ignorant may give out for their more or less abnormal experience with the phenomena of mind. Meantime the spiritual phenomena of mind are realities, and there are manifestations of them as well among the ignorant as among the learned. The ignorant may distort their significance, stand in terror of the manifestations, and accredit them to a divine or a diabolic origin, accordingly as the manifestations affect them favorably or otherwise; while the learned, on the other hand, unmoved by fear may try to classify the phenomena, seek their origin, and give them scientific exposition; and certainly will give them a more intelligible nomenclature; but the bed-rock facts remain the same whether the manifestations of them are among the ignorant or the learned. There is a power in the human spirit that under favorable conditions, which may be self-induced, sees with the mind things not visible to the normal senses; that hears with the mind; and with the mind reads the thoughts of others or unconsciously infuses thoughts into the minds of others. These mind phenomena may be called by the ignorant "second-sight," "witch-craft," "magic," and the like; for they would be ignorant of the more learned terms of "clairvoyance," "clairaudience," "telepathy," or "thought transference;" and would never think of classifying all these manifestations under the general title of "psychical phenomena." Moreover they might be ignorant of the name given to that state of mind under which these abnormal powers are best exercised, the hypnotic or semi-hypnotic state; and also be ignorant of the scientific processes by which that state may be induced, and resort to "crystal-gazing," "peep-stones," "trance-utterances," and what not; but they produced the necessary state of mind, nevertheless, even with their crude methods, and obtained psychical results. It is too late in the day now to doubt of the reality of these mind-powers, or of their manifestation. Psychical research has progressed too far, and its accumulated evidences are too overwhelming to admit of doubt about them; and too many names honored in the scientific and philosophical world stand sponsors for the fact to allow of them being laughed out of the arena of human experiences, or dismissed from consideration by asserting that they are born of ignorance, and are real only to the superstitious. [^4]

Again these mind-powers are at the service of evil disposed persons as well as to those of upright intentions. "As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses," [^5] so also may it be expected that men of corrupt minds, will resist the truth, and employ against it psychic powers of mind as well as the normal mental faculties.

WAS THE NEPHITE RECORD IN DANGER?

These reflections indulged, we may now return to the statement with which they began—viz., Joseph Smith was not the only psychic in the vicinity of Palmyra. A Miss Chase, sister of Willard Chase, the Methodist class leader, already mentioned, had for some time been accredited with psychic powers of mind, and practiced "crystal-gazing;" and besides this, remarkable as it may seem, parties in the neighborhood of the Smith home, numbering some ten or twelve men, sent a distance of sixty or seventy miles for a psychic—"conjuror" they called him—to come to Palmyra and to discover the whereabouts of "Joe Smith's gold bible." The elder Smith learned of the arrival of this person at the home of Willard Chase, and heard him boast in the presence of his employers that he would "have them plates in spite of Joe Smith or all the devils in hell." [^6] This boast and the existence of this conspiracy might well agitate the mind of the elder Smith, as indeed it did.

The day after taking possession of the Nephite record, the young Prophet was offered the job of digging a well for a Mrs. Wells, of Macedon, a village some three miles west of Palmyra, and the family standing much in need of the money promised for the work, Joseph immediately accepted the employment and went to Macedon. Shortly after his departure the neighborhood excitement already referred to arose and the "conjuror" arrived. So great were the fears of the elder Smith that he finally determined upon sending for the Prophet, and to this end Emma Smith was mounted on horse-back and sent to Macedon. After some hesitation Mrs. Wells consented to Joseph returning home before the completion of the well, and furnished him with a horse with which to make the journey.

On arriving home the young Prophet allayed the fears of his father by assuring him that the record was as yet safe, and made immediate preparations for bringing it home. His brother Hyrum was sent for and asked to secure a chest with a lock and key by the time he should return with the plates. The plates were hidden, as already described, between two and three miles from the Smith home. Arriving at the place where they were concealed, the Prophet wrapped them in his farmer's "smock," [^7] and started for home. For greater security Joseph left the high-way and made the journey through the woods and fields. His enemies were evidently on the watch for him, for three times he was assaulted by as many different persons; but being strong and athletic, by dint of blows and flight he threw them off and finally reached home utterly exhausted from the excitement and the fatigue of his adventures.

As soon as he could relate in part what had befallen him on his way home, he desired his father and Messrs. Knight and Stoal to go in search of his assailants, which they did. At the same time a messenger was sent to Hyrum Smith to remind him of the chest he was to provide. Hyrum soon came with the chest, and the record was at last secured under lock and key. Meantime the elder Smith and his two friends, Knight and Stoal, returned from their fruitless search for the Prophet's assailants; and Joseph by now being recovered somewhat from his exhaustion, related to them and some others—"many others," Lucy Smith says—who had come to the Smith home because of the neighborhood excitement—his adventures in getting home with the plates. [^8] It seems that in knocking down his third assailant, Joseph had dislocated his thumb, and this, though not much noticed when it happened, now through its painful throbbing demanded attention, and he requested his father to put it in place.

The Prophet apparently did not return to his work at Macedon, but in order to be near the sacred record entrusted to him, he remained at his father's home working on the farm with his brothers.

THE BREASTPLATE OF URIM AND THUMMIM

It has been several times remarked that with the plates on which a brief history of ancient American peoples was engraven, there was an ancient breast-plate to which, when the Prophet took possession of it, the Urim and Thummim were attached. This breast-plate it appears the Prophet did not bring home with him when he brought the record. But a few days later, according to the statement of Lucy Smith, he came into the house from the field one afternoon, and after remaining a short time put on his "great coat" and left the house. On his returning the mother was engaged in an upper room of the house preparing oil-cloth for painting—it will be remembered that this was an art she had followed for some years. [^9] Joseph called to her and asked her to come down stairs. To this she answered she could not then leave her work, but Joseph insisted and she came down stairs and entered the room where he was, whereupon he placed in her hands the Nephite breast-plate herein alluded to. "It was wrapped in a thin muslin handkerchief," she explains, "so thin that I could feel its proportions without any difficulty. It was concave on one side, and convex on the other, and extended from the neck downwards, as far as the center of the stomach of a man of extraordinary size. It had four straps of the same material, for the purpose of fastening it to the breast, two of which ran back to go over the shoulders, and the other two were designed to fasten to the hips. They were just the width of two of my fingers, (for I measured them,) and they had holes in the end of them, to be convenient in fastening. After I had examined it, Joseph placed it in the chest with the Urim and Thummim. [^10]

VARIOUS CONCEALMENT-PLACES OF THE RECORD

The sacred things were now collected, it would seem, and secure under lock and key. But not so. As the Prophet states in his own narrative, "the house was frequently beset by mobs and evil designing persons, * * * and every device was made use of to get the plates away from me." [^11] One instance of this kind is related by Lucy Smith. A few days after the breast-plate was deposited with the record, Joseph came hurriedly into the house, apparently in some alarm, and inquired if a company of men had recently called at the house. Being answered in the negative, he informed his mother that a mob would be at the house by night-fall or sooner, and that the chest containing the sacred record must be immediately removed from its present place of concealment. At this moment a trusted friend of the family, a Mr. Braman, of Livonia—a village some twenty-five miles distant from Palmyra, in the adjoining county of Livingston—came in, and with his help Joseph took up the hearthstones, in the kitchen, dug a hole sufficiently large to receive the chest and relaid the hearthstones over it. Scarcely had this been done when the expected mob arrived with arms in their hands, and rushed upon the house. Joseph, however, feigned a counter-attack upon the mob, and throwing open the doors and giving command as to a large following, himself and father, Mr. Braman, and his brothers, rushed out of the house as if determined to attack the mob, whereupon they took to flight and dispersed. [^12]

Again, and only a short time after the foregoing incident, the Prophet received premonitions of another assault by the mob. The chest was taken from under the hearthstones and the sacred record and the associated articles were wrapped in cloths and hidden in a quantity of flax that had been stored away in the loft of a cooper's shop that at the time stood across the road from the Smith home. The chest was then nailed up and hidden under the floor of the cooper's shop. At night-fall the mob came and ransacked the premises, but did not enter the house. In the morning the family found the cooper's shop door broken down, the floor torn up and the chest shivered to splinters, but the record was secure in its place of concealment.

In these several movements the mob claimed to have been guided by the direction of Miss Chase, the psychic before alluded to, who, in her "crystal-gazing," claimed to be able to see where "Joe" Smith had hidden his "gold bible." And notwithstanding the many disappointments they met with, the mob's faith in her occult powers seems not to have been shaken.

The constant apprehension for the safety of the record entrusted to him, and these frequently recurring attacks upon the house by his enemies, rendered the work of translation under these circumstances impossible, and the young Prophet resolved upon removing to the home of his wife's parents where he hoped for a more peaceful environment, suitable for the great undertaking.

The circumstances of the Prophet's family were very humble, and they lacked the means to enable Joseph to make this journey; but through the kindness of Martin Harris, a well-to-do farmer in the neighborhood of Palmyra, who had become interested in the Prophet, and gave some credence to his account of the Lord's visitations to him,—through his kindness the necessary money—fifty dollars—was supplied, and Alvah Hale, brother of Emma, came from Harmony, Pennsylvania, with a team and wagon to convey Joseph and his wife to that place.

In the month of August of that same year, Joseph and Emma had visited Harmony for the purpose of securing some personal property belonging to the latter, and which had been left at her father's home at the time of her departure to be married in the preceding January. On the occasion of that visit there was an approachment to reconciliation between Joseph and his father-in-law, and an invitation was extended to himself and Emma to make their home in Harmony. It was doubtless this invitation that determined the Prophet upon removing to Harmony when the persecution became so intolerable in the vicinity of Palmyra. [^13]

He was not, however, permitted to depart in peace. Twice he was overtaken on the road, while still near Palmyra, by an officer who under the pretext of a search warrant sought, as was alleged, something of value that he might attach to satisfy the claim of an alleged debt; but in reality he was searching for the plates. They were concealed in a barrel of beans at the time and it did not occur to the officer to look for them in a depository so commonplace. [^14]

NOTE

VARIATIONS IN THE NARRATIVE OF JOSEPH BRINGING HOME THE PLATES OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

As might be expected there is some conflict in the details of the various narratives that are extant concerning the Prophet securing the Nephite plates and bringing them home. The Prophet himself goes into none of the details of the narrative already given, or those which immediately follow, or in any narrative which he published. The utmost that he said in his autobiographical journal is:

"At length the time arrived for obtaining the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate. On the twenty-second day of September, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-seven, having gone as usual at the end of another year to the place where they were deposited, the same heavenly messenger delivered them up to me with this charge: that I should be responsible for them; that if I should let them go carelessly, or through any neglect of mine, I should be cut off; but that if I would use all my endeavors to preserve them, until he, the messenger, should call for them, they should be protected. I soon found out the reason why I had received such strict charges to keep them safe, and why it was that the messenger had said that when I had done what was required at my hand, he would call for them. For no sooner was it known that I had them, than the most strenuous exertions were used to get them from me. Every stratagem that could be invented was resorted to for that purpose. The persecution became more bitter and severe than before, and multitudes were on the alert continually to get them from me if possible. But by the wisdom of God, they remained safe in my hands, until I had accomplished by them what was required at my hand. When, according to arrangements, the "messenger" called for them, I delivered them up to him; and he has them in his charge until this day, being the second day of May, one thousand eight hundred and thirty-eight.

In the "Wentworth Letter," written and published March, 1842, he merely says:

"After having received many visits from the angels of God unfolding the majesty and glory of the events that should transpire in the last days, on the morning of the 22nd of September, A. D. 1827, the angel of the Lord delivered the records into my hands. * * * As soon as the news of this discovery was made known, false reports, misrepresentation and slander flew, as on the wings of the wind, in every direction; the house was frequently beset by mobs and evil designing persons. Several times I was shot at, and very narrowly escaped, and every device was made use of to get the plates away from me; but the power and blessing of God attended me, and several began to believe my testimony."

This is as far into the details as the Prophet ever went in respect of these incidents in any public utterance that has been published. Lucy Smith and others, however, have added details, which, in the main, are doubtless accurate; but, as in all narratives of events, by different witnesses, even by eye witnesses, and especially when given from memory and many years after the events took place, there are certain discrepancies. As for example, a statement by Mr. Stoal, [^15] fixes the home-coming of Joseph with the plates in the morning; while from the nature of the events crowded into that day by Lucy Smith, this home-coming must have been sometime in the afternoon, and late in the afternoon. The events summarized are as follows: The elder Smith hearing conversations and threats when moving about among the neighbors, returns home and holds consultation with the family and determines to send Emma Smith to Macedon to bring the Prophet home; Emma rides on horse-back between five and six miles to Macedon; the Prophet makes arrangements with Mrs. Wells to be released from her work and rides home with Emma between five and six miles; after partaking of refreshments and giving various directions, he walks some three miles to where the plates are hidden; and then through woods and fields makes his way home with a heavy burden; it must have been late in the afternoon when he came home, if all these events happened in that one day.

Again, according to Lucy Smith, the Prophet's father and Messrs. Stoal and Knight were not at the house when Joseph, exhausted, came home with the plates, since, according to her narrative, Joseph desired her to send the lad Don Carlos—a younger brother—for his father and the two friends, "and have them go immediately and see if they could find the men who had been pursuing him." [^16] According to Mr. Stoal's statement, however, sixteen years after the event, he was at the house when Joseph came to the door with the plates and was the one who took them from him "the morning he brought them home," saying at the same time—"Blessed is he that sees and believeth, and more blessed is he that believeth without seeing." [^17]

TESTIMONY OF MR. STOAL TO RECEIVING THE PLATES FROM THE PROPHET

These discrepancies in details under all the circumstances are not to be wondered at, and can readily be accounted for by the intelligent reader. Some of the events mentioned by Lucy Smith as having happened on one day may have belonged to other days. Lucy's written account was given from memory eighteen years after the events took place, and a slight error of this kind would be quite natural; or Mr. Stoal's statement that it was in the "morning" that the Prophet brought home the record may have been an error—he dictated his statement from memory, sixteen years after the event occurred. And now as to the second matter, the absence of the elder Smith and the two friends, Knight and Stoal, when the young Prophet arrived home, (according to Lucy Smith's account); and the presence of Stoal and his taking the plates from the exhausted Prophet when he arrived, the other two being absent, or one of them may have been absent. In any event the two or the one absent was sent for to make up the party to go in search of the assailants of Joseph. The details are not more variant than would reasonably be expected, and the variation in details, under the circumstances, by no means weaken the narrative nor discredit the witnesses.

As the statement of Mr. Stoal has been seldom referred to in connection with the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, I think it important that the part of it mentioned in this note should be given. It appears that this early friend of the Prophet had such faith in the mission of Joseph that he was baptized, but did not remove from New York when the church was commanded to go to Ohio. Sixteen years afterwards, however, when the church was settled in Nauvoo, and the Prophet was at the height of his fame and glory, Mr. Stoal, then in his declining years and failing health, induced a Mrs. Martha Campbell, at whose home he was living, to write for him—and partly as he dictated—to the Prophet, asking if he would receive him in the church and allow him to renew his covenants, and expressing his intention to remove to Nauvoo in the spring. This letter was written December 19, 1843. And now the passage on the point of his receiving from Joseph the plates:

"He [Mr. Stoal] says he has never staggered at the foundation of the work, for he knew too much concerning it. If I understood him right he was the first person that took the plates out of your hands the morning you brought them in, and he observed, 'Blessed is he that sees and believeth, and more blessed is he that believeth without seeing;" and he says he has seen and believes. He seems anxious to get there [i. e. Nauvoo] to 'renew his covenant with the Lord." [^18]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] A photogravure of the house is given in this chapter. Joseph Smith sold this house to a Mr. McCune who built a two story addition to it—the part which appears on the left. The two story division of the house on the right, and the low addition between that and the part on the left, is the house as it stood when Joseph Smith occupied it; and it was in this house that a large part of the Book of Mormon was translated. The house stands on the north bank of the Susquehannah river, two miles west of the Twin river, and is now not more than sixty feet from the New York, Erie and Western Railroad. The building on the right, the old part, is very rickety, and looks as though it would soon tumble down from rot and age. Not many rods from the house is a country grave-yard which appears at the extreme left of the photogravure. Here is interred Isaac Hale and his wife, also a child of Joseph and Emma Smith. The photogravure is from a photograph taken by George E. Anderson of Springville, Utah.
[^2] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 19.
[^3] II Nephi, ch. xxvii.
[^4] Harris' statement follows later.
[^5] The engraving of the transcript of characters accompanying this chapter is photographed from the original transcript now in possession of Fred M. Smith, of Independence, Missouri, grand-son of the Prophet. It is by the courtesy of this gentleman that I am permitted to use the photographed facsimile presented here.
[^6] The writer is of the opinion that there is in this statement too wide a scope given to what Professor Anthon said of the translation of the Egyptian-Nephite characters. Of course in the transcripts the professor would doubtless recognize some Egyptian characters of the hieratic Egyptian, and in the translation would also find a right interpretation of those characters, as it will be seen by his letters, quoted later in the body of the work, he acknowledges that the characters submitted to him were true characters, but beyond this I do not think he could give confirmation as to the correctness of the translation; for, according to the writers of the Book of Mormon, they had changed somewhat the characters in both languages in which they made records, both in the Egyptian, and also in the Hebrew (See Mormon, ix:32, 43): and Moroni adds: "The Lord knoweth the things which we have written, and also that none other people knoweth our language, therefore he hath prepared means for the interpretation thereof" (Mormon ix:34), referring to the Urim and Thummim or 'Interpreters,' as the Nephites called that instrument. It follows from this that neither Professor Anthon nor any one else could have confirmed the translation beyond perhaps saying that some of the Egyptian characters which he recognized in the transcript had true significance.
[^7] Howe's Mormonism, ch. xviii, first edition.
[^8] I copy the letter from Gleanings by the Way, Rev. John A. Clark, D. D., where Anthon's letter is published in full. It is frequently quoted, or at least parts of it are, in various anti-"Mormon" works, but nowhere in full, so far as I am aware, except in Gleanings by the Way, and in connection with Professor Anthon's letter to Mr. E. D. Howe. This doubtless, for the reason that this second letter of Professor Anthon's contradicts several statements that he makes in his letter to E. D. Howe. Lengthy exerpts of the Coit letter will also be found in the appendix of Early Days of Mormonism, J. H. Kennedy, 1880.
[^9] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i. p. 21.
[^10] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xxv. Anti-"Mormon" writers refer to this incident of the "stranger's accompanying Joseph home" as one of the appearances of Sidney Rigdon at the Smith home before the publication of the Book of Mormon. Especially does Theodore Schroeder, insinuatingly, so employ the incident. (American Historical Magazine, Predecessor of Americana, vol. ii, p. 75, note 113.)
[^11] It is charged by some that Mrs. Harris, being unfriendly to the work, burned the manuscript, but this she denied. (Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, p. 22.)
[^12] The revelation appears as section iii in Doctrine and Covenants. In passing I may be pardoned for so far entering into argument as to say, that I am confident that this revelation alone will stand as an effectual contradiction and refutation of the misrepresentations made concerning the Prophet's character and manner of life about this time. The representations of his enemies say that during this time he was of intemperate habits, lazy, improvident, a chronic liar and charlatan, a low, cunning deceiver and blackguard. See Howe, Tucker, Kennedy, Kidder, Turner, Caswell, Bennett, Hyde, Lyford, Linn; and all anti-"Mormon" writers who take their cue from that vicious collection of affidavits gathered in 1833 by "Dr." Philastus Hurlburt. A character such as these writers represent Joseph Smith to be about this time, could have no such conceptions of God as this revelation sets forth; he would indulge in no such self-reproofs; and would plan no such self-corrections as the principles of this revelation require, nor hold up to himself such incentives for his actions as are here portrayed.
[^13] Evidently these conspirators acted upon the supposition that because the Prophet professed to translate by means of Urim and Thummim under the inspiration of God, that the work of translation was automatic, a purely mechanical process, that would not allow of even verbal variations in the retranslation of a given passage. This introduces one of the questions respecting the Book of Mormon which has been much debated, and which at the proper place (see chapter x) will receive consideration. Here I can only say that translation by means of Urim and Thummim, under the inspiration of God, is not the automatic, mechanical thing it is supposed to be, but on the contrary that method of translation would be as liable to verbal variation—as I shall prove later—as ordinary translation would be.
[^14] Book of Mormon, "The Words of Mormon," p. 132-7, current edition.
[^15] New Witnesses for God, vol. ii, p. 316.
[^16] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xxiii.
[^17] New Witnesses for God, vol. ii pp. 315-6, where full statement of Stoal is given and its value as evidence considered.
[^18] The original of Mrs. Campbell's letter is on file in the Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City, Package iv.
