B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XII

TESTIMONY ON MERELY HUMAN BASIS TO BOOK OF MORMON

A FEW days after the three witnesses obtained their view of the Book of Mormon plates, said plates were shown to the eight witnesses by the Prophet himself. Lucy Smith gives the most detailed account of the attendant circumstances. The day following the one on which the three witnesses received their testimony, the Palmyra party, consisting of the Prophet's father and mother and Martin Harris returned home; and now Lucy Smith's statement:

"In a few days we were followed by Joseph, Oliver and the Whitmers, who came to make us a visit, and make some arrangements about getting the book printed. Soon after they came, all the male part of the company, with my husband, Samuel and Hyrum, retired to a place where the family were in the habit of offering up their devotions to God. They went to this place because it had been revealed to Joseph that the plates would be carried thither by one of the ancient Nephites. Here it was that those eight witnesses, whose names are recorded in the Book of Mormon, looked upon them and handled them. * * * After these witnesses returned to the house, the angel again made his appearance to Joseph, at which time Joseph delivered up the plates into the angel's hands." [^1]

This narrative is confirmed by the statement of Joseph himself with respect to delivering up the record to the angel. At the time the plates were first given into the Prophet's keeping he was informed that the heavenly messenger would call for them. He then recounts the efforts made to wrest the plates from him by his enemies, and adds:

"But by the wisdom of God they remained safe in my hands, until I had accomplished by them what was required at my hand. When, according to arrangements, the messenger [the angel Moroni] called for them, I delivered them up to him; and he has them in his charge until this day, being the 2nd of May, 1838." [^2]

In the evening of the day that the eight witnesses saw and examined the Nephite plates, according to Lucy Smith, they held meeting at the Smith residence, "in which all the witnesses bore testimony to the facts as stated above", that is, to the facts stated in their testimony as here given and which appeared in the first and in all subsequent editions of the Book of Mormon.

THE TESTIMONY OF THE EIGHT WITNESSES

"Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people unto whom this work shall come, that Joseph Smith, Jun., the translator of this work, has shown unto us the plates of which hath been spoken, which have the appearance of gold; and as many of the leaves as the said Smith has translated, we did handle with our hands; and we also saw the engravings thereon, all of which has the appearance of ancient work, and of curious workmanship. And this we bear record with words of soberness, that the said Smith has shown unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of a surety that the said Smith has got the plates of which we have spoken. And we give our names unto the world, to witness unto the world that which we have seen; and we lie not, God bearing witness of it.

CHRISTIAN WHITMER, HIRUM PAGE,

JACOB WHITMER, JOSEPH SMITH, SEN.,

PETER WHITMER, JUN., HYRUM SMITH,

JOHN WHITMER, SAMUEL H. SMITH."

The testimony of the eight witnesses differs from that of the three witnesses in that the view of the plates by the latter was attended by a remarkable display of the glory and power of God, and the ministration of an angel; but no such remarkable display of God's splendor and power was attendant upon the exhibition of the plates to the eight witnesses. On the contrary, it was just a plain, matter-of-fact exhibition of the plates by the Prophet himself to his friends. They saw the plates; they handled them; they turned the leaves of the old Nephite record, and saw and marveled at its curious workmanship. No brilliant light illuminated the forest or dazzled their vision; no angel was there to awe them by the splendor of his presence; no soul-piercing voice of God from the midst of a glory to make them tremble by its power. All these supernatural circumstances present at the view of the plates by the three witnesses were absent at the time when the eight witnesses saw them. In this latter event all was natural, matter-of-fact, plain. Nothing to inspire awe, or fear, or dread; nothing uncanny or overwhelming, but just a plain, straightforward proceeding that leaves men in possession of all their faculties, and self-consciousness; all of which renders such a thing as deception, or imposition entirely out of the question. They could pass the plates from hand to hand, guess at their weight—doubtless considerable, that idea being conveyed in their testimony—"we have seen and hefted, and know of a surety, that the said Smith has got the plates." They could look upon the engravings, and observe calmly how different they were from everything modern in the way of record-making known to them, and hence the conclusion that the workmanship was not only curious but ancient.

FIDELITY OF THE EIGHT WITNESSES

Of these eight witnesses five of them, viz: Christian Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jun., Joseph Smith, Sen., Hyrum Smith, and Samuel Smith, all remained true throughout their lives, not only to their testimony, but faithful to the church also, and were honorable, upright men. While the three of the eight witnesses who left the church, or were excommunicated from it, viz: John Whitmer, Hirum Page, and Jacob Whitmer, not one of them ever denied the truth of his testimony; [^3] a circumstance of some weight in helping one to determine the value of the testimony to which, with those who remained faithful to the church, they subscribed their names when the Book of Mormon was first given to the world.

THE TWO KINDS OF TESTIMONY—DIVINE AND HUMAN

It is to be observed that what may be called two kinds of testimony to the truth of the Book of Mormon is found in the statements of the three and eight witnesses respectively; viz: what men would call miraculous testimony, and ordinary testimony. Had there been but one kind of testimony the matter would have been much simplified for the objector. Had the testimony of the three witnesses been the only kind given; that is, if the plates had been exhibited to the eight witnesses in the same manner as they had been revealed to the three, then, perhaps, mental hallucination might have been urged with more show of reason. Or, if the three witnesses had seen the plates in the same manner as the eight did, in a plain, matter-of-fact way, without display of the divine power, then the theory of pure fabrication, with collusion on the part of all those who assisted in bringing forth the work, would have more standing. But with the two kinds of testimony to deal with it is extremely difficult for objectors to dispose of the matter.

ANTI-"MORMON" CRITICISM OF THE WITNESSES

Anti-"Mormon" writers are much divided as to their treatment of the testimony of these eleven witnesses. The early anti-"Mormon" writers generally assumed a conspiracy between Joseph Smith and the witnesses to the Book of Mormon, and hence accorded no importance to either group—the three or the eight. [^4] Later, however, the force of the testimony of the witnesses persisting, and pressing for an explanation which the theory of conspiracy and collusion did not satisfy, there began to be advanced the theory that probably Joseph Smith had in some way deceived the witnesses and thus brought them to give their testimony to the world. Such is the attitude of Daniel P. Kidder, author of Mormonism and the Mormons, published in 1842; [^5] also of the Rev. Henry Caswall, Professor of Divinity in Kemper College of Missouri, author of The Prophet of the Nineteenth Century, 1843; [^6] also of Professor J. B. Turner of Illinois College, Jacksonville, Illinois, author of Mormonism in All Ages, 1842. [^7] Governor Ford, of Illinois, states this same theory very circumstantially, in his History of Illinois, published in 1854, but modestly "leaves it to philosophers to determine whether the fumes of an enthusiastic and fanatical imagination are thus capable of binding the mind and deceiving the senses by so absurd a delusion." [^8]

A third class of anti-"Mormon" writers—the latest in the field and who now doubtless hold the field against all others among intelligent readers—insist that Joseph Smith himself was deceived—"genuinely deluded by the automatic freaks of a vigorous but undisciplined brain." So Lily Dougall, author of The Mormon Prophet, [^9] 1899, holds.

It remained, however, for the year of grace 1902 to witness the setting forth of these theories under the learned formulas of a scientific treatise, in which the testimony of the witnesses received special consideration. Mr. I. Woodbridge Riley, the author of the work referred to, after quoting the account of the exhibition of the plates by the angel to the three witnesses, as related in the History of Joseph Smith, regards the duty before him to be to find to what degree the manifestations are explicable on the grounds of subjective hallucination, induced by hypnotic suggestion." [^10]

Mr. Riley is positive and elaborate in his exposition of the theory of hallucination under hypnotic suggestion in accounting for the testimony of the three witnesses; but brief and markedly less sure of his ground in relation to the testimony of the eight. Here he can only say that the "Bucolic Phrases" of the witnesses—to the effect that they had "seen" and both "handled" and "hefted" the plates—"properly interpreted, suggest both visual and tactual sense illusion." He offers, however, as an alternative, the theory of "pure fabrication;" and the formal, collective statement of the witnesses he refers to as a document due to the "affidavit habit," characteristic of the times! This or "collective hypnotization," must account for their testimony; and what Mr. Riley says for collective hypnotization is not convincing; it scarcely amounts to more than a suggestion, and is timidly put forth.

It is just at this point that the two kinds of testimony—the testimony of the three witnesses and the eight, respectively, act and react upon each other in a manner quite remarkable. The "mental mirage" theory might offer a possible solution for the vision of the three witnesses, but what of the testimony of the eight witnesses—all so plain, matter-of-fact, straightforward and real? How shall that be accounted for? Here all the miraculous is absent. It is a man to man transaction. Neither superstition, nor expectation of the supernatural can play any part in working up an illusion or "mental mirage" respecting what the eight witnesses saw and handled. Their testimony must be accounted for on some other hypothesis than that of hallucination. And indeed it is. Some regard it as a mere fabrication of interested parties to the general scheme of deception. This, however, is an arbitrary proceeding, not warranted by a just treatment of the facts involved. Others, impressed with the evident honesty of the witnesses, or not being able to account for the matter in any other way, admit that Joseph Smith must have had plates which he exhibited to the eight witnesses, but deceived them as to the manner in which he came in possession of them. Such is the conclusion of Tucker; [^11] Rev. William Harris; [^12] Daniel P. Kidder; [^13] Professor Turner also adopts the same theory; [^14] as also does John Hyde. [^15] The net result then of the anti-"Mormon" speculations in relation to the testimony of the three witnesses, and the eight is the theory of hallucination to account for the testimony of the three witnesses, and pure fabrication, with the possibility of deception by Joseph Smith as to the existence of some kind of plates lurking in the background, to account for the testimony of the eight witnesses.

INTER-RELATION OF DIVINE AND HUMAN TESTIMONY

But the testimony of the three and the eight witnesses, respectively, stands or falls together. If the pure fabrication theory is adopted to explain away the testimony of the eight witnesses, there is no reason why it should not be adopted to explain away the testimony of the three. But every circumstance connected with the testimony of all these witnesses, as we have seen, cries out against the theory of "pure fabrication." It is in recognition of the evident honesty of the three witnesses that the theory of mental hallucination is invented to account for their testimony; as it is also the evident honesty of the eight witnesses that leads to the admission by many anti-"Mormon" writers that Joseph Smith must have had some kind of plates which he exhibited to the eight witnesses, though he may not have obtained them through supernatural means.

The theory of pure fabrication of the testimony of the witnesses is absolutely overwhelmed by the evidence of their honesty. But why have the "pure fabrication" theory to account for the testimony of the eight witnesses, and the "mental hallucination" theory to account for the testimony of the three? If the testimony of the eight is pure fabrication is not the testimony of the three pure fabrication also? Or, at least, is it not most likely to be so? For if conscious fraud, and pure fabrication lurk anywhere in Joseph Smith's and the eleven witnesses' account of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, would it not exist throughout the whole proceeding?

The hallucination theory breaks down under the force of the matter-of-fact testimony of the eight witnesses, from which all possible elements of hallucination are absent.

The manifestation of divine power, through which the three witnesses received their testimony, destroys the theory of deception alleged to have been practiced by the Prophet on the credulity of the eight witnesses by exhibiting plates either manufactured by himself or some ancient plates accidentally discovered.

Such, then is the force of this direct testimony of the eleven witnesses to the truth of the Book of Mormon—the testimony of the three and the eight when considered together. It is so palpably true that it cannot be resolved into illusion or mistake. It is so evidently honest that it cannot be resolved into pure fabrication. It is of such a nature that it would not possibly have been the result of deception wrought by the cunning of Joseph Smith. There remains after these but one other theory. "The witnesses were honest." They saw and heard and handled what they saw, and heard, and handled.

PERSISTENCE OF THE WITNESSES

The persistence of these witnesses in adhering to their testimony after their connection with Joseph Smith and the church was severed, is strong evidence against the presumption of collusion among these young men to deceive the world. Suppose, for a moment, however, that such a collusion did exist. In that event, if the three witnesses fell into transgression—as they evidently did—and violated church discipline ever so flagrantly, would Joseph Smith dare to break friendship with them by excommunicating them? Would he not, on the contrary, say in his heart: It matters not what these men do, I dare not raise my hand against them; for if I do they will divulge our secret compact, and I shall be execrated as a vile imposter by the whole world. I shall be repudiated by my own people, and driven out from all society as a vagabond. At whatever cost I must cover up their iniquity, lest I myself by them be exposed to shame. Such, doubtless, would have been his course of reasoning; and had he with them conspired to deceive mankind, such, doubtless, is what would have taken place; for I maintain that men who would be base enough to concoct such a deception would also be base enough to expose it and become traitors when they became disaffected towards each other. But nothing of the kind took place. When these men violated church discipline and would not repent and forsake the evil they did, neither Joseph Smith nor the church would any longer fellowship them but boldly excommunicated them.

By the act of excommunication, Joseph Smith virtually said to the three witnesses: Gentlemen, God has made you witnesses for himself in this age of spiritual darkness and unbelief, but you refuse to keep his laws, therefore we must withdraw the hand of fellowship from you. This may fill you with anger and malice; you may raise your hand against me and the work of God to destroy it; a wicked spirit may put it into your hearts to deny the testimony you have borne; but I know you received that witness from God, I was with you when you received it, I saw the glorious messenger from heaven show you the plates; I, myself, heard the voice of God bear record to you that the translation was correct and the work true—now deny that testimony if you dare—this work is of God and he can sustain it even if you should turn against it; therefore, we will not fellowship you in your insubordination—you are cut off from our association—do your worst! That is what, in effect, that action said; but though Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer became the pronounced enemies of Joseph Smith, and sought his overthrow, yet they never denied the testimony they bore to the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon. Through all the vicissitudes of life they remained true to that trust committed to them of God. In my opinion they dared not deny that which God had revealed; it drew with it consequences too weighty for them to meet. And the same conclusions must hold with reference to the three out of the group of eight witnesses who left the church or were excommunicated. [^16]

Footnotes

An extended review of Mr. Riley's book will be found in the author's work. Defense of the Faith and the Saints, vol. i. pp. 39-61.

---
Notas:
[^1] The letter of Mr. Weed is published in New Light on Mormonism, by Mrs. Ellen E. Dickinson, grand niece of Solomon Spaulding. The letter is in the Appendix to the book, pages 260-261, and bears date of April 12, 1880. It would seem that the Prophet made two calls upon Mr. Weed, first alone, at which time he had an extended interview with this gentleman in relation to the Book of Mormon: and the second time, in company with Martin Harris, who, Mr. Weed states, offered to be security for payment of the cost of publication. Evidently the Prophet's personal appearance impressed Mr. Weed favorably, for in the letter here considered, he says: "He seemed about thirty years of age, was compactly built, about five feet eight inches in height, had regular features and would impress one favorably in conversation." Mr. Weed also writes a brief introduction to Mrs. Ellen E. Dickinson's work, who poses as "a representative of the Spaulding family."
[^2] Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism, Tucker, p. 52.
[^3] In Kennedy's Early Days of Mormonism, that writer says that Harris gave his bond and a "mortgage on his farm," for the $3,000. "As Mrs. Harris refused to be a party to the transaction, an agreement of separation between herself and husband was arranged. She received her share of the estate, some eighty acres of land and the farm house." (Early Days of Mormonism, Scribners, 1888, p. 50.) There is nothing in our church annals, however, which confirms the statement that a mortgage was taken on the farm, beyond the declaration that Harris became security for the payment of $3,000 to the printer. The farm was sold, or at least Mr. Harris' part of it, to Mr. Thomas Lackey to raise the money to pay the printer's bill. See statement of Amasa M. Lyman, who worked for Mr. Lackey in 1832, (Millennial Star, vol. xxvii, p. 473).
[^4] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xxxi.
[^5] According to a letter written by J. N. T. Tucker, who claims to have been a practical printer in Grandin's establishment, while the Book of Mormon was in the course of printing, relates how "after putting one sheet in type, we [the printers] laid it aside, and told Martin Harris it was lost, and there would be serious defection in the book, unless another sheet like the original could be produced." This is represented as throwing Martin Harris into "quite an excitement." "After two or three weeks," continues Mr. Tucker, "another sheet was produced, but no more like the original than any other sheet of paper would have been written over by a common school boy, after having read, as they did, the manuscript preceding and succeeding the lost sheet." All of which, except perhaps the sequestration of the sheet of the manuscript in question, is sheer fabrication, since no such thing could occur when the Prophet had taken the precaution to keep the original manuscript in the hands of his friends, and send only a copy to the printer. (See New Witnesses For God, vol. ii, p. 124; Bennett's Mormonism Exposed, p. 122.)
[^6] I am enabled to present this facsimile by courtesy of Mr. Fred M. Smith, of the so-called "Reorganized Church of Latter-day Saints." The writer saw and examined the printer's manuscript in the possession of David Whitmer in 1884, and again examined it in June, 1909, and hence speaks from personal knowledge on this point in the text.
[^7] Among those present when the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon was deposited in the cornerstone of the Nauvoo House, was Elder Warren Foote, who made an entry of the fact in his journal, in which he says: "I was standing very near the cornerstone, when Joseph Smith came up with the manuscript of the Book of Mormon and said he wanted to put that in there, as he had had trouble enough with it. It appeared to be written on foolscap paper, and was about three inches in thickness" (New Witnesses for God, vol. ii, p. 127). Also Ebenezer Robinson, one-time associated editor of the Times and Seasons, published in Nauvoo, (L. D. S. periodical) in a monthly periodical published by him in Davis City, Iowa, 1890, called The Return, relates the same circumstance, as follows: "After the brethren had assembled at the southeast corner of the foundation, where the cornerstone was to be laid, President Joseph Smith said: 'Wait, brethren, I have a document I wish to put in that stone,' and started for his house, which was only a few rods away, across Main Street. I went with him to the house, and also one or two other brethren. He got a manuscript copy of the Book of Mormon, and brought it into the room where we were standing, and said: 'I will examine to see if it is all here,' and as he did so I stood near him, at his left side, and saw distinctly the writing, as he turned up the pages until he hastily went through the book and satisfied himself that it was all there. * * * It was written on foolscap paper, and formed a package, as the sheets lay flat, of about two or two and a half inches thick, I should judge. It was written mostly in Oliver Cowdery's handwriting, with which I was intimately acquainted, having set many pages of type from his handwriting, in the church printing office at Kirtland, Ohio. Some parts of it were written in other handwriting. He took the manuscript and deposited it in the cornerstone of the Nauvoo House, together with other papers and things, including different pieces of United States coin." (The Return, vol. ii, pp. 314-15.)
[^8] This in November, 1909. (See New Witnesses for God, vol. ii, pp. 128-9.)
[^9] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, chs. xxxii and xxxiii.
[^10] History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xxxiii
[^11] Address to all Believers in Christ, p. 31. Oliver Cowdery also alludes to this circumstance but in a casual and indefinite way (See Cowdery's Defense in a Rehearsal of My Grounds for Separating Myself from the Latter-day Saints, published at Norton, Ohio, 1839. Republished in Anti-Mormon Tract, No. 9, by R. B. Neal, Grayson, Ky., 1906.) See also Note at close of this chapter.
[^12] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xix.
[^13] Mormonism and the Mormons, 1842, pp. 52, 53.
[^14] Mormonism in All Ages, p. 178.
[^15] Mormonism, Its Leaders and Designs, pp. 269, 270.
[^16] New Witnesses for God, vol. ii, chs. xiv to xxi inclusive.
