B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XIV

AN ANALYSIS OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

THE Prophet Joseph Smith's own summary of the contents of the Book of Mormon is doubtless the very best that can be made, in a brief statement, and for that reason it is here quoted from his letter to Mr. John Wentworth of the Chicago Democrat, 1842:

THE PROPHET'S SUMMARY OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

"In this important and interesting book, the history of ancient America is unfolded, from its first settlement by a colony that came from the Tower of Babel, at the confusion of languages, to the beginning of the fifth century of the Christian Era. We are informed by these records that America in ancient times has been inhabited by two distinct races of people. The first were called Jaredites, and came directly from the Tower of Babel. The second race came directly from the city of Jerusalem, about six hundred years before Christ. They were principally Israelites, of the descendants of Joseph. The Jaredites were destroyed about the time that the Israelites came from Jerusalem, who succeeded them in the inheritance of the country. The principal nation of the second race fell in battle towards the close of the fourth century. The remnant are the Indians that now inhabit this country. This book also tells us that our Savior made his appearance upon this continent after his resurrection; that he planted the gospel here in all its fulness, and richness, and power, and blessing; that they had apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers and evangelists; the same order, the same priesthood, the same ordinances, gifts, powers and blessings, as were enjoyed on the eastern continents, that the people were cut off in consequence of their transgressions, that the last of their prophets who existed among them was commanded to write an abridgment of their prophecies, history, etc., and to hide it up in the earth, and that it should come forth and be united with the Bible for the accomplishment of the purposes of God in the last days."

PURPOSE FOR WHICH THE BOOK WAS PRESERVED

The several purposes for which the book was compiled by Mormon and his son Moroni, are perhaps best stated in the title page of the book found with the gold plates, and written by Moroni himself, as follows:

THE BOOK OF MORMON

An Account Written by THE HAND OF MORMON UPON PLATES TAKEN FROM THE PLATES OF NEPHI

Wherefore it is an abridgment of the record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites written to the Lamanites who are a remnant of the house of Israel; and also to Jew and Gentile written by way of commandment, and also by the spirit of prophecy and of revelation—written and sealed up, and hid up unto the Lord, that they might not be destroyed—to come forth by the gift and power of God unto the interpretation thereof—sealed by the hand of Moroni, and hid up unto the Lord, to come forth in due time by way of the Gentile, the interpretation thereof by the gift of God.

An abridgment taken from the Book of Ether also; which is a record of the people of Jared; who were scattered at the time the Lord confounded the language of the people when they were building a tower to get to heaven—which is to shew unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever—and also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations—And now if there are faults, they are the mistakes of men; wherefore condemn not the things of God, that ye may be found spotless at the judgment-seat of Christ. [^1]

Of this preface Joseph Smith says: "The title page of the Book of Mormon is a literal translation taken from the very last leaf, on the left hand side of the collection or book of plates, which contained the record which has been translated, the language of the whole running the same as all Hebrew writing in general (i. e. from right to left); and that said title page is by no means a modern composition."

STRUCTURE OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

With reference to its construction the Book of Mormon separates into three divisions:

First Division: The Small Plates of Nephi, a record kept upon gold plates made by the first Nephi, upon which he purposed to record and have recorded more especially the work of the holy ministry among the Nephites, the prophecies of the coming of the Messiah in the flesh, and the exhortations to righteousness by the prophets who should arise among his people. As compared with his plates on which he designed to have recorded the secular history of his people, the first plates above mentioned were small, and doubtless comparatively few in number, hence their name—The Small Plates of Nephi. The historical data contained in these small plates of Nephi, extend over a period of about four hundred years, or from the departure of Lehi from Jerusalem to the reign of King Benjamin. But chiefly these plates were filled with prophecies and exhortations to righteousness, and many transcriptions from the writings of Isaiah, and other prophets, while historical data—though sufficient to give a general idea of the movement of Lehi's colony, and the subsequent march of events among the peoples that sprang from that colony—are meager.

The translation of these small plates in current editions, occupies the first one hundred and thirty-two pages of the Book of Mormon. The books of this first division are six in number, viz: I Nephi, II Nephi, Book of Jacob, Book of Enos, Book of Jarom, Book of Omni. Though there are but six books in this division there are nine writers, as follows:

The first Nephi, who writes one hundred six and a half pages [^2] (current edition, 1928) of the one hundred and thirty-one in this division.

Jacob, brother of Nephi, eighteen pages.

Enos, son of above Jacob, two pages.

Jarom, son of above Enos, two pages.

In the Book of Omni there are but three pages, but there are five writers, each of whom records merely a few lines:

Omni, son of the above Jarom;

Amaron, son of above Omni;

Chemish, brother of the above Amaron;

Abinadom, son of Chemish;

Amaleki, son of above Abinadom.

Amaleki writes about two pages out of the three pages comprising the Book of Omni, and gives the important information concerning the second hegira of the righteous Nephites, their union with the people of Zarahemla and the formation of the Nephite-Zarahemla nation.

Although there are nine writers in this division of the Book of Mormon, the writing is chiefly done by the first two, as will be seen by the above statement.

Second Division: Mormon's Abridgment of the Large Plates of Nephi comprises the second division of the Book of Mormon. This is a condensed record made from the various books written or engraved upon the Large Plates of Nephi, which plates, it will be remembered, were made by the first Nephi, as well as the Small Plates of Nephi, that upon them might be recorded the secular history of the people, their wars and contentions, the affairs of government and the migrations of the people. This part of the Book of Mormon is the work of one man, Mormon, from whom this whole record of the Nephites takes its name, and yet the abridgment of Mormon occupies but 326 out of 522 pages in the whole book. [^3] Mormon's own book, bearing his own name, makes eighteen and a half pages.

The style of Mormon's abridgment is very complicated. It consists mainly of his condensation of the various books which he found engraven upon the Large Plates of Nephi—the Book of Mosiah, Book of Alma, Helaman, III Nephi, IV Nephi, etc..Because Mormon retained the names of these respective books to his abridgment of them. Many readers of the Book of Mormon have been led to suppose that there was a separate writer for each book, overlooking the fact that these books, so-called, in the Book of Mormon, are but brief abridgments of the original books bearing those names. Occasionally, however, Mormon came upon passages in the original annals that pleased him so well that he transcribed them verbatim into the record he was writing.

The modern method of writing would be, of course, to make the abridgment of Mormon the regular text of the book, put the verbatim quotations from the old Nephite books that were being abridged within quotation marks, and throw the occasional remarks or comments of the abridger into footnotes. But these devices in literary work were not known, apparently, among the Nephites.

After completing his abridgment of the books written upon the Large Plates of Nephi, down to his own day, Mormon made a record of the things which came under his own observation, and engraved them upon the Large Plates of Nephi, and called that the Book of Mormon; but upon the plates on which he had engraven his abridgment of all the books found in the Large Plates, and which he had made with his own hands, he recorded but a brief account of the things which he had witnessed among his people, and that, too, he called the Book of Mormon. [^4] It occupies fourteen and a half pages; which, with the other three hundred and ninety and a half pages, as above stated, makes four hundred and five pages of the Book of Mormon written by the hand of Mormon.

Third Division: The third division of the Book of Mormon is made up to the writings of Moroni, the son of Mormon. He finishes the record of his father, Mormon, in which he occupies seven and a half pages. After that he abridges the history of the people of Jared, who were led from the Tower of Babel to the north continent of the western hemisphere, and whose record was found by a branch of the Nephite people. This abridged history of the Jaredites occupies thirty-two pages, and in character of composition is much like the complex style of Mormon's abridgment of the Nephite records. It was doubtless modeled after that work.

Then follows his own book, the Book of Moroni, which occupies twelve and a half pages, making in all forty-four pages written by Moroni.

The following is a summary of the three divisions:

Plates of Nephi, nine writers, (of whom two

write 124 1/2 of the 131 pages).......................131 pages

books written upon the Large Plates of Nephi...326 pages

that occurred in his own day.......................... 18 1/2 pages

Words of Mormon......................... 2 pages

Jaredite History, his own book, called the Book

of Moroni......................................... 44 pages

Total....................................521 1/2 pages

The total number of writers in the Book of Mormon is eleven, of whom four do the principal part of the writing, these are the First Nephi, Jacob, Mormon and Moroni.

Such is the Book of Mormon as to its construction—the number of its writers, and the style employed in the parts that are abridgments from the larger records of the Nephites and Jaredites. [^5]

The evidences for the truth of the Book of Mormon are both external and internal.

SUMMARY OF EXTERNAL EVIDENCES

The external evidences include the testimony of the three witnesses and of the eight witnesses. Their testimony has already been considered. The testimony of American antiquities is appealed to by those who accept the claims of the book as genuine. The testimony is summarized as follows:

SUMMARY OF INTERNAL EVIDENCES

The internal evidences of the Book of Mormon consist in the following facts:

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] As a culmination of the controversy on the subject of proper Christian baptism, which had agitated the people for several decades in the states of Virginia, Tennessee, Kentucky, Ohio, Pennsylvania and western New York, the great debate between Mr. Alexander Campbell of the Christian (Campbellite) church, and Rev. N. L. Rice, of the Presbyterian church, took place. The debate was held at Lexington, Kentucky, with United States senator Henry Clay from Kentucky, as President of the Board of Moderators and Chairman of the meetings. All the subjects named in the text were debated and occupy six hundred and ten pages of the volume of nine hundred twelve printed pages which report the debate. (See A Debate Between Rev. Alexander Campbell and Rev. N. L. Rice, 1843, extending through eighteen days, from Nov. 15th to Dec. 22nd, published by A. T. Stillman and Son, Louisville, Ky., 1844.)
[^2] See St. Matt. xxvii:52, 53. "And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves, after his [the Christ's] resurrection, and went into the holy city and appeared unto many." Why not John the Baptist, fore-runner of the Christ and martyr with the rest? Who could be more worthy than he of an early resurrection?
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xiii. It will be observed that the words "Until the Sons of Levi do offer," etc. As if when the sons of Levi offer an offering to the Lord in righteousness, then the Aaronic priesthood would be taken from the earth. Oliver Cowdery's report of the same incident is, "shall never be taken from the earth that the sons of Levi may offer an offering unto the Lord in righteousness," etc., which seems more in harmony with the things involved.
[^4] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 39.
[^5] Oliver Cowdery's description of this event is worth reproducing in extenso. It was written in 1834, and published in October of that year, in the Messenger and Advocate, vol. i, No. 1, p. 15. After describing the anxiety which both himself and the Prophet felt upon the subject of baptism, Oliver proceeds to say:
