B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XV

THE RESTORATION OF THE PRIESTHOOD

THE subject of Christian baptism was much discussed among the rival sects in the early decades of the 19th century. The purpose of it; the proper subjects to receive it; the effects of it; the manner in which it should be administered; by whom it could be administered, by any Christian who understood its significance, or only by ordained ministers? By pouring, or sprinkling, or by immersion only? All these questions were subjects of intense controversy in the period named. [^1]

THE QUESTION OF BAPTISM

When, therefore, in the course of translating the Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery came to a passage making reference to "baptism for the remission of sins," it is not surprising that they held divergent views upon the subject; but instead of resorting to argument on the matter they agreed to inquire of the Lord, through prayer, for the knowledge essential to a right understanding of the subject. It was while thus engaged, according to the testimony of both these men, that a heavenly messenger appeared unto them and announced himself to be John, the same that in the New Testament is called "the Baptist." He was now raised from the dead [^2] and had been sent to confer upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery the Aaronic priesthood, which he did in these words:

JOHN THE BAPTIST—ORDINATION

"Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness." [^3]

The messenger directed that Joseph Smith should baptize Oliver Cowdery, and afterwards that Oliver should baptize Joseph; which when done Joseph proceeded to ordain Oliver to the Aaronic priesthood, and afterwards received ordination at Oliver's hands—"for so were we commanded," [^4] says the Prophet, in his narration of the circumstance. [^5] Both experienced great exaltation of spirit on this occasion. "No sooner had I baptized Oliver Cowdery," says the Prophet, "than the Holy Ghost fell upon him, and he stood up and prophesied many things which should shortly come to pass. And again, so soon as I had been baptized by him, I also had the spirit of prophecy. * * * I prophesied concerning the rise of this church, and many other things connected with the church and this generation of the children of men." [^6]

PRIESTHOOD OF THE "PREPARATORY GOSPEL"

This priesthood which the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery had received under the hands of the angel John, the Aaronic priesthood, holds the keys of the ministering of angels and "the preparatory gospel," which is "the gospel of repentance and of baptism and the remission of sins." Priesthood, of course, briefly explained, is the power or authority which God confers upon men to act in his name. Hence those who receive it are commissioned to teach in the name, which signifies in the authority, of God. They may call men to repentance in that authority. They may baptize men in that authority for the remission of sins.

In this first dispensation of the priesthood to these men there was given only a limited authority. Like the mission of him who restored it, by the above described administration, this priesthood was intended to prepare [^7] the way for higher things—it was the priesthood of the preparatory gospel. [^8] John himself explained on the occasion of conferring this priesthood upon the Prophet and Oliver that it did not possess the power to lay on hands for bestowal of the Holy Ghost; but this power or authority would be given to them later. John further explained that he acted under the direction of the ancient apostles, Peter, James, and John who held the keys of the higher priesthood referred to; and when that priesthood should be conferred upon them, Joseph would be ordained the first elder of the church, and Oliver the second elder. [^9]

Meantime the minds of these two brethren had been enlightened and put at rest concerning baptism; for they had received the ordinance under the direction and authority of him who in earth-life had been known by way of pre-eminence as the Baptist. [^10] Also these brethren in consequence of this ordination experienced an enlargement of understanding, an intellectual and spiritual awakening. "We began to have the scriptures laid open to our understandings, and the true meaning and intention of their more mysterious passages revealed unto us, in a manner which we never could attain to previously." [^11] Such is the Prophet's description of his own and Oliver's spiritual awakening immediately after their baptism.

The ordination of these brethren and their baptism, events so important in the history of the church, occurred on the 15th of May, 1829, while they were still residing at Harmony, in Pennsylvania, and engaged in the translation of the Book of Mormon. At first they felt it necessary to keep secret the fact of their ordination and baptism, as in Harmony and vicinity there were threats of mob violence which were only prevented from being executed by the influence of Isaac Hale, the Prophet's father-in-law; who, though not believing in the work of Joseph Smith, was nevertheless opposed to mobs and lawlessness, and gave the young Prophet the benefit of his influence, which for some time had amounted to protection.

EARLY CONVERTS—SAMUEL SMITH, ET AL

The restoration of the priesthood, however, had not been made to be kept a secret, nor to go unused of these men. Consequently in a few days, despite the prudence which caution prompted, they found themselves reasoning out of the scriptures with their friends and acquaintances as they happened to meet them. The authority to teach had been given, the spirit of teaching had come with it.

About this time Samuel Smith, a younger brother of the Prophet, came to visit him; and to Samuel the two brethren imparted the glad tidings of what the Lord had restored to the earth—authority to administer in the ordinances of the gospel. They reasoned with him out of the Bible, they showed to him the part of the translation that had been made up to that time of the Book of Mormon. But Samuel was not easily persuaded. He made many inquiries, he asked for many explanations. Finally he retired to the woods in order to inquire of the Lord, and while so engaged received such spiritual manifestations and impressions that he became convinced of the truth of the things he had heard, and became the first candidate for baptism, after Joseph and Oliver, in the new dispensation. He was baptized by Oliver, on the 25th day of May, 1829. [^12]

Returning to his father's house under an elation of spirit that acceptance of the gospel had brought to him, Samuel evidently excited increased interest in the ever enlarging work of his Prophet brother, for Hyrum Smith hastened from Palmyra to Harmony in order to inquire of the Lord concerning these things reported by Samuel, and to learn what his relationship to the then unfolding work was to be. The Prophet inquired, through the Urim and Thummim, and obtained for him a revelation. It is admirable, this word of the Lord to Hyrum Smith:

THE WORD OF THE LORD TO HYRUM SMITH—QUALIFICATIONS FOR THE WORK

"A great and marvelous work is about to come forth among the children of men.

Behold, I am God, give heed to my word, which is quick and powerful, sharper than a two-edged sword, to the dividing asunder of both joints and marrow; therefore give heed unto my word.

Behold, the field is white already to harvest, therefore, whoso desireth to reap, let him thrust in his sickle with his might, and reap while the day lasts, that he may treasure up for his soul everlasting salvation in the kingdom of God.

Yea, whosoever will thrust in his sickle and reap, the same is called of God;

Therefore, if you will ask of me, you shall receive, if you will knock, it shall be opened unto you.

Now, as you have asked, behold, I say unto you, keep my commandments, and seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion.

Seek not for riches but for wisdom, and, behold, the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto you, and then shall you be made rich: behold, he that hath eternal life is rich.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, even as you desire of me, so it shall be done unto you: and if you desire, you shall be the means of doing much good in this generation. * *

And now, verily, verily, I say unto thee, put your trust in that Spirit which leadeth to do good: yea, to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously, and this is my Spirit."

"Seek not for riches but for wisdom!" "He that hath eternal life is rich!" "Put your trust in that Spirit which leadeth to do good!" "Do justly, walk humbly, judge righteously—this is my Spirit!" That is a passage truly worthy to emanate from Divine Wisdom.

Continuing, these passages occur in the revelation:—

"I will impart unto you my spirit, which shall enlighten your mind, which shall fill your soul with joy. * * * Behold, this is your work, to keep my commandment, yea, with all your might, mind and strength. * * * Behold thou art Hyrum, my son! Seek the kingdom of God, and all things shall be added according to that which is just." [^13]

RESTORATION OF THE MELCHIZEDEK PRIESTHOOD—APOSTLESHIP

The exact date upon which was fulfilled the promise of John the Baptist that the greater priesthood should be restored is not known. But beyond all doubt it was between the 15th of May, 1829, and the month of April, 1830; for in the revelation directing the manner of organizing the church, given early in April of the year last named, the ordination of the Prophet and of Oliver Cowdery to the "apostleship"—and consequently to the higher priesthood, since the office of an apostle is an office of that higher priesthood—is referred to as an accomplished fact:

"Which commandments [i. e. to organize the church] were given to Joseph Smith, Jun., who was called of God and ordained an apostle of Jesus Christ, to be the first elder of this church; and to Oliver Cowdery, who was also called of God, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to be the second elder of this church, and ordained under his hand." [^14]

The Prophet in an ecstatic review of the things God had revealed to him, written under date of September 6th, 1842, makes incidental reference to the occasion of his own and Oliver's ordination to the apostleship, and incidentally mentions the place and persons connected with the event:

"And again what do we hear? * * * The voice of Peter, James and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county and Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times." [^15]

In September, 1830, the matter of this ordination to the apostleship is again referred to in a revelation, in very specific terms. The revelation deals primarily with the sacrament of the Lord's supper, and makes the promise that the Lord will in some future time celebrate that supper with certain notable ones of his servants—with Adam and Elias; and with the patriarchs Abraham and Jacob and Joseph, and John the Baptist—

"And also with Peter, James, and John, whom I have sent unto you, by whom I have ordained you and confirmed you to be apostles, and especial witnesses of my name, and bear the keys of your ministry, and of the same things which I revealed unto them. Unto whom I have committed the keys of my kingdom, and a dispensation of the gospel for the last times; and for the fulness of times, in the which I will gather together in one all things, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth." [^16]

These passages, then, found scattered through these revelations give evidence that the promise made by John the Baptist of ordination to a higher priesthood than he had conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery had been fulfilled, and within the time period named above, by the persons Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the kingdom, and "in the wilderness on the Susquehanna river."

PRIESTHOOD AS POWER OF GOD

It has already been explained that priesthood is power or authority which God gives to man by which man may act in the authority of God in the administration of the gospel. But we have spoken here of the "Aaronic priesthood," and also of a "greater" or "higher priesthood" being conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, hence a word of explanation is necessary.

The church recognizes two orders of priesthood, called the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods respectively. It was explained by revelation to Joseph Smith that the reason why the higher order of priesthood came to be called after Melchizedek was because Melchizedek was such a great high priest. That is, he so magnified his calling, so honored God in his service, that the order of priesthood he held was called by his name. "Before his day," the revelation goes on to say, "it was called the Holy Priesthood after the order of the Son of God." That is to say, the kind or order of priesthood held by the Son of God himself. [^17] "But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid a too frequent repetition of his name, they (the church in ancient days), called that priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek priesthood." [^18] This higher priesthood existed in the days of the ante-diluvian patriarchs; also among the post-diluvian patriarchs, down to the days of Melchizedek and Abraham. Moses also held it, and by its authority wrought his wonderful works in the deliverance of Israel from Egypt. But because of the transgression on the part of Israel the Lord finally took Moses from their midst and also withdrew this higher or Melchizedek priesthood—as an institution, and an organization—from among them; leaving the lesser or Aaronic priesthood with them, which remained until the days of John the Baptist, [^19] who was a priest of the Aaronic order. But when the Messiah came, and the gospel was about to take the place of the law of Moses—that having fulfilled its purpose [^20]—there was need, as Paul argues, [^21] for a change in the priesthood also; that is, the higher priesthood—"the priesthood after the order of the Son of God"—must be restored to take the lead in the administration of the higher law, the gospel. The lesser priesthood also remained to assist, in a subordinate way, in the holy ministry of the church. But the Melchizedek priesthood administers the gospel and holds the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, "even the key of the knowledge of God." [^22] The offices of the greater priesthood are apostles, prophets, high priests, seventies, elders; the offices of the lesser priesthood are bishops, priests, teachers, deacons. [^23]

Both these priesthoods had now been conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, and as the greater priesthood has power and authority over all the offices in the church, and they had not only received that priesthood but had also been ordained to the office of apostles in it, they were fully and perfectly equipped with all the divine authority needful to proceed with the organization of the church of Christ.

Footnotes

"The Lord who is rich in mercy and ever willing to answer the consistent prayer of the humble, after we had called upon him in a fervent manner, aside from the abodes of men, condescended to manifest to us his will. On a sudden, as from the midst of eternity, the voice of the Redeemer spake peace to us, while the veil was parted and the angel of God came down clothed with glory and delivered the anxiously looked for message, and the keys of the gospel of repentance. What joy! what wonder! what amazement! While the world was racked and distracted—while millions were groping as the blind for the wall, and while all men were resting upon uncertainty, as a general mass, our eyes beheld—our ears heard. As in the 'blaze of day'; yes, more—above the glitter of the May sunbeam, which then shed its brilliancy over the face of nature! Then his voice, though mild, pierced to the center, and his words, 'I am thy fellow-servant,' dispelled every fear. We listened, we gazed, we admired! 'T was the voice of the angel from glory—'t was a message from the Most High, and as we heard we rejoiced, while his love enkindled upon our souls, and we were rapt in the vision of the Almighty! Where was room for doubt? Nowhere; uncertainty had fled, doubt had sunk, no more to rise, while fiction and deception had fled forever. But, dear brother [This quotation is from a letter addressed to W. W. Phelps, hence the "Dear Brother."] think further, think for a moment what joy filled our hearts and with what surprise we must have bowed, (for who could not have bowed the knee for such a blessing?) when we received under his hands the Holy Priesthood! [Words of the ordination above in the text follow.] * * *

"* * * I shall not attempt to paint to you the feelings of this heart, nor the majestic beauty and glory which surrounded us on this occasion; but you will believe me when I say, that earth, nor men, with the eloquence of time, cannot begin to clothe language in as interesting and sublime a manner as this holy personage. No; nor has this earth power to give the joy, to bestow the peace, or comprehend the wisdom which was contained in each sentence as it was delivered by the power of the Holy Spirit! Man may deceive his fellow man; deception may follow deception, and the children of the Wicked One may have power to seduce the foolish and untaught, till naught but fiction feeds the many, and the fruit of falsehood carries in its current the giddy to the grave; but one touch with the finger of his love, yes, one ray of glory from the upper world, or one word from the mouth of the Savior, from the bosom of eternity, strikes it all into insignificance, and blots it forever from the mind! The assurance that we were in the presence of an angel; the certainty that we heard the voice of Jesus, and the truth unsullied as it flowed from a pure personage, dictated by the will of God, is to me, past description, and I shall ever look upon this expression of the Savior's goodness with wonder and thanksgiving while I am permitted to tarry, and in those mansions where perfection dwells and sin never comes, I hope to adore in that day which shall never cease." (Messenger and Advocate, October, 1834.)

---
Notas:
[^1] The fact mentioned in the text is emphasized by the ages of leading converts who joined the church within the next two years after its organization, and who afterwards became its chief elders; Brigham Young was but twenty-nine when the church was organized. Heber C. Kimball was the same age. Parley P. Pratt, destined to be recognized as its most powerful advocate in its early days, by both prose and poetic writing, was twenty-three. Orson Pratt, the future theologian and philosopher of the movement, was but nineteen. It was a work which from its nature emphatically called for the enthusiasm, the faith, the hope of youth, and the youthful were most responsive to its call.
[^2] This upon the authority of Kennedy's Early Days of Mormonism, p. 72, footnote.
[^3] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 61.
[^4] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xx; 1-3. Also History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 65 et seq.
[^5] Subsequently when some persons desired to join the church without baptism at the hands of the elders, having been baptized by the ministers of other churches, the Lord said: "All old covenants have I caused to be done away in this thing, and this is a new and everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning. Wherefore, although a man should be baptized an hundred times, it availeth him nothing, for you cannot enter in at the straight gate by the law of Moses, neither by your dead works. For it is because of your dead works, that I have caused this last covenant and this church to be built up unto me even as in days of old. Wherefore enter ye in at the gate, as I have commanded and seek not to counsel your God." (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xxii.)
[^6] Eight years is fixed as the age of baptism for children. (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxviii:27.)
[^7] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xx:73. These are the same words given to the Nephites, except that the opening clause in the Book of Mormon is, "Having authority given me of Jesus Christ" (III Nephi xi; 25), and that means the same, of course, as "Having been commissioned of Jesus Christ," etc.
[^8] All officers in the church holding higher authority than those named would, of course, have authority to administer the sacrament, but it is more especially a function of the priest's office.
[^9] A few months after the organization of the church, viz., early in the month of August, 1830, the following incident occurred: The Prophet Joseph left his house in Harmony, Penn., for the purpose of procuring wine to administer the sacrament to a few saints visiting him at his home. He had gone but a short distance when he was met by a heavenly messenger and received the revelation contained in the Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xxvii, a portion of which is as follows: "Behold, I say unto you, that it mattereth not what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink when ye partake of the sacrament, if it so be that' ye do it with an eye single to my glory, remembering unto the Father my body which was laid down for you, and my blood which was shed for the remission of your sins: wherefore, a commandment I give unto you, that ye shall not purchase wine, neither strong drink of your enemies: wherefore you shall partake of none except it is made new among you; yea, in this my Father's kingdom, which shall be built upon the earth." From that time forth the church has quite generally used water in the holy sacrament.
[^10] It must be remembered that this revelation was given before the church was organized; at the time there were a number who had been baptized, and who had children not old enough to be baptized, and had not yet been blessed of the elders. This commandment therefore was directed more especially to them, but applies, of course, to people placed in like circumstances. Also this law is interpreted to mean that the saints everywhere shall bring their children in early infancy to the elders before the church and have them named, blessed and dedicated unto the Lord by solemn prayer; and this is the practice of the church. Subsequently, in November, 1831, the Lord said: "Inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ, the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents; for this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized; and their children shall be baptized for the remission of their sins when eight years old and receive the laying on of the hands, and they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord." (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxviii:25-28.)
[^11] The term "Elder" is both a general and specific title. That is, it may be applied to an apostle or a seventy; as, for instance, in the revelation under consideration (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xx), it is said: "An apostle is an elder," etc. We shall see also further on that it is the name of a specific office in the church; that ninety-six elders constitute a quorum; that they constitute a standing ministry in the stakes of Zion; and that they have authority to do all that is enumerated in the text above. It must also be understood that the officers enumerated in the text are the officers with which the church began her work, not all the officers that have come into existence under her constantly developing organization, and as now known.
[^12] Names of the first six persons baptized according to Geo. A. Smith, church historian, who presented the names to President Brigham Young, November 22nd, 1858: Oliver Cowdery, baptized by Joseph Smith, Jun.; Joseph Smith, Jun., baptized by Oliver Cowdery; Samuel H. Smith, baptized by Oliver Cowdery; Hyrum Smith, baptized by Joseph Smith, Jun.; David Whitmer, baptized by Joseph Smith, Jun.; Peter Whitmer, Jun., baptized by Oliver Cowdery. (History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1858, p. 1,104). There has been some question as to the number that had been baptized previous to the organization of the church on the 6th day of April, 1830. David Whitmer in his Address to All Believers in Christ, a pamphlet of seventy-five pages, published in 1887, says that there were six elders and about seventy members before April 6th, 1830. Others have estimated the number at thirty, thirty-five, and forty. These estimates, however, are beyond all question too large. In the minutes of the second conference of the church, held at Fayette, New York, on the 26th of September, 1830, this statement is made: "Number of the several members uniting to this church, since the last conference, thirty-five: making in whole, now belonging to this church, sixty-two." "The last conference," referred to was one held on the 9th of June, 1830. If there were but sixty-two members in September, 1830, and thirty-five of them were added since the conference of the church held on the 9th of June of that year, then there were but twenty-seven in the church on the said 9th of June. In the last week of May, 1830, Newel Knight was baptized—one; on the 18th of April, 1830, Oliver Cowdery baptized seven; (the names are given in History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 81); on the 11th of April, Oliver baptized six persons (their names are also given in History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 81); on the 6th of April, 1830, the same day that the church was organized, there were four persons baptized, two of whom were the father and mother of the Prophet. This makes a total of eighteen baptized between the 9th of June conference and the 6th of April meeting; and as there were but twenty-seven in the church on the 9th of June, the number that had been baptized up to the 6th of April, 1830, must have been but nine. (History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 76-7, footnote.)
[^13] The words "of Latter-day Saints," were not used as part of the title until some time after, April 26, 1838, when they were added by revelation from the Lord. (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxv).
[^14] See Doctrine and Covenants, sec xxi.
[^15] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xxvi.
[^16] Ibid, sec. xx:65.
[^17] That this was to be the method of government in the church is further emphasized in a revelation given through Joseph Smith in 1839, wherein it is said: "No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long suffering, by gentleness, and meekness, and by love unfeigned." (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxi).
[^18] Baring-Gould, Origin of Religious Beliefs, vol. ii, pp. 243-4.
[^19] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxiv:1-26.
[^20] St. Matt. v: 17, 18 cf. Gal. iii.
[^21] Hebrews vii; 11, 12.
[^22] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. 84; 19.
[^23] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. 107; 8.
