B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XVI

THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CHURCH

THE removal of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery into Fayette, Seneca county, New York, was attended with happy results to the developing work they had in hand. The Whitmer family was large and locally influential. They gave the Prophet gracious welcome to their home; and from the first manifested sympathy for, and gave him aid in, his work. There were five sons in this family, ranging in age from thirty-two to twenty-one, all of whom became interested in the Prophet's work. The Prophet himself was but twenty-five. Oliver Cowdery a year younger. Hyrum Smith was thirty, Samuel Smith, the third baptized in the New Dispensation, but twenty-two; Hiram Page, son-in-law in the Whitmer family, the Knight boys, Newel and Joseph, Jun., soon to be identified with the work, were all under thirty. The establishment of the New Dispensation church was evidently a young men's movement. [^1] Peter Whitmer, Sen., however, was a man fifty-seven years of age when Joseph Smith became his guest in 1829. He was of Pennsylvania German extraction, [^2] and was a faithful member of that strictest of sects—a Presbyterian. He trained his family in that faith, and hence there was an intensely religious atmosphere at the Whitmer home.

The people of Seneca county quite generally were friendly and disposed to listen to what the little group of believers had to say. Some even went so far as to open their houses where the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery might meet theirs friends for instruction and explanations. In June, 1829, Hyrum Smith, and David and Peter Whitmer, Jun., were baptized in Seneca Lake, the first by the Prophet, the others by Oliver Cowdery. From this time on the circle of believers constantly enlarged and occasionally there was a baptism.

PRELIMINARY STEPS TO ORGANIZATION

The translation of the Book of Mormon having been completed, it was but natural for the young Prophet's mind to turn to the work that was to follow the coming forth of that work—the establishment of the church of Christ. Moreover, the authority to proceed with the organization had been given, and a number of people had been baptized, so that there existed all the elements for an organization. The Prophet, however, proceeded cautiously, by anxious prayer seeking to know the will of God. As early as June, 1829, the manner of procedure in organizing the church was outlined by the word of the Lord received in the chamber of "Father Peter Whitmer's" house. According to that instruction Joseph was to ordain Oliver Cowdery to be an elder in the church of Christ; and Oliver in turn was to ordain the Prophet to the same office; then proceed to ordain others as it should be made known to them from time to time. But these men nominated by the word of the Lord to become the first and second elders in the church, respectively, were "commanded," says the Prophet, to defer their ordination until such time as it should be practicable to have their brethren, who had been and who would be baptized, assembled together, when they must have their sanction to ordain each other, and have them decide by vote whether they were willing to accept the two brethren named as spiritual teachers or not; when, also, they were commanded to bless bread and break it with them, and to take wine, bless it, and drink it with them; and afterward proceed to ordain each other according to the commandment; then call out such men as the Spirit should dictate, and ordain them; and then attend to the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, upon all those who had previously been baptized, doing all things in the name of the Lord. [^3]

COMMANDMENT TO ORGANIZE THE CHURCH

Subsequently a commandment was given fixing the exact date on which the organization of the church was to be effected—viz., the sixth day of April, "one thousand eight hundred and thirty years, since the coming of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ in the flesh." It was to be "regularly organized and established," agreeably to the laws of the country, by the will and commandments of God, "which commandments were given to Joseph Smith, Jun., * * * and Oliver Cowdery." [^4]

The section of the Doctrine and Covenants containing this commandment to organize the church (Sec. xx) seems to be a series of brief revelations received previous to the organization of the church setting forth in brief summary the incidents in which the church had its origin—set forth in detail in these pages—the call of Joseph Smith; his subsequent entanglement in the vanities of the world; his repentance, and the ministration of holy angels and the commandments of God "which inspired him," and gave him power to bring forth the Book of Mormon—"given by inspiration," and "confirmed to others by the ministering of angels, and is declared to the world by them, proving that the holy scriptures are true."

THE CHURCH DOCTRINES, ORDINANCES AND GOVERNMENT

Then follows a declaration of fundamental doctrines and an outline of church organization and government, which is here summarized:—

I. Of the Existence of God:—There is a God in heaven who is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting—unchangeable; the framer of heaven and earth and all things which are in them.

II. Of the Creation and Fall of Man:—God created man male and female, after his own image, and in his own likeness created he them. He gave them commandment that they should love and serve him, and that he should be the sole object of their worship. But by the transgression of these holy laws man became sensual and devilish—fallen man.

III. Of Jesus Christ:—The Almighty God gave his Only Begotten Son as a ransom for fallen man, as it is written of him in the scriptures. He suffered temptations, but gave no heed to them; he was crucified, died, and rose again the third day; he ascended into heaven to sit on the right hand of his Father, to reign with almighty power according to the will of God. As many as believe on him and are baptized in his holy name, enduring in faith to the end—shall be saved. Not only those who believe after he came in the flesh; but all those who from the beginning believed in the words of the holy prophets, who testified of him in all things.

IV. Of the Holy Ghost and the Trinity:—The Holy Ghost beareth record of the Father and of the Son—is God's witness. The Father, Son and Holy Ghost constitute the Holy Trinity—one God, or Grand Presidency of heaven and earth, infinite, eternal.

V. Of Justification and Sanctification:—Justification and sanctification come through the grace of God, and are just and true principles. That is, the grace of God supplies the means or conditions of justification and sanctification, and it is for man to apply those means. The means or conditions of justification and sanctification are that men love and serve God with all their might, mind and strength. That would lead them to exercise faith in God, repentance of sin and baptism for the remission of sins, laying on of hands for the Holy Ghost, and the pursuit of a godly life and conversion—the old conditions of salvation.

VI. Of Falling from Grace:—It is possible for men to fall from grace and depart from the living God, therefore the saints are admonished to take heed and pray always, lest they fall into temptation. Even those who are sanctified are cautioned to take heed.

VII. Of Baptism:—All who humble themselves before God, and desire to be baptized and come forth with broken hearts and contrite spirits, and witness before the church that they have truly repented of all their sins, and are willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end, and truly manifest by their works that they have received of the spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins—shall be received by baptism into the church. [^5] No person, however, can be received into the church of Christ, unless he has arrived unto the years of accountability [^6] before God, and is capable of repentance.

VIII. Of the Manner of Baptism:—The person who is called of God, and has authority from Jesus Christ to baptize, shall go down into the water with the person who has presented him or herself for baptism, and shall say—calling him or her by name:—

"Having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen." [^7]

Then shall he immerse him or her, and come forth again out of the water.

IX. Of Confirmation:—Confirmation into the church follows baptism and is performed by the laying on of hands, by those who have authority in the church. The Holy Ghost is imparted in the same manner and by the same act of administration. There is no special form of words given for confirming persons into the church and imparting the Holy Ghost; but, judging from the form given for baptism, administering the sacrament, etc., a simple form is regarded as most proper. But whatever other words are used, the following may not be omitted: I confirm you a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; and say unto you, receive ye the Holy Ghost. Those officiating, of course, are to be careful to do this in the name of Jesus Christ.

X. Of the Duties of Members:—It is the duty of the members of the church to manifest righteousness by "a godly walk and conversation:" to abstain from ill feeling toward each other, neither indulging in lying, back-biting nor evil speaking. It is also their duty to pray vocally and in secret. They are required to meet together often to partake of bread and wine in remembrance of the Lord Jesus, which is to be administered by the elder or priest [^8] in the following manner: kneeling with the church he consecrates the emblems of the body and blood of Christ in these words:

THE HOLY SACRAMENT OF THE LORD'S SUPPER

XI. Blessing on the Bread:—"O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it, that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him and keep his commandments which he has given them; that they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen."

XII. Blessing on the Wine [^9]:—"O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this wine to the souls of all those who drink of it, that they may do it in remembrance of the blood of thy Son, which was shed for them; that they may witness unto thee, O God the Eternal Father, that they do always remember him, that they may have his Spirit to be with them. Amen."

XIII. Of the Duties of Saints Respecting Children:—Every member of the church having children is required to bring them to the elders, before the church, who are to lay their hands upon them and bless them in the name of Jesus Christ. [^10]

XIV. The Officers of the Church and their Duties—

Elders [^11]:—Elders have authority to preside over meetings and conduct them as prompted by the Holy Ghost. They also have authority to teach and expound the scriptures; to watch over the church; to baptize; lay on hands for the bestowal of the Holy Ghost; confirm those baptized, members of the church; administer the sacrament, and ordain other elders and also priests, teachers, and deacons.

Priests:—It is the duty of priests to preach; teach, and expound scripture; to visit the home of each member and exhort them to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all duties. They may also baptize and administer the sacrament, ordain other priests, teachers and deacons, take the lead of meetings when no elder is present, and in a general way assist the elder; but they have no authority to lay on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost or for the confirmation of members into the church.

Teachers:—The teacher's duty is to always be with the church, watch over and strengthen it; to see that there is no iniquity in it, and that the members thereof meet together often and all do their duty. Teachers may warn, expound, exhort, teach and invite all to come unto Christ, and take the lead of meetings when no elder or priest is present; but they have not the authority to baptize, administer the sacrament or lay on hands.

Deacons:—Deacons are appointed to assist the teachers in the performance of their duties. They may also warn, expound, exhort, teach and invite all to come unto Christ, but, like the teachers, they have no authority to baptize, administer the sacrament or lay on hands.

XV. Conferences:—The several elders comprising the church of Christ are to meet in conference once in three months, or from time to time as the said conference shall appoint, to do whatever church business is necessary. It is the duty of the several branches to send one or more of their teachers (or other representatives) to attend the conferences, with a list of the names of those who have joined the church since the last conference, that a record of the names of the whole church may be kept by one who shall be appointed to that work; and the names of those who are expelled are also to be sent up to the conferences, that their names may be blotted out of the general records. Members removing from the church where they reside are to take a letter certifying that they are regular members in good standing, and that when signed by the regular authorities of the branch or ward church from whence they move is to admit them into the fellowship of the saints in the branch or ward to which they go.

Such is the plan of government and discipline contained in the revelation given just previous to the organization of the church; and in it one may observe the germ of that more complete organization which will be treated more fully in another section of this History. The above was sufficient for the church in its infancy.

On the day appointed for the organization of the church, six of those who had been baptized, viz., Joseph Smith, Jun., Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Peter Whitmer, Jun., Samuel H. Smith and David Whitmer [^12]—met with a few of their friends at the house of Peter Whitmer, Sen., in Fayette township, Seneca county, New York. The meeting was opened by solemn prayer, after which, according to previous commandment, the Prophet Joseph called upon the brethren present to know if they would accept himself and Oliver Cowdery as their teachers in the things of the kingdom of God; and if they were willing that they should proceed to organize the church according to the commandment of the Lord. To this they consented by unanimous vote. Joseph then ordained Oliver an elder of the church of Jesus Christ; [^13] after which Oliver ordained Joseph an elder of the said church. The sacrament was administered and those who had been previously baptized were confirmed members of the church and received the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. Some enjoyed the gift of prophecy, and all rejoiced exceedingly.

While the church was yet assembled a revelation was received from the Lord, [^14] directing that a record be kept in the church, and that in it Joseph Smith should be called a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, an elder of the church. And the church was commanded to give heed to all his words and commandments which he should receive from the Lord, accepting his word as the word of the Lord in all patience and faith. On condition of the members doing this, the Lord promised them that the gates of hell should not prevail against the church; but on the contrary he would disperse the powers of darkness from before them and shake the heavens for their good.

TWO GREAT PRINCIPLES—THE WILL OF GOD: CONSENT OF THE PEOPLE

Thus the church was organized. And in the process of effecting that organization we see in operation two great principles—(1) the expressed mind and will of God; (2) the consent of the people. The Lord had given commandment to his chosen servants to organize the church; but before they proceed to effect that organization the people that are available as members must consent to the organization. Although Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery had been ordained under the hands of Peter, James, and John to be apostles, yet when it came their being ordained presiding elders of the church, that could only be done with the consent of those who were to become members of the church; and thus in the very inception of the work the principle that "all things shall be done by common consent in the church, by much prayer and faith," [^15] was recognized; and subsequently it was announced as the law, that "no person is to be ordained to any office in this church, where there is a regularly organized branch of the same, without the vote of that church." [^16] All this because the government of the church of Christ, like all God's exercise of authority—is moral government only. There are two kinds of authority represented in government, effective and moral. Effective authority operates by compulsion, and is the authority of earthly, human governments. Moral authority operates by persuasion only; this is the method of divine government. [^17] "The action of God upon man is moral, and moral only." By constituting man free, God "has refused to exercise effective authority over him." "An ecclesiastical or political society claiming divine authority, must exercise moral authority only; for the moment it exercises compulsion it ceases to represent God, and resolves itself into effective authority which is human, all human, and not at all divine." [^18]

HEAD OF THE CHURCH—PROPHET—SEER—REVELATOR

No sooner was the church organized, however, than a prophet, seer, and translator is appointed in the person of the presiding elder, Joseph Smith, Jun., and the church is commanded to give heed to his word, as unto the word of the Lord himself. In the government of the church there is to be a union of the counsels of God and the consent of the people. The church is to exercise moral government—the government of God. But there is devised in this system of government the means of bringing down into those affairs of men with which the church is to concern herself, the very wisdom of God, and yet in such manner as not to interfere with the freedom of men, beyond what instruction, reason, persuasion, love and moral influence will interfere with or modify their freedom.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] THE REMARKABLE CASE OF THE LEVITATION OF NEWEL KNIGHT Kennedy states that when it became noised abroad that the honest old German was being duped [?] by Smith, his pastor Rev. Diedrich Villers, of the German Reformed church, called upon him to remonstrate against his folly. The only reply he could gain from the old farmer was, "Jesus Christ; yesterday, today, and forever" (Kennedy's Early Days of Mormonism, p. 73). So far from this being a reproach to "the honest old German," one may see in it that stronger convictions of the "Eternal Christ" had come to the mind of Peter Whitmer, Sen., in his new found faith.
[^2] VINDICATION OF THE PROPHET BY HIS TRIALS AT SOUTH BAINBRIDGE AND COLESVILLE Chapter viii, p. 85, and note.
[^3] The central principle of Universalism is a belief in the final salvation of all men; and it cannot be otherwise than that such faith, whatever its defects and untruth may be, will tend to tolerance and broadmindedness. The vice of the doctrine is that it is likely to end in absolute indifference to religion.
[^4] She was Sally Coburn before her marriage and had long been a leading member of the choir in one of the churches in Colesville: her father was a musician.
[^5] These facts are learned from Newel Knight's Journal, published in the Faith Promoting Series, Salt Lake City, No. 10.
[^6] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, pp. 82, 83.
[^7] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, pp. 82, 83. Also Newel Knight's Journal, Faith Promoting Series, No. 10, pp. 50, 51. Also see Note 1 end of this chapter, for a discussion of the subject.
[^8] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 83.
[^9] Some confusion exists as to the date in our annals. In the Times and Seasons, and in the Millennial Star, also in the Manuscript History of the Church in the Historian's Office, the date of the conference is given the first of June; but the minutes of the conference, written by Oliver Cowdery, in what is called the Far West Record, Ms., the date is given as the "9th of June," and that date is followed in the text above as the most likely to be accurate.
[^10] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 88.
[^11] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 95.
[^12] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, pp. 93, 94. See also Note 2 at the close of this chapter.
[^13] Scientific Demonstration of a Future Life, Hudson, pp. 289-291.
[^14] Science and Immortality, Sir Oliver Lodge, F. R. S., 1909, p. 54.
[^15] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, pp. 95, 96. Mr. Reid's speech is published in full in the Times and Seasons, vol. v, pp. 549-552.
[^16] Ibid, sec. xx:65.
[^17] That this was to be the method of government in the church is further emphasized in a revelation given through Joseph Smith in 1839, wherein it is said: "No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long suffering, by gentleness, and meekness, and by love unfeigned." (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxi).
[^18] Baring-Gould, Origin of Religious Beliefs, vol. ii, pp. 243-4.
