B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XVII

BEGINNING OF THE PUBLIC MINISTRY OF THE CHURCH—EARLY PERSECUTIONS

THE public ministry of the church was begun on Sunday, the 11th of April, 1830. The meeting was held in Fayette township, at the home of Peter Whitmer, Sen., where five days before the church had been organized. The meeting was attended by large crowds of people; and Oliver Cowdery had the honor of making the first proclamation of the gospel in the new dispensation, in a public meeting called for that purpose. At the close of the meeting six persons, viz: Hiram Page and four members of the Whitmer family were baptized by Oliver Cowdery in Seneca Lake, to which the Whitmer farm was adjacent. It is a beautiful expanse of clear water, this American lake with a Roman name. It is some thirty-six miles in extent north and south, and between three and four miles in width. Its sand-pebbly shore, and the gentle declivity of its margin, made it an ideal place for the beautiful ceremony of baptism by immersion, wherein are symbolized the burial and resurrection of the Christ; also the death, to sin, of the convert, and his resurrection to a new life of righteousness; the formal taking on of the name of Christ, the visible entrance into the kingdom of God. A week later, seven more were added to the church at the same place, three of whom were Whitmers, including Peter Whitmer, Sen., [^1] and his wife, Mary M. Whitmer; the others were their immediate neighbors.

THE PROPHET'S EARLY FRIENDS AND CONVERTS

Meantime the Prophet was not unmindful of his friends, the Knight family, living at Colesville in Broome county, New York, about one hundred miles away; and in this month of April he paid them a visit, to inform them of the progress being made in the work intrusted to him; and hoping, doubtless, to bring them into the church of Christ. Of this family and the friendship subsisting between them and Joseph Smith we have already spoken. [^2] The family were Universalists in their faith, and this of itself, since the central idea of that faith tends to liberalize the mind, [^3] to say nothing of the esteem in which the family had previously held the Prophet, insured him a respectful hearing, now that he had come as the official representative of a church. The Prophet was not disappointed in his reception, or the Knight family's hospitality. Several meetings were held in Colesville where the Knights lived, and a spirit of inquiry, accompanied by a desire to know the truth, was awakened.

Among those who became interested was Newel Knight, son of Joseph Knight, Sen., a young man five years the Prophet's senior. He was a man of rather delicate constitution. As he had no taste for farming, he had engaged in milling both in carding mills and grist mills; but owing to his failing health he had discontinued these occupations on the advice of his physicians.

He was a prosperous man, however, in material affairs, and had married well, although his wife [^4] was also of a delicate constitution. Newel was happy also in the confidence and esteem of his father's family and the neighborhood. [^5] He was a man of high character and of a sensitive nature. He and the Prophet had many conversations on the subject of religion; and as many at the meetings now being held were praying for guidance in forming their opinions of the strange things being testified of among them, the Prophet urged his friend Newel to do the same, not only to pray in secret but in the presence of others, and at the meetings. This Newel promised to do, but when the time came, at the evening meeting, his heart failed him, and he excused himself from the undertaking, and could not be persuaded by the Prophet to change his mind. The following morning he retired to the woods where he attempted to carry out his intention to pray in secret, according to his announcement at the meeting the evening before. But he was oppressed by the sense of a duty neglected, by the consciousness of a promise broken; and when he attempted to pray in secret, he failed. Not even words would come at his bidding. Prayer is not a mechanical function. One may not always pray when one chooses. Something more than words are needed. Prayer is soul of man communing with soul of God—the infinite in man reaching upward to touch the infinite of God. God must be a party to this blending of souls, else there will be no prayer.

NEWEL KNIGHT—LEVITATION OF

Newel Knight, under the circumstances, could not then reach God's soul. Newel must be taught a lesson, so also the whole church. Newel Knight could not pray. He began to feel uneasy; both mind and body were afflicted, until on reaching home his appearance was such as to alarm his wife. He requested her to bring the Prophet to him. "I went," says the Prophet, "and found him suffering very much in his mind, and his body acted upon in a very strange manner; his visage and limbs distorted and twisted in every shape and appearance possible to imagine; and finally he was caught up off the floor of the apartment and tossed about most fearfully." [^6] His relatives and some of the neighbors having heard of his condition soon gathered at his house and witnessed his distress. The Prophet after some effort caught him by the hand, and immediately Newel spoke to him and asked him to cast the devil out of him, for he knew he was possessed, and he knew the Prophet could cast out the evil spirit. "If you know that I can," said Joseph, "it shall be done." And then almost unconsciously the Prophet rebuked the evil spirit and commanded him in the name of Jesus Christ to depart from the afflicted man. Newel was instantly relieved: his countenance became natural, the distortions of his body ceased. He himself declared that he saw the evil spirit leave him and vanish from sight. His relief from this mental distress, however, was attended with great physical weakness. But after the storm came the calm. His friends laid him upon his bed, and then was witnessed a most remarkable scene. Newel himself afterwards narrated it as follows:

"I now began to feel a most pleasing sensation resting upon me, and immediately the visions of heaven were opened to my view. I felt myself attracted upward, and remained for some time enwrapt in contemplation, insomuch that I knew not what was going on in the room. By and by, I felt some weight pressing upon my shoulder and the side of my head, which served to recall me to a sense of my situation, and I found that the spirit of the Lord had actually caught me up off the floor, and that my shoulder and head were pressing against the beams." [^7]

This is usually called "the first miracle in the church." It was witnessed by eight or ten adult persons, most of whom afterwards joined the church. The Prophet himself ascribed the power by which the evil spirit was cast out, to God; saying:

"It was not done by man, nor the power of man; but it was done by God, and by the power of godliness: therefore, let the honor and the praise, the dominion and the glory, be ascribed to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for ever and ever. Amen." [^8]

Soon after this occurrence the Prophet returned to Fayette, whence he was followed by Newel Knight in the last week of May. Soon after Newel's arrival at Fayette he was baptized by David Whitmer.

FIRST CONFERENCE OF THE CHURCH

The first conference of the church was held on the ninth day of June, 1830. [^9] About ninety members were in attendance and a large number of believers and sympathizers. The conference was a spirited one. The sacrament of the "Lord's Supper" was administered; a number were called and ordained to the several offices of the church, and there was singing and exhortation. Also spiritual manifestations in visions, and in prophecy concerning the future development of the work then beginning its unfoldment. All present were impressed with the solemnity and yet also with the joy of the occasion. "To find ourselves engaged," says the Prophet, in recording the events of the conference, "in the very same order of things as observed by the holy apostles of old; to realize the importance and solemnity of such proceedings; and to witness and feel with our own natural senses, the like glorious manifestations of the powers of the priesthood, the gifts and blessings of the Holy Ghost, and the goodness and condescension of a merciful God unto such as obey the everlasting gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, combined to create within us sensations of rapturous gratitude, and inspire us with fresh zeal and energy in the cause of truth."

Shortly after the close of the conference David Whitmer baptized eleven persons in Seneca Lake; and the Prophet returned to his home in Harmony, Pennsylvania.

There was no more staying at home, however, for the Prophet. Under divine guidance he had launched an institution, devotion to which would absorb his life, and be more to him than home and family and country. He no more primarily belonged to home and family, but to the church of God. She must be henceforth the first object of his solicitude, and of his activities; all else, secondary.

In consonance with this new attitude toward life's activities, the Prophet soon left Harmony to pursue his labors at Colesville. Arriving here in company with Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and John Whitmer, he found a number of the Knight family and some others ready for baptism. A public meeting was appointed in Colesville the Sunday following the arrival of the Prophet's party. On Saturday a dam was built across a convenient stream of water, that a suitable place for baptisms might be ready. During the night the dam was torn out by a mob. Sunday came, and a congregation assembled, among whom, it was afterwards ascertained, were the parties who destroyed the dam. Oliver Cowdery preached and the Prophet and others bore testimony to the truth of the Book of Mormon, and also to the truth of the gospel that had been restored.

After the meeting a number opposed the work by seeking to turn against the brethren those who gave credence to their testimony. In this they were not successful. Early Monday morning the dam across the creek was repaired and thirteen persons were baptized. About the time the baptisms were concluded, the mob collected—about fifty in number—and were highly enraged because they had been thwarted in their efforts to prevent the baptisms. The house of Mr. Knight was surrounded by these infuriated men, who seemed determined to commit violence upon the saints. The Prophet's party, therefore, with a few friends, withdrew to the home of Newel Knight, in the hope that this would allay the excitement.

But they were followed by the questioning, threatening mob. "And as long as they chose to stay," says the Prophet, "we were obliged to answer them various unprofitable questions and bear with insults and threatenings without number." [^10]

BEGINNING OF PERSECUTION UNDER FORMS OF LAW

A meeting had been appointed for Monday evening at the house of Joseph Knight, Sen., for the purpose of attending to the confirmation of those who had been baptized that morning. At the appointed hour the newly baptized converts and their friends arrived. When just as the meeting was about to be opened, a constable appeared on the scene and placed the Prophet under arrest on a warrant charging him with being a disorderly person by preaching the Book of Mormon, and setting the country in an uproar. This charge was sworn out by a young man of the name of Benton, but most likely at the instigation of a Mr. Cyrus McMaster, a Presbyterian of high standing; a Doctor Boyington, of the same church; and the Rev. Mr. Shearer a Presbyterian minister, all of whom were active instigators of the persecutions to be enumerated in this chapter. The charge of course was ridiculous; and indeed was only a pretense of legal procedure, during which the mob hoped to get the Prophet into their hands. This the constable himself disclosed soon after the arrest; for the officer had found the Prophet a very different person from what he had been represented to be, and became his friend.

The constable's story was soon confirmed, for not far from Mr. Knight's house the wagon in which the officer with his prisoner had started for South Bainbridge was surrounded by the mob who had been lying in ambush, and who seemed only to await a signal from the constable to take the prisoner. This signal, however, was not given; on the contrary the officer put the whip to his horse, and left them. During the chase that followed, a wheel came off the constable's wagon, and he and his prisoner were nearly overtaken by the mob; but the wheel was replaced in time to make good their escape.

The constable drove his prisoner to South Bainbridge, in Chenango county, where he lodged him in a tavern, himself sleeping with his feet at the door of their room with a loaded musket at his side, declaring that if they were unlawfully interfered with he would fight for the prisoner.

The trial came on the next day before Joseph Chamberlain, [^11] justice of the peace. Meantime the Prophet's friends had not been inactive. Joseph Knight, Sen., engaged the services of two of his neighbors, well versed in the law, although not practicing attorneys. They were respectable farmers, James Davidson and John Reid, by name and both widely known for their integrity and honor. These gentlemen and a number of the Prophet's friends arrived at South Bainbridge before the opening of the trial.

The main charge apparently, was soon abandoned, as it could not possibly be entertained by the court; but a number of other charges utterly irrelevant were investigated, the nature of which is disclosed by the questions put to the witnesses. And here let it be said, that although these matters are insignificant in themselves, yet they disclose the nature of the charges made against the Prophet, and the untruthfulness of such accusations made against him as involve the employment of his prophetic gifts, or the use of his official position, for material gain. For example: His friend Josiah Stoal was put upon the stand and questioned as follows:

"Did not he [Joseph Smith] go to you and tell you that an angel had appeared unto him and authorized him to get the horse from you?

"No, he told me no such story.

"Well, how had he the horse of you?

"He bought him of me as any other man would.

"Have you had your pay?

"That is none of your business.

"The question being put again the witness replied:

"I hold his note for the price of the horse, which I consider as good as the pay; for I am well acquainted with Joseph Smith, Jun., and know him to be an honest man; and if he wishes, I am ready to let him have another horse on the same terms."

Mr. Jonathan Thompson was next called up and examined:

"Has not the prisoner, Joseph Smith, Jun., had a yoke of oxen of you?

"Yes.

"Did he not obtain them of you by telling you that he had a revelation to the effect that he was to have them?

"No, he did not mention a word of the kind concerning the oxen; he purchased them the same as any other man would."

The court was detained until two daughters of Mr. Stoal could be sent for and questioned. These were two young ladies with whom the Prophet had kept company before his marriage. They were examined as to his conduct generally, but especially as to his behavior towards them, both in public and in private. They both gave such answers as left the young Prophet's enemies without pretext of action on their account.

Incidents alleged to have taken place in Broome county were introduced, but these the court, being held in Chenango county, would not entertain; and after the court had been in session from ten in the morning until midnight, the trial closed, by the justice declaring the prisoner "not guilty."

During the day a successful application had been made for a warrant against the Prophet in Broome county; and no sooner was he discharged by Justice Chamberlain than he was arrested under the warrant from Broome county, and dragged off to Colesville some fifteen miles distant. He was taken to a tavern where a number of men gathered and for some time, in the presence of the constable, they ridiculed and insulted the helpless prisoner.

The next day the trial began, and the Prophet found his faithful friends and his counsel of the day before, Messrs. Davidson and Reid, by his side. Many witnesses were called, but their testimony was so palpably false and contradictory that it could not be admitted by the court. A lawyer by the name of Seymour assisted by a Mr. Burch conducted the case for the prosecution. They called Newel Knight as a witness against the prisoner, to detail the account of the Prophet's ministration to him when possessed of an evil spirit, as already related—such were the matters of inquiry in a court of justice in an early decade of the nineteenth century, in the state of New York! In the plea for the state, prosecutor Seymour dragged in the matter of the Prophet having been "a money digger," and in every way that occurred to his ingenuity sought to influence the court against him.

DEFENDERS OF THE PROPHET—DAVIDSON AND REID

Messrs. Davidson and Reid followed in behalf of the defendant. I may not hope to describe so well as the Prophet himself does the effort these gentlemen made in behalf of their client; and it is due to history and to these gentlemen that their client's own brief description of their speeches shall be recorded here:

"They held forth in true colors the nature of the prosecution, the malignancy of intention, and the apparent disposition to persecute their client, rather than to afford him justice. They took up the different arguments which had been brought by the lawyers for the prosecution, and having shown their utter futility and misapplication, then proceeded to scrutinize the evidence which had been adduced, and each, in his turn, thanked God that he had been engaged in so good a cause as that of defending a man whose character stood so well the test of such a strict investigation. In fact, these men, although not regular lawyers, were upon this occasion able to put to silence their opponents, and convince the court that I was innocent. They spoke like men inspired of God, whilst those who were arrayed against me trembled under the sound of their voices, and quailed before them like criminals before a bar of justice." [^12]

The court pronounced the prisoner "not guilty," to the joy of his friends, and the vexation of his enemies, who still breathed out threats of violence against him; but with the assistance of the constable, who had treated him with unnecessary harshness when making the arrest, and also in bringing him to Colesville, but who now had become friendly, the Prophet escaped their hands and was soon among his friends at Harmony.

NOTES

The levitation of Newel Knight, related in the text of this chapter is a very remarkable instance of that strange phenomenon, of the possibility and actuality of which there is now little doubt among many leading men of science. The reality of this particular circumstance is well attested. It was not a case of subjective hallucination on the part of Newel Knight; for eight or ten adult persons witnessed the fact of the levitation, and it was doubtless a contributing cause to their uniting with the church, since it was associated with the official action of the Prophet, who had dared in the name of Jesus Christ to rebuke the psychic power that bound Newel Knight just previous to the levitation taking place.

As for the possibility and the actuality of levitation itself, in view of our scriptural and modern knowledge, there can scarcely be a question about it. The case of Elijah's ascension into heaven (II Kings, ii) can be no other than a case of levitation. So, too, the young man's axehead, which fell into the Jordan, and which, through the power exercised by Elisha, "did swim" to the surface of the water and was taken out (II Kings, vi). The ascension of the risen Christ, a personage of "flesh and bone" (St. Luke xxii:39), is another case of scriptural levitation (St. Luke xxi:51; Acts i:9).

Relative to the attitude of many scientific minds towards the fact of levitation (and hence as to the possibility of such a case as the one here being considered) the following from the works of Thomas J. Hudson, author of The Law of Psychic Phenomena and other works on that line of thought, is instructive. Referring to the subjective mind in man, and speaking of its powers, he says:

"It remains to consider another power, peculiarly its own, which demonstrates the actual possession by the soul of a kinetic potency which for the present cannot be classed as intellectual. I refer, of course, to its power to move ponderable bodies, otherwise known as the power of levitation. * * * Of the existence of this force no one who has investigated the subject, pretends to doubt. It has been investigated by many of the ablest scientists of the world, notably by Professor Elliott Coues, of Washington, and Professors Crookes and Lodge, of London, besides many other scientists of lesser note in Europe and America. Professor Coues has given it a name, 'Telekinesis,' and writes on the subject learnedly and interestingly, as he writes on every subject which he handles; and Professor Crookes has given the world a very learned disquisition on the topic; whilst Professor Lodge has exhausted the resources of human ingenuity in devising tests demonstrative of the existence of the force, and of the English language in describing them. * * * But no scientist has been able to do more than to enable us to say that it is a power belonging exclusively to the subjective entity; that it performs no normal function in this life; that it requires a physical basis in order to produce phenomena cognizable by the objective sense, and thus, like all other psychic phenomena known as spiritistic, it is never produced except as a result of the most intensely abnormal physical and mental conditions. * * * The only thing that can be said of the power with certainty is that it exists; that it is not a power of the objective mind; that it is a power of the human soul, and that it is valuable in this life only as an evidence that there is a kinetic force resident in the soul. * * * Besides, if, as we must suppose, the soul is a spark of the Divine Intelligence, it must be invested, in some degree, with the potential energy inhering in Omnipotence." [^13]

Sir Oliver Lodge in his Science and Immortality, referring to the various explanations to account for miracles, says: "That some may use the term miracle, to mean the utilization of unknown laws—* * * laws whereby time and space appear temporarily suspended, or extraordinary cures are affected, or other effects produced such as the levitations and other physical phenomena related of the saints." [^14]

In the presence of this high authority for the actuality of such phenomena as is here considered, it may not be regarded as the result of superstition or ignorance if one believed in the somewhat remarkable instance of levitation supplied by the case of Newel Knight.

The effect of the two trails of the Prophet described in this chapter must be to give him a clear bill of acquittal of practically all those charges alleged against his youth. It should be remembered that the trials took place right in the vicinity where he had spent the greater part of the preceding five years of his life, being frequently employed by Mr. Stoal and Mr. Knight, and during the last year living at his own home in Harmony, but a few miles distant over the New York state line. Of accusations there were plenty and to spare; but submitted to investigation they proved to be but the slanders of his enemies, or the idle exaggerated gossip of a rural community. On this point most interesting and enlightening are the remarks made upon these incidents in the Prophet's early experience by one of his counsel, at these trials, namely, by John Reid, about fourteen years after the trials occurred. Mr. Reid, though never a convert to the Prophet's faith, nevertheless always held him in high esteem. In May, 1844, Mr. Reid visited Nauvoo, and in a public address related the early experiences connected with these New York trials. After giving a detailed account of the rise of the opposition against the Prophet by sectarian zealots, he said:

"Those bigots soon made up a false accusation against him and had him arraigned before Joseph Chamberlain, a justice of the peace, a man that was always ready to deal justice to all, and a man of great discernment of mind. The case came on about 10 o'clock a. m. I was called upon to defend the prisoner. The prosecutors employed the best counsel they could get, and ransacked the town of Bainbridge and county of Chenango for witnesses that would swear hard enough to convict the prisoner; but they entirely failed. Yes, sir, let me say to you that not one blemish nor spot was found against his character, he came from that trial, notwithstanding the mighty efforts that were made to convict him of crime by his vigilant persecutors, with his character unstained by even the appearance of guilt. The trial closed about 12 o'clock at night. After a few moments deliberation, the court pronounced the words 'not guilty,' and the prisoner was discharged. But alas! the devil, not satisfied with his defeat, stirred up a man not unlike himself, who was more fit to dwell among the fiends of hell than to belong to the human family, to go to Colesville and get another writ, and take him to Broome county for another trial. They were sure they could send that boy to hell, or to Texas, they did not care which; and in half an hour after he was discharged by the court, he was arrested again, and on the way to Colesville for another trial. I was again called upon by his friends to defend him against his malignant persecutors, and clear him from the false charges they had preferred against him. I made every reasonable excuse I could, as I was nearly worn out through fatigue and want of sleep; as I had been engaged in lawsuits for two days, and nearly the whole of two nights. But I saw the persecution was great against him; and here let me say, Mr. Chairman, singular as it may seem, while Mr. Knight was pleading with me to go, a peculiar impression or thought struck my mind, that I must go and defend him, for he was the Lord's anointed. I did not know what it meant, but thought I must go and clear the Lord's anointed. I said I would go, and started with as much faith as the apostles had when they could remove mountains, accompanied by Father Knight, who was like the old patriarchs that followed the ark of God to the city of David. * * *

"The next morning about 10 o'clock the court was organized. The prisoner was to be tried by three justices of the peace, that his departure out of the county might be made sure. Neither talents nor money were wanting to insure them success. They employed the ablest lawyer in that county, and introduced twenty or thirty witnesses before dark, but proved nothing. They then sent out runners and ransacked the hills and vales, grog shops and ditches, and gathered together a company that looked as if they had come from hell and had been whipped by the soot boy thereof; which they brought forward to testify one after another, but with no better success than before, although they wrung and twisted into every shape, in trying to tell something that would criminate the prisoner. Nothing was proven against him however. Having got through with the examination of their witnesses about 2 o'clock in the morning, the case was argued about two hours. There was not one particle of testimony against the prisoner. No, sir, he came out like the three [Hebrew] children from the fiery furnace, without the smell of fire upon his garments. The court deliberated upon the case for half an hour with closed doors, and then we were called in. The court arraigned the prisoner and said: 'Mr. Smith, we have had your case under consideration, examined the testimony and find nothing to condemn you, and therefore you are discharged.' They then proceeded to reprimand him severely, not because anything derogatory to his character in any shape had been proven against him by the host of witnesses that had testified during the trial, but merely to please those fiends in human shape who were engaged in the unhallowed persecution of an innocent man, sheerly on account of his religious opinions.

"After they had got through, I arose and said: 'This court puts me in mind of a certain trial held before Felix of old, when the enemies of Paul arraigned him before the venerable judge for some alleged crime, and nothing was found in him worthy of death or of bonds. Yet, to please the Jews, who were his accusers, he was left bound contrary to law; and this court has served Mr. Smith in the same way, by their unlawful and uncalled for reprimand after his discharge, to please his accusers.' We got him away that night from the midst of three hundred people without his receiving any injury; but I am well aware that we were assisted by some higher power than man; for to look back on the scene, I cannot tell how we succeeded in getting him away. I take no glory to myself; it was the Lord's work, and marvelous in our eyes." [^15]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This, 1929.
[^2] See Note end of chapter.
[^3] Adam, then, a generic name, as well as an individual name.
[^4] Both evolution and devolution, the process in the universe—a scientific truth.
[^5] The last lines of the quotation are taken from ch. ii, verse 1 of the Book of Moses, to complete the emphasis of the fact that the revelations to Moses pertain to our earth and its heavens, not to the whole universe. The importance of these doctrines will be discussed in a subsequent chapter of this work.
[^6] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xxiv.
[^7] That Oliver Cowdery attained unto such power is evidenced by the testimony of Wilford Woodruff, the fourth president of the church who on March 3rd, 1889, said: "I have seen Oliver Cowdery when it seemed as though the earth trembled under his feet. I never heard a man bear a stronger testimony than he did when under the influence of the Spirit. But the moment he left the kingdom of God, that moment his power fell like lightning from heaven. He was shorn of his strength, like Samson in the lap of Delilah. He lost the power and testimony which he had enjoyed, and he never recovered it again in its fulness while in the flesh, although he died in the church. It does not pay a man to sin or to do wrong." (The Deseret News, weekly, vol. xxxvi p. 391).
[^8] Part of paragraph 37, sec. xx of the Doctrine and Covenants. The reasons for the demand of the change are not adequately stated in our annals, but under the system of ecclesiastical government being developed, Oliver Cowdery was clearly out of order.
[^9] In the manuscript of the Prophet Joseph's History this conference is said to have been appointed for the "first day of September;" but in the Far West Record, a manuscript record kept by the clerks of the high council in Missouri—and to which reference has before been made, are the minutes of the 9th of June conference (1830)—which state that the conference adjourned to meet again on the "26th of September." The record also contains the minutes of the above conference bearing the date of September 26th.
[^10] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xxviii.
[^11] Book of Mormon, Ether, ch. xiii.
[^12] See II Chronicles, v: 1, 2. Also New Witnesses for God, vol. iii, ch. xxxv. The Place of the Patriarch Joseph in Israel.
[^13] We believe in the literal gathering of Israel, and in the restoration of the Ten Tribes. That Zion will be built upon this continent (i. e. North America). (Articles of Faith, No. 10.)
[^14] "Lamanites," American Indians. The name is from the Book of Mormon character, Laman, eldest son of Lehi, which Lehi led the colony from Jerusalem to the western hemisphere about 600 B. C. It became a party name rather than a racial one in the latter part of Nephite history—fourth century, A. D.—and is a name applied now in "Mormon" literature to all the American Indians. "Borders by the Lamanites:" The government of the United States had already begun the execution of that policy which required the removal of the Indians from states east of the Mississippi to the territory west of Missouri and Arkansas, and a number of eastern tribes had already been removed to these then western lands. The site of the future "Zion" was to be somewhere on the "borders of the Lamanites."
[^15] See II Nephi, ch. xxx. III Nephi, ch. xvi. For a consideration of the fulfillment of the prophecies concerning the gospel going to the Lamanites and their acceptance of it see the writer's work, New Witnesses for God, vol. iii, pp. 285-291.
