B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XVIII

THE BOOK OF MOSES—THE FIRST GENERAL CONFERENCE OF THE CHURCH—THE COMING OF PARLEY P. PRATT

ALTHOUGH pronounced not guilty by the court at Colesville, it did not follow that the Prophet and his associates were to be permitted to exercise the rights of free men and follow unmolested their calling as ministers of the gospel. This was discovered on an attempt being made by the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery to hold meeting, shortly after the close of the trial, at the home of Joseph Knight, Sen., for the purpose of confirming those who had been baptized; and whose confirmation had been so unwarrantably prevented by the first arrest of the Prophet. No sooner did the two brethren appear in Colesville than the mob began to gather to oppose them. It was considered wise on the part of the brethren and their friends to avoid a conflict, and so they departed without even waiting for refreshments. They were closely pursued by the mob, but were successful in eluding them. They traveled most of the night, resting only for a short time under a large tree by the wayside, sleeping and watching alternately, until a little rested, when they resumed their journey and arrived at the Prophet's home in Harmony early in the morning.

THE BOOK OF MOSES

About this time a most important revelation was given, destined to have a great effect upon the doctrinal development of the church, the full import of which is not yet realized even by the church. [^1] This revelation gave the first part of what is known as the Book of Moses now published in the Pearl of Great Price, one of the four standard doctrinal books of the church. This part could well be entitled the "Call of Moses." For the calling of this prophet and preparing him for his mission as the deliverer of Israel and the historian of the creation is really the burden of this portion of the book. The chapter deals with four important subjects: (1) The eternity of God, and the office of the Christ as the Savior of men; (2) The call of Moses to deliver the children of Israel from bondage; (3) The partial revelation to Moses of the creations of God, the divine purpose in that creation and the earth-life of man, from which doubtless, Moses was able to write the creation story of Genesis; and, (4), the localization of the revelations to Moses to our earth and its immediately associated spheres—the heavens that are connected with it. In abbreviated form these several topics are thus presented:

BRIEF ANALYSIS OF THE BOOK OF MOSES

Preface: "The words of God, which he spake unto Moses at a time when Moses was caught up into an exceeding high mountain, and he saw God face to face, and he talked with him, and the glory of God was upon Moses, therefore Moses could endure his presence."

The Eternity of God: the Office of the Christ: "And God spake unto Moses, saying: Behold, I am the Lord God Almighty, and endless is my name; for I am without beginning of days or end of years: And I have a work for thee, Moses, my son; and thou art in the similitude of mine Only Begotten; and mine Only Begotten is and shall be the Savior, for He is full of grace and truth; but there is no God beside me, and all things are present with me, for I know them all." [^2]

The Call of Moses: [In the midst of the vision Lucifer appears to Moses, and is rebuked by him, whereupon the vision is renewed, and the Lord said]:

"Blessed art thou, Moses, for I, the Almighty, have chosen thee, and thou shalt be made stronger than many waters; for they shall obey thy command as if thou wert God. And lo, I am with thee, even unto the end of thy days; for thou shalt deliver my people from bondage, even Israel my chosen."

The Partial Revelation of the Creations of God: The Divine Purpose in the Creation and Earth-Life of Man: "Behold, thou art my son; wherefore look, and I will show thee the workmanship of mine hands; but not all, for my works are without end, and also my words, for they never cease. Wherefore, no man can behold all my works, except he behold all my glory; and no man can behold all my glory, and afterwards remain in the flesh on the earth. * * * And now behold, this one thing I show unto thee, Moses, my son; for thou art in the world, and now I show it unto thee. And it came to pass that Moses looked, and beheld the world upon which he was created, and Moses beheld the world and the ends thereof, and all the children of men which are, and which were created; of the same he greatly marveled and wondered. * * *

"And it came to pass as the voice was still speaking, Moses cast his eyes and beheld the earth, yea, even all of it; and there was not a particle of it which he did not behold, discerning it by the Spirit of God. And he beheld also the inhabitants thereof, and there was not a soul which he beheld not; and he discerned them by the Spirit of God; and their numbers were great, even numberless as the sand upon the seashore. And he beheld many lands; and each land was called earth, and there were inhabitants on the face thereof. And it came to pass that Moses called upon God, saying: Tell me, I pray thee, why these things are so, and by what thou madest them? And behold, the glory of the Lord was upon Moses, so that Moses stood in the presence of God, and talked with him face to face. And the Lord God said unto Moses: For mine own purpose have I made these things. Here is wisdom, and it remaineth in me. And by the Word of my power have I created them, which is mine only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth. And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten. And the first man of all men have I called Adam, which is many. [^3] But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you. For behold, there are many worlds that have passed away by the word of my power! And there are many that now stand, and innumerable are they unto man; but all things are numbered unto me, for they are mine and I know them.

"And it came to pass that Moses spake unto the Lord, saying: Be merciful unto thy servant, O God, and tell me concerning this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, and also the heavens, and then thy servant will be content. And the Lord God spake unto Moses, saying: The heavens, they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man; but they are numbered unto me, for they are mine. And as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof, even so shall another come; [^4] and there is no end to my works, neither to my words. For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man."

The Revelations of God to Moses Local: "And it came to pass that Moses spake unto the Lord, saying * * * tell me concerning this earth and the inhabitants thereof, and also the heavens, and then thy servant will be content. * * * And now Moses my son, I will speak unto thee concerning this earth upon which thou standest; and thou shalt write the things which I shall speak. * * * And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto Moses, saying: Behold, I reveal unto you concerning this heaven, and this earth; write the words which I speak." [^5]

THE PROPHET ADMONISHED IN HIS WORK

About the same time a revelation was given making more definite the calling of the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery. In the midst of the incidents related in this and the preceding chapter the Prophet and Oliver were trying to raise a crop on the small farm at Harmony which the former had purchased of Isaac Hale, his father-in-law, and which he still owned. But the Prophet had been called to a larger work than this, and one which required all his time. Hence the Lord said in the revelation referred to:

"Behold thou wast called and chosen to write the Book of Mormon, and to the work of my ministry. * * * Magnify thine office; and after thou hast sowed thy fields and secured them, go speedily unto the church which is in Colesville, Fayette and Manchester, and they shall support thee; and I will bless them both spiritually and temporally. * * * And thou shalt continue in calling upon God in my name, and writing the things which shall be given thee by the Comforter, and expounding all scriptures unto the church; and it shall be given thee in the very moment what thou shalt speak and write, and they shall hear it, or I will send unto them a cursing instead of a blessing. For thou shalt devote all thy service in Zion; and in this thou shalt have strength. Be patient in afflictions, for thou shalt have many; but endure them, for, lo, I am with thee, even unto the end of thy days." [^6]

Concerning Oliver Cowdery it was said:

"And thy brother Oliver shall continue in bearing my name before the world, and also to the church. And he shall not suppose that he can say enough in my cause; and lo, I am with him to the end. In me he shall have glory, and not of himself; whether in weakness or in strength, whether in bonds or free, and at all times, and in all places, he shall open his mouth and declare my gospel as with the voice of a trump, both day and night. And I will give unto him strength such as is not known among men." [^7]

To Emma Smith also was given consolation through the word of the Lord, for in a revelation given during those days, she was appointed to be a scribe unto the Prophet during a projected absence of Oliver Cowdery. To her it was said:

"Thou needest not fear, for thy husband shall support thee in the church; for unto them is his calling, that all things might be revealed unto them, whatsoever I will, according to their faith. And verily I say unto thee, that thou shalt lay aside the things of this world, and seek for the things of a better. And it shall be given thee, also, to make a selection of sacred hymns, as it shall be given thee, which is pleasing unto me, to be had in my church. For my soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads."

ATTEMPT TO "COMMAND" THE "HEAD"

Shortly after the revelations above were given, Oliver Cowdery went to visit the church in Fayette; and the Prophet occupied himself in setting in order and copying the revelations which up to this time had been received; in which work he was assisted by John Whitmer who continued to reside with him. While so engaged, much to the Prophet's surprise, he received a letter from Oliver Cowdery "commanding" him to alter one of the revelations which had been received. [^8] The Prophet immediately answered Oliver by letter, but the matter was not finally settled until the Prophet visited the saints in Fayette in person, and convinced Oliver Cowdery and a number of the Whitmers who had taken Oliver's view of the subject, that the passage was reasonable, and according to the scripture: "And thus was this error rooted out," says the Prophet, "which, having its rise in presumption and rash judgment, was the more particularly calculated, when once fairly understood, to teach each and all of us the necessity of humility and meekness before the Lord, that he might teach us of his ways, that we might walk in his paths, and live by every word that proceedeth forth from his mouth."

In the latter part of August, 1830, Joseph Smith, Jun., in company with John Whitmer, David Whitmer, and Hyrum Smith visited the Colesville saints, assembled them together, confirmed them members of the church, partook of the sacrament, rejoiced in their achievements, sang hosannas to God, and the next morning returned to Harmony without molestation.

This work accomplished, the Prophet in the last week of August removed to Fayette. Here, however, irregularity had asserted itself, in that Hiram Page had been receiving "revelations" for the church, through the use of an alleged "seer stone," concerning the upbuilding of Zion, the order of the church, etc. "All of which was entirely at variance with the order of God's house," remarks the Prophet, "laid down in the New Testament, as well as in our later revelations." A general conference had been appointed for the 26th of September, [^9] and the Prophet thought it wisdom not to say anything about this matter until the conference convened. But on discovering that Oliver Cowdery and a number of the Whitmers were believing in the things set forth by Hiram Page, it was thought best that inquiry should be made of the Lord, and before the conference convened a revelation was received, in which the "revelations" of Hiram Page were condemned; and Oliver Cowdery was commanded to take Hiram Page between himself and him alone, and tell him that the things he had written as revelations were not of God, that satan had deceived him.

Oliver Cowdery's late presumption was also reprimanded in this revelation. The revelation, in fact, was directed to him:

"Behold, I say unto you, Oliver, that it shall be given unto thee, that thou shalt be heard by the church in all things whatsoever thou shalt teach them by the Comforter, concerning the revelations and commandments which I have given. But, behold, verily, verily, I say unto thee, no one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this church, excepting my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., for he receiveth them even as Moses; and thou shalt be obedient unto the things which I shall give unto him, even as Aaron, to declare faithfully the commandments and the revelations, with power and authority unto the church. And if thou are led at any time by the Comforter to speak or teach or at all times by the way of commandment unto the church, thou mayest do it. But thou shalt not write by way of commandment, but by wisdom: And thou shalt not command him who is at thy head, and at the head of the church. For I have given him the keys of the mysteries, and the revelations which are sealed, until I shall appoint unto them another in his stead. * * * For all things must be done in order, and by common consent in the church, by the prayer of faith." [^10]

Thus the order of the church in respect of receiving revelations was more clearly defined, and by the time the conference convened on the 26th day of September the difficulties were well on the way to an amicable settlement.

The conference continued through three days. Besides the preaching and ordinary business a number of revelations were received concerning the future development of the work. Reproof and encouragement were given most fearlessly; a number of people were baptized, and the work generally strengthened. "The utmost harmony prevailed," says the Prophet, "and all things were settled satisfactorily to all present."

THE CITY "NEW JERUSALEM" OR "ZION" IN THE WESTERN WORLD

Among the things made known by the Book of Mormon is the fact that the land of America is a "chosen land above all other lands, a chosen land of the Lord;" also that upon it in the last days shall be builded "a new Jerusalem," or "Zion" unto the remnant of the seed of Joseph [^11] who holds the birthright in Israel. [^12] Hence it is a matter of faith with the Latter-day Saints that this city of "Zion" will be built upon the continent of North America. [^13] Very naturally the saints were early exercised concerning this "City" and especially concerning its location. Its location was undoubtedly one of the subjects of Hiram Page's revelations; for in the revelation correcting his errors it is said: "It is not revealed, and no man knoweth, where the city Zion shall be built, but it shall be given hereafter. Behold I say unto you, that it shall be on the borders, by the Lamanites." [^14] Also the Book of Mormon declares that the gospel of the Christ which it contains shall be preached among the Lamanites, and that they shall be restored to a knowledge of their fathers. [^15] This also was a matter that early engaged the attention of the saints, and especially at this September conference. In a revelation received a few days before the conference convened Oliver Cowdery had been appointed to introduce this work to the Lamanites. [^16]

During the conference young Peter Whitmer was appointed to go with him. [^17] And in October following Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson were added to this Indian mission.

PARLEY P. PRATT

The coming of Parley P. Pratt to the church is a matter of sufficient importance to receive more than a passing notice, both on account of his exceptional native talents and the great work he accomplished in the church, and because of the controversy that gathers about the circumstance of his coming to the church, under the circumstances attendant upon that coming. Viz: Coming immediately from the vicinity of Sidney Rigdon's activities and after association with him; taking this eastern journey for Columbia county, New York, shortly after the Book of Mormon was published; stopping off at Newark, in the vicinity of Palmyra without any seeming occasion beyond a psychic impression that he had a work to do in that neighborhood before going on to the objective point of his journey; meeting the Smiths and accepting the Book of Mormon; all which, it is claimed, bears evidence of his being in collusion with the parties bringing forth the Book of Mormon, and perhaps was the connecting link between Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon and the Spaulding Manuscript. [^18] Our history as it proceeds will establish the vanity of these idle speculations.

Parley Parker Pratt was the son of Jared and Charity Pratt, and his ancestry runs back to the first settlers of Hartford, Connecticut, in 1639. He was born in Burlington, Otsego county, New York, 1807. His boyhood was spent on a farm, in Canaan, Columbia county, New York, and he had but few educational opportunities. Early in youth, however, he gave evidence of possessing a profoundly religious nature and joined the Baptist church. In his seventeenth year, in company with his brother William, he journeyed west about two hundred miles, and selected lands for a farm about two miles from Oswego, New York. Owing to failure of crops, and also the failure of his brother William to raise his portion of the payments on the land, the farm finally reverted to the original owner. Somewhat disheartened by this incident young Pratt left the state of New York in 1826, and settled some twelve miles west of Cleveland, in Lorain county, Ohio, then literally a wilderness, where he laid the foundations of a wilderness home. The following year he returned to the home of his boyhood and married Miss Thankful Halsey, in September, 1827. The young couple immediately started for the western home in Ohio, where work on the new farm was resumed.

About eighteen months later Sidney Rigdon, then an associate of Alexander Campbell and Walter Scott in that aggressive reform movement which resulted in the founding of the sect of the "Disciples" or "Christians," came into Mr. Pratt's neighborhood on a preaching tour. The doctrines of the "Disciples," appealed to the understanding of Mr. Pratt and he accepted them, resolving also to devote his life to the ministry of that church. With this in view he sold his possessions and started in company with his wife for eastern New York, desiring that the friends of his youth should be among the first to receive his ministrations as a preacher of the gospel. On the journey eastward, following an impression to do so, he stopped off at Newark, in Wayne county, some fifteen or twenty miles east of Palmyra, where he made and filled several appointments for preaching. While in Newark he heard of the Book of Mormon, saw one in fact, at the home of a Mr. Hamlin, learned the current account of its discovery and publication, read it, and resolved to investigate its claims as a divine record. With this purpose in view he visited the Smith home near Palmyra, but the Prophet was absent in Harmony. He met Hyrum Smith however, and with him visited the Whitmers at Fayette, where, about the first of September, he was baptized by Oliver Cowdery, and ordained an elder of the church. He now resumed his journey to the eastern part of the state, preached the gospel to his kindred and to the friends of his boyhood days. His brother Orson, destined to become one of the most powerful advocates of the gospel of the New Dispensation—then a youth of nineteen—readily embraced the gospel, as did several others.

Parley now returned to Fayette, arriving shortly after the first conference of the church was concluded, and there, for the first time, he met the Prophet, and received his appointment to join in the mission to the Lamanites. Soon afterwards the four brethren who had been appointed to this labor started on foot upon their mission, which was to carry them to the distant frontiers of the United States on the Missouri—"to the borders of the Lamanites."

NOTE

THE REVELATION OF THE CHRIST'S MISSION TO MOSES

The reader may be startled at the plainness of the revelation made to Moses of the Christ and his mission: "Thou art in the similitude of mine Only Begotten;" "Mine Only Begotten is and shall be the Savior, for he is full of grace and truth"—these words, I say, addressed to Moses may be a surprise to the reader, for they represent the existence of a knowledge of the Christ in ancient times not generally if at all conceded. Inquiry into the facts, however, will sustain the probability of the truth of what is represented as being said to Moses in the passage of Latter-day Saint scripture here considered.

The Christ in Christian scripture is spoken of as the "Lamb slain from before the foundation of the world" (Rev. xiii:8). This, if it means anything, means that the Christ and his mission was known before the foundations of the earth were laid. Why then, should not his relationship to God and his mission be made known to Moses?

Paul speaks of living "in hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, promised before the world began" (Titus i:2). This, if it means anything, means that the scheme on which God promised eternal life,—the Christian scheme,—salvation and resurrection for the race through the atonement and the resurrection of the Christ, was known and promised before the world began. Then why should not the part of the Christ in the devised plan of "eternal life" be revealed unto Moses?

Again Paul, in speaking of Moses, says that he esteemed "the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward" (Heb. xi:26). But how could Moses esteem "the reproach of Christ as greater riches than the treasures of Egypt," if he knew nothing of the Christ, or of "the recompense of the reward," in serving him?

Again Paul says: "The scripture foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith preached before the gospel unto Abraham" (Gal. iii:8). But where the gospel is preached there always must the Christ be preached, as the very heart and life of it—hence even Abraham must have had knowledge of the Christ, and the hope of eternal life through him "which God, that cannot lie, promised before the world began."

Later in the very scripture last quoted, Paul asks—"Wherefore then serveth the law?" (i. e. the law of Moses). He answers: "It was added because of transgression, until the Seed [i. e. the Christ] should come to whom the promise was made" (v. 19); "wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith" (v. 24). From this it seems that the gospel of Christ was in the world among the patriarchs before the law of Moses. Why, then, should not Moses have knowledge of the gospel, and of the central fact of it—the Christ?

In the third chapter of Hebrews Paul alludes to the transgressions of ancient Israel; and especially to those in Israel who, by reason of their sins, were destroyed in the wilderness. Then, in opening the fourth chapter, he says: "Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left us of entering unto his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. For unto us [the people of Paul's day] was the gospel preached, as well as unto them [meaning ancient Israel]: but the word preached did not profit them [ancient Israel], not being mixed with faith in them that heard it (Heb. iv:1, 2). Here is the gospel in ancient Israel—the Christ must be the central figure of it.

Paul makes a further allusion to the gospel being with the children of Israel in the days of Moses. Writing to the Corinthians he says:

"Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea;

"And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea;

"And did all eat the same spiritual meat;

"And did all drink the same spiritual drink; for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ." (I Cor. x:1-4).

Surely after this there need be no surprise that an alleged ancient scripture, hitherto not known to the world, should represent that Moses had definite knowledge of the Christ, as the Only Begotten Son of God, and as being the Savior of Men.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] THE TIME OF SIDNEY RIGDON'S CONVERSION AND BAPTISM Acts. chs. iii, iv, v.
[^2] THE DIFFICULTIES INVOLVED IN THE ASSUMPTION OF THE COLLABORATION OF SIDNEY RIGDON AND JOSEPH SMITH IN PRODUCING THE BOOK OF MORMON History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 124. Also Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, ch. vii.
[^3] THE TESTIMONY OF SIDNEY RIGDON TO HIS SON ON THE INTEGRITY OF HIS ACCOUNT OF BECOMING ACQUAINTED WITH THE BOOK OF MORMON History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, pp. 124-5. Pratt's Autobiography, ch vii, see Note 1 end of chapter.
[^4] Pratt's reply to Sunderland, 1842, Saints Herald, vol. xlv, p. 61: also Reynolds' Myth of the Manuscript Found, p. 32 et seq.
[^5] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 120, footnote.
[^6] This on the authority of a statement of Peter Boyer quoted by Mr. Patterson in Who Wrote the Book of Mormon, p. 8. In History of the Church, Period I, Rev. Clark's home is said to be Pittsburg; this is an error. The question is discussed at length in the American Historical Magazine, predecessor of Americana, vol. iv; January, 1909, pp. 30-33, and the fact of Clark's residence in Beaver county, joining Allegheny county—in which Pittsburg is located—on the northwest, is clearly established.
[^7] The contention that Rigdon was the author of the Book of Mormon runs all through the several chapters of Linn's dealing with the Book of Mormon in his Story of the Mormons. See book i, and especially ch. viii. The matter is considered at length in New Witnesses for God, vol. iii, part iv, ch. xliv, Roberts, and the subject is discussed pro et con exhaustively in the American Historical Magazine, predecessor to Americana, in vols. i to iv, by Theodore Schroeder and B. H. Roberts, respectively.
[^8] Who Wrote the Book of Mormon, R. Patterson, p. 11, published in the History of Washington County, Pa. The work is valuable as a collection of testimonies from original sources, as to Sidney Rigdon's early life and alleged connection with the Patterson printing establishment; which, however, is not very satisfactory either to the author or the publisher, as may be judged from the quotation from each in the text above.
[^9] American Historical Magazine, vol. iv, p. 175. Bradden-Kelly Debate, p. 100.
[^10] See Note 2, end of chapter.
[^11] Parley P. Pratt's Autobiography, p. 50.
[^12] Frederick Granger Williams was born in Suffield, Hartford county, Connecticut, October 28th, 1787. He was therefore a man of forty-three years of age when the gospel was brought to him at Kirtland by Oliver Cowdery and associates. The father of Frederick G. Williams, William Wheeler Williams, was born in Connecticut and moved with his family to the Western Reserve, in 1794, at which time there was but one house standing on the present site of Cleveland. Frederick G. Williams was a man of considerable influence in the community where he resided. He owned a farm near Kirtland, but at the time of the arrival of Cowdery, Pratt, et al. he was practicing medicine, and was widely known. He abandoned the practice of his profession, however, for the work of the ministry, and accompanied the Lamanite mission to Missouri.
[^13] Reynolds' Myth of the Manuscript Found, pp. 35-6.
[^14] Life of Sidney Rigdon, by his son, John W. Rigdon, Ms. pp. 188-195. Also History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, pp. 122-3.
[^15] See II Nephi, ch. xxx. III Nephi, ch. xvi. For a consideration of the fulfillment of the prophecies concerning the gospel going to the Lamanites and their acceptance of it see the writer's work, New Witnesses for God, vol. iii, pp. 285-291.
[^16] Doctrine and Covenants, sec xxviii.
[^17] Ibid, sec. xxx. Peter Whitmer was but twenty-one, having been born 1809.
[^18] Such is the claim of Mr. Theodore Schroeder in his Origin of the Book of Mormon, in the American Historical Magazine, predecessor of Americana, vol. ii, No. 1.
