B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XIX

THE FIRST MISSION—THE LAMANITES (AMERICAN INDIANS)—THE COMING OF SIDNEY RIGDON

THE first tribe of Indians visited by the mission to the Lamanites was the Catteraugus tribe located near the city of Buffalo. The visit was brief, occupying but one day, but the missionaries proclaimed their message and left two Books of Mormon with members of the tribe who could read, and resumed their journey, "preaching by the way."

The westward journey of these brethren led them through northeastern Ohio, the scene of Sidney Rigdon's active ministry as a preacher in the church of the "Disciples" (Campbellites). He was then living at Mentor, Geauga county, but his field of labor extended into surrounding counties where he had a large following. It was but to be expected that Parley P. Pratt would seek out his former pastor and, subsequently, his associates in the "Disciple" ministry, for the purpose of making them acquainted with the New Dispensation of the gospel which he himself had found, and present to them the Book of Mormon, with which Sidney Rigdon now for the first time became acquainted. The reception of Elder Pratt and his associates by Mr. Rigdon was cordial; but Pratt's account of the Book of Mormon was listened to somewhat guardedly, and the manner of its coming forth closely questioned. However, Mr. Rigdon granted the missionaries the use of his chapel at Mentor and they presented their message to his congregation. At the close of their remarks Mr. Rigdon briefly addressed the congregation chiefly by way of caution against hasty judgment, admonishing them in the language of Paul to "prove all things, and to hold fast to that which is good." In this spirit Mr. Rigdon himself began an investigation of the book and of the message which came with it.

OPENING OF THE WORK AT KIRTLAND

Meantime the missionaries of the New Dispensation found an opening for preaching at Kirtland, some four miles southeast from Mentor. Here a number of Christian families of Mr. Rigdon's faith, but under the immediate leadership of a Mr. Lyman Wight, were undertaking to follow the example of the early Christians by "having all things in common." "Neither said any of them that aught of the things which he possessed was his own;" [^1] but all lived as one family. Here great success attended the missionaries, for in a short time the whole "common stock family," for so were they called, accepted the message and were baptized—seventeen souls in all. [^2]

In about two weeks, [^3] having finished his investigation of the Book of Mormon and the message which had so strangely come to him, Sidney Rigdon announced himself as ready for baptism. The circumstances attendant upon this event were impressive. When he had satisfied himself of the truth of the new message, according to Elder Pratt, Mr. Rigdon "called together a large congregation of his friends, neighbors and brethren, and then addressed them very affectionately for nearly two hours, during most of which time, both himself and nearly all the congregation were melted into tears. He asked forgiveness of everybody who might have had occasion to be offended with any part of his former life; he forgave all who had persecuted or injured him in any manner, and the next morning, himself and wife, were baptized by Elder Oliver Cowdery." "I was present," says Parley P. Pratt, "it was a solemn scene, most of the people were greatly affected, they came out of the water overwhelmed in tears." [^4]

SIDNEY RIGDON

As in the case of Parley P. Pratt, so with Sidney Rigdon, his introduction into the work requires more than a passing notice. Rigdon was of English and Scotch-Irish extraction, although his progenitors for several generations were Americans, living in Maryland, Massachusetts and New Jersey. [^5] He was born in St. Clair township, Allegheny county, Pennsylvania, on the 19th of February, 1793, and was the youngest son of William and Nancy Rigdon. The early days of Sidney Rigdon's life were uneventful. His youth and the early years of his manhood were spent at his father's farm in St. Clair township. When Sidney was seventeen years old his father died, but he continued on the farm with his mother until he was twenty-six. In his twenty-fifth year he joined the "Regular Baptist" society or church. The pastor in charge was the Rev. David Phillips, a clergyman from Wales. In March, 1819, Mr. Rigdon left the farm and made his home with the Rev. Andrew Clark, of Beaver county, Pennsylvania, [^6] also a Baptist minister. While residing with Mr. Clark he took out a license and began from that time his career as a minister. In May, 1819, he removed from Pennsylvania to Trumbull county, Ohio. In July of the same year he made his home with Adamson Bentley, a minister of the same faith. While residing at Bentley's he met Phebe Brook, to whom he was married on the 12th day of June, 1820. She was a native of the state of New Jersey, Bridgetown, Cumberland county, but previous to her marriage had removed to Trumbull county, Ohio.

Sidney Rigdon continued to preach throughout Trumbull county until November, 1821. Passing through Pittsburg about that time, for the purpose of visiting his relatives at the old homestead in St. Clair township, he was invited to preach to the Baptist society of Pittsburg, which he did the following and several succeeding Sundays. As the congregation had no regular pastor they invited him to take charge and become their regular minister; a "call" which he accepted and removed from Warren in Trumbull county, Ohio, to Pittsburg, in February, 1822. Meantime misgivings arose in his mind with reference to some of the doctrines of the church with which he was connected, especially with reference to the fate of unbaptized infants. Finally, after serving his congregation about two years and six months, he gave up his charge in August, 1824, and retired from the ministry. After taking this step he joined his wife's brother, Richard Brook, in the tanning business. Together they started a small tannery in which Mr. Rigdon worked as a journeyman for some two years. Meantime he had formed the acquaintance of a Mr. Alexander Campbell, generally regarded as the founder of the sect of the "Disciples," or "Campbellites," and Mr. Walter Scott, a Scotchman by birth, but at this time a resident of Pittsburg and a dissenter from a Scandinavian church with which he had formerly been associated. These three gentlemen often met and discussed the subject of religion, the necessity for a universal reformation among the churches, the abandonment of their creeds, etc. The consultations they held led ultimately to the establishment of the church or sect of the "Disciples."

Mr. Rigdon left Pittsburg in 1826, and went to Bainbridge, Geauga county, Ohio, where the people urged him to preach for them. He did so, following in his teachings that line of doctrine which in his consultation with Messrs. Campbell and Scott they had considered essential to Christian spiritual life, viz.: faith in God, repentance of sins, baptism by immersion in water for the remission of sins, and holiness of life—a godly walk and conversation. Mr. Rigdon continued to labor in Bainbridge for about one year, when the people of Mentor, in the same county, but some thirty miles distant from Bainbridge, invited him to reside among them and preach. This he consented to do, and notwithstanding he at first met with some opposition, he prevailed against it and extended his labors into surrounding townships and counties until he had in a number of places a large following. Such were his circumstances and such his labor when the message of "Mormonism" found him—when Parley P. Pratt, his former friend and associate in the ministry, presented him with the Book of Mormon and its attendant message.

RIGDON'S ALLEGED CONTACT WITH SPAULDING'S MANUSCRIPT

This biographical sketch carefully considered will readily establish two things: (1) that Sidney Rigdon was not a resident of Pittsburg at any time when the Spaulding Manuscript is said to have been there in the hands of a printer pending its intended publication, during which time—1812-1814, but by some, who assume a revision of the "first Spaulding Manuscript," extended to 1816—Sidney Rigdon "stole it," or "borrowed" and "copied it," and thence conveyed it by some means into Joseph Smith's hands to be put forth as the Book of Mormon; (2) that Rigdon's movements, so connected with public events in Pennsylvania and Ohio, and so easily traced, admit of no probability of collaboration with Joseph Smith in producing the Book of Mormon. [^7] In relation to the first item, the residence of Rigdon at Pittsburg, previous to 1821-1822, at which time he went there as the pastor of the first Baptist church, and also as to his connection with Patterson's printing office, where, it is alleged, he had opportunity to "steal" or to "borrow and copy" the Spaulding Manuscript, Mr. Robert Patterson, son of the printer Patterson, and author of Who Wrote the Book of Mormon, after presenting a very unsatisfactory list of witnesses to these matters, says:

"These witnesses are all whom we can find, after inquiries extending through some three years, who can testify at all to Rigdon's residence in Pittsburg before 1816, and to his possible employment in Patterson's printing office or bindery. Of this employment none of them speak from personal knowledge. In making inquiries among two or three score of the oldest residents of Pittsburg and vicinity, those who had any opinion on the subject invariably, so far as now remembered, repeated the story of Rigdon's employment in Patterson's office, as if it were a well-known and admitted fact; they 'could tell all about it,' but when pressed as to their personal knowledge of it or their authority for the conviction, they had none."

The search for evidence on this point was prolonged and thorough; evidently, at the outset, the confidence was great; but the results were a disappointment. That becomes more apparent when one reads the footnote of the publishers on Mr. Patterson's passage above—

"The candid reader will doubtless suspend his judgment on this hitherto accepted theory of Rigdon's printership, or set it down as, at the most, only probable, but certainly not yet proved." [^8]

As the second item, viz., the collaboration of Sidney Rigdon and Joseph Smith in producing the Book of Mormon, in addition to what may be gathered from the foregoing biographical sketch, the following concerning Sidney Rigdon is summarized from Hayden's History of the Disciples:

"The Disciple (Campbellite) history sets forth, that Rigdon was their standing minister for the year 1825, at Bainbridge, Ohio; for the year 1826 at Mentor and Bainbridge; for the year 1827 at Mantua; for the year 1828 at Mentor. * * * The next year, 1829, Rigdon continued the work in Mentor, and at Euclid, and founded the church in Perry, Ohio, Aug. 7th. The next year, 1830, he continued as their minister, at Mentor, Euclid, Kirtland and occasionally at Hiram, Perry, Mantua, and Plainsville." [^9]

Joseph Smith's movements during the years named are between Manchester, New York; Harmony, Pennsylvania; and Fayette township (where the Whitmer's lived), New York; a distance from Ohio points, where Sidney Rigdon was operating, by the nearest road traveled, of from 250 to 300 miles. It is utterly impossible under such circumstances that the alleged collaboration could have taken place. [^10]

During the two or three weeks the Lamanite mission remained in Kirtland and vicinity they baptized one hundred and twenty-seven souls; [^11] also they ordained to the ministry, Sidney Rigdon, Isaac Morley, John Murdock, Lyman Wight, and others; they also reported their success to the Prophet by letter, and he sent John Whitmer to preside at Kirtland. On the arrival of Elder Whitmer, the Lamanite mission, adding Dr. Frederick G. Williams [^12] to their number, continued its journey westward.

NOTES

It is denied that two weeks elapsed between the first appearance of the Lamanite mission at Mentor and the baptism of Sidney Rigdon. Those who claim that Sidney Rigdon was in collusion with Joseph Smith in the production of the Book of Mormon insist that his conversion was mere pretense; that he knew of the coming of Cowdery and Pratt, and was anxiously awaiting it, and that he was baptized almost immediately on their arrival—at least within two days. So says Howe, Mormonism Unveiled, p. 104, first edition; so Clark, who follows Howe, Gleanings by the Way, p. 312; Schroeder, American Historical Magazine, predecessor of Americana, Vol. II, pp. 68, 69. It is held by the last named writer that "the two weeks" period was an "after-thought" by those who wrote our annals because it suggested too great haste in the matter of Rigdon's conversion, too apparently indicated the collusion between himself and Joseph Smith in the matter of producing the Book of Mormon. Hence there was recorded in our annals a seeming hesitancy on the part of Rigdon to accept the book, and the delay of two weeks was invented between the coming of Cowdery and his associates and the baptism of Mr. Rigdon. Mr. Schroeder in the American Historical Magazine argues the question at great length. Seizing upon the statement of Pratt that the missionary party started from the state of New York on foot "late in October,"—"preaching by the way," "even to Indians," and holding that the distance they traveled before reaching Mentor was three hundred and seventy miles—he insists that the party could not possibly have reached the vicinity of Kirtland earlier than the middle of November. He then cites the Journal of Lyman Wight to the effect that Wight and wife were baptized on the 14th day of November, 1830, and the recollection of Mrs. Wight—given many years afterwards—that the Rigdons were baptized on the same day (see also History of the Church—[a Josephite work]—Vol. I, pp. 153-4). This, with the statement of Howe that Rigdon's baptism occurred "two days" after the arrival of Cowdery et al, and reference to a letter published, if at all, no one knows where, of one H. H. Clapp, to the effect that Rigdon was baptized exactly thirty-six hours after the arrival of Cowdery and party—this makes up Mr. Schroeder's case.

Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, however, fixes the date of the arrival of the Lamanite missionary party in the vicinity of Kirtland "in the latter part of October" (Mormonism Unveiled, p. 102); Clark, "the last of October" (Gleanings by the Way, p. 312); Lyman Wight's journal fixes the date of the mission's arrival at Kirtland and their first interview with him "about the first of November," and as that interview took place two or three days after their arrival at Mentor and their first interview with Sidney Rigdon, it must have been "in the latter part of October," as stated by both Howe and Clark, that the Lamanite mission arrived in the vicinity of Kirtland. Then if Rigdon's baptism took place at the same time as the Wights', viz., "on the 14th of November, 1830," it makes up the "two weeks" of our church annals.

It is true that Elder Pratt in his Autobiography (page 49) states that the mission started "late in October;" also that the distance traveled, about three hundred and fifty miles,—not three hundred and seventy miles as erroneously stated by Schroeder, since the mission started from the Smith home near Palmyra instead of from Fayette, the home of the Whitmers—would require about two weeks; but evidently the indefinite "late in October" of Pratt's Autobiography, conveys a wrong impression. Elsewhere he writes the date of departure as "about the 15th of October, 1830," (See Pratt's reply to Sunderland, 1842, Saints' Herald, Vol. XLV, p. 61). Before starting on this Lamanite mission the parties to it drew up and signed a covenant to mutually sustain each other, and seek each other's welfare; this document was signed in the presence of Joseph Smith, Jun., and David Whitmer, who witness it by their signatures. It bears the date of "Manchester, October 17, 1830."

It would doubtless be drawn up and signed on the very day of the mission's departure, ad hence unquestionably fixes the date on which the four brethren left Manchester township (the Smith home) upon their mission. (The document is published in Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, first edition, pp. 212, 213). If this be accepted as the date of the msision's departure, and the fact of it is a moral certainty, then there is the necessary two weeks in which to make the journey to Mentor, Ohio, arriving the last day of October; and thence to the baptism of Wight and Rigdon on the 14th day of November, gives the "two weeks" of our annals from the arrival of the mission at Mentor, Ohio, to the baptism of Sidney Rigdon.

"Has it entered into the thoughts of our opponents that if Sidney Rigdon was the author or adaptor of the Book of Mormon, how vast and wide spread must have been the conspiracy that foisted it upon the world? Whole families must have been engaged in it. Men of all ages and various conditions in life, and living in widely separate portions of the country must have been connected with it. First we must include in the catalogue of conspirators the whole of the Smith family, then the Whitmers, Martin Harris and Oliver Cowdery; further, to carry out this absurd idea, Sidney Rigdon and Parley P. Pratt must have been their active fellow conspirators in arranging, carrying out and consummating their iniquitous fraud. To do this they must have traveled thousands of miles and spent months, perhaps years, to accomplish—what? That is the unsolved problem. Was it for the purpose of duping the world? They, at any rate, the great majority of them, were of all men most unlikely to be engaged in such folly. Their habits, surroundings, station in life, youth and inexperience all forbid such a thought. What could they gain, in any light that could be then presented to their minds, by palming [off] such a deception upon the world? This is another unanswerable question." [^13]

In a Manuscript History of his father's life, filed in the Historian's Office, Salt Lake City, John W. Rigdon, near the close of that History makes final reference to the coming of Cowdery, Pratt et al to his father's home in Mentor with the Book of Mormon. He relates how he himself visited the then territory of Utah in 1863, where he spent the winter among the "Mormon" people. He was not favorably impressed with their religious life, and came to the conclusion that the Book of Mormon itself was a fraud. He determined in his own heart that if ever he returned home and found his father, Sidney Rigdon, alive, he would try and find out what he knew of the origin of the Book of Mormon. "Although," he adds, "he had never told but one story about it, and that was that Parley P. Pratt and Oliver Cowdery presented him with a bound volume of that book in the year 1830, while he (Sidney Rigdon) was preaching Campbellism at Mentor, Ohio," What John W. Rigdon claims to have seen in Utah, however, together with the fact that Sidney Rigdon had been charged with writing the Book of Mormon, made him suspicious; "and," he remarks, "I concluded I would make an investigation for my own satisfaction and find out, if I could, if he had all these years been deceiving his family and the world, by telling that which was not true, and I was in earnest about it. If Sidney Rigdon, my father, had thrown his life away by telling a falsehood and bringing sorrow and disgrace upon his family, I wanted to know it and was determined to find out the facts, no matter what the consequences might be. I reached home in the fall of 1865, found my father in good health and (he) was very much pleased to see me. As he had not heard anything from me for some time, he was afraid that I had been killed by the Indians. Shortly after I had arrived home, I went to my father's room; he was there and alone, and now was the time for me to commence my inquiries in regard to the origin of the Book of Mormon, and as to the truth of the Mormon religion. I told him what I had seen at Salt Lake City, and I said to him that what I had seen at Salt Lake had not impressed me very favorably toward the Mormon church, and as to the origin of the Book of Mormon I had some doubts. You have been charged with writing that book and giving it to Joseph Smith to introduce to the world. You have always told me one story; that you never saw the book until it was presented to you by Parley P. Pratt and Oliver Cowdery; and all you ever knew of the origin of that book was what they told you and what Joseph Smith and the witnesses who claimed to have seen the plates had told you. Is this true? If so, all right; if it is not, you owe it to me and to your family to tell it. You are an old man and you will soon pass away, and I wish to know if Joseph Smith, in your intimacy with him for fourteen years, has not said something to you that led you to believe he obtained that book in some other way than what he had told you. Give me all you know about it, that I may know the truth. My father, after I had finished saying what I have repeated above, looked at me a moment, raised his hand above his head and slowly said, with tears glistening in his eyes: 'My son, I can swear before high heaven that what I have told you about the origin of that book is true. Your mother and sister, Mrs. Athalia Robinson, were present when that book was handed to me in Mentor, Ohio, and all I ever knew about the origin of that book was what Parley P. Pratt, Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Smith and the witnesses who claimed they saw the plates have told me, and in all of my intimacy with Joseph Smith he never told me but one story, and that was that he found it engraved upon gold plates in a hill near Palmyra, New York, and that an angel had appeared to him and directed him where to find it; and I have never, to you or to any one else, told but the one story, and that I now repeat to you.' I believed him, and now believe he told me the truth. He also said to me after that that Mormonism was true; that Joseph Smith was a Prophet, and this world would find it out some day.

"After my father's death, my mother, who survived him several years was in the enjoyment of good health up to the time of her last sickness, she being eighty-six years old. A short time before her death I had a conversation with her about the origin of the Book of Mormon and wanted to know what she remembered about its being presented to my father. She said to me in that conversation that what my father had told me about the book being presented to him was true, for she was present at the time and knew that was the first time he ever saw it, and that the stories told about my father writing the Book of Mormon were not true. This she said to me in her old age and when the shadows of the grave were gathering around her; and I believed her." [^14]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] JOSEPH SMITH'S INSPIRED REVISION OF THE BIBLE Orson Pratt, who for well nigh half a century was the great advocate and expounder of the New Dispensation theology, was born September 19, 1811, in Hartford, Washington county, New York. His ancestors, of course, are the same as Parley P. Pratt's—(See this History, ch. xviii). The humble circumstances of his parents compelled him to seek employment where he could obtain it in various places, mainly at farming, during which time, however, he managed to get some schooling, paying especial attention to arithmetic, and gaining an acquaintance also with bookkeeping, grammar, geography and surveying. The early lessons of morality and religion taught at his father's home made deep impressions on his youthful mind, and led him in the autumn of 1829 to particularly seek the Lord. For this purpose he frequently retired to the lonely fields or the woods for prayer. This continued till September, 1830, when his brother Parley came into the neighborhood where he resided, and, as already related, converted him to the New Dispensation of the gospel.
[^2] SOME OF THE "LOST BOOKS" OF THE SCRIPTURES Edward Partridge was born in Pittsfield, Berkshire county, Massachusetts, on the 27th of August, 1793, of William and Jemima Partridge. His-father's immediate ancestor emigrated from Berwick, Scotland, during the seventeenth century, and settled at Hadley, Massachusetts, on the Connecticut river. At the age of seventeen he went to learn the hatter's trade, and continued as an apprentice for about four years. the doctrines of christianity as presented in the current teachings of the churches did not appeal to him; but on hearing a Universal Restorationer preach upon the love of God—(The Restorationists believed that all men will ultimately become holy and happy; that God created only to bless—Book of Religions, Hayward, 1842, pp. 91-95)—he accepted that faith, continuing in it until 1828, when, having made his home at Painsville, Ohio, he came under the preaching of Sidney Rigdon, and joined the sect of the Disciples.
[^3] BOOKS THAT ARE MISSING FROM THE NEW TESTAMENT The incident of Edward Partridge's baptism is enriched in interest by some particulars related by Lucy Smith; and the fact that a man of the intelligence and character of Edward Partridge accepted baptism after making the inquiries she alludes to, is an evidence that he was satisfied with his investigation as to the standing of the Smiths. And now Lucy Smith's narrative: "In December of the same year, Joseph appointed a meeting at our house. [They were then living at Fayette.] While he was preaching, Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge came in and seated themselves in the congregation. When Joseph had finished his discourse, he gave all who had any remarks to make, the privilege of speaking. Upon this, Mr. Partridge arose, and stated that he had been to Manchester, with the view of obtaining further information respecting the doctrine which we preached, but not finding us, he had made some inquiry of our neighbors concerning our characters, which they stated had been unimpeachable, until Joseph 'deceived' us relative to the Book of Mormon. He also said that he had walked over our farm, and observed the good order and industry which it exhibited; and, having seen what we had sacrificed for the sake of our faith, and having heard that our veracity was not questioned upon any other point than that of our religion, he believed our testimony, and was ready to be baptized, 'if,' said he, 'Brother Joseph will baptize me.' 'You are now,' replied Joseph, 'much fatigued, brother Partridge, and you had better rest today, and be baptized tomorrow.' 'Just as brother Joseph thinks best,' replied Mr. Partridge, 'I am ready at any time,' He was accordingly baptized the next day." (History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, p. 171).
[^4] An interesting question arises at this point. It is assumed by those who accept the Spaulding Manuscript theory for the origin of the Book of Mormon, through Rigdon, that to conceive and launch the book and the religious system developed in connection with it, required a superior intelligence, wider knowledge, and better education than Joseph Smith possessed, hence Sidney Rigdon is put forth as the man behind the scenes whose brain conceived and developed "Mormonism." But will someone explain, as I have elsewhere suggested—(American Historical Magazine, vol. iv, p. 180) how it is that Sidney Rigdon, as soon as the Book of Mormon is published and the church organized, though having been up to this point the "Master Spirit" of "Mormonism," the real Mephistopheles of the blasphemous drama—now suddenly falls into second place in the development of "Mormonism," nay, to third place, or even farther down the line, since Oliver Cowdery has been accepted and ordained as the second presiding elder in the church, while Rigdon is made merely the Prophet's scribe? It should be remembered that in 1827, the year in which these parties are usually supposed to have been brought together for the work of collaboration, Rigdon was thirty-four years old, Joseph Smith but twenty-two; and when the church was organized, Joseph was but twenty-five and Rigdon thirty-seven. With Rigdon's better education (which is granted), how comes it that this man, superior in education and knowledge of the world, and of greater age, consents to occupy this subordinate place to Joseph Smith? If Rigdon was the great moving spirit of "Mormonism" during its incubation, why did he not continue so after the Book of Mormon was printed and the church organized?
[^5] See Note 1, end of chapter.
[^6] I Nephi xiii:20-30.
[^7] See Notes 2, 3, end of chapter; but for a more extended consideration of this whole subject see the writer's New Witnesses for God, vol. iii, pp. 266-275.
[^8] See Note 1 at the end of the chapter.
[^9] Titus i:2.
[^10] Galatians iii, and Note, ch. xviii, this writing.
[^11] Alma xxii; 13.
[^12] See II Nephi, ch. ii; Book of Jarom, ch. i; Alma, xiii and lii.
[^13] Note 2, end of chapter; also this History, chapter xviii, and Note.
[^14] Statement of Joseph Smith in History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 133.
