B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XX

THE WESTERN MOVEMENT—THE EXODUS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK TO OHIO

EVENTS shift now to Fayette, where the Prophet was residing. Here, early in November, came Orson Pratt, [^1] brother of Parley P. Pratt, not yet twenty years of age, to inquire of the Lord what his duty was with reference to the then unfolding work. The revelation given to the Prophet concerning him reflects the spirit in which the New Dispensation had its inception:

ORSON PRATT'S CONTACT WITH THE WORK

"My son Orson, hearken and hear and behold what I, the Lord God, shall say unto you, even Jesus Christ, your Redeemer; the light and the life of the world; a light which shineth in darkness and the darkness comprehendeth it not; who so loved the world that he gave his own life, that as many as would believe might become the sons of God; wherefore you are my son, and blessed are you because you have believed; and more blessed are you because you are called of me to preach my gospel, to lift up your voice as with the sound of a trump, both long and loud, and cry repentance unto a crooked and perverse generation, preparing the way of the Lord for his second coming."

FIRST MEETING OF THE PROPHET WITH SIDNEY RIGDON AND EDWARD PARTRIDGE

Early in December Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge, [^2] two of the new converts from Kirtland, Ohio, though Partridge as yet was not baptized—came to Fayette, on the same errand that brought Orson Pratt there; viz., to inquire of the Lord through the Prophet. It was the first meeting between these men. The Prophet was favorably impressed with them, especially by Edward Partridge of whom he speaks as "a pattern of piety, and one of the Lord's great men." Subsequently, in a revelation, Partridge is spoken of as being a man whose heart is pure before the Lord—"for he is like Nathaniel of old, in whom there is no guile." Shortly after his arrival at Fayette—the next day, according to Lucy Smith—he was baptized by the Prophet. [^3]

The Prophet inquired of the Lord for these brethren according to their desire and received the divine word concerning them. Edward Partridge was called to the work of the ministry by revelation and was promised the Holy Ghost as his instructor in the things of God. Sidney Rigdon was approved and commended. Unconsciously in his previous labors in the ministry he had been sent forth even as John the Baptist, to prepare the way before the Lord; he had baptized with water unto repentance, but his converts received not the Holy Ghost; now he received a commandment that he should baptize by water and they should receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, "even as the apostles of old; and it shall come to pass that there shall be a great work in the land, even among the Gentiles." Sidney Rigdon was also appointed to be the Prophet's companion in the ministry and his scribe, [^4] "and the scripture shall be given," said the revelation, "even as they are in mine own bosom to the salvation of mine own elect."

INSPIRED "TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE" BEGUN

Sometime before the coming of Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge the Prophet had begun a revision of the Bible under the spirit of revelation. This revision is generally referred to as "an inspired translation;" with the coming of Sidney Rigdon and his appointment to be the Prophet's scribe this work was resumed with great earnestness. What is really the prelude to this inspired revision of the Bible was given in outline in chapter xviii of this History, dealing with what is there called the first chapter of the Book of Moses. This revelation, as already remarked, gives the source and ground work of the knowledge of Moses concerning divine things, and from which point the Prophet Joseph proceeds with his revision of the English Bible. [^5]

The reason assigned by the Prophet for undertaking this work of revision is that the Book of Mormon revealed the fact that many plain and precious truths respecting the gospel, as also many covenants of the Lord, had been taken away from the scriptures; [^6] and in some cases whole books referred to in the scriptures are missing from the collection in the Old and the New Testament, and are "lost books," [^7] so far as our knowledge of them is concerned.

The fragment of this work published by the church, [^8] makes it clear that not only was the mission of the Christ made known to the ancient patriarchs of the Bible, but that the complete scheme of Christian redemption through the atonement of the Christ was revealed and a dispensation of that gospel committed to Adam and succeeding patriarchs; notably to Enoch and to Noah. Thus in the earliest ages the gospel was known—and known as the plan of "eternal life which God, that cannot lie, promised before the world began;" [^9] but of which men, in subsequent ages, and because of transgression, lost the clear vision. Unto Moses a dispensation of that same gospel was given; and he sought to establish it in ancient Israel; but could not, because his people were not able in their fallen condition—but recently escaped from Egyptian bondage—to rightly apprehend the lofty theme of salvation by vicarious atonement, nor understand the triumph of love and mercy over the claims of inexorable law, on the conditions of acceptance, through faith of God's proffered grace, and repentance of sin. Therefore the "law of carnal commandments," a law of forms and ceremonies and symbols, was given in place of the gospel, to act as "a schoolmaster" to bring them to Christ. [^10]

HARMONY OF BIBLE AND BOOK OF MORMON

This view of the antiquity of the gospel of Christ is in harmony with the knowledge revealed in the Book of Mormon; for that book represents that its peoples, ages before the coming of Christ in the flesh, had knowledge through revelation both of the coming, and of the mission of the Christ, and knowledge also of the efficacy of the atonement. To them it was the "plan of redemption which was prepared from the foundation of the world, through Christ, for all who would believe on his name." [^11] They were taught that looking forward to the atonement, in faith, and accepting it in their hearts would be as effective for salvation as looking back upon it, in the same faith and acceptance, when it became an accomplished fact. [^12] That a knowledge of the gospel was had from the earliest ages, seems to have been clearly understood by Paul, as we have seen; [^13] but that was not the view either of medieval or modern christendom; and hence when it came to the modern world through Joseph Smith, it came with the force of a new revelation.

COMMANDMENT FOR THE REMOVAL OF THE CHURCH TO THE WEST

Late in December the work of inspired revision of the Bible was interrupted by a commandment to the Prophet and his associates to go to Ohio; "and this because of the enemy and for your sakes." Also a commandment was given that the whole church in the state of New York should remove to Ohio.

The year 1831 opened propitiously for the church. The first nine months of her existence had been fruitful of experience and had witnessed an expansion seldom attending upon religious movements in the first months of their existence. In New York, centered chiefly at Colesville, Fayette township, and the Smith home near Palmyra, the little flock numbered about seventy souls. [^14] A few more lived about Canaan in Columbia county, the fruits of Parley P. Pratt's ministry; and by this time—January, 1831—the disciples in Ohio had increased to several hundred.

On the second of January a conference of the saints in New York state was held at Fayette, and here the commandment to the church to gather to Ohio was repeated; and the purpose of God in dealing with his people was further disclosed by the declaration that it was his purpose to grant unto his saints "a land of promise, a land flowing with milk and honey, upon which there shall be no curse when the Lord cometh. And I will give it unto you for the land of your inheritance, if you seek it with all your hearts; and this shall be my covenant with you, ye shall have it for the land of your inheritance, and for the inheritance of your children forever, while the earth shall stand, and ye shall possess it again in eternity, no more to pass away." [^15]

This land of course was to be their "Zion," but location of the particular city, at this time, was not revealed. They must seek their promised inheritance by faith, even as Abraham of old, who by faith "when he was called to go out into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out, not knowing whither he went." [^16]

For the present, however, the saints were commanded to go to Ohio "and there," the Lord is represented as saying, "I will give you my law; and there you shall be endowed with power from on high; and from thence, whomsoever I will, shall go forth among all nations, and it shall be told them what they shall do; for I have a great work laid up in store, for Israel shall be saved, and I will lead them whithersoever I will, and no power shall stay my hand." [^17] Certain men were to be appointed by the voice of the church, "and they shall look to the poor and the needy, and administer to their relief, that they shall not suffer; and send them forth to the place which I have commanded them. And this shall be their work, to govern the affairs of the property of this church." Such farms as could be sold were to be sold; the others rented or left unrented if necessary; but the commandment to go in search of "Zion" was imperative, and all were to labor with their might to carry out the commandment.

By the latter part of January the Prophet with his wife were ready to start for Ohio, and in company with Elders Rigdon and Partridge they arrived at Kirtland about the first of February. The Prophet and his wife were received into the home of Newel K. Whitney, [^18] a young merchant of Kirtland, and a member of the church, where they remained several weeks, "and received every kindness and attention," writes the Prophet, "that could be expected." [^19]

There was plenty of work for the Prophet in Kirtland. Here the membership was about one hundred; with several hundred more in the surrounding country. By spring the membership had increased to more than one thousand in the several counties forming northeastern Ohio. [^20]

"COMMUNITY OF GOODS" AT KIRTLAND

In Kirtland the experiment of holding all property in common and living as one family—an experiment already existing before the gospel was preached to that people by Elders Cowdery, Pratt et al—had been continued up to the arrival of the Prophet. It might have been expected that this system of life, having some color of justification both upon New Testament and Book of Mormon authority, [^21] would have appealed to him. On the contrary however he advised against continuance of the experiment, and tactfully brought about the disorganization of "The Family." [^22]

It appears that following the proclamation of the gospel in Kirtland and vicinity, attended as it was by the declaration that the spiritual gifts of that gospel were to be enjoyed, as among the primitive Christians, led to some extravagances of religious frenzy and disorderly conduct; and while there went out exaggerated and highly colored reports of this exhibition of wild enthusiasm, yet there was enough of fact to bring reproach upon the church. The Prophet at once reproved this tendency to over zeal, and immediately corrected the abuses that arose under it. [^23]

THE FIRST BISHOP OF THE CHURCH

Early in February there occurred an unlooked for development in the church organization: Edward Partridge was called by revelation to forsake his business, merchandizing, and accept the office of "Bishop" in the church, to which office he was required to devote all his time and energies. [^24] This appointment of Edward Partridge to be a bishop is called an unlooked for development in organization, because there was nothing in preceding revelations that intimated that bishops would constitute any part of the church organization and government.

Shortly after this the Lord fulfilled the promise made before the Prophet and his associates left New York for Ohio, viz., "And there will I give unto you my law." This came in the form of an elaborate revelation in the month of February.

A digest of it will be of interest, even to those who will not be willing to accept it as a revelation, since it will at least be a setting forth of the aspiration, the aims and purposes of Joseph Smith and his associates. If it be true that as a man thinketh so is he, and that out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh, then sure it must be that those who essay to set forth the "law of the Lord" must reveal both their conceptions of the character of God, and their own ideals of his righteousness. In the "law" one may find the spring and source of Latter-day Saint ideals for personal and community life. It is important to contemplate it. The revelation was given in the presence of twelve elders of the church who had assembled under commandment for the express purpose of receiving it, and agreeing upon it. Following is the proposed digest:

REVELATION OF THE MORAL LAW OF THE GOSPEL [^25]

Prelude to the Law: "Hearken, O, Ye Elders of my church, who have assembled yourselves together in my name, even Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, the Savior of the world, inasmuch as they believe on my name, and keep my commandments. * * * Hearken and hear and obey the law which I shall give unto you."

The Moral Law: "And now, behold, I speak unto the church: Thou shalt not kill; and he that kills shall not have forgiveness in this world, nor in the world to come. And again I say, thou shalt not kill; but he that killeth shall die. * * * If any person among you shall kill, he shall be delivered up and dealt with according to the laws of the land; for remember that he hath no forgiveness, and it shall be proven according to the laws of the land.

"Thou shalt not steal; and he that stealeth and will not repent shall be cast out. * * * And if a man or a woman shall rob, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of the land. And if he or she shall steal, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of the land.

"Thou shalt not lie, he that lieth and will not repent, shall be cast out. * * * And if he or she shall lie, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of the land. And if he or she do any manner of iniquity, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law, even that of God."

Simplicity in Apparel: "Thou shalt not be proud in thy heart; let all thy garments be plain, and their beauty, the beauty of the work of thine own hands."

Cleanliness: "Let all things be done in cleanliness before me."

Industry: "Thou shalt not be idle; for he that is idle shall not eat the bread nor wear the garments of the laborer."

Evil Speaking: "Thou shalt not speak evil of thy neighbor nor do him any harm. Thou knowest my laws concerning these things are given in my scriptures; he that sinneth and repenteth not, shall be cast out."

Chastity: "Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else; And he that looketh upon a woman to lust after her, shall deny the faith and shall not have the Spirit, and if he repents not he shall be cast out. Thou shalt not commit adultery; and he that committeth adultery and repenteth not, shall be cast out; but he that has committed adultery and repents with all his heart, and forsaketh it; and doeth it no more, thou shalt forgive; but he that doeth it again, he shall not be forgiven, but shall be cast out."

Offenses—Personal and Public: "And if thy brother or sister offend thee, thou shalt take him or her between him or her and thee alone; and if he or she confess, thou shalt be reconciled. And if he or she confess not, thou shalt deliver him or her up unto the church, not to the members, but to the elders. And it shall be done in a meeting, and that not before the world.

"And if thy brother or sister offend many, he or she shall be chastened before many. And if any one offend openly, he or she shall be rebuked openly, that he or she may be ashamed. And if he or she confess not, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of God. If any shall offend in secret, he or she shall be rebuked in secret, that he or she may have opportunity to confess in secret to him or her whom he or she has offended, and to God, that the church may not speak reproachfully of him or her."

Care for the Poor: "Behold thou wilt remember the poor and consecrate of thy properties for their support." That which a man had to impart unto them was to be given with "a covenant and a deed" which could not be broken: "and inasmuch as ye impart of your substance to the poor, ye do it unto me," saith the Lord.

Stewardships: Every man is made accountable unto the Lord a "steward over his own property, or that which he has received by consecration, as much as is sufficient for himself and family." But no community of goods is contemplated: "Thou shalt not take thy brother's garment: thou shalt pay for that which thou shalt receive of thy brother." If more is obtained in the management of the stewardship than is necessary for his support, the surplus is to be given into the Lord's store house.

Care of the Sick—Community Sympathy: "And whosoever among you are sick, and have not faith to be healed, but believe, shall be nourished with all tenderness, with herbs and mild food, and that not by the hand of an enemy. And the elders of the church, two or more, shall be called, and shall pray for and lay their hands upon them in my name; and if they die they shall die unto me, and if they live they shall live unto me. Thou shalt live together in love, insomuch that thou shalt weep for the loss of them that die, and more especially for those that have not hope of a glorious resurrection. And it shall come to pass that those that die in me, shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them; and they that die not in me, wo unto them, for their death is bitter.

"And again, it shall come to pass, that he that hath faith in me to be healed, and is not appointed unto death, shall be healed; he who hath faith to see shall see; he who hath faith to hear shall hear; the lame who have faith to leap shall leap; and they who have not faith to do these things, but believe in me, have power to become my sons; and inasmuch as they break not my laws, thou shalt bear their infirmities."

THE LAW OF CONSECRATION INTRODUCED

Such was the law given to the church in Ohio. Of its excellence as constituting or recognizing both personal and community moral obligations, comment is unnecessary. The statement of it is its own vindication. One thing should be remarked, however, in respect of the law of consecration mentioned above. It was this law which doubtless led many to suppose that the Latter-day Saints sought to establish community of goods, and malice at different times has charged also community of wives. But community of goods is not involved in the principles of consecration and stewardship as above set forth, or subsequently developed either in doctrine or practice. The principle underlying this doctrine of the church is recognition of the Lord as Creator, Proprietor and Owner of the earth and the fulness thereof, and man as but a steward in his possessions. The earth is the Lord's by proprietary right. His because he created it, and sustains it from age to age by his power, and makes it fruitful by his bounty. By the act of consecration, according to the above law, and as afterwards developed, a man visibly and actually recognized God as proprietor of the earth; and by receiving back from such consecration a stewardship from God's visible agency, the church, he acknowledged himself but a steward over that which he possesses, but he is accountable to God only for his management of that stewardship. If from that management there arose beyond what was needful for his personal use and that of his family, that surplus could again be consecrated to the Lord's store house to be used in the granting of other stewardships or developing enterprises involving community interests. In other words the surplus product of the community's industry was to be made available for community interests.

NOTES

This was a work that occupied the Prophet for a number of years, but it was never published in his lifetime, excepting some fragments of it, and it is doubtful if he ever really completed, to his entire satisfaction, the stupendous work of revision. The evidences that might be quoted in favor of his having completed the work are, first, an entry made in his Journal—"I completed the translation and review of the New Testament, on the 2nd of February, 1833; and sealed it up, no more to be opened till it arrived in Zion"—Independence, Missouri (History of the Church, Period I, vol. I, p. 324). It was the intention to have this revised version of the New Testament printed at Independence in connection with the Book of Mormon, hence the revision of the New Testament was completed before the Old; but before the work of printing could even be commenced, the persecutions arose which made it impossible. Second: In a letter from Kirtland to "The Brethren in Zion," under date of July 2nd, 1833, the Prophet writes: "We this day finished the translation of the scriptures, for which we return our gratitude to our heavenly Father" (History of the Church, Period I, Vol. I, p. 368). This must have reference to the Old Testament since the New Testament had been "completed" on the 2nd of February preceding. Yet when questioned through letter by the brethren at Independence as to printing the revised New Testament, the Prophet answered: "It cannot be done until we can attend to it ourselves, and this we will do as soon as the Lord permits" (History of the Church, Period I, Vol. I, p. 365); a sense of incompletion and a desire to review the work again may have been the motive for having it printed under his own immediate supervision. In a "memorial" of the Prophet's to the high council at Nauvoo, under date of 13th of June, 1840, he asks the church to erect an office in which he might more immediately pursue his spiritual callings, among other things "commence the work of translating the Egyptian records [some records from Egypt which came into his possession in Kirtland, 1835, of which more later], the Bible and wait upon the Lord for such revelations as may be suited to the conditions and circumstances of the church." Including "the Bible" in the translations yet to be done clearly indicates, notwithstanding previous expressions about "completing" it, "finishing" it, etc., that he did not at this date—June 18th, 1840,—regard it as a work wholly ended. On this subject George Q. Cannon in his Life of Joseph Smith, (page 142) says: "We have heard President Brigham Young state that the Prophet, before his death, had spoken to him about going through the translation of the scriptures again and perfecting it upon points of doctrine which the Lord had restrained him from giving in plainness and fulness at the time of which we write"—(Feb. 2nd, 1833).

On this revised version of the Jewish scriptures the church has published several chapters of St. Matthew, including in it the last verse of the 23rd chapter. These extracts are found in a collection of sacred writings called The Pearl of Great Price: A Selection from the Revelations, Translations and Narrations of Joseph Smith, first published by Franklin D. Richards in England, 1851. The parts of the inspired revision published include the chapters referred to and analyzed in chapter xviii of this writing, and thence the revision extends to the commandment to Noah to build the ark.

Some of the sons of Joseph Smith through the authority of what is known as the "Reorganized Church" have published what purports to be the entire translation of the Old and New Testament from the manuscript that was left with the Prophet intended to give it.

The following are some books of the Old Testament referred to in the text of this History that are missing.

The "scriptures" that existed in the days of Abraham, older than the five books of Moses, for Abraham was before Moses. These scriptures are referred to by Paul as follows: "And the scriptures foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham." (Gal. iii:8).

The book of the Covenant, through which Moses instructed Israel. (Exo. xxiv:7).

The book of the Wars of the Lord. (Num. xxi:14).

The book of Jasher. (Josh. x:13, and II Sam. i:18).

The book of the Manner of the Kingdom. (I Sam. x:25).

Books containing three thousand proverbs, a thousand and five songs, a treatise on natural history by Solomon. (I Kings iv:32, 33).

The acts of Solomon. (I Kings xi:41).

The book of Gad the Seer. (I Chron. xxix:29).

The book of Nathan the prophet. (I Chron. xxix:29 and II Chron. ix:29).

The prophecy of Ahijah, the Shilonite. (II Chron. ix:29).

The Visions of Iddo the Seer. (II Chron. ix:29).

The book of Shemaiah the prophet. (II Chron. xii:15).

The story of the prophet Iddo. (II Chron. xiii:22).

The book of Jehu. (II Chron. xx:34).

Prophecy of Enoch: Speaking of characters who are like "raging waves of the sea foaming out their own shame," Jude says, "And Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied of these, saying, Behold the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his saints, to execute judgment upon all, etc," (Jude 15, 16). From this it appears that Enoch had a revelation concerning the glorious coming of the Son of God to judgment. May not the prophecy of Enoch have been among the "scripture" with which Abraham was acquainted?

Another Epistle of Jude. "When I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you that ye should contend earnestly for the faith once delivered unto the saints." (Jude 3). We have but one epistle of Jude. Would not the epistle on the "common salvation" be as important as the one and the only one we have from Jude's pen?

Another Epistle to the Ephesians: In Ephesians iii and 3rd, Paul alludes to another epistle which he had written to that people, but of which the world has no knowledge except this reference to it, which is made by its author. This epistle contained a revelation from God.

Another Epistle to the Laodiceans: "When this epistle (Collosians) is read among you, cause that it be read also in the church of the Laodiceans, and that ye likewise read the epistle from Laodicea" (Col. iv:16). The Epistle to the Laodiceans is among the scriptures that are lost.

Another Epistle to the Corinthians: In the first letter to the Corinthians is this statement: "I wrote unto you in an epistle not to keep company with fornicators" (I Cor. v:9). From this it would appear that our so-called First Epistle to the Corinthians is really not the first, since Paul in it speaks of a former letter he had written, and which was doubtless as good scripture as the two which have been preserved.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] That the Lord's servants might give to him a witness of their obedience; See History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, pp. 175-179. Cannon's Life of Joseph Smith the Prophet, p. 113.
[^2] That they might have the honor of laying the foundation of Zion; Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lii.
[^3] That they might bear record in all their travels hereafter, where the city of Zion shall stand; Ibid, xliii.
[^4] That the testimony of these things might go forth from "the city of the heritage of God." [^14] "This sect of Christians arose in England, and Ann Lee has the credit of being its founder. They derive their name from their manner of worship, which is performed by singing and dancing, and clapping their hands in regular time, to a novel but rather pleasant kind of music. This sect was persecuted in England, and came to America in 1774. They first settled in Watervliet, near Albany, New York. They claim revelations from heaven, or gifts from the Holy Spirit, which direct them in the choice of their leaders, and in other important concerns. Their dress and manners are similar to those of the Society of Friends (Quakers); hence they are often called 'Shaking Quakers'." (Hayward's Book of All Religions, pp. 84-85.)
[^5] Scraps of Biography, Newel Knight's Journal, pp. 70-71. "The church at Thompson was involved in difficulty because of the rebellion of Lemon Copley who would not do as he had previously agreed; which thing confused the whole church" (John Whitmer's History of the Church, Ms., ch. viii).
[^6] Pratt's Autobiography, p. 65.
[^7] Pratt's Autobiography, p. 54.
[^8] Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 56-61.
[^9] This has reference to the line separating the white settlers of Missouri from the Indian tribes settled west of the Missouri line, who are "Israelites," according to the Book of Mormon, for which the term "Jew" here stands.
[^10] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lvii.
[^11] William Wine Phelps, born at Hanover, Morris county, New Jersey, February 17th, 1792. Consequently he was a man of about forty years of age when he joined the church. Previous to coming to Kirtland he had resided in New York state. He had been somewhat active in politics, the editor of a partisan paper, and had aspired to be a candidate for the office of lieutenant-governor of the state of New York. He was a writer of some ability, and a number of hymns the most characteristic of Latter-day Saint thought and aspiration stand to his credit.
[^12] John Whitmer's History of the Church, Ms., ch. ix.
[^13] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lviii:61-64.
[^14] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lviii:1-13.
[^15] See page 254.
[^16] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lviii.
[^17] Chapter xx.
[^18] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lviii:18-20.
[^19] It throws a side light on the character of the Prophet, and will also give an insight into the secret of that influence which he always exercised among his people, to give the account of the Prophet's arrival in Kirtland as it stands in the tradition of the Whitney family: "About the first of February, 1831, a sleigh containing four persons drove through the streets of Kirtland and drew up in front of the store of Gilbert and Whitney. One of the men, a young and stalwart personage, alighted, and springing up the steps walked into the store and to where the junior partner was standing. 'Newel K. Whitney! Thou art the man!' he exclaimed, extending his hand cordially, as if to an old familiar acquaintance. 'You have the advantage of me,' replied the merchant, as he mechanically took the proffered hand, 'I could not call you by name as you have me.' 'I am Joseph the Prophet,' said the stranger, smiling. 'You've prayed me here, now what do you want of me?' The Prophet, it is said, while in the East, had seen the Whitneys in vision praying for his coming to Kirtland." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 146).
[^20] Parley P. Pratt's Autobiography, p. 50.
[^21] Acts ii:41-47; also Acts iv:32-37; Acts v:1-7. III Nephi, ch. xxvi:19, 20. IV Nephi i:1-3.
[^22] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, pp. 146-7.
[^23] Even anti-"Mormon" writers admit that Joseph Smith was astonished at the alleged spiritual manifestations among his following at Kirtland, proving that his religious ideas and the system he was developing contemplated no such religious frenzy and unseemly conduct as had broken out in that place. Also these same writers admit that "He told them [his disciples] that he had inquired of the Lord concerning the matter, and had been informed that it was all the work of the devil; * * * the disturbances therefore ceased." (Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, first edition, pp. 104, 116.)
[^24] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xli.
[^25] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xlii.
