B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XXI

THE ZION OF THE WESTERN WORLD

BY early spring of 1831 the church in Kirtland and vicinity had increased to more than one thousand in membership. The New York saints also began to arrive in the spring, and by May all had reached Kirtland, or its vicinity.

GATHERING AT KIRTLAND

A conference of the church had been appointed for June. It convened on Friday the third and continued until Sunday; the congregation is said to have numbered two thousand. [^1] During the conference a revelation was received appointing by name twenty-eight elders to travel through the western country in pairs, preaching the gospel by the way, baptizing and confirming by the water's side those who would receive the truth. These elders were to meet in conference in western Missouri, "upon the land," said the Lord, "which I will consecrate unto my people, which are a remnant of Jacob, and those who are heirs according to the covenant." [^2]

Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon were to be among those who were to go upon this mission, and if faithful the Lord promised to reveal to them the place of the saints' inheritance in Missouri. "I will hasten the city in its time," said the Lord, "and will crown the faithful with joy." [^3] And so the elders went forth upon this mission.

Meantime the Colesville saints, about sixty in number, led from Colesville, New York, by Newel Knight, and who had settled at Thompson, sixteen miles northeast of Kirtland, met with some disappointment growing out of the bad faith of one Lemon Copley, a "Shaking Quaker," [^4] residing at Thompson. He had under his control an extensive tract of land which he agreed to allow the Colesville saints to occupy, and a contract was agreed upon; but the terms of this agreement Copley soon afterwards broke, and threw all concerned into confusion. [^5] Copley had joined the church and had been ordained to the priesthood. There was a large settlement of the "Shakers" located near the city of Cleveland, and Elders Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt and Copley were sent on a mission to them, but they would not hear much less receive the gospel. [^6] Copley himself, also turned away from the faith, which doubtless led to the breaking of his engagements with the Colesville saints at Thompson. Under these circumstances the Colesville branch resolved to remove in a body under the leadership of Newel Knight to the land of promise, western Missouri. They settled about twelve miles west of Independence, Jackson county, on the edge of an extensive prairie in Kaw township, now part of Kansas City, arriving there the latter part of June.

Joseph Smith arrived in Missouri about the middle of July. Here he met with the Lamanite mission sent from New York less than a year before. The Prophet, however, had already heard the report of their labors through Elder Parley P. Pratt, who had been sent back to Ohio, early in the spring, to report the mission's progress.

THE LAMANITE MISSION IN WESTERN MISSOURI

It appears that after leaving Kirtland in November, 1830, the Lamanite mission visited the Wyandot tribe of Indians near Sandusky, Ohio, with whom they spent several days. "We were well received," writes Elder Parley P. Pratt, "and had an opportunity of laying before them the record of their forefathers, which we did. They rejoiced in the tidings, bid us Godspeed and desired us to write to them in relation to our success among the tribes further west, who had already removed to the Indian territory, where these expected soon to go." [^7]

On arriving at Independence two of the company secured employment, while the other three crossed the frontier line and began their labors among the Indians. They visited the Shawnees, spending one night with them, and the next day crossed the Kansas river and began their labors among the Delawares. They sought an interview with the chief of the Delawares, known among the whites as "Chief Anderson." He was the grand sachem of ten nations or tribes, and consequently possessed of large influence. He had always opposed the introduction of missionaries among his people, and therefore did not at first extend a very hearty welcome to the brethren. However, through an interpreter, the brethren made known their errand and explained to him the Book of Mormon and the information it contained for his people. They asked to be heard before a full council of his nation, a proposition which the chief took under consideration until the next day. Next morning the conversation with the Delaware chief was renewed, but he was not inclined at first to call the council. However as he began to understand better the nature of the Book of Mormon, he changed his mind and asked the brethren to suspend their conversation until the council could be assembled. A runner was dispatched to the tribes and in about an hour forty leading men were assembled and seated in grave silence to hear the message concerning the book of their forefathers.

MISSION AMONG THE LAMANITES

Oliver Cowdery addressed them at some length, during which he detailed the history of their forefathers to them, their ancient glory and power, and the cause of their decline and present fallen state. He announced the discovery of the record containing an account of these ancient events, and recited the prophecies the book contained of future deliverance of the red man from his thraldom of savage life with its attendant physical hardships and moral and spiritual limitations. In reply the venerable chief of the Delawares said:

"We feel truly thankful to our white friends who have come so far and been at such pains to tell us good news, and especially this new news concerning the book of our forefathers it makes us glad in here"—placing his hand on his heart. "It is now winter; we are new settlers in this place; the snow is deep; our cattle and horses are dying; our wigwams are poor; we have much to do in the spring; to build houses and fence and make farms; but we will build a council house and meet together, and you shall read to us and teach us more concerning the book of our fathers, and the will of the Great Spirit."

Elder Parley P. Pratt in his report of the mission says:

"We continued for several days to instruct the old chief and many of his tribe. The interest became more and more intense on their part, from day to day, until at length nearly the whole tribe began to feel a spirit of inquiry and excitement on the subject. We found several among them who could read, and to them we gave copies of the book, explaining to them that it was the book of their forefathers. Some began to rejoice exceedingly and took great pains to tell the news to others in their own language. The excitement now reached the frontier settlements in Missouri, and stirred up the jealousy and envy of the Indian agents and sectarian missionaries to that degree that we were soon ordered out of the Indian country as disturbers of the peace, and even threatened with the military in case of non-compliance. We accordingly departed from the Indian country and came over the line, and commenced laboring in Jackson county, Missouri, among the whites. * * * Thus ended our first Indian mission, in which we had preached the gospel in its fulness and distributed the record of their forefathers among three tribes, viz.: The Catteraugus Indians, near Buffalo, N. Y.; the Wyandots, of Ohio; and the Delawares, west of Missouri." [^8]

THE PROPHET'S ARRIVAL AT INDEPENDENCE

"The meeting of our brethren, who had long waited our arrival," says the Prophet, referring to meeting with the members of the Lamanite mission and also with the saints of the Colesville branch, "was a glorious one, and moistened with many tears. It seemed good and pleasant for brethren to meet together in unity."

The questions uppermost in every mind on arriving in western Missouri were, Where is the place of our inheritance? Where is the city of Zion to be built? Where shall the temple stand? The saints were not long left in doubt as to these questions; for a few days after the arrival of the Prophet he received a revelation in which it was announced that Missouri was the land which the Lord had consecrated for the gathering of his saints, and "the place which is now called Independence is the center place, and the spot for the temple is lying westward, upon a lot which is not far from the court house." And this instruction follows:

"Wherefore it is wisdom that the land should be purchased by the saints; and also every tract lying westward even unto the line running directly between Jew [^9] and Gentile. And also every tract bordered by the prairies, inasmuch as my disciples are enabled to buy lands. Behold, this is wisdom, that they may obtain it for an everlasting inheritance." [^10]

This quotation definitely establishes the fact that there was not intention on the part of Joseph Smith or the saints to procure their inheritances in the land of Zion other than by purchase. Sidney Gilbert of the mercantile firm of Gilbert and Whitney was appointed an agent of the church to purchase lands for the saints. Bishop Partridge was appointed to divide unto the saints their inheritance. William W. Phelps [^11] was appointed to be a printer to the church, and Oliver Cowdery was to assist him. Phelps with his family came to Kirtland on the eve of the departure of the elders of the western mission for Missouri. He said he came to throw in his lot with the church "and to do the will of the Lord." He was at once appointed to go with the Prophet to Missouri.

The first Sunday after the arrival of the elders of this western mission at Independence, a public meeting was held over the western boundary of Missouri, and Elder Phelps delivered an address upon the New Dispensation of the gospel. Such a congregation was present as could only be possible in an American frontier district—Indians, Negroes (then slaves), and all classes and conditions of people from the surrounding counties—Universalists, Atheists, Deists, Presbyterians, Methodists, Baptists, both priests and people. At the conclusion of the services two persons were baptized.

THE BEGINNING OF ZION OF THE LAST DAYS

On the 2nd of August, in the Colesville branch of the church, Kaw township, the foundation of the first house was laid by the saints in Jackson county. It was to be a log structure, and the first log was carried by twelve men, of whom the Prophet was one, in honor of the twelve tribes of Israel. Sidney Rigdon by prayer consecrated the land to the gathering of the saints. "Do you," he asked the assembled saints—

"Do you receive this land for the land of your inheritance with thankful hearts from the Lord?"

Answer from all: "We do."

"Do you pledge yourselves to keep the law of God on this land which you never have kept in your own lands?"

"We do."

"Do you pledge yourselves to see that others of your brethren who shall come hither keep the laws of God?"

"We do."

After prayer, he arose and said: "I now pronounce this land consecrated and dedicated unto the Lord for a possession and inheritance for the saints, and for all the faithful servants of the Lord to the remotest ages of time, in the name of Jesus Christ, having authority from him. Amen." [^12]

"It was a season of joy," writes the Prophet, "and afforded a glimpse of the future which time will yet unveil to the satisfaction of the faithful."

The day following the Prophet dedicated the temple site in Independence, located "a little west of the courthouse." A scant half mile west of the courthouse one comes to a slightly crowning hill—"A gentle hill of mild declivity"—to which tradition points as the place so dedicated. In course of the ceremonies the 87th Psalm was read:

"His foundation is the holy mountains.

The Lord loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.

Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God.

I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me; behold Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia: this man was born there.

And of Zion it shall be said, this and that man was born in her; and the Highest himself shall establish her.

The Lord shall count when he writeth up the people, that this man was born there.

As well the singers as the players on instruments shall be there: all my springs [i. e. hopes] are in thee."

On the fourth of August a conference was held in Kaw township, at which quite a number of the elders of the western mission were present. With the close of the conference the purpose for which the mission had been appointed, viz., definitely locating the land of Zion and dedicating it to the Lord for the gathering of the saints, was accomplished, and the leading elders of the church, who were not appointed to remain in the land, began making preparations for returning to Kirtland.

All the elders who started from Kirtland had not arrived in time to participate in this conference, or the important events which preceded it. Arrangements were therefore made by which upon their arrival another conference was to be held at which Bishop Edward Partridge would preside, after which the elders were to return to the east bearing testimony by the way of what they had learned concerning Zion. [^13]

PURPOSE OF THE MISSION TO WESTERN MISSOURI

There has obtained very generally misapprehensions concerning the purpose of this mission to western Missouri. It has been usually supposed that the purpose was to proceed immediately to take possession of the land, and to commence the glorious city which is the subject of some of the Book of Mormon prophecies, and prophecies in the revelations to Joseph Smith; which prophecies generally allude to the city of Zion in her completed and glorified state, not to the humble beginnings in which the city might have its origin. Fortunately for the history of this event the revelations received by Joseph Smith about this time and on the spot, clearly manifest that he had no misapprehensions as to the purpose of the Lord in assembling his servants in western Missouri on this occasion; nor was there any ground for disappointment in his conceptions about Zion, because the present was a day, apparently, of simple and small things. In a revelation to these elders of the western mission the Lord said:

"Blessed is he that keepeth my commandments, whether in life or in death; and he that is faithful in tribulation, the reward of the same is greater in the kingdom of heaven. Ye cannot behold with your natural eyes, for the present time, the design of your God concerning those things which shall come hereafter, and the glory which shall follow after much tribulation. For after much tribulation cometh the blessings."

The Lord then proceeds to state the reasons for which he had brought them to the place of the city of Zion, which summarized are as follows:

It may be thought that this was not much to be accomplished by the western mission, and yet from these early days of the New Dispensation until now the ministry of the church because of the things which were then done on the land have been able to testify of the fixed decree of God to build in that place a Holy City for the western world—Zion!—yet to be a center of spiritual light and truth and power. To know this and to be witnesses of it to the world is a great, yea, a very great thing; and not unworthy of the toil and sacrifices of these first elders. That Joseph Smith, however, clearly understood that not all the elders and saints would immediately receive their inheritance in western Missouri is evident from the revelation last quoted, which, after giving various directions to certain elders who were to remain in Zion, says: "Concerning the residue of the elders of my church, the time has not yet come, for many years, for them to receive their inheritance in this land."

OBTAIN THE LAND OF ZION BY PURCHASE

That there was any intention to obtain this land of Zion by any other than by legitimate means, by purchase, has already been made apparent, [^15] and is further evident from the following passage from the revelation just quoted: "Let there be an agent appointed by the voice of the church unto the church in Ohio, to receive monies to purchase the lands in Zion." It is also announced as the will of the Lord that "the disciples, and the children of men should open their hearts, even to purchase this whole region of country, as soon as time will permit. * * * Let all things be done in order; and let the privileges of the land be made known from time to time by the bishop or the agent of the church. And let the work of the gathering be not in haste, nor by flight, but let it be done as it shall be counseled by the elders of the church at the conferences, according to the knowledge which they receive from time to time." [^16]

Nor in this movement was there to be encouraged any lawlessness, nor usurpation of the function of the state by the church. True, Bishop Partridge was appointed a judge in Israel—in the church—"to divide the lands of the heritage of God unto his children," under the law of consecration and stewardship, explained in a former chapter; [^17] and he was "to judge the Lord's people" by the testimony of the just, and by the assistance of his counselors, according to the laws of the kingdom which are given by the prophets of God; "for verily I say unto you," said the Lord, "my law shall be kept on this land. Let no man think he is ruler, but let God rule him that judgeth, according to the counsel of his own will." [^18] But all this had reference to authority and administration within the church organization as will appear from the verses of the revelation immediately following the last passage quoted, viz.:

"Let no man break the laws of the land, for he that keepeth the laws of God hath no need to break the laws of the land:

Wherefore, be subject to the powers that be, until he reigns whose right it is to reign, [the Christ] and subdues all enemies under his feet.

Behold, the laws which ye have received from my hand are the laws of the church, and in this light ye shall hold them forth. Behold, here is wisdom."

All this demonstrates that there were no ulterior motives in the gathering of the saints to western Missouri. Peace, good order, respect for the rights of others, obedience to the laws of the land, were enjoined; and there was to be no usurpation of the functions of the state by reason of the revelations being received through the Prophet—these were "the laws of the church," not laws for the state, nor were they designed to annul the laws of the state, or the nation—"Behold the laws which ye have received from my hand are the laws of the church, and as such ye shall hold them forth. Behold, here is wisdom!" Can any one doubt it?

THE FAVORED LAND FOR THE CITY OF ZION

It was a new world into which these New England and eastern people had come, when they reached western Missouri. It was to them like some limitless paradise, these immense alternating stretches of open, rolling prairie and densely wooded water courses, as compared with the closed-in, heavily wooded hill country from which they had come. It would not be difficult to regard western Missouri in 1831 as a promised land, fit to be the inheritance of the saints of the Most High, the site of the new world's New Jerusalem—Zion, the capital to be of the Christ-empire in the western world. It was a fitting environment for such a conception.

Independence, designated as the center place of Zion, is located among the rolling hills of alternating prairie and woodland in the northern part of Jackson county, about three or four miles south of the Missouri river. It is situated midway between two small rivers which flow northward into the Missouri; the stream on the west is called Big Blue, and the one on the east Little Blue. Independence in 1831, though the county seat of Jackson county, was but a small frontier town. It had a courthouse built of brick, two or three merchant stores and fifteen or twenty dwelling houses, mostly built of logs hewed on both sides.

Jackson county itself is in ninety-four west longitude, and thirty-nine north latitude, being nearly equally distant from the northern and southern boundaries of the United States. It is also about midway between the Atlantic and the Pacific oceans, making it a central point within the United States; and, with reference to both North and South America, a central place in this western hemisphere. The climate is delightful, being mild at least three-fourths of the year. The soil of western Missouri is, for the most part, a rich, black loam, in places intermingled with sand and clay, and is from two to ten feet in depth, with a sub-soil of a fine quality of clay. Both climate and soil are favorable to the production of all the fruits and vegetables of the warm temperate climate. In the popular conception, Missouri is regarded as an agricultural state, yet it has a greater variety of mineral products than most states of the American Union and few states surpass it in the aggregate of its mineral output; and fewer still exceed it in the production of its mills and factories. North and west of the location designated by Joseph Smith as the central gathering place for the Lord's people are now the great states of Iowa, Kansas and Oklahoma. Surely there was nothing lacking to this location so far as richness and variety of natural resources were concerned; and nothing so far as variety, beauty and grandeur of landscape are concerned; nor central position, whether with reference to the United States or the continent of North America-all advantages that arise from these circumstances are abundantly present, and vindicate that wisdom, whether men shall account it merely human or born of a divine inspiration, that led Joseph Smith to establish his people in Jackson county as the place of their inheritance, and the location of the "Holy City" of the western world-the Zion of God.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxi.
[^2] The subject of this revelation and prophecy is considered at length by the writer in an article under the title, The Fulfillment of a Prophecy: The Testimony of the Floods, Improvement Era, September, 1903. See also Note, end of this chapter.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxiii; 27-32.
[^4] See chapter xxi.
[^5] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxiii:14.
[^6] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxiii.
[^7] The circumstance here referred to is thus related in Hayden's History of the Disciples (a Campbellite work), pp. 250-1. "Ezra Booth, of Mantua, a Methodist preacher of much more than ordinary culture, and with strong natural abilities, in company with his wife, Mr. and Mrs. Johnson, and some other citizens of this place, (Hiram) visited Smith at his home in Kirtland, in 1831. Mrs. Johnson had been afflicted for some time with a lame arm, and was not at the time of the visit able to lift her hand to her head. The party visited Smith partly out of curiosity, and partly to see for themselves what there might be in the new doctrine. During the interview the conversation turned on the subject of supernatural gifts, such as were conferred in the days of the apostles. Some one said, 'Here is Mrs. Johnson with a lame arm; has God given any power to men now on earth to cure her?' A few moments later, when the conversation had turned in another direction, Smith arose, and walking across the room, and taking Mrs. Johnson by the hand, said in the most solemn and impressive manner: 'Woman, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, I command thee to be whole,' and immediately left the room. The company were awe-stricken at the infinite presumption of the man, and the calm assurance with which he spoke. The sudden mental and moral shock—I know not how better to explain the well-attested fact, electrified the rheumatic arm—Mrs. Johnson at once lifted it with ease, and on her return home the next day she was able to do her washing without difficulty or pain."
[^8] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 216.
[^9] They are reproduced in Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 1834, and also in Anti-Mormon Tracts, No. 6, by R. B. Neal of Grayson, Kentucky, 1901.
[^10] The Johnson family was one of the typical American families of old colonial times, sensible, honest, well-to-do. "My grandfather, Israel Johnson," writes Luke Johnson in an autobiographical sketch, "lived in Chesterfield, New Hampshire, and was much respected by his neighbors for his honesty, integrity and industry. My father, John Johnson, was born in Chesterfield, New Hampshire, April 11th, 1779. He followed the occupation of farming on a large scale, and was noted for paying his debts and living independently. He moved from Pomfret, Vermont, to Hiram, Portage county, Ohio. He was connected with the Methodist church for about five years previous to receiving the gospel." Luke Johnson then relates the circumstance of the Prophet, through the power of God, healing his mother of chronic rheumatism in the arm, which converted Ezra Booth as already related, and then resumes: "My father was satisfied in regard to the truth of Mormonism, and was baptized by Joseph Smith, Jun., in the winter of 1830-1, and furnished him and his family a home, while he translated a portion of the Bible." (Millennial Star, vol. xxvi, pp. 834-6.) A photogravure of the Johnson home is published with this chapter.
[^11] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxx.
[^12] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 236, footnote.
[^13] At first Oliver Cowdery alone was appointed to take the collected revelations and a considerable sum of money to Independence for the purchase of lands, etc. But in a revelation given about the time appointed for him to start it was said: "It is wisdom in me that he should not be entrusted with the commandments and the monies which he shall carry unto the land of Zion, except one go with him who will be true and faithful; wherefore, I the Lord will that my servant John Whitmer, shall go with my servant Oliver Cowdery." (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxix.) This passage has been much discussed by anti-"Mormon" writers as implying distrust in Oliver Cowdery's honesty, and hence one "who will be true and faithful" must go with him. The fact was that much of the journey between Kirtland and Independence, or Zion, was through a sparsely settled country, the western portion of it through a frontier country where there is always a gathering, more or less, of lawless people; and it was at considerable risk that a person traveled through such a country, especially when alone and carrying money with him. It was wisdom then, for the sake of Oliver Cowdery, and to insure the safety of the money and the sacred things he was to carry with him, that one should go with him that would be a true and faithful companion, hence the appointment of John Whitmer.
[^15] See History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 217, and footnote.
[^16] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxviii. This does not commit the church to the position that every word spoken by its ministry is the word of the Lord and Scripture; it is only "When" God's servants "speak as moved upon by the Holy Ghost." that it is so; and "When" should be emphasized.
[^17] See Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxviii, for the several items in the text above.
[^18] Ibid, sec. lxviii:14.
