B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XXII

PREDICTION OF DESTRUCTION UPON THE WESTERN WATERS—DEVELOPMENTS AT KIRTLAND—THE VISION OF THE THREE GLORIES

THE return of such elders of the western mission as had not been appointed to remain in Missouri was begun on the 9th of August from Independence landing. Arrangements had been made for the company to journey down the Missouri river by means of canoes as far as St. Louis, whence most of them were to go overland to Kirtland two and two preaching by the way. After three days upon the river they reached McIlwaine's Bend where they camped for the night, and here an important revelation was given relative to their own movements and also in relation to the "destroyer" that should ride upon those western waters, and the danger thereafter of journeying upon them. Shortly after landing, and before night fell upon the scene, William W. Phelps beheld in open vision the "destroyer" in his most horrible power ride upon the face of the waters. "Others," continues the Prophet in his narrative, "heard the noise but saw not the vision." "Behold there are many dangers upon the waters," said the revelation, "and more especially hereafter; for I, the Lord, have declared in mine anger, many destructions upon the waters; yea, and especially upon these waters [i. e. of western Missouri]. * * * And now, behold, for your good, I give unto you a commandment concerning these things." [^1] Then follows instructions to the saints who shall hereafter journey to the land of Zion, not to go upon the river, but by land, "pitching their tents by the way." [^2]

DISAGREEMENTS AMONG BRETHREN

During the three days upon the river some disagreements and ill feeling had developed among the brethren and explanations and reconciliations had become necessary; it had also been discovered that progress on their journey by the river in canoes was slow, and hence it became necessary for those who had been appointed to purchase the printing press, Sidney Gilbert and William W. Phelps; and the Prophet, Sidney Rigdon, and Oliver Cowdery, who had been commanded to hasten their return to Kirtland, found it imperative to find a more expeditious means of travel than by the canoes. The greater part of the night at McIlwaine's Bend was devoted to these matters. The brethren became reconciled to each other, and those whose affairs more especially cried haste started overland the next morning for St. Louis, and the rest of the company continued the journey via the river.

Very naturally the theme uppermost in the minds of the saints in Kirtland and vicinity on the return of the Prophet and his associates was the land of Zion, and their duty with reference to gathering to the land. The answer by revelation was, doubtless, somewhat startling; since it revealed the possibility of trouble and bloodshed in connection with obtaining the land of their inheritance.

ZION BY PURCHASE OR BY BLOOD

"And now, behold, this is the will of the Lord your God concerning his saints, that they should assemble themselves together unto the land of Zion, not in haste, lest there should be confusion, which bringeth pestilence.

Behold, the land of Zion, I, the Lord, hold it in mine own hands;

Nevertheless, I the Lord, render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's:

Wherefore, I the Lord, will that you should purchase the lands that you may have advantage of the world, that you may have claim on the world, that they may not be stirred up unto anger;

For Satan putteth it into their hearts to anger against you, and to the shedding of blood;

Wherefore, the land of Zion shall not be obtained but by purchase or by blood, otherwise there is none inheritance for you.

And if by purchase, behold you are blessed;

And if by blood, as you are forbidden to shed blood, lo, your enemies are upon you, and ye shall be scourged from city to city, and from synagogue to synagogue, and but few shall stand to receive an inheritance." [^3]

The language in the above passage has been the subject of much controversy. Some, and among these were the old settlers of Jackson county, Missouri, pretended to see in it a threat to take possession of western Missouri by conquest, by the "shedding of blood." Surely nothing can be further removed from the intent of the passage when justly construed. It has already been pointed out [^4] that the saints had been commanded to purchase lands in western Missouri and no hope was ever given that they could obtain them in any other way. In the revelation just quoted the saints are informed that satan is stirring up their enemies, in the land of their inheritance, to anger against them, "and to the shedding of blood." "Wherefore the land of Zion shall not be obtained but by purchase or by blood." If obtained "by purchase" the saints may be accounted blessed. If "by blood"—since they were "forbidden to shed blood"—lo, their enemies will be upon them, and they shall be "scourged from city to city, and from synagogue to synagogue, and but few shall stand to receive an inheritance." And so the event turned out. The saints failed to respond with becoming promptness to the commandment to purchase the land of Zion; and all that was predicted in the revelation befell them. The passage then was a warning to the saints, not a threat directed at the old settlers of Jackson county; and if blood was to be shed, clearly it was to be the blood of the saints rather than that of their enemies.

LAPSES AT KIRTLAND

Meantime, in the absence of the Prophet and other church leaders, evil had reared its head in Kirtland and vicinity, and claimed its following. "Many have turned away from my commandments and have not kept them," said the Lord. Others had "sought after signs and wonders for faith, and not for the good of man," or the Lord's glory. Others still had been guilty of downright sin—immorality. [^5] These were sharply rebuked; the law of chastity was repeated and those guilty of its violation, it was declared, would be deprived of the Spirit of the Lord, and would deny the faith. These with liars and sorcerers, it was further declared, would have no part in the first resurrection, but would be subject to banishment from the presence of God. "Behold, I, the Lord, say unto you, that ye are not justified because these things are among you. * * * Wherefore, let the church repent of their sins, and I the Lord will own them, otherwise they shall be cut off." [^6]

EZRA BOOTH'S APOSTASY—LETTERS

Nor was dissension and apostasy confined to those who remained in Ohio. At least one of the elders who had gone up to the land of Zion with the western Mission, about this time openly renounced the faith, and published in the Ohio Star, (Ravenna, Portage county) a series of nine letters in justification of his apostasy. This was Ezra Booth, formerly a Methodist minister of Hiram, Portage county, Ohio. He entered the church on seeing a person healed of an infirmity of many years standing; [^7] and as he was begotten to the faith by seeing a "miracle," so too, it appears, he craved continuous miraculous manifestations to feed his spiritual life. He had expressed the desire that the Savior would grant him power "to smite men, and make them believe," as he wanted God to do, it is alleged, in his own case. [^8] Such, it is needless to say, is not God's method; and when Booth found that the way for reaching other men with truth, and preserving one's own spiritual life was still through God's ancient sacrifice—"the upright heart and pure;" and by faith, patience, diligence, together with love unfeigned—these methods proved too slow for him and he was disappointed, and denied the faith. His letters make no charge of immorality against the Prophet, or any charge at all that could be said to be serious, or fundamental, the man's soured spirit being taken into account, and the false coloring noted which in all such cases paints the picture untrue to truth. The Booth Letters had but momentary influence, and though they have been several times reproduced [^9] in anti-"Mormon" works, they seem never to have been effective in discrediting the work at whose destruction they were leveled. The fact is Booth's Letters do not deal with fundamental truths on which the New Dispensation of the gospel is founded. "Lightness and levity" in the Prophet, a "proneness to jesting and joking," or a "temper easily irritated"—all of which is charged by Booth against the Prophet—might be admitted, as also sundry weaknesses and imperfections in his following, but these things however much they are to be deplored, if true, do not reach down into the vitals of the religious and philosophical system of truth being unfolded by Joseph Smith. Did the world stand in need of revelation from God in the early decades of the nineteenth century of the Christian era? Did Joseph Smith receive such a revelation? Was the Prophet's story of the origin of the Book of Mormon true? Does that book bear evidence of its alleged divine origin? Had a New Dispensation of divine authority been committed to Joseph Smith by personages formerly holding that authority and divine commission? Or are there insuperable difficulties to such an unfolding of truth, or the granting of such a magnificent series of dispensations all entering into and forming one great dispensation to be known as the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times? These are the vital questions, not if men charged with a work so great bear themselves well or ill in every circumstance; or act wise or foolish in a given issue. And these fundamental questions are not considered by Ezra Booth's Letters; nor, for matter of that, are they treated worthily in any anti-"Mormon" literature extant.

RENEWED ACTIVITIES AT KIRTLAND AND VICINITY

During the closing months of the year 1831 great activity prevailed throughout the branches of the church in Kirtland and vicinity. Joseph Smith in September made his home at Hiram, Portage county,—about thirty miles southeast of Kirtland—with the Johnson family, [^10] and Sidney Rigdon was temporarily lodged nearby in order to attend to his duty as scribe in the work of revising the English Bible. Numerous council and conference meetings were held to set in order the various branches of the church, and regulate all things pertaining to the church in general. Inasmuch as a printing press had been purchased and was to be established at Independence, Missouri, it was resolved by the brethren in conference assembled that a monthly periodical should be published to be called The Evening and Morning Star. Also it was decided to publish a collection of the revelations in which the New Dispensation had its origin. The collection was to be called The Book of Commandments, and it was voted to print an edition of ten thousand copies. Joseph Smith, Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer, Sidney Rigdon and William W. Phelps both by revelation [^11] and conference action [^12] were appointed stewards over the revelations and commandments which had been given to them; the business of publishing these works, in other words, was granted to the brethren named as a stewardship, which was to be managed as all other stewardships granted in the church, viz., the profits arising from the management of the stewardship to be used by him or those who held it. If more was received than was necessary for the support of himself and family then the surplus was to be given to the Lord's storehouse.

THE FIRST COLLATION OF THE REVELATIONS OF THE NEW DISPENSATION

The revelations were collected under the supervision of the Prophet, edited by him and dedicated to the Lord, and by commandment given into the care of Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer [^13] to convey to Independence for publication.

In October, Orson Hyde, [^14] then a young man of twenty-six, and a clerk in Gilbert and Whitney's store, at Kirtland, came into the church. He had been successively a Methodist class leader and Campbellite pastor. When the Lamanite mission came to Kirtland and presented the Book of Mormon, Orson Hyde at the request of Campbellite friends, opposed the book in public addresses. But feeling reproved by the Spirit for this course he desisted, made further inquiry, with the result that he became a convert as stated above. [^15] "Mormonism" in Orson Hyde's conversion had found one more chief apostle of the New Dispensation, one who later was to carry its message to far distant Jerusalem, and dedicate the land of Palestine for the gathering of the Jews.

Meantime sundry revelations were given adding line upon line and precept upon precept to the unfolding law of God, and developing the organization of the church. The power and authority of God's servants in their ministry was declared. "They shall speak as they are moved upon by the Holy Ghost," said the Lord. "And whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost, shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation: Behold this is the promise of the Lord unto you, O ye my servants:"

THE LAW UNTO "ZION" AND HER STAKES

The law unto Zion and all her stakes was given respecting parents teaching their children the gospel. The divine injunction was that children must be taught faith in Christ as the Son of the living God; repentance, baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and all this by the time they are eight years of age, that they might then be received into the church by baptism. Failing in this, the sin is upon the head of the parents. The saints were also "to teach their children to pray and to walk uprightly before the Lord."

The saints were commanded to observe the Sabbath day and keep it holy.

Idlers in the land of Zion were reproved: "I the Lord am not well pleased with the inhabitants of Zion, for there are idlers among them; and their children are also growing up in wickedness; they also seek not earnestly the riches of eternity, but their eyes are full of greediness. Those things ought not to be, and must be done away from among them."

Prayer also was enjoined: "He that observeth not his prayers before the Lord in the season thereof, let him be had in remembrance before the judge of my people"—i. e. the bishop. [^16]

These instructions and reproofs given to the saints, plainly testify to the fact that the church was standing for the law of righteousness; not only stoutly, but absolutely.

It was made known in the month of November that other bishops were to be appointed unto the church [^17] besides the one already appointed, Bishop Partridge; and shortly afterwards, namely, on the 4th of December, Elder Newel K. Whitney was appointed by revelation, [^18] and ordained by Joseph Smith to be the Bishop of Kirtland and the eastern branches of the church. Newel K. Whitney was a thorough business man both by instincts and training; and since in the New Dispensation the bishopric has to do chiefly with temporal affairs, receiving the consecrations and tithes of the people, looking after the poor, and supervising generally the material interests of the church, the selection of Elder Whitney for this position was a most fortunate one. [^19]

On January the 25th, 1832, a conference of high priests, elders and members of the church was held in Amherst, Lorain county, Ohio, and here Joseph, the Prophet, was sustained as President of the high priesthood of the church, and ordained to that office; [^20] which also carries with it the office of President of the whole church; "The duty of the President of the high priesthood is to preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses. * * * Yea, to be a seer, a revelator, a translator, and a prophet, having all the gifts of God which he bestows upon the head of the church." [^21]

In the midst of these many activities the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon were not neglecting the revision of the Bible. They had made some progress in revising the Old Testament, when the idea was conceived of publishing the New Testament and the Book of Mormon together, and hence the revision of the Old Testament was laid aside and the revision of the

New taken up. [^22] In the Johnson residence a large upper room [^23] was fitted up for the use of the Prophet and his scribe, Sidney Rigdon, and here day after day, and often far into the night they pursued their sacred task.

THE VISION OF THE KINGDOMS OF GOD—DEGREES OF GLORY

In the month of February, while working upon the revision of the gospel according to St. John, they came to the 29th verse of the fifth chapter which, referring to those in their graves who shall hear the voice of the Son of God, it stands in the English version as follows:

"And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil; unto the resurrection of damnation."

This passage was given to the Prophet by the Spirit as follows:

"They who have done good, to the resurrection of the just; and they who have done evil, to the resurrection of the unjust."

"This caused us to marvel," says the Prophet, "for it was given unto us of the Spirit. And while we meditated upon these things the Lord touched the eyes of our understandings and they were opened, and the glory of the Lord shone round about." Then followed a vision, the like of which, for beauty, for reasonableness, for value as doctrine, for comforting influence, for vindication of the mercy and justice of God—stands unsurpassed even in sacred literature. To appreciate what is here said of the "vision" it will be necessary to briefly state the Christian faith that generally obtained at that time—1832.

For man, in the Christian thought of the period, there existed but two states and places—heaven and hell. Heaven and hell, be it remembered, were regarded both as a state and a place. Heaven was a state and a place of glory, peace, rest and joy. The glory unspeakable; the joy enduring forever. Hell was a state and place of endless misery, sorrow and suffering; the least of which suffering was to be the most frightful physical torture the wit of man can conceive; and this suffering was to be without end as to its continuance and without mitigation as to its severity. If one gained heaven, even by ever so small a margin, he entered upon a complete possession of all its unutterable joys, equally with the angels and holiest of saints. If he missed heaven, even by ever so narrow a margin, he was doomed to everlasting torment, equally with the wickedest of men, and vilest of devils, and there was no deliverance for him. Nor is the climax of this absurdity and abomination reached yet; for it still remains to say that these terrible ideas as to man's future in hell were not to obtain as to adults of the human race only, or to those who had come to years of accountability, and who had been instructed in the things of God and rejected them, but the uninstructed heathen—according to the creeds of men—and even the millions of them are unnumbered—and non-elect children dying in infancy, and unbaptized infants, were doomed to suffer the wrath of God in hell during all the ages of an endless future. [^24]

It was left for Joseph Smith to lift this veil of darkness from man's future, and reaffirm the forgotten Christian principle that in God's kingdom there are many mansions; [^25] that every man shall be rewarded according to his works; [^26] that there are glories celestial, terrestrial and telestial in the kingdoms of God; that as one star differs from another star in glory, "so is the resurrection of the dead." [^27]

The vision received under the circumstances already detailed the Prophet was commanded to write, which he did. The introduction as a hymn of praise, exalting the majesty and wisdom of God, is worthy the Psalmist—

A HYMN OF PRAISE TO GOD

Hear O ye heavens, and give ear O earth, and rejoice ye inhabitants thereof, for the Lord is God, and beside him there is no Savior:

Great is his wisdom, marvelous are his ways, and the extent of his doings none can find out;

His purposes fail not, neither are there any who can stay his hand;

From eternity to eternity he is the same, and his years never fail!

In their vision these men also beheld the Christ, which circumstance is described as follows:

We beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father and received of his fulness;

And saw the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne, worshipping God, and the Lamb, who worship him for ever and ever.

And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony last of all, which we give of him, that he lives;

For we saw him, even on the right hand of God, and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father:

And that by him and through him, and of him the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God.

Lucifer and the sons of perdition are thus described:

And this we saw also, and bear record, that an angel of God was in authority in the presence of God, who rebelled against the Only Begotten Son, whom the Father loved, and who was in the bosom of the Father—was thrust down from the presence of God and the Son.

And was called perdition, for the heavens wept over him—he was Lucifer, a son of the morning.

And we beheld, and lo, he is fallen! is fallen! even a Son of the Morning!

Lucifer had rebelled against God, "wherefore he maketh war with the saints of God, and encompasseth them round about." Those whom he prevails against become the sons of perdition, of whom it is said that "it had been better for them never to have been born." These are they who deny the Holy Spirit after having received it; these deny the Son of God after he is revealed to them; they crucify him unto themselves, and put him to an open shame. They commit high treason against God. The greatness of their punishment, and the end thereof no man knoweth, neither is it revealed, nor will it be revealed except to those who partake of it.

Then follows at length a description of the three grand divisions into which men in the future, judged according to their works woven into character, will be separated—the celestial, terrestrial and telestial; of which the light of the sun, the moon and the stars, respectively, are spoken of as being typical. These are but general divisions; within them are subdivisions extending to infinity to meet the infinite variation of the worthiness, intelligence and character of men. But even of the least of the three grand divisions, the telestial kingdom, it is said that it "surpasses all understanding;" and that even its inhabitants, the last to be redeemed, and even then deprived of the personal presence of God and the Christ, shall nevertheless receive the ministration of angels and the Holy Ghost, for they are to be accounted "heirs of salvation." How infinitely more glorious, then, must be the higher kingdoms of God and the Christ!

The length of the vision precludes its reproduction in extenso in this work; [^28] but it is one of the church's best literary and doctrinal monuments, and is worthy of Joseph Smith's own characterization of it—"A transcript from the records of the eternal world!"

NOTE

JOSEPH SMITH'S PREDICTION OF DESTRUCTION UPON THE WATERS; MORE ESPECIALLY OF THE INLAND WATERS OF NORTH AMERICA AND OF WESTERN MISSOURI

"Nothing very important occurred until the third day, when many of the dangers so common upon the western waters manifested themselves; and after we had encamped upon the bank of the river at McIlwaine's Bend, Brother Phelps, in open vision by daylight, saw the destroyer in his most horrible power ride upon the face of the waters, others heard the noise, but saw not the vision" (History of the Church, Period I, Vol. I, p. 203). Then in the revelation given at that time, this: "Behold there are many dangers upon the waters, and more especially hereafter; for I the Lord, have decreed in mine anger, many destructions upon the waters; yea, and especially upon these waters. * * * I, the Lord, have decreed and the destroyer rideth upon the face thereof; and I revoke not the decree" (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxi).

It is a matter of common knowledge that great indeed has been the destruction on these western streams more especially since that time, almost annually. But in May and June of 1903, the destruction upon these western streams, in and about the localities referred to, in the above prediction, reached a climax. High water trouble began on the lower Mississippi as early as the month of March, and about the middle of the month, the Mississippi, at Memphis, registered on the gauge 39.8 feet—the highest ever recorded up to that time. This circumstance created great alarm throughout the lower Mississippi country, and the press of the United States discussed quite generally the necessity for governmental action to provide for strengthening the Mississippi levees, the necessity of forest preservation on the head waters of the great streams, and also the building of reservoirs in the same region for the purpose of holding back freshet waters, and thus prevent the possibility of such floods as were threatening to overwhelm the lower Mississippi country. A few weeks later, points in Kansas and Missouri became the flooded regions, and the disasters were thus described by an eastern journal:

"The floods that wrought so much havoc along the Kansas and Missouri rivers have now subsided, so that their direful results can be calmly calculated by the authorities of the many cities and towns relieved from the awful strain of the three days of death and devastation.

"Minds unclouded by the fear of pending disaster look upon wrecked homes and hopes, fearful loss of life, blotting out of families, irreparable wrenching apart of parents and children, brother and sister, sweetheart and betrothed, and finally, upon the terrible commercial loss that is represented in figures that climb close to the quarter of a billion mark.

"Kansas City and Topeka suffered the most serious losses in lives and property, although all along the course of the Kansas, or, as it is locally called the Kaw river, the damage was great, and in many of the riverside towns there was a loss of life from the sudden encroachment of the angry waters.

"The physical conditions against which the submerged cities had to battle during the height of the flood are thus briefly summarized:

"Train service annulled.

"Waterworks shut down.

"Street cars stopped.

"Fire companies paralyzed.

"Electric light plants out of business.

"Not a manufacturing plant in operation.

"Wholesale mercantile district submerged under fifteen feet of water.

"Water rushing through streets like mill races.

"Fires breaking out in spots in the flooded districts.

"Kansas City, Kansas, and the near by towns, suffered most. The towns of Armourdale, Argentine and Harlem have been completely wiped off the map, and are now lying submerged by the widening river. No living human being remains in the unfortunate towns.

"Kansas City, Kansas, was cut off for three days from communication with the outside world except by trolley to Leavenworth, from which point relief was rushed to the stricken city. The population of 20,000 was starving, and fought like wild beasts for the 100,000 rations that were hurried to them from the fort.

"The hospitals of the city were soon filled and the post office was turned into one for the occasion. Thieves, taking advantage of the situation, looted and raided the houses that had been deserted by the occupants. Bands of citizens were organized to patrol the streets, and armed with guns they shot the ghouls without mercy. One thousand regulars were asked for to preserve order in the stricken city.

"Kansas City, Mo., just across the river in ordinary times, but now cut off by a sea of raging waters, was powerless to assist her neighbor. Only one bridge that had formerly connected the two cities was left standing, and that was surrounded by miles of water.

"Families caught by the floods in their homes fled to the roofs of houses and cried for help. Their destitute situation was apparent from the highlands, but there was no way to reach them. No boat could live in the rushing torrent of the Kaw. These marooned families vainly hoisted white flags of distress, and while their awful plight was plainly visible to those on shore, there was no way in which succor could be sent to them. The victims shrieked in their agony, and their pitiful cries were plainly heard by those who were powerless to aid them."

A summary of the destruction to property in this region of country by reason of the floods was given in the press dispatches of June the 7th, in the aggregate, as nearly $12,000,000; and the lower estimate of the loss in crops was $5,000,000. The magazines for July, 1903, that dealt with the subject of the Missouri and Kaw river floods charged that the daily papers exaggerated the losses sustained, especially by the farmers; and yet, this same magazine, The American Review of Reviews, July, 1903, estimates the loss in Kansas City alone at $7,000,000 and speaking of the loss of stock and property in the Kaw valley, it remarks that "it is no light thing for a thriving section to have ten million dollars or more swept away" (p. 77). So that this conservative magazine, after having an opportunity to correct and comment upon what it calls the exaggeration of the daily papers, places the losses sustained in the flooded districts even beyond the high mark of the passages quoted in this writing from the daily press." (Improvement Era, September, 1903.)

This summary of the flood conditions for 1903 is preserved here without change because it may be regarded as somewhat typical conditions that have prevailed in this district of the great western regions of the United States since that time and occasionally they have been repeated at intervals to quite an extent. In 1927, however, the destructiveness of floods in the several great river valleys centering in the Mississippi valley regions especially referred to in the Prophet's predictions, reached apparently a climax and aroused the nation to a policy of "flood control" that will be memorable, and marks with singular emphasis the fulfillment of the predictions of the Prophet quoted in this note.

The seriousness of these calamities in that year may be understood by the fact that congress took action by the adoption of what is known "as the army engineer's plan" which called for an appropriation of $325,000,000 for flood control in these regions which was immediately passed by both house and senate and signed by the president for flood control.

As further evidence of the great disaster through floods on these waters in 1927, it may be further stated that to take care of those rendered homeless and dependent upon outside sources for food, shelter, taking care of the sick and the like, the Red Cross organization established along the flooded region 149 major concentration centers for care of the refugees driven from their homes. The number of the refugees given succor in the concentration camps during the emergency period numbered more than 330,000 persons, the total number of refugees given relief in the emergency period was 607,236 of whom 33.4% were white and 66.6% were negroes. On August 20, of that year there still were 65,527 refugees being fed at the expense of the Red Cross funds. At that time there had been 90,111 families given rehabilitation aid through the same agency. Hospital relief was administered to these refugees, 296,872 occulations were administered and vaccinations to the number 121,705 were given by August 1 of the disastrous year.

The survey made by the Red Cross investigators set down the flood territory (estimated) to be about 3,800,000 acres of which 82,800 remained inundated as late as August 20. The total loss of animals in the flooded territory are approximately given as follows: Horses and mules, 25,325; cattle, 50,490; swine, 148,110; fowl, 1,276,570. An audit of the Red Cross funds on August 10 of that year showed total expenditures for food relief up to that time amounting to $9,638,374, while commitments then outstanding for food relief totaled $12,392,417.

A meeting at Peoria, Ill., of representatives of those affected by the floods at which were gathered also many prominent national characters, read a proposal before the conference for the members to urge upon congress an appropriation of $100,000,000 per annum over a period of ten years for purposes of flood control, showing the aroused seriousness of the people in the region "where the destroyer did ride upon the face of the waters."

Footnotes

"'I cannot see a bishop in myself, brother Joseph; but if you say it's the Lord's will, I'll try."

"'You need not take my word alone;' answered the Prophet, kindly. 'Go and ask Father for yourself.'

"Newel felt the force of this mild rebuke, but determined to do as he advised. His humble, heartfelt prayer was answered.' In the silence of night and the solitude of his chamber, he heard a voice from heaven: 'Thy strength is in me.' The words were few and simple, but they had a world of meaning. His doubts were dispelled like dew before the dawn. He straightway sought the Prophet, told him he was satisfied, and was willing to accept the office to which he had been called." (The Contributor, January, 1885.

---
Notas:
[^1] According to Hayden's History of the Disciples on the Western Reserve, Mr. Ryder was much perplexed over "Mormonism," and for a time was undecided whether to join the church or not. "In the month of June," (1831), writes Mr. Hayden, "he read in a newspaper an account of the destruction of Pekin in China, and he remembered that six weeks before, a young 'Mormon' girl had predicted the destruction of that city." J. H. Kennedy, in his Early Days of Mormonism, Scribner's Son, 1888, refers to the same thing, and adds: "This appeal to the superstitious part of his nature was the final weight in the balance, and he threw the whole power of his influence upon the side of 'Mormonism.' His surrender caused an excitement almost equal to that which followed the fall of Rigdon." (pp. 103-4). The initial point of his apostasy is equally interesting. It appears that some time after his baptism he was ordained an elder of the church; and somewhat later informed by a communication signed by the Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon, that it was the will of the Lord, made known by the Spirit, that he should preach the gospel. Both in the letter he received and in the official commission to preach, however, his name was spelled R-i-d-e-r, instead of R-y-d-e-r, and it was soberly stated in the History of the Disciples on the Western Reserve, Hayden, that he thought if the "Spirit" through which he had been called to preach could err in the matter of spelling his name, it might have erred in calling him to the ministry as well; or, in other words, he was led to doubt if he were called at all by the Spirit of God, because of the error in spelling his name! The same circumstance is referred to in Kennedy's Early Days of Mormonism, p. 104. How absolute the "Knave" was! Truly inspiration must spell "by the card," or "equivocation" for the matter of a letter will undo it!
[^2] Hayden's History of the Disciples on the Western Reserve, p. 250, et seq.
[^3] The consultation had was in respect of a horrible mutilation upon the Prophet's person. (See Autobiography of Luke Johnson, Millennial Star, vol. xxvi).
[^4] For instance at one point in the proceedings one mobber called to another—"Simonds, Simonds, where's the tar bucket?" "I don't know where 'tis," answered another. "Eli's left it"—referring doubtless to Simonds Ryder, the Campbellite preacher before referred to, and Eli Johnson, two of the mob leaders.
[^5] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i. pp. 264-5 and footnotes.
[^6] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lvii:11-13.
[^7] See ante, chapter xxii. This was on the 20th March; Rigdon was not named as a counselor, until about one year later, March 8th, 1833, and neither was ordained until March the 18th of that year. (See History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, ch. xxiv; also Ibid, ch. xix.)
[^8] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxi:1-3.
[^9] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxviii:1-10.
[^10] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 267.
[^11] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxii.
[^12] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxii:11-17.
[^13] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 270.
[^14] Ibid, pp. 269, 270.
[^15] Brigham Young came of an honorable ancestry. His great-grandfather, William Young, was among the original proprietors of Barrington and Nottingham, New Hampshire; where he is first heard of in 1721. "These towns were settled by men, or the children of men, who had shown faithfulness and bravery in the Indian wars. The lands were given to them by the government in recognition of this service. Wm. Young had a number of free-holds in these towns, and bought several others. * * * He resided in later years in Boston, but died in Hopkinton, Massachusetts. In his will in Middlesex county Record he leaves about $10,000.00 to his wife and daughter and minor son, and names Rev. S. Barrett as the guardian of the latter." (From Genealogical Chart, Brigham Young Family. See also History of Brigham Young, Millennial Star, vol. xxv, pp. 295-6; 310-311; and 326-28 et seq.)
[^16] Heber C. Kimball, the second member of the group, was born June 14, 1801, in Sheldon, Franklin county, Vermont. His parents were American born, though of Scotch extraction, the ancient name of the family being, it is believed, Campbell. His opportunities for acquiring an education even of the common school order were extremely limited. At the age of nineteen he was apprenticed to his elder brother, Charles, to learn the potter's trade. He served some two years as an apprentice and then worked for his brother as a journeyman potter. While yet in the employ of his brother they together moved to Mendon, Monroe county, where the latter established a pottery. While living here Heber married Vilate Murray, of Victor, a town near Mendon, but in the adjoining county of Ontario. Soon after his marriage he joined the Baptist church. Three weeks later, and some time in the winter of 1831, a number of the elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints began preaching in the town of Victor, and Heber C. Kimball and a number of the Youngs attended their meetings. Then followed the visit to the branch of the church in Columbia, Pennsylvania, mentioned above. After his return from Columbia he was baptized by Alpheus Gifford, on the 15th day of April, 1832. During the summer of 1832 Heber C. Kimball was ordained an elder and with the Youngs labored part of his time in the ministry, and succeeded in raising up several small branches of the church.
[^17] These are the assistants of the apostles in the foreign ministry of the church, and now (1929) number 220 quorums of seventy members each, making a body of men, when the quorums are full, of more than fifteen thousand. Of this organization more will be said later.
[^18] The circumstances of this first meeting between the Prophet and his successor are thus detailed by Brigham Young in his Autobiography, published in the Millennial Star, 1863, vol. xxv, No. 28, p. 439: "In September, 1832, Brother Heber C. Kimball took his horse and wagon, Brother Joseph Young and myself accompanying him, and started for Kirtland to see the Prophet. We visited many friends on the way, and some branches of the church. We exhorted them and prayed with them, and I spoke in tongues. Some pronounced it genuine and from the Lord, and others pronounced it of the devil. We proceeded to Kirtland and stopped at John P. Greene's, who had just arrived there with his family. We rested a few minutes, took some refreshments and started to see the Prophet. We went to his father's house and learned that he was in the woods chopping. We immediately repaired to the woods, where we found the Prophet, and two or three of his brothers, chopping and hauling wood. Here my joy was full at the privilege of shaking the hand of the Prophet of God, and receiving the sure testimony, by the spirit of prophecy, that he was all that any man could believe him to be a true Prophet. He was happy to see us and bid us welcome. We soon returned to his house, he accompanying us.
[^19] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxii.
[^20] A biographical note of Bishop Whitney will be found in chapter xx, this History. He and the Prophet Joseph were fast friends. "But though Joseph loved him as a bosom friend," writes Whitney's biographer, Elder Orson F. Whitney, his grandson, and now—1929—of the council of the twelve apostles, "he did not fail to correct him whenever occasion required, and the candor of his rebuke, and the outspoken nature of their friendship, served only to knit their souls more closely together. * * * The thought of assuming this important responsibility (the office of bishop) was almost more than he could bear. Though in natural gifts few men were better qualified for such a position, he nevertheless distrusted his ability, and deemed himself incapable of discharging the high and holy trust. In his perplexity he appealed to the Prophet:
[^21] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, pp. 243, 267, and footnotes.
[^22] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cvii:91, 92. Attention is called to the fact that there is to be observed, as we proceed with this history, a gradual development, or evolution, of church government; and that like all movements having endurance, or that are worth while, the church government was not "made," it "grew."
[^23] See this History, ch. xx, Note 1.
[^24] The translating room is in the southeast corner of the house, and two upper windows on the right of the photogravure open into it.
[^25] Perhaps a slight variation from this general belief should be noted in the case of the Roman catholic church. That church does not teach that all Christians at death go immediately into heaven, but on the contrary teaches that "a Christian who dies after the guilt and everlasting punishment of mortal sins have been forgiven him, but who, either from want of opportunity or through his negligence, has not discharged the debt of temporal punishment due to his sin, will have to discharge the debt to the justice of God in purgatory. In purgatory these souls are purified and rendered fit to enter into heaven, where nothing defiled enters." (Catholic belief, Bruno p. 185). But ultimately, even in the Roman catholic faith, it is heaven or hell for the inhabitants of the earth.
[^26] St. John, xiv:1-3.
[^27] Rom., ii:6-12, I Cor., iii:8, II Cor., v: 10. Rev., ii:23. Rev., xx:12.
[^28] I Cor., xv:40-42.
