B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XXIII

MOB VIOLENCE AT HIRAM—THE FIRST CHURCH PERIODICAL—THE EVENING AND MORNING STAR—THE COMING OF BRIGHAM YOUNG

LIGHTS and shadows closely intermingled in the history of the church in the New Dispensation. Following close upon the vision recounted in the last chapter was perpetrated one of the cruelest and most cowardly outrages of mob violence in the history of our country. Quite a number of men in Portage county followed Ezra Booth in his apostasy, among whom a very bitter spirit of opposition to Joseph Smith developed. So far as one may judge nothing had occurred that gave the least color of justification for the unexpected out-burst of violence, except that Elders Rigdon and Smith had been more than usually active and successful in their public ministry in Hiram and vicinity. The alleged "public exposure of Smith's methods," by such men as Booth and Ryder, another apostate, [^1] "coupled with rumors of immoral practices in the fold," do not justify a resort to mob violence, though Linn in his Story of the Mormons, cites these as the causes of the outrage upon Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon. There was nothing in the Booth Letters to the Ohio Star, even if all Booth there alleges against the Prophet were admitted as true that would give any color of excuse for resorting to violence; and equally lame is the appeal to "rumors of immoral practices in the fold;" and the further excuse suggested by Hayden, in his Early History of the Disciples on the Western Reserve, is equally unconvincing, viz., the assertion that after Elders Smith and Rigdon left with the western mission for Missouri, in 1831, papers which they left behind them and which fell into the hands of the people of Hiram, "revealed the horrid fact that a plot was laid to take their property from them and place it under the personal control of Smith, the Prophet;" and that "some who had been the dupes of this deception determined not to let it pass with impunity." [^2] The experience of men in all reforms and revolutions, and more especially where such movements involve religious prejudices or principles, can be appealed to as showing that there is no bitterness so intense, no hatred so unreasoning as the bitterness and hate of the apostate; and in the early spring of 1832, those who had turned from the faith, with some others, assaulted Elders Smith and Rigdon under the following circumstances:

MOB VIOLENCE UPON THE PROPHET AND SIDNEY RIGDON

For some time the Prophet and his wife had been broken of their rest in caring for twin babes, then about one year old, and afflicted with the measles. Emma Smith had taken these babes—children of John Murdock's, the mother having died shortly after their birth—to rear, hoping that they would fill the void in her heart occasioned by the death of her own twin babes born on the same day as the Murdock twins. On the night of the 24th of March, after long watching over one of the babes, the Prophet at the solicitations of his wife lay down on a trundle bed to get a little sleep. The next thing he was conscious of was the screams of his wife, and found himself in the hands of a dozen ruffians and being carried out of the house. Naturally he did not submit quietly, but resisted with all his might. He was overpowered, however, and beaten and choked into insensibility. Recovering from this first attack, he was carried past the orchard towards the meadow. On the way he saw Elder Rigdon stretched out upon the ground, and apparently dead. He expected the same fate for himself, but expressed the hope to his captors that they would not kill him. There seemed to be some uncertainty among the mob on this point. A consultation [^3] was held, after which the Prophet was again assaulted, his clothing torn from him, his body scratched and beaten, and covered with tar and feathers. In the brutal process one man tried to force the tar paddle into his mouth; another a phial, supposed to contain aqua-fortis, but broke it in his teeth. All this was attended with horrible oaths and imprecations such as might be expected from fiends incarnate engaged in such a lawless, brutal proceeding.

After the departure of the mob the Prophet tried to rise and make his way to the Johnson house, but fell from exhaustion and the effect of his beating. After he began to recover his strength he removed some of the tar from his lips that he might breathe more freely. A second attempt to reach the house was more successful. On seeing him covered with blood and tar his wife fainted. Meantime his friends having gathered at the Johnson home, they spent the rest of the night in cleansing his lacerated and bruised body.

Elder Rigdon had apparently suffered more even than the Prophet, or else had less strength to endure the ordeal. He had for some time lived in a small house not far from the Johnson residence. From this he was taken by the mob and dragged by the heels held high while his head dashed over the hard frozen ground, until he was rendered unconscious. For several days he was delirious, and in his mania seemed desirous of killing his best friends.

The mobbing took place on Saturday night. The Prophet had an appointment to preach at Hiram on Sunday morning, and all bruised and scarified as he was, he appeared before the congregation, held the appointed service; and in the afternoon administered baptism to three converts. In the morning meeting several members of the mob were present, known to the Prophet through the inadvertent use of some of their names during the mob's proceedings, [^4] and in other cases known to him by their close contact with him in the struggle he made against their assaults. They were not all an ignorant rabble, but among them were prominent Campbellites, Methodists and Baptists. Simonds Ryder, apparently, was their leader; and the Prophet declares that Felatiab Allen, Esq., supplied a barrel of whiskey to render the mob, numbering between forty and fifty, reckless. [^5]

TWO CENTERS OF ACTIVITY—KIRTLAND AND INDEPENDENCE

In order to get a proper understanding of the events which make up the history of the church during these and subsequent years it is necessary to note the fact that in creating two centers of activity for the church,—Independence, Missouri, and Kirtland, Ohio, there had arisen a rivalry and something of jealousy between the two places. The foundation of the church membership in Jackson county consisted of the first converts of the Prophet in Fayette and Colesville, New York; whereas at Kirtland the foundation of the church membership consisted largely of the following of Sidney Rigdon. The New York group, besides being the Prophet's earliest friends and first converts had followed him under the commandment of God from New York to Ohio, almost in one body; and thence, under his direction, from Ohio to the western borders of Missouri. True, the Prophet had also come from Ohio to Missouri, and had assisted the New York saints in locating the city of Zion and dedicating the site of the future temple of God, still the Prophet had largely devoted himself personally to the saints at Kirtland, and to the affairs of that center of church activity. Here he had met a number of influential men. Besides Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge, there were Sidney Gilbert and Newel K. Whitney, prosperous merchants; Frederick G. Williams, Titus Billings and the Johnson family. True, some of these Kirtland leaders had been stationed at Independence, but chiefly as leaders; Edward Partridge as bishop, Sidney Gilbert, in charge of the Lord's storehouse; William W. Phelps, as printer unto the church, while Oliver Cowdery, the only one of the early New York group recognized by appointment to official position, was appointed Phelps' assistant. [^6] Recently also, January, 1832, at Amherst, Ohio, the Prophet had been appointed and ordained president of the high priesthood, which carried with it also the office of president of the church; [^7] and on March 20th of this same year Frederick G. Williams was appointed to be ordained a high priest and designated as a counselor to the Prophet, unto whom had been given the keys of the kingdom "which belongeth always unto the presidency of the high priesthood." [^8] In all this the saints in Jackson county had not participated. Also some months previously a bishop—Newel K. Whitney—had been appointed to preside in that office in Kirtland and over the eastern branches. This rapid development in the church organization was something for which the saints in Missouri were scarcely prepared; and therefore Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Newel K. Whitney were appointed "to sit in council with the saints which are in Zion; otherwise satan seeketh to turn their hearts away from the truth, that they become blinded and understand not the things which are prepared for them." [^9]

Accordingly, on the first day of April, 1832, the above named brethren, with Peter Whitmer and Jesse Gause added to the company, started for Missouri. To escape their enemies in Hiram and Kirtland, who still breathed out threatenings against them, they went via the Ohio river—boarding a steamer at Steubenville to St. Louis; thence by stage coach to Independence where they arrived on the 24th of April.

A general council of the church was immediately called and the Prophet was acknowledged as the president of the high priesthood of the church, Bishop Edward Partridge in behalf of the church giving to him the right hand of fellowship. "The scene was solemn, impressive, and delightful," says the Prophet. [^10] Thus the action of the Amherst conference was ratified by the church in Zion.

PRESIDENT OF THE HIGH PRIESTHOOD ACKNOWLEDGED IN ZION

A grievance between Elder Rigdon and Bishop Partridge, which had resulted in estrangement and hardness, was amicably settled during the intermission between the forenoon and afternoon of their council; and when the saints met together in the afternoon the Prophet received a revelation which opened with the pleasing announcement that, "In as much as you have forgiven one another your trespasses, even so I the Lord forgive you." But they were warned against further transgressions, and this important principle was announced: "I the Lord am bound [i. e. to fulfill his promises] when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise." [^11]

A central board of control over temporal concerns as pertaining to the management of "the affairs of the poor, and all things pertaining to the bishopric, both in the land of Zion and in the land of Kirtland," was appointed by this revelation, Joseph Smith, Newel K. Whitney, Sidney Rigdon, Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris being named as the board; and for their services in managing these important temporal interests they were to have equal claims upon the properties handled, every man according to his wants and his needs, "in as much as his wants were just." [^12]

THE BOOK OF COMMANDMENTS

The council ordered that a three thousand edition of the Book of Commandments be printed instead of an edition of ten thousand, as at first contemplated; also that the selection of hymns that had been made by Emma Smith in fulfillment of her appointment be corrected and published by W. W. Phelps. It was also arranged that the brethren engaged in mercantile pursuits in Kirtland and Independence, respectively, be united in one firm; the store in each place being regarded as a branch of the one firm. Still it was resolved that each of these branches should have a separate company name. The name of the branch in Zion was to be "Gilbert, Whitney & Company," and the one in Kirtland "Newel K. Whitney & Company." W. W. Phelps and A. S. Gilbert were appointed to draft the bond for the united firm. A. S. Gilbert and Newel K. Whitney were appointed to be the agents of the new firm, one operating at Independence, the other at Kirtland. It was also resolved that whenever any special business should arise it would be the duty of the united firm by its branches at Independence and Kirtland, to regulate the same by special agency. It was also resolved that the united firm negotiate a loan of fifteen thousand dollars at six per centum. The firm of Newel K. Whitney & Co. was appointed to transact the business. While this last measure was adopted by the council there was manifested some opposition to it. [^13] It was the effort of the Prophet in all these transactions, according to his own words, "to so organize the church that the brethren might eventually be independent of every incumbrance beneath the celestial kingdom, by bonds and covenants of mutual friendship, and mutual love." [^14]

During this visit to Missouri the Prophet spent two days with the Colesville saints, located in Kaw township, twelve miles west of Independence. These were his earliest friends, and his first converts. These had befriended him while translating the Book of Mormon, housed him and fed him. These stood by him when mobs in New York pursued him; and furnished him the means of defense when haled before the courts at Bainbridge and Colesville. These had followed him from New York to Ohio, from Ohio to the western borders of Missouri. These left all to follow the voice of the Master revealed through him. How they must have believed in him! How trusted him! How he must have loved them—how sweet his reunion and communion with them!

Before the brethren left Jackson county on the return journey to Ohio, Sidney Rigdon preached what the Prophet called "two most powerful discourses;" "which," he continues, "so far as outward appearance was concerned, gave great satisfaction."

THE EVENING AND MORNING STAR

In June, 1832, the first number of the Evening and Morning Star issued from the church press. It was of royal quarto size, and of course was to be devoted to the propaganda and support of the doctrines of the New Dispensation. It was the first periodical published by the church, the first of that long series of periodicals since published in many lands and many languages. A prime means this periodical literature has been of both advocacy and defense of the truth. Looking over the pages of this pioneer periodical of the church its defects are easily apparent. Chiefly they consist in a bad choice of matter and a lack of orderly and simple setting forth of the events in which the work of the Lord in these last days had its origin, together with a turgid style which was the vice of nearly all American literature of the period. And yet one can readily understand the cause of these defects. The editors and publishers were anxious to plunge at once into the midst of the things God had revealed, apparently unmindful of the fact that the world to whom the Star's message was addressed was unfamiliar with the events with which the work began. That the Prophet, though having had no training in journalism, keenly felt the defects of the Star is evident from the reproof he administered to its editor after the publication of several numbers of the first volume: "We wish you to render the Star as interesting as possible, by setting forth the rise, progress, and faith of the church, as well as the doctrine; for if you do not render it more interesting than at present, it will fall, and the church suffer a great loss thereby."

THE NEW GROUP OF LEADERS

About this time a new group of men appear at Kirtland, destined to wield a great influence upon the history of the church. These were Brigham Young, [^15] Heber C. Kimball, [^16] and Joseph Young, an elder brother of Brigham Young's. The first two were destined, subsequently, to be associated together for many years in the presidency of the church; the first will conduct the great exodus of the church from the confines of the United States into Mexican territory—now the valleys of the state of Utah; the second will become the first apostle to carry the New Dispensation of the gospel to a foreign nation,—England—in 1837. The last of the three, Joseph Young, was to become the head of that body of priesthood that constitutes in the main the propaganda of the church—the quorums of the seventy. [^17] All three of these men had become members of the church in the spring of 1832, and now in the month of November of that year, they came to Kirtland, and for the first time met with the Prophet. [^18]

Footnotes

Brigham Young's grandfather, Joseph Young, was a physician and surgeon in the French and Indian War, and was accidently killed when about forty years of age. Brigham's father, John Young, was born in Hopkinton, Middlesex county, Massachusetts, in 1763. He led a very circumspect, exemplary and religious life from early youth, being a member of the Methodist church. At sixteen he enlisted in the American Revolutionary War, and served under General Washington through three campaigns in Massachusetts and New Jersey. About two years after the close of the war he married Nabby Howe, daughter of Phineas and Susannah Howe. In 1801 he moved from Massachusetts to Whittingham, Windham county, Vermont, and here Brigham was born, on the first of June, 1801. He was the ninth child and fourth son of his father's family; and was early taught by his parents to live a strictly moral life; it was not until he was in his twenty-second year, however, that he gave serious thought to religion. He soon afterwards joined the Methodist church. On the 8th of October he married Miriam Works, daughter of Asa and Jerusha Works, and for a number of years followed the trade of carpenter and joiner, painter and glazier. In the spring of 1829 he made his home at Mendon, a small town some fifteen miles south and east of Rochester, in Monroe county, where his father had also come to reside. A year later he saw for the first time the Book of Mormon, a copy that was left at the home of his brother, Phineas Young, by Samuel H. Smith, brother of the Prophet. In the fall of 1831, Elders Alpheus Gifford, Elial Strong and others appeared in the vicinity of Mendon, preaching the restored gospel as revealed through Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Brigham believed their testimony. In company with his brother, Phineas, and Heber C. Kimball he visited a branch of the church in Columbia, Bradford county, Pennsylvania. The three brethren remained with the branch of the church about a week, during which time their faith was much strengthened in the mission of the modern Prophet. On returning to Mendon, Brigham Young, in company with John P. Greene, started for Canada to find Joseph Young, above mentioned, and then a preacher in the Methodist church. On meeting his brother, Brigham related what he had learned of the New Dispensation, and Joseph rejoiced at hearing the glad tidings. Together they returned to Mendon, where they arrived in March, 1832, Joseph Young was baptized on the 6th of April following, and on the 14th of April, Brigham was baptized by Eleazer Miller, and confirmed a member of the church at the water's edge; and almost immediately afterwards he was ordained an elder in the church. During the summer of 1832 Brigham preached in Mendon and vicinity and assisted in raising up several branches of the church. On the 8th of September his wife died of consumption, leaving him with two small children, both girls. After the death of his wife he made his home with Heber C. Kimball, the latter's wife taking in charge his motherless babes.

"In the evening a few of the brethren came in, and we conversed upon the things of the kingdom. He called upon me to pray; in my prayer I spoke in tongues. As soon as we arose from our knees, the brethren flocked around him, and asked his opinion concerning the gift of tongues that was upon me. He told them it was the pure Adamic language. Some said to him they expected he would condemn the gift Brother Brigham had, but he said, No, it is of God, and the time will come when Brigham Young will preside over this church.' The latter part of this conversation was in my absence." (Millennial Star, vol. xxv, p. 439.)

---
Notas:
[^1] Time of the Publication of the Revelation: The revelation and prophecy on war, of December 25th, 1832, was not immediately published. The elders engaged in the missionary work of the church, however, obtained manuscript copies of it, and in their journeys carried it with them and read it to their congregations in various parts of the United States. In Vol. XIII of the Millennial Star, published in 1851, pp. 216 and 217, is an advertisement of a new church publication to be called the Pearl of Great Price. In the announced contents is named this revelation of December, 1832, with a statement that it had "never before appeared in print." Subsequently, but in the same year, the Pearl of Great Price with this prophecy in it, was published by Franklin D. Richards, in Liverpool, England. Copies of the first edition of this work are on file in the Historian's Office at Salt Lake City. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxiv:111-116.
[^2] The Rebellion Began in South Carolina: It is true that there was practical rebellion in South Carolina at the time the revelation on war was given, but it is singular that twenty-eight or nine years later, when hostilities broke out in the war between the states, in every act of rebellion leading to that war, South Carolina took the initiative, in evidence of which the following facts of history are set forth: See this History, ch. xv.
[^3] The Southern States Called Upon Other Nations, and Upon the Nation of Great Britain in Particular, for Assistance in the War: As early as May, 1861, the Confederacy sent commissioners abroad to seek recognition and aid from foreign powers. William L. Yancy, of Alabama; P.A. Rost, of Louisiana; A Dudley Mann, of Virginia; and T. Butler King, of Georgia. Mr. Yancy was appointed to operate in England, Mr. Rost in France, and Mr. Mann in Holland and Belgium. Mr. King had a roving commission. Subsequently, in October, 1861, the Confederacy appointed James M. Mason and John Slidell, ambassadors to England and France respectively, to solicit the assistance of the British and French governments in the southern cause. The ambassadors took passage from Charleston to Cuba in a blockade runner. At the latter place they engaged passage to England on the British steam packet Trent. On the 8th of November, 1861, the Trent was overtaken by the Federal warship San Jacinto, Captain Wilkes commanding; and Messrs. Mason and Slidell were taken prisoners and carried to Boston Harbor, where they were placed in Fort Warren. England promptly resented this violation of the rights of a neutral nation upon the high seas, and the United States as promptly disavowed the action of Captain Wilkes, made a suitable apology, and as soon as might be, restored Messrs. Mason and Slidell to a British deck, the Rinaldo, in which vessel the ambassadors were taken to England, where they prosecuted their mission. The above prelude and anthem is set to music by Arthur Shepherd, under the title The Lord Hath Brought Again Zion, baritone solo and chorus for mixed voices. It is published by Oliver Ditson Company, Boston. Mr. Shepherd has won a number of high honors from eastern musical institutions for his compositions. Among them being the Paderewski Prize for the best orchestral composition in the year 1906. He was a teacher in the New England Conservatory of Music; and in 1909 won the prize at the Federation of Musical Clubs at Grand Rapids, Michigan. The Lord Hath Brought Again Zion is pronounced a masterpiece of musical composition.
[^4] The War Beginning in the Rebellion of South Carolina Terminated in the Death and Misery of Many Souls: Though it is notorious that it did so, let us consider the fact of it somewhat in detail. Mr. Alexander H. Stephens, in concluding the chapter he devotes to the Civil War, in his History of the United States, says: "The Federal records show that they had, from first to last, 2,600,000 men in the service; while the Confederates all told, and in like manner, had but little over 600,000. * * * Of Federal prisoners during the war, the Confederates took in round numbers 270,000; while the whole number of Confederates captured and held in prisons by the Federals was in like round numbers 220,000. * * * Of these 270,000 Federal prisoners taken, 22,576 died in Confederate hands; and of the 220,000 Confederates taken by Federals, 26,436 died in their hands. * * * The entire loss on both sides, includng those who were permanently disabled, as well as those killed in battle, and who died from wounds received and diseases contracted in the service, amounted, upon a reasonable estimate, to the stupendous aggregate of 1,000,000 of men!" History of the United States, Alexander H. Stephens, 1882, pp. 451-3.
[^5] "And 'Then' War Shall Be Poured Out Upon All Nations:" This passage is from paragraph three of the revelation as published in the Doctrine and Covenants (Sec.lxxxvii), the authorized book of collected revelations accepted by the church as one of its books of scripture. In early editions containing this revelation the "and then war," etc., was written "and thus war" etc. But a later reading of the manuscript copy of the revelation in the Church Historian's Office, discovered that in the manuscript copy it was written "then" not "thus;" which made a tremendous difference in the significance of the revelation, and greatly increased the prophetic value of it. The change was authorized and made in the copy of the revelation and was published in the History of the Church, Period I, 1902, Vol. I, pp. 301-2. Afterwards the same change was made in the Doctrine and Covenants. The change first appeared in the edition of 1921, Salt Lake City, and has been made in all subsequent editions. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxvii.
[^6] Miscellaneous Items of the Prophecy: In the part taken by negroes in the war between the states, many see the fulfillment of the prediction of the revelation that "slaves shall rise up against their masters, who shall be marshaled and disciplined for war;" [^13] for of the 2,653,000 soldiers enlisted on the side of the Union, 186,397 were colored, and many of them saw active service in the field against their former masters. History of the Church, Period I, vol. v, ch. xvii; Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxx.
[^7] Cooper's American Politics, Book i, p. 88.
[^8] Lossing's History of the United States, p. 546.
[^9] Cooper's American Politics, Bock i, p. 88.
[^10] Lossing's History of the United States, p. 547, note 2.
[^11] Stephens' History of the United States, p. 610.
[^12] The above statements are taken from Current History for February, 1919. The statistics being compiled by Walter Littlefield. The figures of the military losses were all compiled from official data or where these were not obtainable, they were taken from official estimates. (See Current History, February, 1919, published by The New York Times.)
[^13] The passage means, doubtless, "slaves, who shall be marshaled and disciplined for war, shall rise up against their masters."
[^14] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxviii.
[^15] All these themes are enlarged upon in a subsequent and more appropriate chapter.
[^16] Heber C. Kimball, the second member of the group, was born June 14, 1801, in Sheldon, Franklin county, Vermont. His parents were American born, though of Scotch extraction, the ancient name of the family being, it is believed, Campbell. His opportunities for acquiring an education even of the common school order were extremely limited. At the age of nineteen he was apprenticed to his elder brother, Charles, to learn the potter's trade. He served some two years as an apprentice and then worked for his brother as a journeyman potter. While yet in the employ of his brother they together moved to Mendon, Monroe county, where the latter established a pottery. While living here Heber married Vilate Murray, of Victor, a town near Mendon, but in the adjoining county of Ontario. Soon after his marriage he joined the Baptist church. Three weeks later, and some time in the winter of 1831, a number of the elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints began preaching in the town of Victor, and Heber C. Kimball and a number of the Youngs attended their meetings. Then followed the visit to the branch of the church in Columbia, Pennsylvania, mentioned above. After his return from Columbia he was baptized by Alpheus Gifford, on the 15th day of April, 1832. During the summer of 1832 Heber C. Kimball was ordained an elder and with the Youngs labored part of his time in the ministry, and succeeded in raising up several small branches of the church.
[^17] These are the assistants of the apostles in the foreign ministry of the church, and now (1929) number 220 quorums of seventy members each, making a body of men, when the quorums are full, of more than fifteen thousand. Of this organization more will be said later.
[^18] The circumstances of this first meeting between the Prophet and his successor are thus detailed by Brigham Young in his Autobiography, published in the Millennial Star, 1863, vol. xxv, No. 28, p. 439: "In September, 1832, Brother Heber C. Kimball took his horse and wagon, Brother Joseph Young and myself accompanying him, and started for Kirtland to see the Prophet. We visited many friends on the way, and some branches of the church. We exhorted them and prayed with them, and I spoke in tongues. Some pronounced it genuine and from the Lord, and others pronounced it of the devil. We proceeded to Kirtland and stopped at John P. Greene's, who had just arrived there with his family. We rested a few minutes, took some refreshments and started to see the Prophet. We went to his father's house and learned that he was in the woods chopping. We immediately repaired to the woods, where we found the Prophet, and two or three of his brothers, chopping and hauling wood. Here my joy was full at the privilege of shaking the hand of the Prophet of God, and receiving the sure testimony, by the spirit of prophecy, that he was all that any man could believe him to be a true Prophet. He was happy to see us and bid us welcome. We soon returned to his house, he accompanying us.
