B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XXIV

THE PROPHET'S ACTIVITIES—SUNDRY REVELATIONS—A PROPHECY ON WAR—DOCTRINAL DEVELOPMENT

THE activities of the Prophet during the remainder of the year after his return from Missouri to Kirtland in June, consisted principally of, first, a hurried journey to Albany, New York, and Boston, in company with Bishop Whitney. The latter had been required by revelation [^1] to visit those cities, chiefly as the bishop of Kirtland and the eastern branches; and to negotiate the loan of fifteen thousand dollars authorized by the action of the brethren at Independence in the early part of May. Second, the Prophet continued the work of revising the English Bible. And third, received sundry revelations of profoundest doctrinal importance.

One of these revelations received on the 22nd and 23rd of September dealt with the matter of "priesthood," of which explanations have already been given. [^2] Instruction was also given to the ministry of the church, to the effect that in going into the world to preach the gospel of the kingdom the elders go without purse and script, taking no thought for the morrow for what they should eat or drink or where withal they should be clothed—"let the morrow take thought for the things of itself." Also the manner in which they should deliver their message was indicated:

"Neither take ye thought before hand what ye shall say, but treasure up in your minds continually the words of life, and it shall be given you in the very hour that portion that shall be meted unto every man."

The saints were sharply reproved, and more especially those living in Zion—Missouri. "And your minds," said the Lord, addressing the Prophet and the six elders in whose presence the revelation was received—

"Your minds in times past have been darkened because of unbelief, and because you have treated lightly the things you have received; which vanity, and unbelief hath brought the whole church under condemnation. And this condemnation resteth upon the children of Zion, even all; and they shall remain under this condemnation until they repent and remember the new covenant, even the Book of Mormon and the former commandments which I have given them, not only to say, but to do according to that which I have written, that they may bring forth fruit meet for their Father's kingdom, otherwise there remaineth a scourge and a judgment to be poured out upon the children of Zion: for shall the children of the kingdom pollute my holy land? Verily I say unto you, Nay."

The promise of the spiritual blessings of the gospel were renewed and emphasized:

As I said unto mine apostles I say unto you again, that every soul who believeth on your words, and is baptized by water for the remission of sins, shall receive the Holy Ghost.

And these signs shall follow them that believe: in my name they shall do many wonderful works; in my name they shall cast out devils; in my name they shall heal the sick; in my name they shall open the eyes of the blind, and unstop the ears of the deaf; and the tongue of the dumb shall speak; and if any man shall administer poison unto them it shall not hurt them; and the poison of a serpent shall not have power to harm them.

But a commandment I give unto them, that they shall not boast themselves of these things, neither speak them before the world, for these things are given unto you for your profit and for salvation.

THE LORD HATH BROUGHT AGAIN ZION

Some parts of the revelation will rank high as inspired literature, of which the following prelude and anthem is an example:

PRELUDE

"I the Almighty have laid my hands upon the nations to scourge them for their wickedness: And plagues shall go forth, and they shall not be taken from the earth until I have completed my work, which shall be cut short in righteousness; until all shall know me who remain even from the least unto the greatest, and shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, and shall see eye to eye, and shall lift up their voice, and with the voice together shall they sing this new song, saying—

ANTHEM The Lord hath brought again Zion: The Lord hath redeemed his people, Israel, According to the election of grace, Which was brought to pass by the faith And covenant of their fathers. The Lord hath redeemed his people; And Satan is bound and time is no longer. The Lord hath gathered all things in one. The Lord hath brought down Zion from above. The Lord hath brought up Zion from beneath. The earth hath travailed and brought forth her strength; And truth is established in her bowels; And the heavens have smiled upon her; And she is clothed with the glory of her God; For he stands in the midst of his people. Glory, and honor, and power, and might, Be ascribed to our God; for he is full of mercy, Justice, grace and truth, and peace, For ever and ever, Amen." [^3]

AGITATION OF WAR BETWEEN THE STATES

Towards the close of 1832 a great political crisis arose in the United States. The "protective tarriff" law passed in 1828 by congress was from its inception distasteful to the south—to the cotton-growing states—as being inimical to their industrial and commercial interests; and when in the spring of 1832 additional duties were imposed on foreign goods, it led to threatened rebellion in South Carolina. A state convention was called and met on the 19th of November, the governor of the state being made president of the convention. That assembly declared the late tariff measure unconstitutional, and therefore null and void; and proclaimed that any attempt to enforce the collection of duties in the port of Charleston, would be resisted by arms, and result in the withdrawal of South Carolina from the Union. The state legislature meeting directly after the adjournment of the convention enacted laws in support of these determinations, military preparations were begun and civil war seemed inevitable. But Andrew Jackson was then the chief executive of the nation, and met the crisis by issuing a proclamation on the 10th of December, denying the right of any state to nullify any act of the national government, and warned those fomenting rebellion in South Carolina that the laws of the United States would be strictly enforced by military power if necessary. The prompt action and the well known firmness of President Jackson checked the rising tide of rebellion, and in February, 1833, Henry Clay introduced his compromise tariff measure gradually reducing the obnoxious duties, and for a time the agitation ceased. [^4]

It was during this agitation, namely on the 25th of December, that Joseph Smith received a revelation on "War." Naturally a mind as active as the Prophet's would be exercised by a question so important and far reaching as this threatened rebellion in South Carolina, and thus he delivered himself upon the subject:

REVELATION AND PROPHECY ON WAR

"Verily, thus said the Lord, concerning the wars that will shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina, which will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls. The days will come that war will be poured out upon all nations, beginning at that place; For behold, the Southern States shall be divided against the Northern States, and the Southern States will call on other nations, even the nation of Great Britain, as it is called, and they shall also call upon other nations, in order to defend themselves against other nations; and then war shall be poured out upon all nations.

And it shall come to pass, after many days, slaves shall rise up agains their masters, who shall be marshaled and disciplined for war: And it shall come to pass also, that the remnants who are left of the land [the native American Indians] will marshal themselves, and shall become exceeding angry, and shall vex the Gentiles with a sore vexation:

And thus, with the sword, and by bloodshed, the inhabitants of the earth shall mourn; and with famine, and plague, and earthquakes, and the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also, shall the inhabitants of the earth be made to feel the wrath, and indignation and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the consumption decreed, hath made a full end of all nations; that the cry of the saints, and of the blood of the saints, shall cease to come up into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth, from the earth, to be avenged of their enemies. Wherefore, stand ye in holy places, and be not moved, until the day of the Lord come; for behold it cometh quickly, saith the Lord. Amen." [^5]

Once afterwards the Prophet made allusion to this prediction of war between the states, namely at a meeting in Ramus, Hancock county, Illinois, on the 2nd of April, 1843, when he said:

"I prophesy, in the name of the Lord God, that the commencement of the difficulties which will cause much bloodshed previous to the coming of the Son of Man will be in South Carolina. It may probably arise through the slave question. This a voice declared to me while I was praying earnestly on the subject, December 25th, 1832." [^6]

REFLECTIONS ON THE REVELATION ON WAR

I am careful to make these statements that the reader may have ample assurance that the revelation and prophecy preceded the event of the great American Civil War. The revelation containing the prophecy was given on the 25th of December, 1832. The first shot fired in the great war was fired early on the morning of April 12th, 1861. Hence the prediction preceded the commencement of its fulfillment by twenty-eight years, three months and seventeen days. Ten years before the war began, the prophecy was published in England and circulated both in that country and in the United States. There can be no question, therefore, as to the prophecy preceding the event.

Deeming her interests threatened, and the institution of slavery doomed if Abraham Lincoln was elected, on November 5th, 1860, the legislature of South Carolina met to choose presidential electors, and Governor William H. Gist in his message to that legislature recommended that in the event of Abraham Lincoln's election to the presidency, a convention of the people of the state be immediately called to consider and determine for themselves the mode and measure of redress. He expressed the opinion that the only alternative left in the event of Lincoln's election was "the secession of South Carolina from the federal union."

Abraham Lincoln being elected in November, 1860, on the 17th of that month, an ordinance of secession was unanimously adopted by the legislature of South Carolina, the first act of the kind by any of the states.

On the 10th of November, 1860, the United States senators from South Carolina, James N. Hammond and James Chestnut, Jun., resigned their seats, being the first of the senators to take that step.

On the 24th of November, 1860, South Carolina's representatives in congress withdrew; they were the first representatives to do so. [^7]

Members to a state convention called were chosen on the 3rd of December, 1860, to take measures for maintaining the "sovereignty" of South Carolina. The convention was assembled in Charleston. [^8]

On the 20th of December, the convention passed the ordinance of secession and Governor Pickins—just elected—announced on the same date the repeal, by the good people of South Carolina, the ordinance of May 23rd, 1788, by which South Carolina had ratified the federal constitution, and declared "the dissolution of the union between the state of South Carolina and the other states under the name of the United States." The governor's proclamation also announced to the world "that the state of South Carolina is, as she has a right to be, a separate, sovereign, free and independent state; and, as such, has a right to levy war, conclude peace, negotiate treaties, leagues, or covenants, and to do all acts whatsoever that rightly pertain to a free and independent state. Done in the eighty-fifth year of the sovereignty and independence of South Carolina. [^9]

The act of rebellion on the part of South Carolina was completed. She was followed in the act of rebellion by ten other southern states, as follows—I take the date on which the state conventions passed their secession ordinances to be the date on which the rebellion of the respective states was completed: Mississippi, January 9th, 1861; Florida, January 10th; Alabama, January 11th; Georgia, January 19th; Louisiana, January 26th; Texas, February 1st; Virginia, April 17th; Arkansas, May 6th; North Carolina, May 20th; Tennessee, June 8th, all of the same year, 1861. [^10] And thus truly the southern states were "divided against the northern states."

Not only in these several acts of rebellion did South Carolina take the initiative, but actual hostilities was begun by her, and the first gun in the war between the states was fired from her shores.

On the 11th of April, 1861, General Beauregard, in command of the Confederate forces in Charleston demanded the evacuation of Fort Sumter. Major Anderson refused to comply with the demand, whereupon, early on the morning of the 12th of April, General Beauregard opened fire on the fort from his batteries of about thirty heavy guns and mortars, to which the guns of the fort promptly replied. The bombardment lasted thirty-two hours; and then Major Anderson capitulated, though the fleet from the north was within view during the bombardment.

"This was the beginning of a war between the states of the federal union, which has been truly characterized as 'one of the most tremendous conflicts on record.' The din of its clangor reached the remotest parts of the earth and the people of all nations looked on for four years and upwards, in wonder and amazement, as its gigantic proportions loomed forth, and its hideous engines of destruction of human life and everything of human structure were terribly displayed in its sanguinary progress and grievous duration." [^11]

Though Messrs. Mason and Slidell did not succeed in securing the open assistance of Great Britain, yet it is well known that British sympathy was with the Confederate cause; and so far did this sympathy lead England to violate the law of nations that, against the protests of the United States' minister at the court of St. James, she allowed the confederate war vessels Alabama and Florida, built by Messrs. Laird & Co., shipbuilders, Liverpool, England, to put to sea. These vessels did immense damage to northern states shipping. The Alabama alone captured sixty-five merchant vessels belonging to the United States; and destroyed some ten million dollars worth of property. Finally the United States warship Kearsarge sunk her off the coast of France, near Cherbourg. This Alabama trouble led to ill feeling between England and the United States which was not finally settled until the 27th of June, 1872, when the Geneva Board of Arbitration decided that England should pay to the United States the sum of fifteen million five hundred thousand dollars, an amount really in excess of the demands of merchants and others claiming the loss of property through depredation of the Alabama.

"* * * Both sides during the struggle, relied for means to support it upon the issue of paper money, and upon loans secured by bonds. An enormous public debt was thus created by each, and the aggregate of money thus expended on both sides, including the loss and sacrifice of property, could not have been less than 8,000,000,000 of dollars—a sum fully equal to three-fourths of the assessed valuation of the taxable property of all the states together when it commenced."

To the terrible loss of life and property let there be added the consideration of the suffering of the wounded and the sick who languished in loathsome prisons; the sorrow of widows and orphans who looked in vain for the return of husbands and fathers, who marched in the fulness of manly strength to the war; the anguish of parents, whose dim eyes looked in vain for sons thrown into unknown graves; and the gentler yet equally tender sorrows of sisters which in the fierce war lost the companions of their childhood. Let all this, I say, be taken into account, as resulting from this war and the "misery of many souls," no less than the death of many others will be apparent.

It will be observed that in the revelation the statement is made that the southern states will call upon "other nations" to aid her in the war between the states; and specifies Great Britain as among these "other nations:" "And the southern states shall call upon other nations," it continues, "even the nation of Great Britain, as it is called, and they shall also call upon other nations in order to defend themselves against other nations; and then [when Great Britain does that] war shall be poured out upon all nations."

Take note that this mis-print in the revelation, "thus" instead of "then," was discovered and corrected in the first volume of the History of the Church, Period I, in 1902, twelve years before the outbreak of the World War of 1914.

England through many years trusted to the strength of her navy to guarantee the integrity of her far-flung empire; and her statesmen prided themselves on what they called England's policy of "Splendid Isolation." That is to say, her freedom from entangling alliances with continental European powers, and for matter of that, with other world powers. But when Germany began its rivalry in naval construction against England, some years before the outbreak of the World War of 1914-1918, then England lost her sense of security based upon the strength of her navy, and turned to other nations—"called upon other nations, in order to defend herself against other nations," then was the signal given for the "war upon all nations."

THE WORLD WAR

England formed her entente alliance with France, and later with other world powers, with what result is common historical knowledge. Even casual observation of the leading events and the results of that war will bring conviction that it was in a large measure the fulfillment of this prediction of the Prophet Joseph Smith, uttered more than four score years earlier, that "war would be poured out upon all nations;" for during its continuance "sixteen established nations and three new ones which the war brought forth [making nineteen], assembled their human powers for the great conflict, fifteen on one side and four on the other." Against one or more of the four nations—the European central powers—twelve other nations declared war, but did not actively indulge in it; thus making thirty-one nations which declared war. Of the nations remaining outside this number, five other independent nations severed their relations with one or more of the four original aggressors (Germanic powers and their allies). "All were seriously affected." Authoritative tables give the grand total of all armies mobilized at 59,176,864. Direct military deaths out of this number are set down as 7,781,806; the wounded at 18,681,257, prisoners and missing 7,080,580; making a total of direct military casualties of 33,434,443. This is only a statement of military casualties however. The same authority sets down the number of civilians as being greater from famine, disease, and massacres than those who fell in the military operations. Of these two classes are named: civilians who were killed by direct military causes, and those who died from indirect causes. Of the first class the number was 100,082; and the second—those who died from indirect causes, among the Armenians, Syrians, Jews, and Greeks—massacred or starved by the Turks—are numbered at 4,000,000. The deaths numbered beyond the normal mortality of influenza and pneumonia induced by the war is placed at 4,000,000. The Serbians who died through diseases, or massacre, numbered 1,085,441. Making the total of deaths in these two classes 9,085,441, so that with military deaths and civilian deaths, resulting from the war, make a grand total of 16,967,329 deaths. And of the more than 18,000,000 who were wounded in battle 30% or about 6,000,000, were made permanent human wrecks. [^12]

The destruction of property, the waste and destruction and the misery ever attendant upon war—war's other names in fact—is beyond all human expression or comprehension and I undertake no representation of it in figures. But who may deny that the facts above stated make up a case where war was literally "poured out upon all nations;" and that by "the sword and by bloodshed the inhabitants of the earth were made to mourn?" How much more calamity the world will have to endure under this prediction—how much of "famine and plague, and earthquake, and the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also," remains to be seen.

In our several Indian uprisings since the close of the Civil War, many see the fulfillment of that part of the prophecy which declares that the "remnants who are left of the land [the American Indians] will marshal themselves, and shall become exceeding angry, and shall vex the Gentiles with a sore vexation." As for the remainder of the prophecy and its fulfillment, which predicts still more extensive and destructive wars—those are events of the future, to be wrought out as God wills.

THE OLIVE LEAF

In addition to these revelations given in the closing months of the year 1832, one more was given on the 27th of December, which the Prophet himself called the "Olive Leaf," which he explained to mean, "The Lord's Message of Peace to us,"—i. e. to the elders and saints in Kirtland. It is a revelation of peculiar power and beauty, dealing with lofty spiritual themes, and deep philosophical questions, as well as giving practical instructions for the saints, as a topical outline will show. [^14]

The Lord declares his acceptance of the saints and renews upon them the promise and gift of the Holy Spirit; gives assurance of the resurrection of the dead; proclaims "the spirit and the body" to be the "soul of man," that the resurrection is the redemption of the "soul;" that the redemption of the soul is "through him who quickeneth all things, in whose bosom it is decreed that the poor and the meek of the earth shall inherit it."

The final sanctification of the earth is proclaimed, that those worthy of a celestial glory may possess it; for this intent was it created, and those inhabitants of the earth who have not been able to abide a celestial law cannot receive a celestial glory, and hence must receive another, even a lesser glory, and inhabit another kingdom.

The co-existence and eternity of matter and extension of space is affirmed; also the universality and sovereign power of law. The immanence of God, by his Spirit, in the infinite universe is proclaimed in this revelation; also it declares that the planetary system of the infinite universe is inhabited by sentient beings—the children of God.

Surely these are lofty themes! This is knowledge worthy of God to reveal; worthy of a world to receive, and by it be enlightened. [^15]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This is understood by the church to mean tea and coffee.
[^2] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxix. Given Feb. 27, 1833.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cvii:91, 92.
[^4] It was doubtless the thought here expressed in this revelation that led one of the prominent disciples to sing, after the death of the Prophet—
[^5] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xc.
[^6] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 334.
[^7] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxviii:77-80, 117-119.
[^8] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xciii:36. This has been the heraldic motto of two important church publications: The Contributor, a monthly magazine, published in Utah, The Organ of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations, an organization having in view the physical, intellectual, moral, social and spiritual development of the young men of the church, and which continued through seventeen years. It was succeeded in the same line by the Improvement Era, now (1929) current, which, in addition to being the organ of the young men's associations is also the organ of the quorums of the priesthood of the church.
[^9] A "stake" of Zion is a territorial subdivision of the church comprising several ecclesiastical wards, placed under the direction of a special presidency. The region of country in and about Independence, Missouri, is "Zion" or the "Center Place"—the location of the future "Holy City" of America; other groups of settlements or ecclesiastical wards are and will be "stakes" of Zion.
[^10] The temple was to be called "The House of the Lord for the Presidency of the High and Most Holy Priesthood, after the Order of Melchizedek." It was to be eighty-seven by sixty-one feet, and twenty-eight feet high—two stories. Ten feet taken off the east end for stairways to the upper floor, leaving the main halls seventy-seven by sixty-one feet. The main features of the internal arrangements were that a series of three pulpits or stands rising one above another were arranged in the east and west end of the halls, to be occupied by the several presidencies of the Melchizedek and Aaronic priesthood respectively, with drop curtains, from the ceilings so arranged as to admit of each hall being divided into four compartments when thought necessary.
[^11] Stephens' History of the United States, p. 610.
[^12] The above statements are taken from Current History for February, 1919. The statistics being compiled by Walter Littlefield. The figures of the military losses were all compiled from official data or where these were not obtainable, they were taken from official estimates. (See Current History, February, 1919, published by The New York Times.)
[^14] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxviii.
[^15] All these themes are enlarged upon in a subsequent and more appropriate chapter.
