B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XXVI

THE EXPULSION OF THE SAINTS FROM JACKSON COUNTY, MISSOURI—FOREWARNINGS OF DANGER—CHARGES OF THE OLD SETTLERS AGAINST THE SAINTS—REFUTATION OF THE CHARGES

THE attainment of the ideal is difficult. In nothing is it more so than in righteousness. With the name "saint," there goes the idea of a perfect life; yet, upon second thought, it will be remembered that those who have borne that title have done so in virtue of their aspirations for sanctity rather than absolute attainment of it. And this because, as remarked by Guizot, "In nothing, perhaps, is it given to man ever to arrive at the goal he has proposed to himself; his glory is in advancing towards it." These reflections are pertinent at the opening of a chapter in this History that is to deal with the expulsion of the Latter-day Saints from Jackson county, Missouri, since their failure to meet perfectly the high requirements of the law of God given to them in their land of promise is, in large part, responsible for what befell them.

UNEASINESS IN ZION

In the visit made to the settlements of the saints in Jackson county, in the spring of 1832, by Joseph Smith and other leading elders, as detailed in a former chapter, all matters of difference between the leaders in Missouri and Ohio were amicably adjusted and settled, and each gave the other the right hand of fellowship in token of perfect good will and friendship. Not long after the departure of the Ohio brethren, however, suspicions, evil surmisings and jealousies reasserted themselves and found expression in both spoken and written word, and in failure to carry out the plans that had been agreed upon for the general welfare of the church. This had become so manifest towards the close of the year that it was a cause of deep anxiety to the Prophet and other leaders of the church at Kirtland, and led to the writing of two communications to the brethren in Zion, of great historical importance, and also important as exhibiting the spirit in which the Prophet and his associates worked in maintaining and developing the New Dispensation of the gospel committed to their hands. One of these letters was written by the Prophet, the other by a conference of high priests, per Orson Hyde and Hyrum Smith. The Prophet's communication was accompanied by the revelation called the "Olive Leaf," the main features of which were considered in the closing paragraphs of chapter xxiv and was addressed to Elder W. W. Phelps.

THE PROPHET'S LETTER—WARNING

"Kirtland, January 14, 1833.

"Brother William W. Phelps:

"I send you the 'Olive Leaf' which we have plucked from the tree of Paradise, the Lord's message of peace to us; for though our brethren in Zion indulge in feelings towards us which are not according to the requirements of the new covenant, yet, we have the satisfaction of knowing that the Lord approves of us, and has accepted us, and established his name in Kirtland for the salvation of the nations; for the Lord will have a place whence his word will go forth, in these last days, in purity; for if Zion will not purify herself, so as to be approved of in all things, in his sight, he will seek another people; for his work will go on until Israel is gathered, and they who will not hear his voice, must expect to feel his wrath. Let me say unto you, seek to purify yourselves, and also all the inhabitants of Zion, lest the Lord's anger be kindled to fierceness. Repent, repent, is the voice of God to Zion; and strange as it may appear, yet it is true, mankind will persist in self-justification until all their iniquity is exposed, and their character past being redeemed, and that which is treasured up in their hearts be exposed to the gaze of mankind. I say to you (and what I say to you I say to all), hear the warning voice of God, lest Zion fall, and the Lord swear in his wrath the inhabitants of Zion shall not enter into his rest.

"The brethren in Kirtland pray for you unceasingly, for knowing the terrors of the Lord, they greatly fear for you. You will see that the Lord commanded us, in Kirtland, to build a house of God, and establish a school for the prophets, this is the word of the Lord to us, and we must, yea, the Lord helping us, we will obey: as on conditions of our obedience he has promised us great things; yea, even a visit from the heavens to honor us with his own presence. We greatly fear before the Lord lest we should fail of this great honor, which our Master proposes to confer on us; we are seeking for humility and great faith lest we be ashamed in his presence. Our hearts are greatly grieved at the spirit which is breathed both in your letter and that of Brother Gilbert's, the very spirit which is wasting the strength of Zion like a pestilence; and if it is not detected and driven from you, it will ripen Zion for the threatened judgments of God. Remember God sees the secret springs of human action, and knows the hearts of all living.

"Brother, suffer us to speak plainly, for God has respect to the feelings of his saints, and he will not suffer them to be tantalized with impunity. Tell Brother Gilbert that low insinuations God hates; but he rejoices in an honest heart, and knows better who is guilty than he does. We send him this warning voice, and let him fear greatly for himself, lest a worse thing overtake him; all we can say by way of conclusion is, if the fountain of our tears be not dried up, we will still weep for Zion. This from your brother who trembles for Zion, and for the wrath of heaven, which awaits her if she repent not.

(Signed) JOSEPH SMITH, JUN.

"P. S.—I am not in the habit of crying peace, when there is no peace; and, knowing the threatened judgments of God, I say, woe unto them who are at ease in Zion; fearfulness will speedily lay hold of the hypocrite. I did not suspect you had lost the commandments, but thought from your letters you had neglected to read them, otherwise you would not have written as you did.

"It is vain to try to hide a bad spirit from the eyes of them who are spiritual, for it will show itself in speaking and writing, as well as in all other conduct. It is also needless to make great pretensions when the heart is not right; the Lord will expose it to the view of his faithful saints. We wish you to render the Star as interesting as possible, by setting forth the rise, progress, and faith of the church, as well as the doctrine; for if you do not render it more interesting than at present, it will fall, and the church suffer a great loss thereby.

(Signed) J. S., JUN"

SHALL "THE CHILDREN" POLLUTE THE INHERITANCE?

The letter from the conference of high priests alludes to past difficulties; also to a revelation of September 22nd and 23rd [^1] in which it was said that the minds of the saints in times past had been darkened because of unbelief, and because they had treated lightly the things they had received, which vanity and unbelief had brought the whole church under condemnation, "and this condemnation resteth upon the children of Zion [having reference to the saints in Missouri] even all: And they shall remain under this condemnation until they repent and remember the new covenant, even the Book of Mormon and the former commandments which I have given them, not only to say, but to do according to that which I have written, that they may bring forth fruit mete for their Father's kingdom, otherwise there remaineth a scourge and a judgment to be poured out upon the children of Zion: For shall the children of the kingdom pollute my holy land? Verily, I say unto you, Nay."

The answers that had been received by the brethren in Ohio to these reproofs and remonstrances were by no means satisfactory; therefore the conference of high priests wrote to the brethren in Zion as follows:

LETTER OF THE CONFERENCE OF HIGHPRIESTS TO THE BRETHREN IN ZION

"At the time Joseph, Sidney, and Newel left Zion, all matters of hardness and misunderstanding were settled and buried (as they supposed), and you gave them the hand of fellowship; but afterwards you brought up all these things again, in a censorious spirit, accusing Brother Joseph in rather an indirect way of seeking after monarchial power and authority. This came to us in Brother Corrill's letter of June 2nd. We are sensible that this is not the thing Brother Joseph is seeking after, but to magnify the high office and calling whereunto he has been called and appointed by the command of God, and the united voice of this church. It might not be amiss for you to call to mind the circumstances of the Nephites, and the children of Israel rising up against their prophets, and accusing them of seeking after kingly power, and see what befell them, and take warning before it is too late.

"Brother Gilbert's letter of December 10th has been received and read attentively, and the low, dark, and blind insinuations, which were in it, were not received by us as from the fountain of light, though his claims and pretensions to holiness were great. We are not unwilling to be chastened or rebuked for our faults, but we want to receive it in language that we can understand, as Nathan said to David—'Thou art the man!' We are aware that Brother Gilbert is doing much, and has a multitude of business on hand; but let him purge out all the old leaven, and do his business in the spirit of the Lord, and then the Lord will bless him, otherwise the frown of the Lord will remain upon him. There is manifestly an uneasiness in Brother Gilbert, and a fearfulness that God will not provide for his saints in these last days, and these fears lead him on to covetousness. This ought not so to be; but let him do just as the Lord has commanded him, and then the Lord will open his coffers, and his wants will be liberally supplied. But if this uneasy, covetous disposition be cherished by him, the Lord will bring him to poverty, shame and disgrace.

"Brother Phelps' letter of December 15th is also received and carefully read, and it betrays a lightness of spirit that ill becomes a man placed in the important and responsible station that he is placed in. If you have 'fat beef, and potatoes,' eat them in singleness of heart, and boast not yourselves in these things. Think not brethren, that we make a man an offender for a word; this is not the case; but we want to see a spirit in Zion, by which the Lord will build it up; that is the plain, solemn, and pure spirit of Christ. Brother Phelps requested in his last letter that Brother Joseph should come to Zion; but we say that Brother Joseph will not settle in Zion until she repent, and purify herself, and abide by the new covenant, and remember the commandments that have been given her, to do them as well as say them. * * *

"We have the best of feelings, and feelings of the greatest anxiety for the welfare of Zion: we feel more like weeping over Zion than we do like rejoicing over her, for we know that the judgments of God hang over her, and will fall upon her except she repent, and purify herself before the Lord, and put away from her every foul spirit. We now say to Zion, this once, in the name of the Lord, repent! repent! awake! awake! put on thy beautiful garments, before you are made to feel the chastening rod of him whose anger is kindled against you. Let not satan tempt you to think we want to make you bow to us, to domineer over you, for God knows this is not the case: our eyes are watered with tears, and our hearts are poured out to God in prayer for you, that he will spare you and turn away his anger from you. * * *

"* * * We now close our epistle by saying unto you, the Lord has commanded us to purify ourselves, to wash our hands and our feet, that he may testify to his Father and our Father, and to his God and our God, that we are clean from the blood of this generation; and before we could wash our hands and our feet, we were constrained to write this letter. Therefore, with the feelings of inexpressible anxiety for your welfare, we say again, Repent, repent, or Zion must suffer, for the scourge and judgment must come upon her.

"Let the bishop read this to the elders, that they may warn the members of the scourge that is coming, except they repent. Tell them to read the Book of Mormon, and obey it; read the commandments that are printed, and obey them; yea, humble yourselves under the mighty hand of God, that peradventure he may turn his anger from you. Tell them that they have not come up to Zion to sit down in idleness, neglecting the things of God, but they are to be diligent and faithful in obeying the new covenant."

The high priests refer to the Prophet's letter given above and with the following explanation, endorse it.

"There is one clause in Brother Joseph's letter which you may not understand; that is this, 'If the people of Zion did not repent, the Lord would seek another place, and another people.' Zion is the place where the temple will be built, and the people gathered, but all people upon that holy land being under condemnation, the Lord will cut off, if they repent not, and bring another race upon it, that will serve him. The Lord will seek another place to bring forth and prepare his word to go forth to the nations, and as we said before, so we say again, Brother Joseph will not settle in Zion, except she repent, and serve God, and obey the new covenant. With this explanation, the conference sanctions Brother Joseph's letter."

PARTIAL REPENTANCE OF THE INHABITANTS OF ZION

These reproofs and warnings of impending calamities leave nothing to be desired in the matter of frankness. They made some impression, too, on those to whom they were addressed. The above communications bear the date of January 14th, 1833; on the 26th of February following a solemn assembly was called at which a humble repentance was manifested by the brethren in Zion, and such acknowledgments made by letter to the brethren in Kirtland that they were satisfactory to the presidency.

In a revelation given on the 8th of March referring to the matter of the Prophet Joseph going to Zion and presiding there—a matter that Missouri saints seemed very much to urge—it was said:

"Behold ye shall write this commandment, and say unto your brethren in Zion, in love, greeting, that I have called you also to preside over Zion in mine own due time; therefore, let them cease wearying me concerning this matter. Behold, I say unto you that your brethren in Zion begin to repent, and the angels rejoice over them." [^2]

Still there were some with whom the Lord was not well pleased, and they were named. "And the bishop also," said the revelation, "and others have many things to repent of. But verily I say unto you, that I the Lord will contend with Zion, and plead with her strong ones, and chasten her until she overcomes and is clean before me." [^3]

Viewed in the light of the calamities which so soon afterwards befell the saints in Missouri, these utterances of the revelations and the letters were warning and prophecy to them.

The question of the presiding authority in Zion was a vexed one for some time. There seemed to be a general understanding that Bishop Partridge was the presiding authority; still when certain high priests and elders who had been appointed to travel and preach to the world came up to Zion they, in some instances, assumed to set in order the branches of the church, not then understanding the virtue and power of appointment in the priesthood. This led to some confusion, in consequence of which a council of high priests was called for the 26th of March. This council reverted to the instructions given at the solemn assembly of the church held the previous year, on the occasion of the Prophet's visit among them, and they determined to follow the plan then advised, viz, that the seven high priests who were sent from Kirtland to build up Zion, viz, Oliver Cowdery, W. W. Phelps, John Whitmer, Algernon Sidney Gilbert, Bishop Edward Partridge, and his two counselors, Isaac Morley and John Corrill, should stand at the head of affairs in Zion, and, with the consent of the respective branches, should appoint presiding elders over each; of these branches there were now ten.

These efforts at conforming to the requirements previously made of them by the law of the Lord and the counsel of the Prophet, brought the spirit of peace to the saints in Zion; and on the third anniversary of the organization of the church, the 6th of April, 1833, about eighty officers and the saints from the several branches of the church in Jackson county, assembled at what was called "The Ferry" on "Big Blue"—a small forest-lined stream a few miles west of Independence—to celebrate the event. The spring broke early in western Missouri that year, and it was truly a season of hope and joy to the saints. It was the first time the church had celebrated the anniversary of its organization. The progress made was sufficient to be conspicuous. Only three years before, in the house of Peter Whitmer, Sen., the church had been organized with six members, and only nine had been baptized up to that time. Within three years the gospel had been preached in nearly all the states of the Union, in Canada and among a number of the Indian tribes. Thousands had hailed the message with delight, and numerous branches of the church had been established. The place of the city of Zion had been revealed, and nearly a thousand of the saints had gathered there. A printing establishment had been founded, the precious truths of the New Dispensation were being published to the world; and all this had been accomplished in the face of poverty and bitter opposition.

THE MEETING OF UNCONGENIAL ELEMENTS—"OLD SETTLERS" AND NEW SAINTS

Uncongenial elements of population were meeting in Jackson county when the saints came in contact with the "old settlers." The "old settlers" were principally from the mountainous portions of the southern states. They had settled along the water courses, in the forests which lined their banks, instead of out on the broad and fertile prairies, which only required fencing to prepare them for cultivation. It was the work of years to clear a few acres of the timber lands, but with these small fields the "old settlers" were content. They had no disposition to beautify their homes, or even make them convenient or comfortable. They lived in their log cabins without windows, and very frequently without floors other than the ground; and the dingy, smoked log walls were unadorned by pictures or other ornaments. They were uneducated; those who could read or write being the exception; and they had an utter contempt for the refinements of life. They were hospitable to the stranger, and even generous to an enemy in supplying him food and shelter when in need, yet they were narrow-minded, ferocious, and jealous of those who sought to obtain better homes, and who aspired to something better in life than had yet entered into the hearts of these people.

There was another element in western Missouri which did not tend to the improvement of its society. Western Missouri at the time of which I write, was on the frontiers of the United States, and therefore a place of refuge for those who had outraged the laws of society elsewhere. Here they were near the boundary line of the United States, and if pursued by the officers of the law, in a few hours they could cross the line out of their reach. These outcasts helped to give a more desperate complexion to the already reckless population of western Missouri.

The saints could not join the Missourians in their way of life—In Sabbath-breaking, profanity, horse-racing, idleness, and in all too prevalent drunkenness. They had been commanded to keep the Sabbath day holy, to keep themselves unspotted from the sins of the world. The fact of people having so little in common with each other was of itself calculated to beget a coldness and suspicion, which would soon ripen into dislike. The saints, too, for the most part, had come from the northern and New England states, and the dislike and suspicion that existed at that time between the people of the slaveholding and free states, was manifested toward the saints by their "southern" neighbors. Moreover, the "old settlers" were dear lovers of office, and the honors and emoluments growing out of it; and they greatly feared that the rapidly increasing Latter-day Saint population would soon out-number them, and that the offices would be wrested from them.

It must be admitted also that there is something very irritating in the message which the Church of the Latter-day Saints has to proclaim to the world; the churches are all wrong; their creeds are an abomination to the Lord; they teach for doctrine the commandments of men; they draw near to the Lord with their lips, but their hearts are far from him; they have a form of godliness but deny the power thereof—and hence a New Dispensation of the gospel has become necessary. All this of course was not likely to appeal sympathetically to the ministry or people of supposedly orthodox Christian churches, especially when such a message was delivered, as sometimes it must be admitted it was delivered, without due regard to the feelings of those to whom it was addressed. [^4]

As early as the spring of 1832 there began to appear signs of an approaching storm. In the deadly hours of the night the houses of some of the saints were stoned, the windows broken, and the inmates disturbed. In the fall of the same year a large quantity of hay in the stack belonging to the saints was burned, houses were shot into, and the people insulted with abusive language. In the month of April, 1833, the "old settlers" to the number of some three hundred met at Independence, to consult upon a plan for the destruction, or immediate removal, of the "Mormons" from Jackson county. They were unable, however, to unite on any plan, and the mob becoming the worse for liquor, the affair broke up in a "Missouri row."

The sectarian priests inhabiting Jackson and the surrounding counties were earnestly engaged in fanning the flames of prejudice, already burning in the public mind. The Rev. Finis Ewing, the head and front of the Cumberland Presbyterian church, published this statement: "The Mormons are the common enemies of mankind and ought to be destroyed." [^5]

The Rev. Pixley, who had been sent out by the Missionary Society to Christianize the savages of the west, spent his time in going from house to house, seeking to destroy the church by spreading slanderous falsehoods, to incite the people to acts of violence against the saints. [^6]

THE "OLD SETTLERS'" SECRET CONSTITUTION

Early in July, a document was in circulation known as the Secret Constitution, setting forth the alleged grievances of the mob, and binding all who signed it to assist in "removing the Mormons." The document set forth the following: The signers believed an important crisis was at hand in their civil society, because a pretended religious sect—the "Mormons"—had settled in their midst. The civil law did not afford them a sufficient guarantee against the threatening evils, and therefore they had determined to rid themselves of the "Mormons," "peaceably if they could, forcibly if they must," and for the better accomplishment of this object, they had organized themselves into a company—pledging to each other their "bodily powers, their lives, fortunes, and sacred honors.

The saints in this document are represented as being the very dregs of that society from which they came; and also as being poor, "idle, lazy, and vicious." They are accused of claiming to receive direct revelation from God; to heal the sick by the laying on of hands; to speak in unknown tongues by inspiration; and, in short, "to perform all the wonder-working miracles wrought by the inspired apostles and prophets of God;" all of which, the document claims, "is derogatory of God and religion, and subversive of human reason."

The signers of this document also accuse the saints of sowing dissensions and inspiring seditions among their slaves. They further charge that the "Mormons" had invited "free people of color" to settle in Jackson county; and state that the introduction of such a caste among their slaves, would instigate them to rebel against their masters, and to bloodshed.

The "Mormons" are also charged with having openly declared that God had given them the land of Jackson county; and that sooner or later they would possess it as an inheritance. The document then concludes by saying that if after timely warning, and receiving an adequate compensation for what property they could not take with them, the saints shall refuse to leave the county, such means as might be necessary to remove them were to be employed, and called a meeting of the signers to convene at the courthouse in Independence on the twentieth of July, to consult on subsequent movements. [^7]

It may not be amiss here to notice the several charges made against the saints:

"CIVIL LAW" NO PROTECTION TO OLD SETTLERS!

The statement made by the mob that the "civil law did not afford them a sufficient guarantee against the threatening evils" of which they complained, is good evidence that the saints, although they may have fallen far short of coming up to the full requirements of the spiritual laws of the gospel of Jesus Christ, had violated none of the laws of man. This is further evidenced by the statement of the mob in the address adopted at their meeting of the 20th of July and published in the Western Monitor, (printed at Fayette, Howard county, Missouri) where it is said as an excuse for their lawless intentions to resort to mob violence—"the evil is one that no one could have foreseen, and therefore is unprovided for by the laws; and the delays incident to legislation would put the mischief beyond remedy." In all which one plainly sees unconscious admission that the saints were not guilty of infractions of the laws of the land.

As to the saints being the dregs of the society from which they came—it is untrue; they had a respectable standing in the society from which they came, and that society was far in advance of civilization and enlightenment of the people of western Missouri. [^8]

The charge of "idleness" comes with a bad grace from the slaveholders of Missouri. Especially so since the charge is made against people chiefly from New England; who, whatever other faults they may have possessed can never be broadly charged with idleness. In addition to the saints who settled in Missouri having been trained from childhood to habits of industry in their former homes, they had received an express command from God to labor, and the idler was not to eat the bread nor wear the garment of the laborer; [^9] and unless the idler repented, he was to be cast out of the church. [^10]

The saints in Missouri, it is true, claimed to receive revelations from God through the Prophet Joseph Smith; and they also enjoyed the gifts of tongues, and of healing the sick through the anointing with oil and the prayer of faith, in fulfillment of the promises of the Lord; [^11] but how all this can be "derogatory of God and true religion," when these blessings of revelation and the enjoyment of the spiritual gifts enumerated are the same as those that were possessed by the primitive Christians, which they were encouraged to "desire," [^12] and which have ever been regarded as a crowning glory of the early church; or how they could be "subversive of human reason," can only be comprehended by a Missouri mob, seeking a vain excuse for the destruction of those for whom they had conceived an hatred.

THE NEW SETTLERS AND SLAVERY

The charge of sowing dissensions and inspiring seditions among the slaves, and inviting "free people of color" to settle in Jackson county, has no foundation in truth. The July number of the Evening and Morning Star, for 1833, contains an article on "free people of color," and publishes the law of Missouri relating to that class of people. "Free people of color" were negroes or mulattoes who were set free through the kindness of their masters, or who, by working extra hours, for which they were sometimes allowed pay, were able at last to purchase their liberty. Concerning such people the Missouri law provided that:

"If any negro or mulatto come into the state of Missouri, without a certificate from a court of record in some one of the United States, evidencing that he was a citizen of such state, on complaint before any justice of the peace, such negro or mulatto could be commanded by the justice to leave the state; and if the colored person so ordered did not leave the state within thirty days, on complaint of any citizen, such person could be again brought before the justice who might commit him to the common jail of the county, until the convening of the circuit court to inquire into the cause of commitment; and if it was found that the negro or mulatto had remained in the state contrary to the provisions of this statute, the court was authorized to sentence such person to receive ten lashes on his or her bare back, and then order him or her to depart from the state; if the person so treated should still refuse to go, then the same proceedings were to be repeated, and punishment inflicted as often as was necessary until such person departed."

And further: If any person brought into the state of Missouri a free negro or mulatto, without the aforesaid certificate of citizenship, for every negro or mulatto so brought into the state, the person offending was liable to a forfeit of five hundred dollars, to be recovered by action of debt in the name of the state. The editor of the Star commenting upon this law said:

"Slaves are real estate in this and other states, and wisdom would dictate great care among the branches of the church of Christ on this subject. So long as we have no special rule in the church as to people of color, let prudence guide; and while they, as well as we, are in the hands of a merciful God, we say: shun every appearance of evil." [^13]

Publishing this law, and the above comment, was construed by the "old settlers," to be an invitation to free people of color to settle in Jackson county! Whereupon an extra was published to the July number of the Star on the sixteenth of the month, which said:

"Our intention was not only to stop free people of color from emigrating to this state, but to prevent them from being admitted as members of the church. [^14] * * * Great care should be taken on this point. The saints must shun every appearance of evil. As to slaves we have nothing to say. In connection with the wonderful events of this age, much is doing towards abolishing slavery, and colonizing the blacks in Africa.

"We often lament the situation of our sister states in the south, and we fear, lest, as has been the case, the blacks should rise and spill innocent blood: for they are ignorant, and a little may lead them to disturb the peace of society. To be short, we are opposed to have free people of color admitted into the state; and we say, that none will be admitted into the church, for we are determined to obey the laws and constitutions of our country, that we may have that protection which the sons of liberty inherit from the legacy of Washington, through the favorable auspices of a Jefferson, and Jackson."

The Missourians claimed that this article was merely published to give directions and cautions to be observed by "colored brethren," to enable them upon their arrival in Missouri, to "claim and exercise the rights of citizenship." And this base falsehood was used to inflame the minds of the "old settlers" against the saints.

MISSOURI AND THE SAINTS' INHERITANCE

That certain over-zealous church members may have said the Lord would yet give them the land of Missouri for their inheritance, is doubtless true; but that they were to obtain it in any other than a legal way never entered their minds. They had been commanded of the Lord to purchase [^15] the land for an inheritance. Besides, the elders stationed in Zion, about this time, addressed an epistle to the churches throughout the United States, in which they alluded to the gathering of the ancient Israel, and pointing out the difference in their circumstances and those by which the saints were now surrounded. Ancient Israel had been compelled to obtain the lands of their inheritance by the sword. "But," the address adds, "to suppose that we can come up here and take possession of this land by the shedding of blood, would be setting at naught the law of the glorious gospel and also the word of our Great Redeemer: and to suppose that we can take possession of this country without making regular purchases of the same, according to the laws of our nation, would be reproaching this great republic, in which most of us were born, and under whose auspices we all have protection." Nothing then can be clearer than that while the saints may have said that Missouri would eventually be the land of their inheritance, they were expecting to obtain it in a perfectly legitimate manner—by purchase.

I have been particular in examining the charges made against the saints by their enemies in Jackson county, in order that it may be known that wherein the things charged were not in and of themselves innocent, and no cause for offense whatever, they were utterly without foundation in truth.

In answer to the call made for the citizens of Jackson county to assemble at the courthouse on the twentieth of July, 1833, to devise means to rid the county of the "Mormons," between four and five hundred gathered in from all parts of the county. Colonel Richard Simpson was elected chairman of the meeting, and James H. Flournoy and Colonel S. D. Lucas were chosen secretaries. A committee of seven was appointed by the chair to draft an address to the public, in relation to the object of the meeting; the following was the committee: Russel Hicks, Esq., Robert Johnson, Henry Childs, Esq., Colonel Jas. Hambright, Thomas Hudspeth, Joel F. Childs and Jas. M. Hunter.

APPEAL TO MOB VIOLENCE

The address prepared by this committee repeated the falsehoods concerning the saints interfering with slaves; inviting free people of color to settle in Jackson county; of the saints being the very dregs of the society from which they had emigrated; again charged them with most abject poverty, idleness, and of coming to obtain inheritances in Jackson county, "without money and without price." It declared that the evils which threatened their community, by the "Mormons" settling among them, were such as no one could have foreseen, and therefore they were unprovided for by the laws; and the delays incident to legislation would put the mischief beyond all remedy. It expressed the apprehension that if the saints were not interfered with, the day would not be far distant when the civil government of the county would be in their hands; when the sheriff, the justices, and the county judges would be "Mormons" or persons wishing to court their favor from motives of interest or ambition; and then the following:

"What would be the fate of our lives and property in the hands of jurors and witnesses who do not blush to declare, and would not, upon occasion, hesitate to swear, that they have wrought miracles, and have been the subjects of miraculous and supernatural cures, have conversed with God and his angels, and possess and exercise the gifts of divination, and of unknown tongues, and fired with the prospects of obtaining inheritances without money and without price—may better be imagined than described." [^16]

However, in speaking of the gifts of the Spirit which the saints enjoyed—revelation, prophecy, speaking in tongues, healing the sick, etc., the committee proposed to have nothing to say, but piously close the paragraph which refers to these things with the words—"Vengeance belongs to God alone!" For the other things with which they charged the saints—each and all of them were utterly false except it might be in the matter of poverty. But even in this the truth was not stated. A few cases aside, the "poverty" in question was that poverty of the pioneer newly arrived in the wilderness which is to be the subsequent field of his enterprises and triumphs. Quite generally the saints went into Jackson county prepared to purchase lands and build homes; but pending the accomplishment of that, there was much inconvenience and some suffering for want of shelter and clothing; but "abject poverty," there was none.

The conclusion of the mob in the whole matter was thus stated:

"We do hereby most solemnly declare that no Mormon shall in future move to or settle in this [Jackson] county that those now here, who shall give a definite pledge of their intention within a reasonable time to remove out of the county, shall be allowed to remain unmolested, until they have sufficient time to sell their property, and close their business without material sacrifice; that the editor of the Star be required forthwith to close his office, and discontinue the business of printing in this county; and as to all other stores and shops belonging to the sect, their owners must, in every case, strictly comply with the terms of the second article of this declaration, and upon failure, prompt and efficient measures will be taken to close the same; that the Mormon leaders here are required to use their influence in preventing any further immigration of their distant brethren to this county, and to counsel and advise their brethren here to comply with the above requisitions; that those who fail to comply with these requisitions be referred to those of their brethren who have the gifts of divination, and of unknown tongues, to inform them of the lot that awaits them." [^17]

This address was unanimously adopted by the meeting, and a committee of twelve appointed to wait upon the "Mormon" leaders, and see that the foregoing requisitions were assented to by them. In case of a refusal on the part of the "Mormons" to comply with these arbitrary, illegal, and unreasonable demands, the committee, acting as the organ of Jackson county, were to inform them that it was the fixed determination of the mob to adopt such means as would enforce their removal.

The committee called upon Edward Partridge, A. S. Gilbert, John Corrill, Isaac Morley, John Whitmer, and W. W. Phelps, and demanded that they cease publishing the Star and close the printing office; and that, as the presiding elders of the "Mormon" church, they agree to move out of the county forthwith. Three months were asked for by these brethren in which to consider the proposition, and to give them time to counsel with the church authorities in Ohio; as closing a printing office and removing twelve hundred people from their homes was a work of no small moment. But this time was denied them. They asked for ten days; but that was not granted; fifteen minutes only was allowed them in which to decide. At this the conference broke up, and the mob returned to the courthouse and reported to the meeting that they had called upon the "Mormon" leaders and that they refused to give a direct answer, but asked for time to consider the propositions and to counsel with their brethren in Ohio. The meeting then resolved that the printing office be razed to the ground, and the type and press destroyed.

With demoniac yells the mob surrounded the printing office and house of W. W. Phelps. Mrs. Phelps, with a sick infant in her arms, and the rest of the children, were forced out of their home, the furniture was thrown into the street and garden, the press was broken, the type pied; the revelations, book-work and papers were nearly all destroyed or kept by the mob; and the printing office and house of W. W. Phelps were both razed to the ground. Having reduced these buildings to a mass of ruins, the mob proceeded to demolish the mercantile establishment of Gilbert, Whitney & Co., and destroy the goods; but when Mr. Gilbert assured them that the goods would be packed by the twenty-third, they desisted from their work of destruction.

The fiendish hate of the mob, however, had not yet spent its force. With horrible yells and cursings loud, they sought for the leading elders. Men. women and children ran in all directions, not knowing what would befall them. The mob caught Bishop Edward Partridge and Charles Allen, and dragged them through the maddened crowd, which insulted and abused them along the road to the public square. Here two alternatives were presented them; either they must renounce their faith in the Book of Mormon or leave the county. The Book of Mormon they would not deny, nor consent to leave the county. Bishop Partridge, being permitted to speak, said that the saints had to suffer persecution in all ages of the world, and that he was willing to suffer for the sake of Christ, as the saints in former ages had done; that he had done nothing which ought to offend anyone, and that if they abused him, they would injure an innocent man. Here his voice was drowned by the tumult of the crowd, many of whom were shouting: "Call upon your God to deliver you—pretty Jesus you worship!" The two brethren, Partridge and Allen, were stripped of their clothing, and bedaubed with tar, mixed with lime, or pearl-ash, or some other flesh-eating acid, and a quantity of feathers scattered over them. They bore this cruel indignity and abuse with so much resignation and meekness that the crowd grew still, and appeared astonished at what they witnessed. The brethren were permitted to retire in silence.

The outrages of this day were the more reprehensible because of the character of the leaders of the mob. In the main they were county officers—the county judge, the constables, clerks of the court, and justices of the peace; while Lilburn W. Boggs, the lieutenant-governor,—who resided in Jackson county—the second officer in the state, was there quietly looking on and secretly aiding every measure of the mob—and who, walking among the ruins of the printing office and house of W. W. Phelps, remarked to some of the brethren, "You now know what our Jackson boys can do, and you must leave the county!" [^18]

NOTES

Referring to the charges made against the saints in the mob's so-called "Secret Constitution," Elder Parley P. Pratt, a participant in all these Missouri events, makes the following pertinent comment:

"I will briefly notice a few items of the foregoing bond of conspiracy, for I consider most of it as too barefaced to need any comment. In the first place I would inquire whether our belief as set forth in this declaration, as to gifts, miracles, revelations and tongues, is not the same that all the apostles and disciples taught, believed and practiced, and the doctrine of the New Testament?

"Secondly—I would inquire when the New Testament religion ceased, and a law revealed or instituted, which made blasphemy of the belief and practice of it? Or what holy religion the Jackson mob were speaking of, which was thrown into contempt by the revival of the New Testament religion?

"Thirdly—They complain of our society being very poor as to property; but have they never read in the New Testament that God had chosen the poor in this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom of God? And when did poverty become a crime known to the law?

"Fourthly—Concerning free negroes and mulattoes. Do not the laws of Missouri provide abundantly for the removal from the state of all free negroes and mulattoes (except certain privileged ones)? And also for the punishment of those who introduce or harbor them? The statement concerning our invitation to them to become Mormons, and remove to this state, and settle among us, is a wicked fabrication, as no such thing was ever published in the Star, or anywhere else, by our people, or anything in the shadow of it; and we challenge the people of Jackson (county), or any other people, to produce such a publication from us. In fact one dozen free negroes or mulattoes never have belonged to our society in any part of the world, from its first organization to this day (1839).

"Fifthly—As to crime or vice, we solemnly appeal to all the records of the courts of Jackson county, and challenge the county to produce the name of any individual of our society on the list of indictments, from the time of our first settlement in the county, to the time of our expulsion, a period of more than two years.

"Sixthly—As it respects the ridiculous report of our threatening that we would have their lands for a possession, it is too simple to require a notice, as the laws of the country guarantee to every man his rights, and abundantly protect him in their full enjoyment. And we hereby declare, that we settled no lands, only such as our money purchased, and that no such thing ever entered our hearts, as possessing any inheritance in any other way.

Seventhly—We ask what public morals were in danger of being corrupted where officers of the peace could openly violate their several oaths in the most awful manner, and join with hundreds of others in murder, treason, robbery, house burning, stealing, etc." [^19]

This is an old and oft repeated charge against the early members of the church—this charge that they were of the "dregs of the society from which they came," and I repeat again what is said in the text of this History, that the charge is not true. I know the usual method of defense is to concede the charge, and then quote the well-known and, I may add also, the well-worn passage from Paul's writings, where, in speaking of the early Christians, he says: "For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty; not many noble, are called: but God hath chosen the foolish things of the world, * * * the weak things of the world, * * * and base things of the world, and things which are despised, * * * and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are: that no flesh should glory in his psesence." But however complete such an answer may have been in the day of Paul with reference to the Christians of the first century; and however satisfying it may be now in some particulars as to the character of the early membership of the church, so far as the charge, that the early members thereof were of the "dregs of that society from which they came," is concerned, there is a better course to pursue, a more direct and perfect answer to make; and that better course, that more complete answer, is to deny in toto the charge. I do deny it. It is not true. Nobler men and women than those who first embraced the gospel of the Son of God in the New Dispensation are not to be found; nobler spirits were not on earth. It counts for nothing that in the main they were poor in this world's goods. It is of little moment that they were not famous for learning in the schools of men. I care nothing about their not being regarded as constituting "polite society," having neither the leisure nor the means to cultivate the special graces supposed to go to the making of "polished" gentlemen and ladies. But honesty of heart, purity of motive, nobility of soul, righteousness of life, devotion to God—all characteristics and all attributes which go to the making of a people worthy in the sight of God, may exist quite apart from all that man considers essential to entitle certain of their fellow-men to be considered as forming "good society;" and these attributes the early members of the church possessed. The Smiths, the Whitmers, the Cowderys, the Johnsons, the Pages, the Knights, the Partridges, the Pratts, the Morleys, the Rigdons, the Whitneys, the Gilberts, the Hydes, the Allens, and a little later, the Youngs, the Snows, the Kimballs, the Taylors, the Richardses, the Spencers—and a host of others whose names do not appear so prominently in the early history of the church, were a class of people of whom both the church and God might well be proud. So far removed were they from being the dregs of society that they were the very choicest part of it; respected and honored because possessed of those cardinal virtues which always command respect, however fallen the material fortunes, or humble the station or calling of those who possess them. Nor is this general statement concerning the respectability of the early members of the church to be weakened because some of them were unhappily overcome of the world, the flesh and the devil. It is not to be supposed that all who start in the way of salvation will be equal to the task of persevering to the end. The inherent weakness of human nature forbids us to hope for that. The innate weakness of many of the saints was made apparent. The gospel is calculated to do that. "If men come unto me I will show them their weakness," (Ether xii:27. Book of Mormon) is the word of the Lord in the Book of Mormon, and indeed it is self-evident that if men are to be perfected—and that is the mission of the gospel—then it is necessary that their defects be pointed out to them; for the first step in reformation is to learn in what particular direction reformation is needed. All that can be said, then, against some of the early saints of this dispensation is that they manifested some of the sinfulness common to humanity, and much of that weakness which is the heritage of the sons of Adam; and some of them—many of them if you will—were not quite equal to the great task of overcoming that sinful nature, that human frailty. But as a whole the people who comprised the early membership of the church, were highly respectable and honorable, and God-fearing people. [^20]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. ci.
[^2] See ante, ch. xxvi.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. ciii.
[^4] The history of this attempt to "redeem zion," is given in detail in the writer's Missouri Persecutions, chs. xvi-xxvi.
[^5] See Parley P. Pratt's Autobiography, ch. xv. Pratt and Orson Hyde were the camp's delegation that waited upon the governor.
[^6] This refusal of Governor Dunklin to reinstate the saints on their lands in Jackson county was a severe blow to the hopes of Zion's camp and the scattered saints. From the time of their expulsion from Jackson county the governor repeatedly said that the exiles had a right to be reinstated upon their lands, and had promised that he would call out the militia of the state to reinstate them whenever they were ready and willing to return. In his communication to Messrs. W. W. Phelps, Morley, et al., under date of Feb. 4, 1834 (see History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, p. 476) he said in answer to their petition to be reinstated: "One of your requests needs no evidence to support the right to have it granted; it is that your people be put in possession of their homes, from which they have been expelled. But what may be the duty of the executive after that, will depend upon contingencies." Even a few days before his interview with Messrs. Hyde and Pratt, in his letter to Colonel J. Thornton, under date of June 6th, he had said: "A more clear and indisputable right does not exist, than that of the Mormon people, who were expelled from their homes in Jackson county, to return and live on their lands and if they cannot be persuaded as a matter of policy to give up that right, or to qualify it, my course, as the chief executive officer of the state, is a plain one. The Constitution of the United States declares, that the citizens of each state shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of citizens in the several states. Then we cannot interdict any people, who have a political franchise in the United States, from immigrating to this state, nor from choosing what part of the state they will settle in, provided they do not trespass on the property rights of others." The governor's letter to Colonel Thornton is given at length in History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 85-86. In the face of this and other utterances the position now assumed by Governor Dunklin was a manifestation of weakness truly lamentable.
[^7] Algernon Sidney Gilbert. The New Dispensation has had few men more devoted to its interests than Algernon Sidney Gilbert; and few men of keener intellect and larger capacity. He was a man of rare good sense, conservative and of sound judgment. All of which appears in the many communications drawn up in Missouri by him during the troublous times through which the church passed in those days. Much of the correspondence between the Missouri brethren and Governor Dunklin was the work of Elder Gilbert, and it bears witness to the truth of what is here said of him. Something like prejudice existed against him among the early members of the church, because he was once heard to say, when informed that he had been called to preach the gospel, that he "would rather die than go forth to preach the gospel to the Gentiles." His death occurring about this time led one of the prominent elders to say—"The Lord took him at his word." Yet Elder Gilbert's remark did not arise out of any lack of faith in the truth of God's great latter-day work, but from a native difidence and lack of confidence in his ability to preach the gospel; and, of course, a dread of the hardness of heart and the unbelieving minds of those to whom he would be sent. The place and date of Elder Gilbert's birth cannot be ascertained. His father's family resided in Huntington, Connecticut. Besides himself, there was a younger brother who joined the church, but he died of cholera in St. Louis, Missouri, the same year that his elder brother died. Elder Gilbert for some years was a successful merchant in Painsville, Ohio; and subsequently, with Newel K. Whitney, he founded the successful mercantile firm of Gilbert and Whitney in Kirtland, Ohio, at which place the gospel found him in the year 1830. Later, as we have seen in the text of this History, he was called to go to Missouri, and was appointed keeper of the Lord's storehouse, and upon him also devolved the responsibility of purchasing lands for the saints. In the persecutions which came upon the people in Jackson county, he sacrificed all his goods, and was among the six who offered their own lives for the lives of their friends in the Jackson county trouble. (See ante, ch. xxvii). Such a character and such a career as that of Algernon Sidney Gilbert dignifies the cause to which he devoted the energies of his manhood, and is worthy of honorable mention in the pages of its history.
[^8] The governor's letter is published in extenso in the History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 84, et seq. It was published in the first instance, in the Missouri Enquirer, Liberty, Clay county, of June 25th, 1833. His letter is a complete confession of the justice of the Latter-day Saint side of the controversy, and a clear announcement of the duty of the state's executive in the premises. This has already been pointed out by quotation from the letter, (see note 6, this chapter). The governor said further: "Our state Constitution declares that the people's 'right to bear arms, in defense of themselves, and of the state, cannot be questioned.' Then it is their constitutional right to arm themselves. Indeed, our militia law makes it the duty of every man, not exempted by law, between the ages of 18 and 45, to arm himself with a musket, rifle, or some firelock, with a certain quantity of ammunition: &c. And again, our Constitution says, 'that all men have a natural and indefeasible right to worship Almighty God according to the dictates of their own consciences.' I am fully persuaded that the eccentricity of the religious opinions and practices of the Mormons is at the bottom of the outrages committed against them.
[^9] The document from which the above is condensed will be found in the History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, pp. 96, 97.
[^10] The answer is published in the History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, pp. 98, 99.
[^11] The propositions of the "old settlers," and the counter proposition by the "Mormons," and Governor Dunklin's communication appeared in the Missouri Enquirer, Liberty, Clay county, of June 18th, and 25th, 1833; copied into the Evening and Morning Star of July, 1834. See also History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, chs. xxxii to xxxv; and vol. ii, chs. vi to viii inclusive.
[^12] Millennial Star, vol. xvii, page 435.
[^13] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, Appendix.
[^14] In making the statement that it was the intention of the Star article not only to stop "free people of color" emigrating to Missouri, but also to "prevent them from being admitted as members of the church," the editor of the Star, of course, went too far; if not in his second article, explaining the scope and meaning of the first, then in the first article; for he had no authority to seek to prevent "free people of color" from being admitted members of the church. But as a matter of fact there were very few if any "free people of color" in the church at that time. The fears of the Missourians on that head where sheer fabrications of evil-disposed minds. (See statement of Parley P. Pratt, Note 1, end of chapter).
[^15] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lvii:3-5. Also see this History, ch. xxi. Even in the History of Jackson County, published by the Union Historical Company, 1881, wherein reference is made to the assumption that the saints considered themselves "the holy people of the Lord;" that "the Lord was the real owner of all things;" that all "his possessions were free to them"—from which the deduction is made that in view of all this the saints "were not calculated to be very respectful of the rights and interests of their non-Mormon neighbors"—yet these publishers are compelled to admit the fact, and do admit the fact, that no overt act can be charged against the saints in violation of the property rights of their non-"Mormon" neighbors in the following language, which immediately follows the deductions above—"But though no overt acts of transgression upon such rights were being committed, the rapidly gathering numbers of the Mormons, their [alleged] ignorance, poverty and fanaticism, and the boastfulness and assurance with which they reiterated their belief in their destined possession of the country, backed by Smith's significant revelations and the [again alleged] dishonesty of the methods of the leaders, made the new sect an object of profound solicitude to the people." (The account of the Mormons in Jackson County occupies pages 250 to 269 of the History of Jackson County, Mo., here quoted. It will be found as appendix i in the writer's Missouri Persecutions).
[^16] Western Monitor, August 2, 1833.
[^17] Western Monitor, August 2, 1833.
[^18] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, pp. 391-2.
[^19] History of the Persecution of the Saints, 1839, pp. 26-29.
[^20] Missouri Persecutions, Roberts, ch. vi.
