B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XXIX

REASONS FOR THE EXPULSION OF THE SAINTS FROM JACKSON COUNTY—MOVEMENT FOR THE REDEMPTION OF ZION—ZION'S CAMP—PETITIONS FOR REINSTATEMENT TO THEIR LANDS—THE TRIUMPH OF MOBOCRACY

THERE was great distress throughout the church in consequence of the calamities which had befallen the saints in Missouri. The severity and cause of the persecution perplexed the Prophet. He inquired of God and after some time received for an answer a revelation of which the following is a passage:

THE SAINTS NOT BLAMELESS

"Verily I say unto you, concerning your brethren who have been afflicted, and persecuted, and cast out from the land of their inheritance, I, the Lord have suffered the affliction to come upon them, wherewith they have been afflicted, in consequence of their transgressions. Yet I will own them, and they shall be mine in that day when I shall come to make up my jewels. Therefore, they must needs be chastened and tried, even as Abraham, who was commanded to offer up his only son; for all those who will not endure chastening, but deny me, cannot be sanctified. Behold, I say unto you, there were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires among them; therefore by these things they polluted their inheritances. They were slow to hearken unto the voice of the Lord their God, therefore the Lord their God is slow to hearken unto their prayers, to answer them in the day of their trouble." [^1]

This answer, it will be observed, was in harmony with the warnings and prophecies which had preceded the Jackson county difficulties, and sent to the church in Missouri under circumstances of utmost urgency; all which warnings and protestations, however, only resulted in bringing the church in Missouri to a partial repentance. [^2] Seeing, then, that calamities had befallen the saints in Missouri because of their neglecting the counsels of God, the question may arise: Is the Jackson county mob to be held responsible for their lawless and brutal acts of violence? Most assuredly; for it is a case where "offenses must needs come, but woe unto them by whom they come."

In the revelation which gave the foregoing cause for the misfortunes which had overtaken the saints, direction was given to the elders and saints of the churches in the east to make preparations for an extensive purchase of lands in Jackson and surrounding counties; and still later a revelation [^3] was given directing that an effort be made to raise from one to five hundred men, to join their exiled brethren in Missouri, to accept Governor Dunklin's offer to reinstate the exiles in their lands, buy out such of the "old settlers" as could not consent to live with them on terms of friendship, and maintain their inheritance by force of numbers. This led to the organization of Zion's camp. The camp, which gathered at Kirtland in the spring of 1834, when ready to start, numbered about one hundred and fifty. This number was increased to two hundred by the time the camp arrived in Missouri. [^4] On the arrival of the camp in the vicinity of Jackson county, negotiations were opened with Governor Dunklin asking him to fulfill his promise to call out the militia in sufficient numbers to reinstate the exiled saints in their possessions. The governor admitted the justice of the demand, but expressed the fear that should he so proceed his action would excite civil war, and he dared not carry out what he admitted to be the plain duties of his office. He suggested that the delegation that waited upon him urge their brethren to sell their lands in Jackson county. [^5] This the saints could not do without repudiating the revelations that designated Jackson county as the land of their inheritance, the place for the gathering together of God's people, and the location of the city of Zion; also it meant an abandonment of their right as citizens of the United States to settle where-ever they thought proper to make their homes within the confines of he Union." [^6]

With the governor unwilling to fulfill his engagements to the exiles by calling out the militia to reinstate them in their lands; with the inhabitants of western Missouri deeply prejudiced against them, and greatly excited by the arrival of Zion's Camp; and the brethren of the camp, and the exiled brethren, painfully conscious that the saints in the eastern branches of the church had not responded with either sufficient money or men for them to act independently of the governor, take possession of their lands, purchase other lands, and hold them despite the violence of mobs—the necessity of disbanding Zion's camp, and awaiting some future opportunity for the redemption of Zion, was apparent to the minds of its leaders. Accordingly it was disbanded from its encampment on Rush Creek, in Clay county, on the 24th of June, and word to that effect was officially sent to some of the leading citizens of Clay county.

On the eve of disbandment cholera broke out among the members of the camp and within four days thirteen of them died, also some of the Missouri brethren, among whom was Algernon S. Gilbert, the keeper of the "Lord's storehouse." [^7]

FUTILE PROPOSITIONS FOR SETTLEMENT OF THE JACKSON COUNTY TROUBLES

Before the disbandment of the camp, and even before its arrival in the immediate vicinity of Jackson county, several efforts were made both on the part of the exiled saints and their friends and the "old settlers" of Jackson county to adjust their troubles in some peaceable manner. Through some influential gentleman of Clay county the "old settlers" suggested to Governor Dunklin the plan of dividing Jackson county, that the "old settlers" and the saints could occupy separate territory, and confine themselves within their respective limits, with the exception of the public rights of ingress and egress upon the highway. Replying to this proposition the governor said:

"My first advice would be to the Mormons to sell out their lands in Jackson county, and to settle somewhere else, where they could live in peace, provided they could get a fair price for their lands, and reasonable damages for injuries received. If this failed, I would try the citizens, and advise them to meet and rescind their illegal resolves of last summer, and agree to conform to the laws in every particular, in respect to the Mormons."

Should success attend upon neither of these plans then he would favor the plan of dividing the county. "If all these fail," said the governor, in his letter to Colonel Thornton, "then the simple question of legal right would settle it. It is this last that I am afraid I shall have to conform my action to in the end." [^8] But when that issue was fairly presented to Governor Dunklin by the application of the exiles to be reinstated upon their lands on the arrival of their brethren from the east, he failed, as we have seen, in his strength to meet the issue, and allowed mob violence and mob fear to over-awe the majesty of the law.

In order to take our final leave of Governor Dunklin and his connection with these unhappy Missouri troubles, it is only necessary to say that subsequent to the matters above related, replying to an appeal made to him as executive of the state, calling attention to a renewal of interference with the saints, Governor Dunklin took a still more cowardly attitude than the one just described; for he then became the apologist for public sentiment and its demands, regardless of whether or not that sentiment was based on truth or falsehood, for or against law—it still was the public sentiment, and as such was as the voice of God in the American Republic! In proof of which I submit in extenso his letter to the saints on the occasion to which reference is here made:

GOVERNOR DUNKLIN'S LETTER

"City of Jefferson, July 18th, 1836. "Messrs. W. W. Phelps and others:

"Gentlemen:—The treatment your people have received, and are now receiving, is of extraordinary character, such as is seldom experienced in any country by any people. As an individual I sympathize with you, and as the executive of the state, deeply deplore such a state of things. Your appeal to the executive is a natural one, but a proper understanding of our institutions will show you that yours is a case not for the special cognizance of the executive. It is the case, or, I may say, they are cases of individual wrongs. These, as I have before told you, are subjects for judicial interference; and there are cases sometimes of individual outrage which may be so popular as to render the action of courts of justice nugatory, in endeavoring to afford a remedy. I would refer you to the charge of Judge Lawless, made to the grand jury of St. Louis. Public sentiment may become paramount law; and when one man or society of men become so obnoxious to that sentiment as to determine the people to be rid of him or them, it is useless to run counter to it.

"The time was when the people (except those in Jackson county) were divided, and the major part in your favor; that does not now seem to be the case. Why is this so? Does your conduct merit such censures as exist against you? It is not necessary for me to give my opinion. Your neighbors accuse your people of holding illicit communication with the Indians, and of being opposed to slavery. You deny. Whether the charge or the denial is true I cannot tell. The fact exists and your neighbors seem to believe it true; and whether true or false, the consequences will be the same (if your opponents are not merely gasconading), unless you can, by your conduct and arguments convince them of your innocence. If you cannot do this, all I can say to you is that in this Republic the vox populi is the vox dei.

Yours respectfully,

DANIEL DUNKLIN."

Another attempt at peaceful settlement of the troubles existing between the "old settlers" and the saints was made on the 10th of June at Liberty county courthouse, when a delegation from Jackson county and representatives of the exiled saints met with some leading citizens of Clay county to consider propositions presented by the Jackson delegation, which were as follows:

"First. The people of Jackson county will buy all the land the Mormons own in the county of Jackson, and also all the improvements which the Mormons had on any of the public lands as they existed before the first disturbance between the people of Jackson and the Mormons, and for such improvements as they have made since. The valuation of the land and improvements shall be ascertained by three disinterested arbitrators, to be chosen and agreed upon by both parties; should the parties disagree in the choice of the arbitrators, then—is to choose them.

"Twelve Mormons shall be permitted to go with the arbitrators to show them their lands and improvements while they are being valued; and any other Mormons may accompany the arbitrators whom they may desire in order to give them information; and the people of Jackson guarantee their entire safety while doing so.

"When the arbitrators report the value of the land and improvements, the people of Jackson will pay to the Mormons the valuation, with one hundred per cent added thereon, within thirty days thereafter; the Mormons are to agree not to make any effort ever after to settle, either collectively or individually, within the limits of Jackson county; and are to enter into bonds to insure the conveyance of their lands in Jackson county, according to these terms when the payment shall be made, and the committee will enter into a like bond, with such security as shall be sufficient, for the payment of the money according to this proposition. While the arbitrators are investigating and deciding upon the matter referred to them, the Mormons are not to attempt to enter into Jackson county, or to settle there, except such as by these propositions are permitted.

"Second. The people of Jackson will sell all their lands and improvements on public lands in Jackson county to the Mormons, the valuation to be obtained in the same manner, the same per cent to be added, and thirty days allowed for payment as in our proposition to buy: the Mormons to give good security for the payment of the money, and this delegation will give security that the land will be conveyed to the Mormons. All parties to remain as they are till the payment is made, at which time the people of Jackson will give possession." [^9]

On these propositions several speeches were made by members of the Jackson delegation, not of a pacificatory character. The Rev. Mr. Riley, a Baptist minister said that the "Mormons" had lived long enough in Clay county; "and they must either clear out, or be cleared out." To which Mr. Turnham the chairman of the meeting answered: "Let us be Republicans; let us honor our country, and not disgrace it like Jackson county. For God's sake don't disfranchise or drive away the Mormons they are better citizens than many of the old inhabitants." A statement with which others in the meeting—there were about one thousand present—agreed by exclamations of approval. The meeting adjourned in the midst of some confusion owing to a dirk fight between two Missourians, but not before the representatives of the exiled saints promised to call a meeting of their people and lay before them the Jackson delegation's proposition; promising also to use their influence to prevent their brethren then coming to their assistance—Zion's camp—from entering Jackson county until an answer had been made to the foregoing propositions. [^10]

The same evening, when the Jackson delegation was crossing the Missouri on their return home, the ferry boat suddenly sank and seven out of the twelve on board were drowned.

At first glance it might seem that the proposition of the Jackson county people for the settlement of difficulties between the saints and themselves was fair, since they offered to "buy or sell" upon the same terms. But to the buying proposition were attached such conditions that the saints could not accept it since it required that they bind themselves never again to make any effort "to settle, either collectively or individually, within the limits of Jackson county." Such an agreement could not be made by the saints without repudiating the revelations of God under the injunctions of which they had settled in Jackson county, and began preparations to build the city of Zion; and this the Jackson county people knew.

On the other hand, the proposition that the saints buy out the "old settlers" of Jackson upon the terms proposed was equally impossible. The "old settlers" owned so much more land than the saints did, say thirty acres to one. The saints were not wealthy to begin with; and now, after they had been driven from their homes, robbed of their goods, their cattle driven away, their houses, stables, and stacks of grain burned, they were asked to buy nearly the whole of Jackson county, for which they must pay double price, because they were to add one hundred percent to the appraised value—and make the payment in thirty days! One can scarcely believe the people of Jackson county were sincere in making either offer. They knew that both would have to be rejected, and of course were rejected.

The counter proposition formulated by representatives of the saints, provided that twelve disinterested men be chosen, six by the exiles, six by the people of Jackson county, as arbitrators. These twelve men to say what the possessions of those men were worth that would not consent to live with the "Mormon" people, and they should receive the money for the same in one year from the time the treaty was made, none of the saints to enter Jackson county to reside until the money was paid.

This same company of twelve men was to be empowered to say what the damage was which the "Mormons" sustained in being driven from their homes and in the destruction of their property, the said amount allowed for damages to be deducted from the amount paid for the lands of those who would not consent to live with the saints.

The only reply received to this proposition was in a letter from S. C. Owens to Mr. Amos Reese, attorney for the saints, which plainly said that the Jackson people would listen to nothing like the proposition made by the "Mormons;" and here the hopes of settling the Jackson county trouble by arbitration ended. [^11]

COMMENT ON GOVERNOR DUNKLIN'S ATTITUDE ON THE "MORMON" TROUBLES IN MISSOURI

It should be remembered that it was Governor Dunklin's own proposition to call out the state militia in order to re-instate the saints in their homes in Jackson county; but when they were finally ready to take that step he refused to perform what throughout he had recognized as his plain duty in the matter—viz., to restore by executive action the saints to the homes from which ruthlessly and without the authority of law they had been driven.

Later he assumed the position that their cases were individual cases, calling for judicial rather than executive cognizance; and ended by telling them that "public sentiment may become paramount to law; and when one man or society of men become so obnoxious to that sentiment as to determine the people to be rid of him or them, it is useless to run counter to it." Public sentiment was thus against the Latter-day saints, they must convince their neighbors by their conduct and argument that they are innocent. "If you can not do this," says the governor, "all I can say to you is that in this Republic the vox populi is the vox dei.

What a mockery then is free, republican government! Under it none may hope to enjoy liberty but those who are willing to move with the tides of popular sentiment—streams oftener influenced by passion than by reason. How precarious is the hold of the inhabitants of such a government upon their liberties—depending upon the changing whims of the populace—the populace, which "today will weep a Caesar slain; tomorrow vote a monument to Brutus!" Under such a government what is to become of reformers? Perhaps the fate of reformers of other ages, who have fallen victims to the hatred of popular sentiment will answer the question. What is to become of the weaker parties if all are to be crushed or banished that popular sentiment condemns? For what are governments established if not to protect all, the weak as well as the strong, the despised as well as the favored, in the enjoyment of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness?

What do constitutions amount to if they are not recognized as conservators of liberty, by acting as restraints upon these rash acts of injustice, so frequently prompted by the frenzy of popular sentiment—a sentiment often manufactured by a misrepresentation of the principles and motives of those against whom the injustice is levelled? In popular governments constitutions are adopted for the express purpose of restraining the majority in the exercise of its power, and to guarantee the enjoyment of rights and liberties to the minority—to those out of favor with the popular sentiment of the hour. The tyranny of a majority is known and feared, and hence it is restrained by constitutional provisions, which thus become the bulwarks of freedom, by especially guarding the weak against the strong.

It may be held that in popular governments the constitutions and laws enacted in accordance therewith are but the expressions of popular sentiments. Grant it. But the popular sentiment as expressed in constitutions and laws is very different from that expressed by an excited populace, not unfrequently controlled by demagogues.

Popular sentiment is often created by intemperate speeches, and sustained by misrepresentation. More frequently than otherwise, too, the so-called popular sentiment is but the sentiment of the active minority rather than of a majority of the people who may be merely indifferent to the question at issue. But the popular sentiment as expressed by laws and constitutions is adopted in legislative halls where right reason has a chance to assist in forming the sentiment; and where a decent respect for the long established maxims of justice and liberty will be taken into consideration, and will influence the legislature in forming the rules for the action of the people. When popular sentiment is expressed in constitutions and laws, and they are enforced the citizens are, in a measure at least, secure from oppression and sudden destruction; but what guarantee have the people against injustice being done, if an inconsiderate, frenzied, popular sentiment is to be enforced—a sentiment that falsehood creates and that passion directs? None whatever. And should the citizens of the American Republic finally be persuaded to regard the prejudiced and excited voice of the populace as the voice of God—as Governor Dunklin of Missouri did in the case of the Latter-day saints—they may as well prepare themselves to see free government perish from the earth.

NOTE

PROPERTY LOSSES BY THE SAINTS IN THE JACKSON COUNTY PERSECUTIONS

Of the extent of the property injuries inflicted upon the saints in this Jackson county persecution I would add that according to a statement made in a petition to congress for redress of their Jackson county grievances, it is represented that "the houses of the Mormons in the county of Jackson, amounting to about two hundred, were burned down or otherwise destroyed by the mob, as well as much of their crops, furniture, and stock. The damage done to the property of the Mormons by the mob in the county of Jackson, as above related, as near as they can ascertain, would amount to the sum of $175,000.00. The number of Mormons driven from the county of Jackson amounted to about twelve hundred souls." [^12] The above does not include the valuation of their lands of which they were dispossessed.

According to a statement made in an affidavit before the municipal court of Nauvoo, Parley P. Pratt also states that the number driven from the county was twelve hundred, and that two hundred and three houses were destroyed. Lyman Wight in an affidavit before the same body also says of the mob, that "they burned two hundred and three houses and one gristmill, these being the only residences of the saints in Jackson county." [^13]

Footnotes

"They have the right constitutionally guaranteed to them, and it is indefeasible, to believe and worship Joe Smith as a man, an angel, or even as the only true and living God, and to call their habitation 'Zion,' the 'Holy Land,' or even 'heaven' itself. Indeed there is nothing so absurd or ridiculous, that they have not a right to adopt as their religion, so that in its exercise, they do not interfere with the rights of others."

Then, after considering the several plans for composing the difficulties between the "old settlers" and the "Mormons" he adds: "If all these failed, then the simple question of legal right would have to settle it. It is this last that I am afraid I shall have to conform my action to in the end." (Ibid).

---
Notas:
[^1] Ante, chapter xxv, note 9.
[^2] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cii:2.
[^3] Ibid, sec. cii. The high council will be considered more in detail when treating of the organization of the church.
[^4] One hundred and sixty pages—ten forms—of a three thousand edition of the Book of Commandments had been printed at Independence when the printing office was destroyed. These forms were scattered about the streets and otherwise destroyed, except a few copies saved by individuals, one of which is now on file in the Historian's Office at Salt Lake City.
[^5] Improvement Era, Brigham Young, a Character Sketch, June, 1903, B. H. Roberts.
[^6] Now in Lake county.
[^7] Among them were Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Charles C. Rich, Orson Hyde, Jedediah M. Grant, Amasa M. Lyman, and many others prominent in conducting the exodus from Illinois to the Rocky Mountain valleys, and in pioneering Utah and the surrounding states. In all which labor they profited greatly by reason of their experiences in their journey with Zion's camp.
[^8] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xviii.
[^9] See History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, ch. xiii and footnotes.
[^10] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cvii:23, 34.
[^11] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cvii:23-30, also revelation on the organization of the seventy received by President John Taylor, April 13th, 1883, published in the Seventy's Course in Theology, First Year Book, pp. 9, 10.
[^12] History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii. p. 182.
[^13] Much interest has been manifested in the church concerning who was mouth in ordaining respectively the brethren of the first twelve. Most likely the three witnesses who ordained the apostles were mouth in the order in which they have always stood as witnesses, viz., Oliver Cowdery first, David Whitmer second, and Martin Harris third. If they officiated in this order then Oliver Cowdery ordained Lyman E. Johnson; David Whitmer, Brigham Young; and Martin Harris, Heber C. Kimball. It has been suggested by some that the Prophet Joseph may have joined the three witnesses in ordaining the twelve and in that event would be mouth first, and therefore would have ordained Lyman E. Johnson, leaving Oliver Cowdery to ordain Brigham Young; David Whitmer, Heber C. Kimball. This, however, is not likely since but three of those who had been chosen were called up in a group at the above meeting to be ordained, one for each witness. Besides, the express language of the minutes of the proceedings is, "The three witnesses laid their hands upon each ones head and prayed separately;" that is, each ordained his man. The statement of Heber C. Kimball in the published extracts of his journal, also confirms this view of the matter. After giving the names of the twelve men chosen he says: "After having expressed our feelings on this occasion, we were severally called into the stand, and there received our ordinations, under the hands of Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris. These brethren ordained us to the apostleship and predicted many things which would come to pass." (Times and Seasons, vol. vi, p. 868).
