B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XXX

THE ORGANIZATION OF THE "TWELVE" AND THE "SEVENTY"—THE REVELATION ON PRIESTHOOD AND RELATIONSHIP OF QUORUMS—DEDICATION OF THE KIRTLAND TEMPLE

AFTER the disbandment of Zion's camp the Prophet proceeded to organize the saints in western Missouri—chiefly located in Clay county—into a "stake of Zion," [^1] by the organization of a "high council" and a "stake presidency." David Whitmer was chosen president and W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer were selected for his counselors. The high council consists of twelve high priests, and with the presidency of the stake constitute an ecclesiastical court of both original and appellate jurisdiction, but primarily it was organized for settling important difficulties which could not be settled in the bishop's court to the satisfaction of the contesting parties. [^2] The first high council of the church had been organized at Kirtland, of which the presidency of the church were acting as presidents. [^3]

This work accomplished, the Prophet and the most of those who had come with him in Zion's camp returned to Kirtland, which for several years will be the center of ecclesiastical activity.

The press which the church had established in Jackson county in 1831, the mob, in December, 1833, permitted the firm of Davis & Kelley, of Clay county, to take over to Liberty where they began the publication of the Missouri Enquirer; and in payment for the press said firm of Davis & Kelley turned over to the attorneys employed by the saints three hundred dollars on the one thousand dollar conjoint note the brethren of Jackson county had given as a "retaining fee" to Messrs. Woods, Reese, Doniphan and Atchison, their attorneys. Not much return of property to the church on a printing press which, with the bookbindery, eighteen months before, had cost between four and five thousand dollars!

Another press, however, was promptly procured by the church and set up at Kirtland, where, in December, 1833, was resumed the publication of the Evening and Morning Star. It was changed however, from quarto to octavo form, and in time all the previous numbers published in Missouri were reprinted. Also the publication of the revelations given in the New Dispensation which had been interrupted by destruction of the printing office at Independence was resumed; but the title of the collection was changed from "The Book of Commandments" [^4] to "The Book of Doctrine and Covenants." It issued from the press in August, 1835; and in all subsequent editions—of which there are many—that title has been retained. It is recognized as one of the standard works of the church: that is, one of the books of scripture, together with the three other books accepted by the church as scripture, viz: The Bible, Book of Mormon, and The Pearl of Great Price.

ZION'S CAMP VALUES

The journey of "Zion's camp" to Missouri, since it failed of its purpose to reinstate the saints in possession of their lands in Jackson county, was regarded by some as being an unprofitable, and an unmeaning episode. It was far from that. Undoubtedly the most important thing in life is experience, and every experience has a value. It was so with this expedition of Zion's camp. A brother in Kirtland—one too weak in the faith to go with the camp—meeting Brigham Young on his return from Missouri, said to him: "Well, what did you gain on this useless journey to Missouri with Joseph Smith?" "All we went for," promptly replied Brigham Young. "I would not exchange the experience I gained in that expedition for all the wealth of Geauga county" [^5]—the county in which Kirtland was then located. [^6] Certainly in the camp's journey of more than a thousand miles there were experiences enough. There were dissensions and rebellions within the camp; there were threatening portents and hostile demonstrations from without. There were fatigues to endure, hardships to encounter, disappointments to sustain. All these experiences became serviceable to a large number of the two hundred men who participated in them; for of that company more than a score became the leaders—captains and lieutenants [^7]—in two great exoduses; the first, but four years in the future, involving the removal of twelve thousand people from the state of Missouri to Illinois; and the other, twelve years beyond in the future, of the Missouri-Illinois event, viz., the great western exodus of more than twenty thousand Latter-day Saints from Illinois to the Salt Lake and other Rocky Mountain valleys. Viewed, then, in the light of a preparatory training for the larger enterprises awaiting these men, the Zion's camp movement was of immense value to the church.

FINDING APPROVED WITNESSES—APOSTLES—SEVENTIES

In another way also this Zion's camp episode was turned to good account. On Saturday the 14th of February, 1835, a two days convention or conference was convened, at which, after a week's notice, those brethren who had accompanied the Prophet to Missouri in the camp were called together, and it was announced that from their numbers would be chosen the quorum of the twelve apostles and their assistants in the work of the foreign ministry of the church, the seventy.

As early as June, 1829, it was made known that there would be twelve apostles chosen in the New Dispenastion; [^8] and they were to be chosen by the three special witnesses to the Book of Mormon. [^9] The twelve apostles are called to be the special witnesses of the name of the Christ in all the world, thus differing from other officers of the church in the duties of their calling. They would also constitute a traveling, presiding high council, and officiate in the name of the Lord, under the direction of the presidency of the church, to build up the church and regulate all the affairs of the same in all nations. They would hold the keys of the foreign ministry of the church and open the door for the proclamation of the gospel in all nations. [^10] To assist the twelve special witnesses, quorums of seventy were to be appointed whose calling is apostolic in its character, for they, too, are to be special witnesses of the Christ in all the world, and are to act in the name of the Lord under the direction of the twelve "in building up the church and regulating all the affairs of the same in all nations." [^11] The quorum of the twelve are declared to be "equal in authority and power" to the presidency of the church; and the first quorum of the seventy form a quorum "equal in authority to the quorum of the twelve apostles."

Such were the new quorums of priesthood to be organized; and the Prophet explained to the meeting of the members of Zion's camp that the trials and sufferings endured on that journey to Missouri were not in vain, for it was the will of God "that those who went to Zion with a determination to lay down their lives, if necessary, should be ordained to the ministry, and go forth to prune the vineyard for the last time." [^12]

It was with impressive formality that this special conference of the church proceeded to the selection and the ordination of the twelve apostles. The Prophet read at the opening of the conference the 15th chapter of St. John; the appropriateness of it is striking. In it is stressed the needed union with the Christ. So close that it must be as the branch to the vine, if it would have life; love so great that it will not withhold life as a sacrifice to friendship—"and greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends;" the apostles are declared to be friends to the Christ. "Ye have not chosen me but I have chosen you and ordained you that ye may bring forth much fruit." "Love one another;" and "if the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. * * * the servant is not greater than his Lord. If they have persecuted me they will persecute you. * * * They hated me without a cause. * * * But when the Comforter is come * * * even the Spirit of Truth * * * he will testify of me; and ye also shall bear witness." How fitting the scripture to the occasion!

Then followed the setting forth of the proposition for the three witnesses to choose the other twelve witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ, or the twelve apostles, as already commanded in an earlier revelation. The Prophet submitted the question to the conference if they would approve carrying out the plan proposed. It was unanimously approved. After extended remarks the Prophet expressed a desire for "the brethren" to say if they would "be satisfied to have the spirit of the Lord dictate in the choice of the elders to be apostles. Whereupon all the elders present expressed their anxious desire to have it so."

At this point the conference recessed for one hour.

When it convened again in the afternoon, the following hymn was sung:

"Hark! listen to the trumpeters! They sound for volunteers, On Zion's bright and flowery mount Behold the officers. "Their horses white, their armor bright. With courage bold they stand, Enlisting soldiers for their king, To march to Zion's land. * * * "We want no cowards in our band, Who will our colors fly, We call for valiant-hearted men, Who're not afraid to die. "To see our armies on parade, How martial they appear! All armed and dressed in uniform, They look like men of war. "They follow their great General, The great Eternal Lamb— His garments stained in his own blood— King Jesus is His name."

The Prophet, after the hymn, called upon the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon, each one to pray in turn—the same order that was followed when they sought the testimony from God of the truth of the Book of Mormon. After the prayer the three witnesses were blessed by the laying on of the hands of the first presidency, and then proceeded to choose the twelve men to be the apostles. Their names are as follows:

LYMAN E. JOHNSON, WILLIAM E. M'LELLIN,

BRIGHAM YOUNG, JOHN F. BOYNTON,

HEBER C. KIMBALL, ORSON PRATT,

ORSON HYDE, WILLIAM SMITH,

DAVID W. PATTEN, THOMAS B. MARSH,

LUKE S. JOHNSON, PARLEY P. PRATT. [^13]

These men were called up for ordination in groups of three. The first group were:

LYMAN E. JOHNSON,

BRIGHAM YOUNG,

HEBER C. KIMBALL.

The second group:

ORSON HYDE,

DAVID W. PATTEN,

LUKE S. JOHNSON.

The third group:

WILLIAM E. M'LELLIN,

JOHN F. BOYNTON,

WILLIAM SMITH.

Elder Heber C. Kimball adds the interesting remark respecting the ordination of the first group of three: "After we had been thus ordained by these brethren [he refers to the three witnesses], the first presidency [then Joseph Smith, the Prophet, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams, his counselors], laid their hands on us and confirmed these blessings and ordinations, and likewise predicted many things which should come to pass." [^14]

The other three apostles, Parley P. Pratt, Thomas B. Marsh, and Orson Pratt were not present at this conference, but were ordained shortly afterwards, viz., Parley P. Pratt on the 21st of February, by Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer (Martin Harris is not named as being present); Thomas B. Marsh and Orson Pratt (both having been absent from Kirtland on missions at the time of the special conference at which the twelve were called) were ordained on the 26th of April.

All these apostles after they were ordained were given a solemn charge as to their responsibilities and duties, chiefly by Oliver Cowdery.

Two weeks following the choosing of the twelve apostles the first quorum of the seventy was organized, its membership also being selected from the members of Zion's camp. [^15] The organization of the first seventy was effected on the 28th of February, 1835. The names of the first seven presidents chosen were as follows:

HAZEN ALDRICH, ZEBEDEE COLTRIN,

LEONARD RICH, LEVI W. HANCOCK,

JOSEPH YOUNG, LYMAN SHERMAN,

SYLVESTER SMITH.

It was apparently overlooked, at the time, that presidents of the seventy are to be "chosen out of the number of the seventy;" [^16] for it was discovered later that of the above seven brethren all but Joseph Young and Levi W. Hancock had been high priests. Afterwards, viz., on the sixth of April, 1837, on the occasion of a general assembly of the priesthood at Kirtland, the Prophet Joseph invited those brethren among the presidents of seventy who had been high priests to take their places in the high priests' quorum. [^17]

There is some discrepancy between Joseph Young's account and other writers as to the time when the five high priests, who had been ordained presidents of the seventy, were transferred to the high priests' quorum. Joseph Young places it in November, 1835; the Prophet in April, 1837. James Foster, Daniel S. Miles, Josiah Butterfield, Salmon Gee and John Gaylord, were ordained to take the place of the five retiring brethren. It was reported that Levi W. Hancock, who was absent from Kirtland at the time, had previously been ordained a high priest, and John Gould was put in his place in the first council. When Elder Hancock returned to Kirtland during the summer of 1837, however, it was ascertained that it was a mistake about his having been ordained a high priest, and John Gould was taken into the high priests' quorum, and Levi W. Hancock was retained in the first council. The first council as finally settled upon in that organization, and at that time, stood as follows:

JOSEPH YOUNG, DANIEL S. MILES,

LEVI W. HANCOCK, JOSIAH BUTTERFIELD,

JAMES FOSTER, SALMON GEE,

JOHN GAYLORD.

The names of the members of this first quorum are given in the History of the Church, Period I, Vol. II, Ch. xiii. The Prophet stated that the organization of "the first quorum of seventy was according to the vision and revelations which I have received." [^18] Also he stated, at the special conference called for choosing the twelve, that "the meeting had been called because God had commanded it; and it was made known to him by vision and by the Holy Spirit." [^19] At the meeting called for selecting the seventy, 28th February, 1835, the Prophet explained that "the seventies are to constitute traveling quorums to go into all the earth, whithersoever the twelve apostles shall send them." [^20]

When these organizations, the twelve and the seventy, were completed, the Prophet remarked:

"Brethren, some of you are angry with me, because you did not fight in Missouri; but let me tell you, God did not want you to fight. He could not organize his kingdom with twelve men to open the gospel door to the nations of the earth, and with seventy men under their direction to follow in their tracks, unless he took them from a body of men who had offered their lives, and who had made as great a sacrifice as did Abraham. Now the Lord has got his twelve and his seventy, and there will be other quorums of seventy called, who will make the sacrifice, and those who have not made their sacrifices and their offerings now, will make them hereafter." [^21]

PETITION OF THE TWELVE FOR THE WORD OF THE LORD

In the interim, however, the responsibility of their new calling had a sobering effect upon the minds of the twelve elders called to this new responsibility of apostleship. Introspective and retrospective reflection revealed to them that they had not realized the importance of their calling; they had been light-minded and vain, "and in many things had done wrong;" all this they confessed at their council meeting held on the 28th of March, 1835. "For all these things," they record in the minutes of the meeting of that day, "we have asked the forgiveness of our heavenly Father; and wherein we have grieved or wounded the feelings of the presidency, we ask their forgiveness." In view of their early departure for their first mission, they said, in the minutes of their first meeting: "We * * * feel to ask him whom we have acknowledged to be our Prophet and Seer, that he inquire of God for us and obtain a revelation (if consistent) that we may look upon it when we are separated, that our hearts may be comforted. We have unitedly asked our heavenly Father to grant unto us through his Seer a revelation of his mind and will; * * * even a great revelation that will enlarge our hearts, comfort us in adversity, and brighten our hopes amidst the powers of darkness."

This communication they sent to the Prophet, and the same day, "in compliance with the above request," the Prophet inquired of the Lord and received a very important revelation on "priesthood" and the relationship of the respective quorums to each other and to the church. It is a divine outgiving of such importance that it may not be passed without consideration, nor may the genius of Latter-day Saint church government be understood without analytical knowledge of this revelation.

It is to be observed that this revelation comes in answer to an earnest petition from the newly organized important quorum of the church, the twelve apostles; and the answer was immediate; that is as to the first fifty-seven verses of the revelation; they were given on the same day the request for the revelation was made; the remainder was revealed at sundry times and added to it. All this is explained in the introduction to the revelation at the head of it in many editions of the Doctrine and Covenants previous to the edition of 1921; see edition of 1911, etc., and back of that edition to earlier dates.

It is to be observed also that the revelation was given on the same principle that most of the revelations of the New Dispensation were given, viz., upon a desire to know; and upon earnest inquiry of the Lord. "Ask and ye shall receive;" "seek and ye shall find," seems to have been the principle on which the Lord has proceeded with reference to giving revelations. For instance, the Lord revealed himself and his Son Jesus Christ to the Prophet Joseph in answer to the latter's earnest prayer to know the truth respecting the various religions; Moroni came three years later in response to the young Prophet's earnest prayer to know his standing before the Lord; nearly all the early revelations to individuals in the church, to Joseph Smith, Sen., Hyrum Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Knight, Sen., David, Peter, John, and Christian Whitmer, were given in answer to the inquiry of these men to know their duty in respect of the work of the Lord then coming forth. And so throughout with nearly all the revelations, including this revelation—as we have seen—on priesthood and church government.

The first five verses as they now stand in the current editions of the Doctrine and Covenants, constitute an introduction to the whole revelation at once bold, original and unique; and goes far towards establishing the inspiration by which the Prophet speaks. Listen:

"There are, in the church, two priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical priesthood.

"Why the first is called the Melchizedek priesthood is because Melchizedek was such a great high priest. Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God. But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, they, the church, in ancient days, called that priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek priesthood. All other authorities or offices in the church are appendages to this priesthood."

Where else may one find such information as this? Of itself it is a scrap of history brought from some archive of knowledge accessible only to the inspiration of God.

The revelation goes on to recognize two "grand heads" in priesthood, named, respectively, the Melchizedek and the Aaronic priesthoods.

The Melchizedek priesthood holds the right of presidency and has power and authority over all the offices of the church "in all ages of the world to administer in spiritual things."

The second or Aaronic priesthood is so called because it was "conferred upon Aaron and his seed throughout his generations." It is called the lesser priesthood. "Why it is called the lesser priesthood is because it is an appendage to the Melchizedek priesthood, and has power in administering in outward ordinances."

Each of these priesthoods has a presidency. The president of the high priesthood is to be a high priest.

"Wherefore it must needs be that one be appointed of the high priesthood to preside over the priesthood, and he shall be called president of the high priesthood of the church; or presiding high priest over the high priesthood of the church. From the same comes the administering of ordinances and blessings upon the church by the laying on of the hands." [^22]

Thence comes also the holding of "the keys of the kingdom, which belong always unto the presidency of the high priesthood." [^23] Though one is to be "president of the high priesthood of the church," he may be, and is to be assisted by counselors. Thus the Lord to Frederick G. Williams in the revelation just referred to above, where he calls upon him to heed the calling to which he has just been called—"even to be a high priest in my church," said the Lord, "and a counselor unto my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., unto whom I have given the keys of my kingdom, which belong always unto the presidency of the high priesthood." [^24]

In a subsequent revelation it was made known that Sidney Rigdon was called to be a counselor to the Prophet in this same capacity, viz., a counselor in the presidency of the high priesthood: The Lord announced in this revelation (given on the 8th of March, 1833) that he had forgiven the sins of his servant the Prophet, as also the sins of Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams, "and they are accounted as equal with thee [the Prophet] in holding the keys of this last kingdom; as also through your administration the keys of the school of the prophets, which I have commanded to be organized [^25] that they [members of the school] may be perfected in their ministry for the salvation of Zion and of the nations of Israel, and of the Gentiles, as many as will believe." [^26] Ten days following this revelation, viz., on the 18th day of March, 1833, on the occasion of the high priests being assembled in the school of the prophets, Elders Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams expressed their desire to be ordained to the office to which they had been called, viz., "those of presidents of the high priesthood, and to be equal with me [the Prophet] in holding the keys of the kingdom, according to the revelation given on the 8th of March, 1833." "Accordingly," says the Prophet, "I laid my hands on Brothers Sidney and Frederick, and ordained them to take part with me in holding the keys of this last kingdom, and to assist in the presidency of the high priesthood as my counselors." [^27]

Following the organization of the quorum of the twelve, steps were immediately taken to begin their official labors in the ministry, and an extended tour was projected throughout the branches in the eastern states, to extend to the Atlantic ocean. At a meeting on the 12th of March it was decided that the twelve should leave Kirtland on this mission on the 4th of May, with a conference to be held at Kirtland two days earlier.

THE PRESIDENCY OF THE MELCHIZEDEK PRIESTHOOD

The organization of the presidency of the high priesthood had begun sometime previous to this, viz., in January, 1832. The Prophet Joseph had been chosen and ordained "president of the high priesthood of the church" at a conference of high priests and elders and members of the church held at Amherst, Lorain county, Ohio, on the 25th of January, 1832; and this action had been confirmed by another general council of the church held in "Zion" [Independence, Mo.] on the 26th of April, 1832. "The right hand of fellowship was given to me by the bishop, Edward Partridge, in behalf of the church," says the Prophet. "The scene was solemn, impressive and delightful." [^28] And now by the appointment of these two counselors, and their ordination the presidency of the high priesthood of the church was established.

Meantime, Oliver Cowdery had returned from "Zion," that is, Independence, Missouri, where he had been for some time. He had been sustained, it will be remembered, as "the second elder" in the church at its first organization, Joseph Smith being sustained as the "first elder." When he returned to Kirtland he found the "presidency of the high priesthood" existing as set forth above. "Being met together on the 5th of December, 1834, with Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams and Oliver Cowdery, and having under consideration the welfare of the church," says the Prophet, "according to the direction of the Spirit * * * I laid my hands on Brother Oliver Cowdery and ordained him an assistant president; saying these words: 'In the name of Jesus Christ, who was crucified for the sins of the world, I lay my hands upon thee, and ordain thee an assistant president to the high and holy priesthood, in the Church of the Latter-day Saints'." [^29]

THE PRESIDENCY OF THE AARONIC PRIESTHOOD

We next turn to the presidency of the lesser or Aaronic priesthood of the church. "The bishopric," is declared to be, "the presidency of this priesthood," by the revelation we here are considering. And this holds both in the matter of the presiding bishop of the church—meaning the bishop of the whole church—as presiding over the whole Aaronic priesthood of the church, as also local bishops in respective bishop's wards presiding over the Aaronic priesthood in their individual wards. Already we have learned that this lesser priesthood is so called because it is "an appendage to the greater or higher priesthood, and has power in administering, more especially, "outward ordinances." "No man has a legal right to this office to hold the keys of this priesthood"—be a bishop—except he be a literal descendant of Aaron. "But as a high priest of the Melchizedek priesthood has authority to officiate in all the lesser offices, he may officiate in the office of bishop when no literal descendant of Aaron can be found, provided he is called and set apart and ordained unto this power by the hands of the presidency of the Melchizedek priesthood." [^30]

Each of these priesthoods is graded off into direct and regular quorums as follows: Of the Melchizedek priesthood the quorums are high priests, seventies, and elders; of the Aaronic, or lesser priesthood, the quorums are, priests, teacher and deacons. The respective duties, callings, and relations of these several officers in the priesthood and of the respective quorums and their relationship with each other, will receive consideration in a future chapter.

THE THREE GREAT COUNCILS OF THE PRIESTHOOD

This revelation here under review, however, outlines three great councils of the priesthood to which attention should be called, these are:

The First Presidency: There are to be three "presiding high priests" of the Melchizedek priesthood, "chosen by the body, appointed and ordained to that office and upheld by the confidence, faith and prayer of the church: These form a quorum of the presidency of the church." And in as much as "the presidency of the high priesthood" of the church, always hold "the keys of the kingdom," [^31] of course the presidency of that high priesthood becomes the presidency of the church. "The duty of the president of the office of the high priesthood is to preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses.—Behold, here is wisdom; yea, to be a seer, a revelator, a translator, and a prophet, having all the gifts of God which he bestows upon the head of the church." [^32]

The Twelve Apostles: Next to the first presidency is the quorum of the twelve traveling councilors, called to be the twelve apostles, "or special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world—thus differing from other officers in the church in the duties of their calling. * * * The twelve are a traveling presiding high council, to officiate in the name of the Lord, under the direction, of the presidency of the church, agreeable to the institution of heaven; to build up the church, and regulate all the affairs of the same in all nations, first unto the Gentiles and secondly unto the Jews. * * * The twelve being sent out, holding the keys to open the door by the proclamation of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and first unto the Gentiles and then unto the Jews. * * * It is the duty of the traveling high council to call upon the seventy, when they need assistance, to fill the several calls for preaching and administering the gospel, instead of any others." [^33]

The Seventy: Following the twelve apostles as a council in the Melchizedek priesthood, is the first quorum of the seventy.

"The seventy are also called to preach the gospel, and to be especial witnesses unto the Gentiles and in all the world—thus differing from other officers in the church in the duties of their calling. And they form a quorum equal in authority to that of the twelve special witnesses or apostles just named. * * * The seventy are to act in the name of the Lord, under the direction of the twelve or the traveling high council, in building up the church and regulating all the affairs of the same in all nations, first unto the Gentiles and then to the Jews." [^34]

"* * * And it is according to the vision showing the order of the seventy, that they should have seven presidents to preside over them, chosen out of the number of the seventy; and the seventh president of these presidents is to preside over the six; and these seven presidents are to choose other seventy besides the first seventy to whom they belong, and are to preside over them; and also other seventy, until seven times seventy, if the labor in the vineyard of necessity requires it. And these seventy are to be traveling ministers, unto the Gentiles first and also unto the Jews. Whereas other officers of the church, who belong not unto the twelve, neither to the seventy, are not under the responsibility to travel among all nations, but are to travel as their circumstances shall allow, notwithstanding they may hold as high and responsible offices in the church." [^35]

Of these several quorums acting as councils on questions that may be in issue before them, it is said: "Every decision made by either of these quorums must be by the unanimous voice of the same; that is, every member in each quorum must be agreed to its decisions, in order to make their decisions of the same power or validity one with the other—a majority may form a quorum when circumstances render it impossible to be otherwise—unless this is the case, their decisions are not entitled to the same blessings which the decisions of a quorum of three presidents were anciently, who were ordained after the order of Melchizedek, and were righteous and holy men. The decisions of these quorums or either of them, are to be made in all righteousness, in holiness, and lowliness of heart, meekness and long-suffering, and in faith, and virtue, and knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness and charity; because the promise is, if these things abound in them they shall not be unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord. And in case that any decision of these quorums is made in unrighteousness, it may be brought before a general assembly of the several quorums, which constitute the spiritual authorities of the church; otherwise there can be no appeal from their decision." [^36]

PATRIARCHS—EVANGELISTS: ORGANIZATION OF

Patriarchs: "It is the duty of the twelve in all large branches of the church, to ordain evangelical ministers, as they shall be designated unto them by revelation—the order of this priesthood was confirmed to be handed down from father to son, and rightly belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed, to whom the promises were made. This order was instituted in the days of Adam, and came down by lineage in the following manner:" [^37]

Then the line of the patriarchs from Adam to Noah is given. The nature of this office is sufficiently set forth in the passage given from the revelations. (See citations in note 37). It is a new application of the term "evangelist" to call these special officers in the church "evangelical ministers," since there is no such use made commonly of the term "evangelists." Elsewhere in the revelations these evangelists are called "patriarchs."

Presiding Patriarch of the Church: It will be observed that the twelve apostles are to ordain "evangelical ministers" in "large branches of the church." Also there is provided a presiding patriarch over all the patriarchs of the church, and he is known as the presiding patriarch of the church, holding the keys of the patriarchal blessings upon the heads of the Lord's people; the knowledge also through the inspiration of the Spirit of the Lord, of their tribal relations in Israel, and the blessings and powers to which they may attain on conditions of their faithfulness. All the patriarchs, or "evangelists" chosen "in all large branches of the church" by the apostles participate, of course, in all these spiritual powers, graces, and rights of this office in the priesthood, but the patriarchs of the respective "large branches of the church" are limited in their jurisdiction of blessing and designation of tribal relations and ancestry to the respective jurisdictions assigned them. The presiding patriarch over the patriarchs of the church, however, is not so limited, since his jurisdiction in the line of his calling extends throughout the church, and he presides over, instructs and directs the labors of all the patriarchs of the church.

The first general, or presiding patriarch of the church in the New Dispensation was Joseph Smith, Sen., father of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Jun. He was ordained to that office by Joseph Smith, Jun., Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, Frederick G. Williams, who at the time were the presidency of the Melchizedek priesthood, on the 18th of December, 1834, at Kirtland, Ohio. At the same time he was made president of the high priests at Kirtland; and also was active in mission work of the church as well as in giving patriarchal blessings to the people.

All these officers: the first presidency, the council or quorum of the twelve apostles, the council or first quorum of the seventy, the patriarchs, with all among them who may be designated as "prophets," "seers," and "revelators"—all pertain to the higher or Melchizedek priesthood, possession of which is a pre-requisite to any of these positions in the church.

Judiciary Elements: Also there is outlined, in the revelation considered, the elements of a judiciary system, and especially as related to the trial of the president of the high priesthood of the church. Bishops are to be descendants of the house of Aaron in order to have legal right to that priesthood; in that case one may act without counselors in his office of bishop; provided, of course, he shall be properly designated and ordained under the hands or by the direction of the first presidency of the Melchizedek priesthood. [^38] Then "the descendant of Aaron," properly chosen and appointed, may act alone in the office of bishop in administering all temporal things; "having a knowledge of them by the spirit of truth;" also he may act as a judge in Israel, to do the business of the church, to sit in judgment upon transgressors upon testimony, to be a common judge in Israel; his court is one of record; and this in any ward or stake in Zion where he may act. Thus the descendant of Aaron may act as a bishop in the church without counselors, except in the case of the president of the high priesthood being tried before him, explained later.

When no literal descendant of Aaron may be found to act in this office of bishop, then, as a high priest of the Melchizedek priesthood has authority to officiate in all the lesser offices, he may officiate in the office of bishop, [^39] but he must be assisted by two counselors who are also to be high priests of the Melchizedek priesthood.

When acting as a judge in Israel before whom a president of the high priesthood is to be tried, then "twelve high priests of the Melchizedek order" are to be chosen to act as counselors to the bishop who is a literal descendant of Aaron, or to the bishopric, when three high priests are acting as said bishopric. "And in as much as a president of the high priesthood shall transgress," he shall be had in remembrance before the bishop as described above. "And their decision upon his head shall be an end of controversy concerning him. Thus none shall be exempted from the justice and the laws of God, that all things may be done in order and in solemnity before him, according to truth and righteousness." [^40]

Such in outline is the developing organization of the church.

THE KIRTLAND TEMPLE

Meantime the temple, begun in the summer of 1833, was completed and dedicated in March, 1836, with imposing ceremonies which extended through several days. A number of visions and revelations were received: The Savior appeared and proclaimed his acceptance of the temple and of the saints as his people; [^41] Moses appeared and restored the keys of the gathering of Israel; Elias appeared and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham; Elijah came in fulfillment of the words of Malachi "to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to their fathers," preparatory to the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. [^42]

From this visitation of Elijah comes the doctrine of vicarious work for the dead, by which the principles and ordinances of the gospel are applied to the dead: "For, for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit." [^43]

The dedication of the temple was a notable occasion, as making for the spiritual development of the saints, and the reported visions and other spiritual manifestations therein created a sensation throughout northern Ohio. [^44]

The temple facing the east occupies a site that commands a noble view of the surrounding country. Its outside measurements are sixty by eighty feet; the heighth to the square, is fifty feet; to the top of the tower one hundred and ten feet. The ground floor was designed for the ordinary public meetings of the church, for Sunday worship, prayer and sacramental meetings; the hall on the second floor was the meeting place of the "school of the prophets"—the priesthood, and in the attic are five class rooms; in the front of the building are four vestibule rooms; two on each main floor. The building is of stone covered with a fine quality of stucco which is still (1929) in a good state of preservation. The building cost $40,000; and when the conditions under which it was built are taken into account, the saints, few in number and generally poor, it stands as a monument of faith in God and devotion to his revealed purposes. [^45]

NOTE

WILLIAM WINE PHELPS

A biographical note of Elder Phelps, will be found in chapter xxi of this work. As may be learned from the text of this History he was placed in charge of the publishing house of the church in Zion, Independence, Missouri; was prominent in all the Jackson county troubles, and made one of the presidency of the stake in Clay county when it became apparent that the exiled saints could not return to their homes in Jackson county. In the biographical sketch above referred to, it is stated that he was a writer of considerable ability and that a number of hymns, the most characteristic of Latter-day Saint thought stand to his credit. He was especially prolific of hymns about the time of the dedication of the Kirtland temple, and four composed by him were sung in the dedicatory services. The following perhaps is the most spirited, and is still frequently sung in the general conferences and other gatherings of the church.

HOSANNA HYMN The Spirit of God like a fire is burning! The latter-day glory begins to come forth; The visions and blessings of old are returning, The angels are coming to visit the earth. CHORUS We'll sing and we'll shout with the armies of heaven— Hosanna, hosanna, to God and the Lamb! Let glory to them in the highest be given, Henceforth and forever: amen and amen. The Lord is extending the saints' understanding, Restoring their judges and all as at first; The knowledge and power of God are expanding; The veil o'er the earth is beginning to burst. We'll sing and we'll shout, etc. We'll call in our solemn assemblies in spirit, To spread forth the kingdom of heaven abroad, That we through our faith may begin to inherit The visions and blessings and glories of God. We'll sing and we'll shout, etc. We'll wash and be washed, and with oil anointed, Withal not omitting the washing of feet; For he that receiveth his penny appointed Must surely be clean at the harvest of wheat. We'll sing and we'll shout, etc. Old Israel, that fled from the world for his freedom, Must come with the cloud and the pillar amain; A Moses and Aaron and Joshua lead him, And feed him on manna from heaven again. We'll sing and we'll shout, etc. How blessed the day when the lamb and the lion Shall lie down together without any ire, And Ephraim be crowned with his blessing in Zion, As Jesus descends with his chariots of fire! We'll sing and we'll shout, etc.

Footnotes

"From the day the ground was broken for laying the foundation for the temple, until its dedication on the 27th of March, 1836, the work was vigorously prosecuted. With very little capital except brain, bone and sinew, combined with unwavering trust in God, men, women, and even children, worked with their might; while the brethren labored in their departments, the sisters were actively engaged in boarding and clothing workmen not otherwise provided for—all living as abstemiously as possible so that every cent might be appropriated to the grand object, while their energies were stimulated by the prospect of participating in the blessing of a house built by the direction of the Most High and accepted by him." (Women of Mormondom, Tullidge, p. 82.)

---
Notas:
[^1] THE PROPHET JOSEPH'S CONNECTION WITH THE KIRTLAND BANK See Editorial in Evening and Morning Star, vol. ii, p. 369.
[^2] THE LOCATION AND ENVIRONMENT OF KIRTLAND JUSTIFIED THE INDUSTRIAL AND BUSINESS VENTURES OF THE SAINTS See Editorial in Evening and Morning Star, May, 1834.
[^3] THE SALEM INCIDENT Evening and Morning Star, vol. ii, p. 352.
[^4] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxv.
[^5] Ephesians, iv:8-16. Eph., v:25.
[^6] Two classes were formed, one of twenty-three, which met in the morning, and another of twenty-two, which met in the afternoon.
[^7] The functions of this office in the priesthood are to bless the people, designate their lineage, and seal them up to eternal life. (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxiv.) In the revelations the office is referred to as an "evangelical" ministry, and is an order of the priesthood designed to be handed down from father to son, "and rightly belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed, to whom the promises were made." (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cvii:39, 40.)
[^8] Celebration Pioneer's Day, July 24, 1880, pamphlet, p. 25. The statement is made by Orson Pratt, then church historian, in giving a chronological account of mission events in the church.
[^9] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, ch. xxx. Elder Orson Pratt says they organized a branch of the church west of Hamilton, shire town of Wentworth county, which agrees with location mentioned in the History of the Church, Period I, above cited. (Celebration Pioneer's Day, July 24th, 1880, pamphlet, p. 25.)
[^10] The interesting circumstances here alluded to are thus stated by Elder Pratt himself: "It was now April (1836); I had retired to rest one evening at an early hour, and was pondering my future course, when there came a knock at the door. I arose and opened it, when Elder Heber C. Kimball and others entered my house, and being filled with the spirit of prophecy, they blessed me and my wife, and prophesied as follows: 'Brother Parley, thy wife shall be healed from this hour, and shall bear a son, and his name shall be Parley; and he shall be a chosen instrument in the hands of the Lord to inherit the priesthood and to walk in the steps of his father. He shall do a great work in the earth in ministering the word and teaching the children of men. Arise therefore, and go forth in the ministry, nothing doubting. Take no thought for your debts, nor the necessaries of life, for the Lord will supply you with abundant means for all things. Thou shalt go to upper Canada, even to the city of Toronto, the capital, and there thou shalt find a people prepared for the fulness of the gospel, and they shall receive thee, and thou shalt organize the church among them, and it shall spread thence into the regions round about, and many shall be brought to the knowledge of the truth and shall be filled with joy; and from the things growing out of this mission, shall the fulness of the gospel spread into England, and cause a great work to be done in that land. You shall not only have means to deliver you from your present embarrassments, but you shall yet have riches, silver and gold, till you will loathe the counting thereof.' This prophecy was all the more marvelous, because being married near ten years we had never had any children; and for near six years my wife had been consumptive, and had been considered incurable."
[^11] John Taylor was born November 1st, 1808, in Milnthorp, a small town near the head of Morecombe bay, and not far from Windemere, the "Queen of English Lakes," in the county of Westmoreland, England. His father's name was James Taylor, whose forefathers for many generations had lived on an estate known as Craig Gate, in Ackenthwaite. John Taylor's mother's name was Agnes; her maiden name was also Taylor. Her grandfather, Christopher Taylor, lived to be ninety-seven years of age. His son John, father of Agnes, held an office in the excise under the government from his first setting out in life to the age of about sixty. The maiden name of Agnes Taylor's mother was Whittington.
[^12] Revelation, xiv:6, 7.
[^13] History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 489, 490. footnote.
[^14] Dr. Willard Richards, who, as an apostle of the church, secretary and confidential friend of the Prophet, and for many years a counselor in the first presidency of the church with Brigham Young, will be frequently mentioned in this History. He was born at Hopkinton, Middlesex county, Massachusetts, June 24th, 1804. He was of a deeply religious nature, but met with some disappointing experiences in connection with sectarian churches which led him to the conclusion that they were wrong and that God then had no church on earth, but that he would soon have a church whose doctrines would be the truth and the whole truth. While in the practice of his profession near Boston, in 1835, he came in contact for the first time with the Book of Mormon which he read twice through within ten days, and such was his conviction of its truth that he discontinued his practice of medicine and in company with his brother, Dr. Levi Richards, made the journey of seven hundred miles to Kirtland to make further investigation. His inquiries resulted in his conversion, and on the last day of the year, 1836, he was baptized by Brigham Young.
[^15] So great was the embarrassment that in the closing days of 1836—December 22—a special conference of the priesthood, held at Kirtland, found it necessary to issue a circular letter to the branches of the church denouncing as an improper and unchristian-like course, on the part of the elders and the churches abroad, "to send their poor from among them to this place [Kirtland], without the necessary means of subsistence;" and after "deliberate discussion" it was moved and carried unanimously by the conference—after reciting the conditions in Kirtland, and drawing attention to the fact that the saints there had already borne their part in carrying the burdens of the New Dispensation—"that it becomes the duty, henceforth, of all the churches abroad to provide for those who are objects of charity, * * * and not send them from their midst to burden the church in this place unless they come and prepare a place for them, and provide means for their support." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, pp. 468-9).
[^16] Stephens' History of the United States, p. 460.
[^17] History of the United States, Marcus Wilson, p. 479.
[^18] Ibid, pp. 479-80.
[^19] History of the United States, E. Morris, p. 308 and note. "Men grew so eager in land speculation that they purchased freely of land they never had seen and never were likely to see. Town lots were bought at high prices in the far backwoods, and the sites of some of the western cities—which existed only on paper—were six feet under water. In Dickens' story of 'Martin Chuzzlewit' he gives an amusing description of one of these paper cities, dignified with the name of 'Eden.'"
[^20] History of the United States, E. Morris, 1897, p. 308-9.
[^21] Fourteenth article of agreement, see Messenger and Advocate, July, 1837 p. 535; and History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, ch. xxxii.
[^22] See Linn's Story of the Mormons, ch. v. The Prophet of Palmyra, Gregg. ch. xiii. Early Days of Mormonism, Kennedy, ch. vii, and nearly all anti-"Mormon" authors.
[^23] Minutes of Conference held in Kirtland temple, September 3rd, 1837. History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 509-10; and Note I end of chapter.
[^24] History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 488.
[^25] According to Kennedy the man who entered the complaint was Samuel D. Rounds. "As the law then stood in Ohio," remarks Kennedy, "informers, in certain cases, were granted a portion of the fines imposed. The penalty incurred in unlawful banking was of this character, and accordingly, one Samuel D. Rounds decided to enrich himself, harass the Mormons and vindicate the law by one bold stroke. In the March term of court, he caused the arrest of Rigdon and Smith and demanded from each, in the name of himself and the state, a penalty of one thousand dollars, incurred by acting on the fourth day of January, 1837, as an officer of a bank not incorporated by the laws of this state" (Ohio), with the result set forth above. Evidently, from the tone of Kennedy's recital of the incident, the prosecution was malicious. (Early Days of Mormonism, pp. 160-162).
[^26] History of Brigham Young, Millennial Star, vol. xxv, p. 518. Also History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, pp. 509, 510.
[^27] "Dear Brethren: Oliver Cowdery has been in transgression, but as he is now chosen as one of the presidents or counselors, I trust that he will yet humble himself and magnify his calling, but if he should not, the church will soon be under the necessity of raising their hands against him; therefore pray for him." (From a statement signed by Joseph Smith. History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 511). Oliver Cowdery was not present at the above mentioned conference.
[^28] "President Smith then introduced Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Smith, Sen., Hyrum Smith, and John Smith for assistant counselors. These last four together with the first three (Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams) are to be considered the heads of the church, carried unanimously." (From minutes of conference, 3rd September, 1837. History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 509).
[^29] History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 512.
[^30] Elders' Journal, vol. i, p. 57.
[^31] Ibid, p. 57, 58.
[^32] Grandison Newell (a non-"Mormon") lodged a complaint before Justice Flint, of Painsville, charging the Prophet with conspiring to take his life. Much reliance was placed on Parrish's testimony by the Prophet's enemies, and the above answer was quite disconcerting to them. The Justice in the preliminary hearing placed the Prophet under five hundred dollar bonds to keep the peace and to appear at the next term of court. "On the final hearing;" remarks Kennedy, "Smith was discharged, the evidence not being sufficient to make good the charge." (Early Days of Mormonism, p. 157-8).
[^33] See Ante, this chapter.
[^34] Eliza R. Snow in her Biography of Lorenzo Snow, her brother, and the fifth president of the church in the New Dispensation, gives a vivid description of one of these occasions: "They [the dissenters] linked themselves together in an opposing party—pretended that they constituted the church, and claimed that the temple belonged to them, and even attempted to hold it. Warren Parrish, who had been a humble, successful preacher of the gospel, was the ringleader of this apostate party. One Sabbath morning, he, with several of his party, came in to the temple armed with pistols and bowie-knives and seated themselves together in the Aaronic pulpits, on the east end of the temple, while father Smith and others, as usual, occupied those of the Melchizedek priesthood on the west. Soon after the usual opening services, one of the brethren on the west stand arose, and just after he commenced to speak, one on the east interrupted him. Father Smith, presiding, called for order—he told the apostate brother that he should have all the time he wanted, but he must wait his turn—as the brother on the west took the floor and commenced first to speak, he must not be interrupted. A fearful scene ensued—the apostate speaker becoming so clamorous that Father Smith called for the police to take that man out of the house, when Parrish, John Boynton, and others, drew their pistols and bowie-knives, and rushed down from the stand into the congregation; John Boynton saying he would blow out the brains of the first man who dared to lay hands on him. Many in the congregation, especially women and children, were terribly frightened—some tried to escape from the confusion by jumping out of the windows. Amid screams and shrieks, the policemen, in ejecting the belligerents, knocked down a stove-pipe, which fell helter-skelter among the people; but, although bowie-knives and pistols were wrested from their owners, and thrown hither and thither to prevent disastrous results, no one was hurt, and after a short, but terrible scene to be enacted in a temple of God, order was restored, and the services of the day proceeded as usual."
[^35] Joseph Smith's comment, History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 528.
[^36] The Messenger and Advocate, the predecessor of the Elders' Journal, issued three complete volumes, ending with the September number of 1837. The Journal, as stated above, issued but two numbers in Kirtland. It was reestablished at Far West in July following, but again only two numbers were issued, when it was discontinued under circumstances to be related in a future chapter.
[^37] "Stories were put afloat that Mormons of the "old school" had become incendiaries, in the hope that the blaze would extend to the temple which they did not wish to see left in the hands of their enemies" (Early Days of Mormonism, Kennedy, p. 170). The Prophet's version of the burning is as follows: "By reason of the great persecution against the saints in that place [Kirtland], the paper [Elders' Journal] had to be stopped: and through the craft of wicked men they got possession of the printing office, and knowing they could not hold it, it was burned" (Elders' Journal, p. 34—Prospectus). Under date of March 29, 1838, the Prophet wrote to the presidency in Kirtland: "We have heard of the destruction of the printing office, which we presume to believe must have been occasioned by the Parrish Party." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 10-12).
[^38] Of this flight from Kirtland and the pursuit of his enemies, the Prophet says: "The weather was extremely cold, and we were obliged to secrete ourselves in our wagons, sometimes, to elude the grasp of our pursuers, who continued their pursuit of us more than two hundred miles from Kirtland, armed with pistols and guns, seeking our lives. They frequently crossed our track, twice they were in the houses where we stopped, once we tarried all night in the same house with them, with only a partition between us and them; and heard their oaths and imprecations, and threats concerning us, if they could catch us; and late in the evening they came into our room and examined us, but decided we were not the men. At other times we passed them in the streets, and gazed upon them, and they on us, but they knew us not. One Lyons was one of our pursuers. (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 2. 3).
[^39] This date is fixed in the following manner: In the Prophet's editorial in the Elders' Journal, after reciting the facts stated in the above quotation, he relates how Parrish had an opportunity of proving the iniquity of the Prophet in open court in the case of Grandison Newel vs. Joseph Smith; and yet as a witness in that case he testified that he knew nothing in the character or conduct of Mr. Smith an worthy his professions as a man of God; and the case above referred to, Newel vs. Smith, according to Kennedy, was tried on the 3rd of June, 1837. (Early Days of Mormonism, p. 157).
[^40] Early Days of Mormonism, Kennedy, pp. 153-4.
[^41] Such the remarks of the Prophet in his autobiography, History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, ch. xxxii.
[^42] Robinson's narrative is found in The Return, a monthly periodical published by him in Davis City, Iowa, 1889-1891. The account of the Prophet's journey to Salem is in vol. i, July number, 1889, under the caption items of "Personal History."
[^43] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxi.
[^44] 44. History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, chs. xxix and xxx.
[^45] 45. "The building of this structure by a few hundred persons, who, during the period between 1832 and 1836, contributed voluntarily of their money, material, or labor, the women knitting and spinning and making garments for the men who worked on the temple, was regarded with wonder throughout all northern Ohio." (Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 112).
