B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XXXI

THE NAME OF THE CHURCH—EXTENSION OF THE WORK TO CANADA AND ENGLAND—THE DISRUPTION AT KIRTLAND—THE FLIGHT TO MISSOURI

IT is necessary now to relate events of a different order than those of mob violence. The unlikelihood of very soon reestablishing Zion, in Jackson county, together with the general uncertainty of affairs in Missouri pertaining to the saints, made it imperative that Kirtland should be enlarged and maintained as the headquarters of church activity. As already stated in a previous chapter, on the return of the elders from the Zion camp expedition, the foreign ministry of the church, represented in the quorums of the twelve and the seventy, was organized and its duties defined. The temple was hastened to its completion, and dedicated; the Evening and Morning Star, the church periodical, was discontinued with the September number of 1834, and succeeded by the Messenger and Advocate, which was regarded as a more appropriate title for a periodical of the New Dispensation, which had both a message to deliver and a cause to advocate. [^1] About this time also a change was made in the title of the church. Up until now the organization had been called by its members the "Church of Christ" or "The Church of Jesus Christ," but by non-members the "Mormon Church," and "Mormonites." In the hope of establishing a more distinctive title,—and perhaps in the hope of escaping the term "Mormonite" [^2]—at a conference of elders in Kirtland, over which President Joseph Smith presided, held on the 3rd of May, 1834, a resolution was passed to the effect that the church thereafter should be known as "The Church of the Latter-day Saints." [^3] The heading of the conference minutes, however, begins with these words: "Minutes of a conference of the elders of the Church of Christ," etc. This is pointed out in order that it may be seen that while the conference aforesaid adopted the title, "The Church of the Latter-day Saints," and the church officially for some time was called by that name, it was not the intention to regard the church as any other than the "Church of Christ." Subsequently, namely, on the 26th of April, 1838, the matter of the name of the church was finally settled by revelation—"Thus shall my Church be called in the last days," said the Lord, "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." [^4] The appropriateness of this title is self-evident, and in it there is a beautiful recognition of the relationship of the Lord Jesus Christ and the saints to the organization. It is "The Church of Jesus Christ." He owns it, for he organized it. It is his, for he gave himself for it. It is the sacred depository of his truth. It is his instrumentality for promulgating all those spiritual truths in which he would have mankind instructed. It is also the Christ's instrumentality for the perfecting of the saints, as well as for the work of the ministry. [^5] It is the Christ's church in all these respects; but it is an institution which also belongs to the saints. It is their refuge from the confusion and religious doubt of the world. It is their instructor in principle, doctrine, and righteousness. It is their guide in matters of faith and morals. They have a conjoint ownership in it with Jesus Christ, which ownership is recognized in the latter part of the title. "The Church * * * of Latter-day Saints," is equivalent to "The Church of Jesus Christ," and "The Church of the Latter-day Saints"

SCHOOL AND MISSION DEVELOPMENTS

For some time there was a season of joy and gladness in Kirtland for the saints. The school for the elders in the temple went steadily on. During the week Professor H. M. Hawes conducted the "Kirtland High School," where, in addition to the English branches, the classics were taught; and Professor Joshua Seixas was employed to conduct a class in Hebrew which was well and enthusiastically attended by a number of leading elders, including the Prophet. [^6] In the evenings the various temple rooms were quite generally occupied by the different quorums of priesthood. On Thursday night a weekly prayer meeting was held in the main hall of the lower story, conducted by the father of the Prophet, now the presiding patriarch of the church, [^7] and vocal music was taught to members of the choir on several evenings of the week. On Sundays the temple was crowded with eager worshipers from far and near, and Kirtland was indeed a center of educational and religious activity. From thence elders were sent throughout the United States and into Canada, which was the first country to receive the message of the New Dispensation outside of the United States. Elder Orson Pratt preached the first discourse in Canada at Potten, north of the state of Vermont, on the 20th of July, 1833. [^8] In October of the same year the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon performed a brief mission in upper Canada, accompanied by Freeman Nickerson. They held meetings in Mount Pleasant, near Brantford, the shire town of Brant county; also in Waterford, in the adjoining county of Norfolk. About sixteen were baptized and Freeman A. Nickerson (a relative of the Freeman Nickerson who accompanied the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon on their mission) was ordained an elder and appointed to preside over the newly made converts. [^9] Subsequently, namely, in 1836, Elder Parley P. Pratt under very interesting circumstances went to the city of Toronto and preached the gospel in that city and the surrounding country. [^10] Among his early converts in Toronto was John Taylor, who afterwards became prominently associated with Joseph Smith at Nauvoo, was made one of the twelve apostles, and became the third president of the church, succeeding Brigham Young, in that high office. [^11]

From Canada the work finally extended into England in the following manner. Several of the saints in Canada had friends and relatives in England, to whom, by letter, they gave an account of the opening and progress of the New Dispensation of the gospel; and at length, Joseph Fielding, Isaac Russell, John Goodson and John Snyder became anxious to proclaim the gospel in England.

CALAMITOUS EVENTS

About this time the darkest days had fallen upon Kirtland. The spirit of apostasy was rife. No quorum of the church was free from it. Five of the quorum of the twelve at one time were in league with the enemies of the Prophet, and it would seem that every evil power had combined to make an end of the New Dispensation so recently established. In many constitutions of American states it is written that frequent recurrence to fundamental principles is essential to the perpetuity of free government. The doctrine of frequent recurrence to fundamental principles holds not only in civil government, but as well in ecclesiastical organizations. The primary mission given to the church was to make proclamation of the truth deposited with her to the world. She was established to be God's instrumentality for teaching the truth to all nations. The gospel restored "in the hour of God's judgment" was to be preached "to every nation and kindred and tongue and people." [^12] The closer the church adheres to this mission the greater will be her security from the "gates of hell" which seek to prevail against her. And hence it happened that in these darkest Kirtland days there was a recurrence to fundamental principles. "God revealed it to me," says the Prophet, "that something new must be done for the salvation of his church." That "something new" was to send the gospel to England under apostolic commission. The inspiration of the spirit led the Prophet on the 4th of June (Sunday) to go to Heber C. Kimball, then sitting in the temple, and to say to him: "Brother Heber, the spirit of the Lord has whispered to me: Let my servant Heber go to England and proclaim my gospel, and open the door of salvation to that nation." [^13] A few days later Orson Hyde, also of the quorum of the twelve, and Elder Willard Richards, a recent convert to the faith, [^14] were appointed to accompany Elder Kimball, and these three brethren with the four Canadian brethren already named comprised the mission to England, the first foreign mission undertaken under the New Dispensation of the gospel.

We must now consider the calamitous events which befell the saints in Kirtland. As already stated the unlikelihood of any way soon reestablishing Zion, in Jackson county, as a center of church activity, made it imperative that something like permanency be given to the operations of the church in Kirtland. In pursuance of this purpose the leading elders of the church and the saints, as far as they had means to participate in such movements, purchased tracts of land in Kirtland and vicinity, and platted them into town lots with a view of establishing a city of some pretensions. In addition to their printing establishment, a steam sawmill was installed and a tannery founded—both proved to be unprofitable investments and failed. The mercantile establishments were enlarged and an extensive stock of goods purchased on credit. The lands purchased for the expansion of Kirtland were bought at excessively high prices, and also upon credit; but the expected gathering of the saints from the east and elsewhere, who would be able to purchase the lands, failed of realization; and the platted lands were largely left on the hands of the first purchasers. The poor came, in considerable numbers, even to the embarrassment of the presiding authorities of the church; [^15] but these could not build up the city where means for purchasing lots, building homes and establishing manufactures and other industries was the first requisite. The saints, also, it must be admitted, lived extravagantly on borrowed money. They had entered into that spirit of reckless speculation which for several years had been rife throughout the United States, and which expressed itself chiefly in land speculations and in excessive banking, culminating in the disastrous financial panic of 1837. In order that it may be seen—after frankly admitting the folly and sin of the saints in these matters—that the financial failures of the saints at Kirtland were not purely local, nor due to any principle connected with "Mormonism," but were part of a general financial and industrial maelstrom that swept through the country, I quote the following from Alexander H. Stephens' History of the United States:

"Soon after Mr. Van Buren became president occurred a great commercial crisis. This was in April, 1837, and was occasioned by a reckless spirit of speculation, which had, for two or three preceding years, been fostered and encouraged by excessive banking, and the consequent expansion of paper currency beyond all the legitimate wants of the country. During the months of March and April of this year the failures in New York City alone amounted to over $100,000,000. This state of affairs became so distressing, that petitions were sent to the president from several quarters, and a deputation of merchants and bankers of New York waited upon him in person, and solicited him to defer the immediate collection of duties, for which bonds had been given, and to rescind the treasury orders which had been issued under Jackson's administration, requiring dues to the government to be paid in specie. They also asked that an extra session of congress should be called to adopt measures of relief. He granted their request so far only as to suspend suits on bonds, which had been given for the collection of duties. In a few days after his response to this deputation was made known in New York, all the banks in that city stopped specie payments, and their example was soon followed by nearly all the banks in all the states. In this emergency, Mr. Van Buren was compelled to convene an extra session of congress, to provide for meeting demands on the treasury with legal currency. He accordingly summoned the twenty-fifth congress to meet at the capitol on the 4th day of September, 1837. The session lasted five or six weeks. In his message to congress, Mr. Van Buren assigned as the causes of the unhappy condition of the country, the excessive issues of bank paper; the great fire in New York, December, 1835; the large investments that had been made in unproductive lands, and other speculative enterprises. To meet the exigencies of the treasury, as well as to provide for the public relief, as far as to them seemed proper, congress passed an act authorizing the issue of treasury notes to the amount of $10,000,000." [^16]

Another authority says:

"The great extent of the business operations of the country at that time, and their intimate connection with each other, extended the evil throughout all the channels of trade; causing, in the first place, a general failure of the mercantile interests—affecting, through them, the business of the mechanic and the farmer, nor stopping until it had reduced the wages of the humblest day laborer." [^17]

Commenting on the refusal of the president to rescind the order for payments for public lands in specie, Wilson remarks:

"Two days after the decision of the president became known, all the banks in the city of New York suspended specie payments, and this was followed by a similar suspension on the part of the banks throughout the whole county. The people were not the only sufferers by this measure; for, as the deposit banks had likewise ceased to redeem their notes in specie, the government itself was embarrassed, and was unable to discharge its own obligations." [^18]

A more recent historian—Morris, 1897—says:

"The overthrow of the United States bank was followed by the establishment of a host of state banks, many of them without capital, and issuing notes which they were very unlikely to redeem. These became known as 'wild-cat banks.' Some of these state banks whose directors were in harmony with Jackson's views received deposits of government money. This money as already said, soon made its way into the hands of borrowers and gave rise to a high tide of speculation. Land at first, and afterward almost everything, was speculated in, and paid for largely in the notes of the wild-cat banks." [^19]

Speaking of the panic of 1837, Morris says:

"Much of the land bought was purchased from the government. When Jackson found that it was being paid for largely in notes that soon became worthless, an order was issued to the government agents to accept only gold in payment for public lands. This order precipitated a panic.

"It began in 1837, shortly after Van Buren took his seat, in the failure of a large New Orleans business house. Other failures quickly followed. Land was hastily offered for sale, but no one would buy. Prices fell rapidly. In ten days a hundred New York merchants found their business ruined. Within two months the failures in that city alone reached the sum of one hundred million dollars.

"The state bank notes came back in numbers for payment, but there was no gold or silver in the vaults to redeem them, and the banks began to fail in all directions. Gold and silver vanished from sight, and the government was forced to pay its debts in paper money.

"The business depression that followed was one of the worst the country has ever known. Everywhere mills and factories stopped and workmen were thrown out of employment. The government was forced to suspend the payment of the surplus ordered to be divided among the states, and the fourth installment of this was never paid." [^20]

THE KIRTLAND SAFETY SOCIETY BANK

Such were the general conditions prevailing throughout the United States—conditions which affected the industrial and business enterprises of the Latter-day saints in Ohio, in common with other people, and contributed to their failure; but the failure in the case of the saints was magnified out of all just proportions. Especially is this the case in the matter of what is called "The Kirtland Bank" failure, the history of which is as follows: In November, 1836, a number of brethren including the presidency and other leading elders of the church, applied to the Ohio state legislature for a charter for a bank, to be known as the "Kirtland Safety Society Bank;" but on account of religious prejudice it is supposed, the legislature refused to grant the charter. Meantime, confident of getting the charter, Oliver Cowdery had been sent to Philadelphia as the agent of the proposed banking institution and had plates engraved on which to print the proposed bank's currency. Failing to get the charter for a bank, the saints organized a "Stock Industrial Company" called the "Kirtland Safety Society Anti-Bank-ing Company," under which they "proposed the management of their respective occupations," consisting of "agriculture, mechanical arts and merchandising." By the articles of agreement the individual members of said society held themselves bound for the redemption of all notes given by it in proportion to the amount of stock subscribed. [^21] And this article was made unalterable, (see Art. 16). In issuing their notes the "Kirtland Safety Society" doubtless made a mistake in that they used the notes printed from the plates prepared for their anticipated bank issue, using a stamp to make the notes read—Anti-Bank-ing Co., instead of "Kirtland Safety Society Bank." This to avoid the necessity of incurring the expense of making new plates; but anti-"Mormon" writers have attributed a sinister motive to the action. [^22] The "Kirtland Safety Society" enterprise ended disastrously. Having no state charter the notes of the "society" had no legal standing as currency, and were soon rejected by its creditors in New York, Pittsburg and Cleveland, where merchandise for the stores in Kirtland had been purchased on credit, in large quantities, and for which the "society," its notes being rejected, was unable to pay. Prices in real estate rapidly declined so that the large farms purchased by the "society" on credit and platted for a city could not be sold but at great loss; and the financial disasters that had swept over the whole country still paralizing all branches of business activity, the "Kirtland Safety Society" failed with thousands of other business concerns of 1837, and involved many members of the church in financial distress.

Nor was this the worst of their calamities. Pride and worldly mindedness among the saints had preceded some of their financial difficulties, and when their troubles came thick upon them they accused each other of all kinds of sin and folly; there were evil surmisings, bickerings, fault-finding, false accusations and bitterness, until the spirit of the gospel in Kirtland was well nigh eclipsed. The Prophet especially was censured. It was reported that the "bank" had been "instituted by the will of God," i. e., by revelation, "and would never fail, let men do what they would." This the Prophet denied in open conference, saying that "if this had been declared no one had authority from him for doing so;" and added that he "had always said that unless the institution was conducted on righteous principles it would not stand." [^23] Many, however, became disaffected toward the Prophet, "as though I were the sole cause," he writes, "of those very evils I was most strenuously striving against, and which were actually brought upon us by the brethren not giving heed to my counsel." [^24] Matters went on from bad to worse, apostasy was rife even among some of the high church officials. In March, 1837, the Prophet as treasurer, Sidney Rigdon as secretary of the ill-fated "Kirtland Safety Society," were arrested upon a charge of violating the banking laws of the state. [^25] They were adjudged guilty in the Geauga county court, but appealed from the decision on the ground that the "Kirtland Safety Society" was not a bank. This question was never ruled upon by the courts, as both Sidney Rigdon and the Prophet were compelled to flee the state for security of their personal safety from false brethren, before the case could be heard.

KIRTLAND DEBACLE—GLOOM

The breaking up at Kirtland in the closing months of 1837, was well nigh complete. On the 3rd of September, Sunday, a conference was held in the temple at which the dissenters and apostates for the time being were outwitted. Brigham Young early that morning visited the faithful saints and urged their attendance at the conference, so that when the names of the officers of the church were presented those in good standing might be sustained by vote of the people; and that those who had become dissenters might be rejected and disfellowshipped. [^26]

Among these were three of the quorum of the twelve apostles, viz., Luke S. Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson and John F. Boynton. They were given an opportunity of confessing and making satisfaction, and this John F. Boynton attempted in the meeting, but his confession was not satisfactory. He attributed his difficulties to the failure of the "Kirtland bank" which he understood was "instituted by the will of God, and he had been told it would never fail, let men do what they would." This was denounced as untrue by the Prophet. Oliver Cowdery was declared to have been in transgression, but was forgiven and sustained as an "assistant counselor" in the presidency of the church. [^27] Joseph Smith, Sen., Hyrum Smith, John Smith, (uncle of the Prophet) were also sustained as "assistant presidents." [^28] Four members of the Kirtland stake high council were rejected, among the number Martin Harris, one of the three special witnesses of the Book of Mormon. At a meeting held in the temple one week later, the three apostles who had been rejected by the saints made their confessions, and were restored to fellowship, and retained in their office. [^29]

This reconciliation and adjustment of matters, however, was not permanent. It is doubtful even if the confessions of the disaffected apostles were sincere. At any rate, soon afterwards, when the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon were absent in upper Missouri locating new stakes of Zion for the saints, now rapidly gathering to that land, the opposition of these three apostles to the Prophet, and their bitterness towards those who sustained him in the late conference, were manifested in a most determined effort to overthrow the church. The party opposed to the Prophet called themselves "reformers," and were under the leadership of Warren Parrish, one of the seventy, and a man of some native force of character. He had been at one time a faithful elder in the church, clerk to the Prophet, and companion to Elders David W. Patten and Wilford Woodruff in missionary labors in Kentucky and Tennessee. He was guilty of sexual sin in Kirtland, however, of which he made confession to the church, and on promising reformation retained his standing. [^30] He became first a clerk and finally the cashier in the "Kirtland Safety Society Bank," and was guilty of peculation to the extent of more than twenty-five thousand dollars of the funds of the bank. [^31] Questioned in open court in the case of Grandison Newel vs. Joseph Smith—which case was tried in June, 1837—as to whether he knew anything "in the character or conduct of Mr. Smith which is unworthy his profession as a man of God," he answered—"I do not." [^32] Yet Warren Parrish kept up a constant agitation among the saints, insisting that Joseph Smith was a fallen prophet, and that he should be displaced as president of the church in favor of David Whitmer.

In addition to Warren Parrish and the three apostles named, Leonard Rich, Stephen Burnett, Sylvester Smith, Cyrus P. Smalling and Joseph Coe were numbered among the leaders of this movement.

Among other things these "reformers" insisted that the regular authorities in Kirtland had departed from the true order of things by calling the church "The Church of the Latter-day Saints." [^33] They proceeded therefore to repudiate this title and adopt what they considered the proper one, "The Church of Christ," and held themselves forth as the "old standard;" they rejected the Prophet, and denounced those who adhered to him as heretics. They met frequently in the temple, and claimed ownership of it, sometimes resorting to violence in their assertion of the right to control it. [^34] Many of the faithful saints during the year of 1837 had removed from Kirtland to upper Missouri, to which place also many of the saints from the branches in the eastern states and Canada were migrating. The hope of redeeming Zion had not been abandoned; nor had the previous misfortunes which befell the saints in Missouri destroyed their faith in the revealed purposes of God with reference to that land. But the migration of faithful saints from Kirtland stake of Zion during the time named left dissenters and apostates at the last in the majority in that place, and hence the sad results here chronicled.

The closing scenes of the disasters came with the closing days of 1837, and the early days of 1838. On the 22nd of December, Brigham Young, who persisted in declaring both in public and in private that he knew by the power of the Holy Ghost that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, was compelled to flee from the fury of threatened mob violence. Further stormy scenes in council meetings followed. Men braved the Prophet to his face and charged their misfortunes upon him. The sheriff was a frequent visitor at Kirtland and mortgage foreclosures followed each other in surprising frequency. The printing establishment was seized "to satisfy an unjust judgment of the county court," [^35] and the Elders' Journal, which had issued but two numbers of the first volume, was discontinued. [^36] Later the printing office with a large amount of paper and many books was sold by the sheriff to one of the "reformers;" and on the night of the day of sale (January 14th) the office with its contents and also a small Methodist chapel standing nearby were burned to the ground. [^37] On the 12th of January, the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon, to avoid the rising storm of another persecution "under the color of legal process," left Kirtland in the night, en route for the settlement of the saints in upper Missouri. They were followed some distance by their enemies, for more than two hundred miles, according to the Prophet, [^38] but they successfully eluded their pursuers.

NOTES

The following passage occurs in Linn's Story of the Mormons, (p. 159):

"Smith made a stubborn defense of his business conduct. He attributed the disaster of the bank to Parrish's peculations, and the general troubles of the church to 'the spirit of speculation in lands and property of all kinds,' as he puts it in his autobiography, wherein he alleges that 'the evils were actually brought about by the brethren not giving heed to my counsel.' If Smith gave any such counsel, it is unfortunate for his reputation that neither the church records nor his 'revelations' contain any mention of it."

Doubtless it would have been more satisfactory had the Prophet been more specific in his statement on this point. But it is due to him to say that evidence exists that he sought to stem the tide of evil produced by the mismanagement of the "bank" and the speculations of some of its officials. Sometime previous to July 7th, 1837, the Prophet resigned his office in the "Kirtland Safety Society," disposed of his interest therein and withdrew from the institution, saying that he was satisfied "after so long an experiment [five months] that no institution of the kind, established upon just and righteous principles for a blessing not only to the church but to the whole nation, would be suffered to continue its operations in such an age of darkness, speculation, and wickedness." (History of the Church, Period I, Vol. II, p. 497). In the August number of the Messenger and Advocate he also published the following:

Caution.—"To the brethren and friends of the Church of Latter-day Saints, I am disposed to say a word relative to the bills of the Kirtland Safety Society Bank. I hereby warn them to beware of speculators, renegades and gamblers, who are duping the unsuspecting and the unwary, by palming upon them those bills which are of no worth here. I discountenance and disapprove of any and all such practices. I know them to be detrimental to the best interests of society, as well as to the principles of religion."

JOSEPH SMITH, JUN.

In an editorial in the August (1838) number of the Elders Journal the Prophet details an account of the peculations of Warren Parrish as follows:

"He had the handling of large sums of money, and it was soon discovered, that after the money was counted and laid away, and come to be used and counted again, that there was always a part of it missing: this being the case, repeatedly, and those who owned it, knowing that there was no other person but Parrish who had access to it, suspicion of necessity fixed itself on him. At last, the matter went to such lengths, that a search warrant was called for, to search his trunk. The warrant was demanded at the office of F. G. Williams. Esq., but he refused to grant it, some difficulty arose on account of it. The warrant, however, was at last obtained, but too late, for the trunk in question was taken out of the way, and could not be found; but as to his guilt, little doubt can be entertained by any person acquainted with the circumstances. After this affair, Parrish began to discover that there was great iniquity in the church, particularly in the editor of this paper" (i. e. Joseph Smith).

Lucy Smith, mother of the Prophet, in her history of him says that it was Joseph who demanded this warrant in order to bring Parrish to just punishment under the law, and save the credit of the "bank." First she refers to a discourse which the Prophet delivered in Kirtland after his return from the east where he had been in company with Martin Harris. In that discourse the Prophet felicitated the saints on the happy conditions that obtained in Kirtland, but warned them of a change in prospect, and such a change as would lead some of them to be willing to take his life, and they would take it, if God would permit the deed. "But brethren," he said, "I now call upon you to repent, and cease all your hardness of heart, and turn from those principles of death and dishonesty which you are harboring in your bosoms, before it is eternally too late, for there is yet room for repentance."

After this reference to the Prophet's discourse Lucy continues: "In the fall of 1836, a bank was established in Kirtland. Soon after the sermon above mentioned, Joseph discovered that a large amount of money had been taken away by fraud from this bank. He immediately demanded a search warrant of Esquire F. G. Williams, which was flatly refused. 'I insist upon a warrant,' said Joseph, 'for if you will give one, I can get the money, and if you do not, I will break you of your office.' 'Well, break it is, then,' said Williams, 'and we will strike hands upon it.' 'Very well,' said Joseph, 'from henceforth I drop you from my quorum, [in first presidency] in the name of the Lord.'" (History of the Prophet Joseph, Lucy Smith, ch. xlv).

This agrees with the Prophet's statement that when application was made to F. G. Williams for a search warrant and he refused it, "some difficulty arose on account of it."

This movement of the Prophet against Parrish's peculation occurred previous to June, 1837, [^39] and hence previous to the Prophet's withdrawal from the ill-fated institution and disposal of his interest therein; and his "caution" against the validity of the Safety Society's notes. Each of these several actions was a protest against the course the institution was following, after it had fallen under corrupt management. And in view of these several actions and warnings against dishonest methods is not the Prophet warranted in saying that the disasters of the Safety Society arose from its not giving heed to his counsel? And is it fair to insinuate, as Linn does, that our church records give no evidence that the Prophet made any such efforts, or gave any such counsel?

Not all of those who may be classed as anti-"Mormon" writers censure the action of the saints in their efforts to found a city at Kirtland, with industrial, mercantile and banking institutions. Some of this class of writers recognize the right of the saints to engage in these enterprises, as well as other people, and admit that there were natural advantages at Kirtland which justified the hope of success in such a movement. Among those who view matters from this standpoint is Kennedy, an author often cited in our narration. On the point in question he says:

"Looked at from the dispassionate ground of a business view alone, one can hardly criticise the Mormon leaders for many of the ventures into which they were led. It was a time when the canals of New York and Ohio, the waters of Lake Erie and the Ohio river, and the highways between the east and the great west, were filled with people bent upon the founding of new homes in the new lands, and lured by a future that, however bright it might have seemed, has been far outrun by the magnificent developments of the half-century past. Cities were springing up as if by magic. Settlements were made today where the forest had stood untenanted and unbroken but yesterday. Farms were marked out in lands that were on the far frontier a year before. With any advantage in natural gift or commercial creation, one spot seemed equal to the rest in a hope for the future, and those whose interests were staked upon it felt justified in calling the attention of the world to their possessions, and in offering to others a part of the harvest they hoped to reap. Kirtland lay upon one of the roadways the hand of the pioneer had cut through the forests of northern Ohio, while the waters of Lake Erie could be seen from her temple roof. The nucleus of a large town seemed to have been formed in the settlement of so many strangers about the temple, and the limits to which it might yet grow could only be defined by the future. Those who had seen that which had already been done, had a reason for their hope of yet greater things in times to come." [^40]

Another circumstance connected with this Kirtland period, and in a way related to the financial difficulties of the times, is dwelt upon by anti-"Mormon" writers to the disadvantage of the Prophet and of the church; and for that reason it is necessary to mention it here. Briefly told it amounts to this: In July, 1836, in the midst of the greatest financial distress at Kirtland, the Prophet, with his brother Hyrum, Sidney Rigdon and Oliver Cowdery made a journey to Salem, Massachusetts, where they hired a house during the month of August and spent their time in teaching the people from house to house and preaching publicly, as opportunity presented; visiting occasionally sections of the surrounding country which are rich in the history of the Pilgrim Fathers of New England, in Indian warfare, religious superstitions, bigotry, persecution and learned ignorance. [^41] While the Prophet gives a somewhat circumstantial account of this journey to Salem and his return to Kirtland in September, he nowhere assigns an adequate cause for himself and company making it—the object of it is not stated. Ebenezer Robinson, for many years a faithful and prominent elder in the church, and at Nauvoo associated with Don Carlos Smith—brother of the Prophet—in editing and publishing the Times and Seasons, states that the journey to Salem arose from these circumstances. There came to Kirtland a brother by the name of Burgess who stated that he had knowledge of a large amount of money secreted in the cellar of a certain house in Salem, Massachusetts, which had belonged to a widow (then deceased), and thought he was the only person who had knowledge of it, or of the location of the house. The brethren accepting the representations of Burgess as true made the journey to Salem to secure, if possible, the treasure. Burgess, according to Robinson, met the brethren in Salem, but claimed that time had wrought such changes in the town that he could not for a certainty point out the house "and soon left." [^42] They hired a house and occupied it and spent their time as per the narrative of the Prophet already quoted. While in Salem the Prophet received a revelation in which the folly of this journey is sharply reproved:

"I, the Lord your God, am not displeased with your coming this journey, notwithstanding your follies;

I have much treasure in the city for you, for the benefit of Zion; and many people in this city whom I will gather out in due time for the benefit of Zion, through your instrumentality;

Therefore it is expedient that you should form acquaintance with men in this city, as you shall be led, and as it shall be given you.

And it shall come to pass in due time, that I will give this city into your hands, that you shall have power over it, insomuch that they shall not discover your secret parts; and its wealth pertaining to gold and silver shall be yours.

Concern not yourselves about your debts, for I will give you power to pay them.

Concern not yourselves about Zion, for I will deal mercifully with her.

Tarry in this place, and in the regions round about;

And the place where it is my will that you should tarry, for the main, shall be signalized unto you by the peace and power of my Spirit, that shall flow unto you.

This place you may obtain by hire. And inquire diligently concerning the more ancient inhabitants and founders of this city;

For there are more treasures than one for you in this city.

Therefore be ye as wise as serpents and yet without sin, and I will order all things for your good, as fast as ye are able to receive them. Amen." [^43]

Here we have an opportunity of discerning the difference between the ways of God and the ways of men. Whereas these brethren had come seeking an earthly treasure, God directs their attention to spiritual things, telling them there are more treasures than one for them in that city; and instructs them to inquire diligently concerning the ancient inhabitants and founders of that city, doubtless having in view the securing of their genealogies and the redemption of the past generations of men who had lived there; so that if for a moment the weakness of men was manifested in this journey, we see that fault reproved and the strength and wisdom of God made manifest by directing the attention of his servants to the real and true treasures that he would have them seek, even the salvation of men, both the living and the dead.

Footnotes

Elder Pratt made immediate preparations for this mission to Canada, and all that was predicted upon his head by his brother apostle, Elder Heber C. Kimball, was fulfilled. (See Autobiography, chs. xvi, xix, xx.)

At the age of seventeen Elder Taylor was made a Methodist exhorter or local preacher, and was very active and earnest in his ministerial labors. In 1832 he removed with his family to Toronto, upper Canada, and here engaged in preaching under the auspices of the Methodist church. Within a year after his arrival in Canada he married Leonora Cannon, daughter of Captain George Cannon (grandfather of the late George Q. Cannon). Leonora Cannon had come to Canada as the companion of the wife of Mr. Mason, the private secretary of Lord Aylmer, governor-general of Canada. She was a devout Methodist, and through attendance upon church became acquainted with Mr. Taylor. While living in Toronto, Elder Taylor associated himself with a number of gentlemen of education and refinement who were not satisfied with the doctrines of their respective churches, as those doctrines did not, according to their view, agree with the teachings of the Bible. Through this organization they were seeking for greater religious light, and it was under these circumstances that Elder Parley P. Pratt arrived in Toronto with a letter of introduction to Elder Taylor. Elder Pratt several times addressed this association of gentlemen who were seeking the truth. The end of the matter was that John Taylor accepted the gospel under the ministration of Elder Pratt; and was soon afterwards ordained an elder in the church.

---
Notas:
[^1] Their religious tenets were so different from the present churches of the age, that this always had and always would excite deep prejudice against them in any populous country where they might locate. Minutes of a public meeting held at the court house, Liberty, Clay county, the 29th of June, 1836, (History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 449).
[^2] They were eastern men whose manners, habits, customs, and even dialect were essentially different from the Missourians. History of Livingston and Caldwell Counties, National Historical Co., St. Louis, 1886.
[^3] They were non-slave holders, and opposed slavery, which excited deep and abiding prejudices in a community which tolerated and protected slavery. "The first farms were opened in the woods. * * * It is alleged that the first prairie farm was opened by T. W. Higgins in the spring of 1842. In the winter of that year he built his house fairly out on the bleak prairies, and when he selected the site the snow was fifteen inches deep and the thermometer below zero. The old settlers laughed at what they deemed his folly, and declared that nobody but a Yankee would settle so from timber. But they, as well as Major Higgins, lived to declare that nobody but a 'tom-fool' would settle in the timber when there was good, rich prairie to be had. Under the circumstances it was but natural that the first settlers should have an unfavorable opinion of the prairies as to their fitness for agricultural lands. Covered with thick, strong grass, in wet seasons the moisture after a rain was held in the ground near or on the surface a long time before being absorbed or evaporated, and caused the belief that the soil would always be 'soggy,' and that in even moderately wet seasons crops would always drown out. Then there was the tough sod, which no ordinary plow then in use would turn; the land could not be enclosed with brush fence, as in the timber, but rails must be made and hauled; there were but few springs on the prairies, etc., etc.
[^4] Common report had it that they kept up a constant communication with the Indian tribes on the frontier; and declared from the pulpit that the Indians were a part of God's chosen people, destined by heaven to inherit with them the land of Missouri. According to General Doniphan these counties were named after two men, pioneers and soldiers, who had been associated with his father, Joseph Doniphan, a soldier of the Revolution, and one of the pioneers that accompanied Daniel Boone to Kentucky. In the latter state Joseph Doniphan "belonged to a company of Indian scouts and fighters, commanded by Captain Matthew Caldwell. Of this Captain Caldwell General Doniphan often heard his father speak as a brave and gallant soldier, and a skillful Indian fighter. Colonel Joseph H. Daviess, who was killed under General Harrison at the battle of Tippecanoe, Indiana, in 1811, was also an acquaintance and friend of Mr. Joseph Doniphan. When General Doniphan drew up the bill for the organization of the two new counties, he named one of them for Colonel Daviess, and the other Caldwell, in honor of his father's old captain." (History of Caldwell County, p. 105).
[^5] Constitution of the United States, art. iv, sec. ii. "It is obvious," remarks Judge Story, in commenting upon this passage, "that if the citizens of the different states were to be deemed aliens to each other, they could not inherit, or hold, or purchase real estate, or possess any political or municipal privileges in any other state than that in which they were born. And the states would be at liberty to make laws, giving preferences of rights and offices, and even privileges in trade and business, to those who were natives, over all other persons who belonged to other states; or they might make invidious discriminations between the citizens of different states. Such a power would have a tendency to generate jealousies and discontents injurious to the harmony of all the states. And, therefore, the Constitution has wisely created, as it were, a general citizenship, communicating to the citizens of each state, who have their domical in another, all the privileges and immunities enjoyed by the citizens of the latter."
[^6] History of Caldwell County, p. 118.
[^7] "Grand river is a large, beautiful and rapid stream during the high waters of spring, and will undoubtedly admit of navigation by steamboat and other craft." (Remarks of Joseph Smith, History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 34).
[^8] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxvi. Beyond what may be gathered from the above explanation, nothing is known as to the meaning of the phrase, "Adam-ondi-Ahman." John Corrill says: though on what authority is not known—"The interpretation in English is 'the valley of God in which Adam blessed his children,'" (Brief History of the Latter-day Saints, Ms., Corrill, p. 28). The phrase was used incidentally in a revelation about six years before this, viz., in 1832, where the Lord is spoken of being the Holy One of Zion, "who hath established the foundations of Adam-ondi-Ahman" (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxviii:15). Again in a revelation given March 28, 1835, the declaration is made that three years previous to his death Adam gathered certain of the ancient patriarchs together "into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing." Shortly after this W. W. Phelps wrote his hymn—
[^9] Daniel's description of the events here referred to is found in the 7th chapter of his prophecies. The description is very imposing, hence I quote it: "I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of Days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire. A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him; the judgment was set, and the books were opened. * * * I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of Man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of Days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed."
[^10] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 35. This old ruin has been quite generally accepted as marking the site of Adam-ondi-Ahman, an error, since "Tower Hill" is some half a mile east of that place; but because of the word "Adam" in the foregoing phrase, the altar or tower is supposed to have some association with the first patriarch of our race, hence it has been called "The grave of Adam" (History of Caldwell County, p. 118. Also History of Daviess County, D. L. Kort). It will be seen by reference to the text above however, that Joseph Smith assigned the ruin to Nephite origin; and that it was but one of a number of such stone mounds or ruins in that vicinity: "We discovered some antiquities about one mile east of the camp [the camp was in the vicinity of Wight's house], consisting of stone mounds, apparently erected in square piles, though somewhat decayed and obliterated by the weather (erosion) of many years. These mounds were probably erected to secrete treasures." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 37).
[^11] Standing on what used to be the public square of the city, on the occasion of his visit there in 1884, the writer obtained an excellent view of all the surrounding country. Vast fields of waving corn and meadow land were stretched out on all sides, as far as the eye could see. Several towns and villages, with their white church spires gleaming in the sunlight, were in plain view, though from five to ten miles distant. Away to the east is Kingston, the present county seat of Caldwell; further to the northeast is Breckenridge, Hamilton and Kidder; to the west is Plattsburg, and south is the quaint village of Polo. All these places are within easy vision from the site of Far West, and increase the grandeur of the scene. The site chosen for Far West is the finest location for a city in the county, but notwithstanding all the advantages of the location, it has been abandoned and is merely a land of successive cornfields.
[^12] History of Caldwell County, p. 120.
[^13] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xxvi.
[^14] See History of the Church, Period I, for minutes of above investigation, vol. ii, pp. 483-4, footnote.
[^15] Ibid, pp. 522-524.
[^16] See ante, ch. xxiv.
[^17] History of Caldwell County, p. 118.
[^18] "There were also many persons of education and accomplishments. [i. e. among the saints]. School teachers were plenty and schools were numerous. * * * The Mormons very early gave attention to educational matters. There were many teachers among them and schoolhouses were among their first buildings" (History of Caldwell County, p. 121).
[^19] The Journal of this company's travels is published in extenso in History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, chs. ix and x.
[^20] See ante, note 18, this chapter. Under the chapter subdivisions "The Firsts," the History of Caldwell County says: "The first schools were taught by Mormons." Then referring to the local educational work at Kingston, the present county seat, the historian says: "In the vicinity of Kingston the first school was taught by a young lady Mormon, Miss Mary Ann Duty, in an abandoned log cabin on Log Creek. This was in the summer of 1838." History of Caldwell County, p. 99).
[^21] History of Caldwell County, p. 119.
[^22] See Linn's Story of the Mormons, ch. v. The Prophet of Palmyra, Gregg. ch. xiii. Early Days of Mormonism, Kennedy, ch. vii, and nearly all anti-"Mormon" authors.
[^23] Minutes of Conference held in Kirtland temple, September 3rd, 1837. History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 509-10; and Note I end of chapter.
[^24] History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 488.
[^25] According to Kennedy the man who entered the complaint was Samuel D. Rounds. "As the law then stood in Ohio," remarks Kennedy, "informers, in certain cases, were granted a portion of the fines imposed. The penalty incurred in unlawful banking was of this character, and accordingly, one Samuel D. Rounds decided to enrich himself, harass the Mormons and vindicate the law by one bold stroke. In the March term of court, he caused the arrest of Rigdon and Smith and demanded from each, in the name of himself and the state, a penalty of one thousand dollars, incurred by acting on the fourth day of January, 1837, as an officer of a bank not incorporated by the laws of this state" (Ohio), with the result set forth above. Evidently, from the tone of Kennedy's recital of the incident, the prosecution was malicious. (Early Days of Mormonism, pp. 160-162).
[^26] History of Brigham Young, Millennial Star, vol. xxv, p. 518. Also History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, pp. 509, 510.
[^27] "Dear Brethren: Oliver Cowdery has been in transgression, but as he is now chosen as one of the presidents or counselors, I trust that he will yet humble himself and magnify his calling, but if he should not, the church will soon be under the necessity of raising their hands against him; therefore pray for him." (From a statement signed by Joseph Smith. History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 511). Oliver Cowdery was not present at the above mentioned conference.
[^28] "President Smith then introduced Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Smith, Sen., Hyrum Smith, and John Smith for assistant counselors. These last four together with the first three (Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams) are to be considered the heads of the church, carried unanimously." (From minutes of conference, 3rd September, 1837. History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 509).
[^29] History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 512.
[^30] Elders' Journal, vol. i, p. 57.
[^31] Ibid, p. 57, 58.
[^32] Grandison Newell (a non-"Mormon") lodged a complaint before Justice Flint, of Painsville, charging the Prophet with conspiring to take his life. Much reliance was placed on Parrish's testimony by the Prophet's enemies, and the above answer was quite disconcerting to them. The Justice in the preliminary hearing placed the Prophet under five hundred dollar bonds to keep the peace and to appear at the next term of court. "On the final hearing;" remarks Kennedy, "Smith was discharged, the evidence not being sufficient to make good the charge." (Early Days of Mormonism, p. 157-8).
[^33] See Ante, this chapter.
[^34] Eliza R. Snow in her Biography of Lorenzo Snow, her brother, and the fifth president of the church in the New Dispensation, gives a vivid description of one of these occasions: "They [the dissenters] linked themselves together in an opposing party—pretended that they constituted the church, and claimed that the temple belonged to them, and even attempted to hold it. Warren Parrish, who had been a humble, successful preacher of the gospel, was the ringleader of this apostate party. One Sabbath morning, he, with several of his party, came in to the temple armed with pistols and bowie-knives and seated themselves together in the Aaronic pulpits, on the east end of the temple, while father Smith and others, as usual, occupied those of the Melchizedek priesthood on the west. Soon after the usual opening services, one of the brethren on the west stand arose, and just after he commenced to speak, one on the east interrupted him. Father Smith, presiding, called for order—he told the apostate brother that he should have all the time he wanted, but he must wait his turn—as the brother on the west took the floor and commenced first to speak, he must not be interrupted. A fearful scene ensued—the apostate speaker becoming so clamorous that Father Smith called for the police to take that man out of the house, when Parrish, John Boynton, and others, drew their pistols and bowie-knives, and rushed down from the stand into the congregation; John Boynton saying he would blow out the brains of the first man who dared to lay hands on him. Many in the congregation, especially women and children, were terribly frightened—some tried to escape from the confusion by jumping out of the windows. Amid screams and shrieks, the policemen, in ejecting the belligerents, knocked down a stove-pipe, which fell helter-skelter among the people; but, although bowie-knives and pistols were wrested from their owners, and thrown hither and thither to prevent disastrous results, no one was hurt, and after a short, but terrible scene to be enacted in a temple of God, order was restored, and the services of the day proceeded as usual."
[^35] Joseph Smith's comment, History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, p. 528.
[^36] The Messenger and Advocate, the predecessor of the Elders' Journal, issued three complete volumes, ending with the September number of 1837. The Journal, as stated above, issued but two numbers in Kirtland. It was reestablished at Far West in July following, but again only two numbers were issued, when it was discontinued under circumstances to be related in a future chapter.
[^37] "Stories were put afloat that Mormons of the "old school" had become incendiaries, in the hope that the blaze would extend to the temple which they did not wish to see left in the hands of their enemies" (Early Days of Mormonism, Kennedy, p. 170). The Prophet's version of the burning is as follows: "By reason of the great persecution against the saints in that place [Kirtland], the paper [Elders' Journal] had to be stopped: and through the craft of wicked men they got possession of the printing office, and knowing they could not hold it, it was burned" (Elders' Journal, p. 34—Prospectus). Under date of March 29, 1838, the Prophet wrote to the presidency in Kirtland: "We have heard of the destruction of the printing office, which we presume to believe must have been occasioned by the Parrish Party." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 10-12).
[^38] Of this flight from Kirtland and the pursuit of his enemies, the Prophet says: "The weather was extremely cold, and we were obliged to secrete ourselves in our wagons, sometimes, to elude the grasp of our pursuers, who continued their pursuit of us more than two hundred miles from Kirtland, armed with pistols and guns, seeking our lives. They frequently crossed our track, twice they were in the houses where we stopped, once we tarried all night in the same house with them, with only a partition between us and them; and heard their oaths and imprecations, and threats concerning us, if they could catch us; and late in the evening they came into our room and examined us, but decided we were not the men. At other times we passed them in the streets, and gazed upon them, and they on us, but they knew us not. One Lyons was one of our pursuers. (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 2. 3).
[^39] This date is fixed in the following manner: In the Prophet's editorial in the Elders' Journal, after reciting the facts stated in the above quotation, he relates how Parrish had an opportunity of proving the iniquity of the Prophet in open court in the case of Grandison Newel vs. Joseph Smith; and yet as a witness in that case he testified that he knew nothing in the character or conduct of Mr. Smith an worthy his professions as a man of God; and the case above referred to, Newel vs. Smith, according to Kennedy, was tried on the 3rd of June, 1837. (Early Days of Mormonism, p. 157).
[^40] Early Days of Mormonism, Kennedy, pp. 153-4.
[^41] Such the remarks of the Prophet in his autobiography, History of the Church, Period I, vol. ii, ch. xxxii.
[^42] Robinson's narrative is found in The Return, a monthly periodical published by him in Davis City, Iowa, 1889-1891. The account of the Prophet's journey to Salem is in vol. i, July number, 1889, under the caption items of "Personal History."
[^43] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxi.
