B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XXXII

THE PEACEFUL EXODUS FROM CLAY COUNTY—CREATION OF CALDWELL AND DAVIESS COUNTIES FOR "MORMON" SETTLEMENT—ADAM-ONDI-AHMAN—THE FOUNDING OF FAR WEST—INTERNAL DIFFICULTIES—THE ARRIVAL OF KIRTLAND CAMP

MOVEMENTS in Missouri must now be noted. When the people of Clay county welcomed the exiled saints into their midst (1833-1834) the prevailing thought was that their stay would only be temporary. When it became evident that they would not be returned to their Jackson county homes very soon, if at all, from the view point of the "old settlers," there was expressed some misgivings among the people of Clay county as to the propriety of permitting the exiles to remain. Also some of the saints were purchasing lands and making homes which of course looked like permanent settlement. To this manifest uneasiness of the "old settlers" the leading elders of the church replied that they did not regard Clay county as their permanent home, but looked upon it merely as a temporary asylum which they would promptly leave whenever a respectable portion of the citizens of said county should request it. [^1] On the 29th of June, 1836, at a mass meeting held at Liberty court house, which was widely attended, a series of resolutions was passed that culminated in calling upon the saints to now fulfill the pledge which their leaders had given some two years previously, by withdrawing from the county. It is stated in the minutes of this public meeting that the saints were "charged by those opposed to them with an unfriendly determination to break that pledge; that their rapid emigration, their large purchases and offers to purchase land, the remarks of the ignorant and imprudent portion of them that this county is destined to be theirs,—are received and looked upon, by a large portion of this community as strong and convincing proofs that they intend to make this country their permanent home, the center and general rendezvous of their people."

STATEMENT OF OBJECTIONS TO THE SAINTS

The reasons why the saints had become objectionable as permanent citizens to many of the people of Clay county were stated to be:

"We do not vouch for the correctness of these statements," said the committee which draughted the report, "but whether they are true or false, their effect has been the same in exciting our community."

The cause named are represented as having raised a prejudice against the saints, and a feeling of hostility, that the first spark might—and the committee deeply feared would—ignite into all the horrors and desolation of a civil war, and it was therefore—

"Resolved, that it is the fixed and settled conviction of this meeting, that unless the people commonly called 'Mormons,' will agree to stop immediately the immigration of their people to this country, and take measures to remove themselves from it, a civil war is inevitable.

"We do not contend that we have the least right under the constitution and laws of the country to expel them by force. But we would indeed be blind, if we did not foresee that the first blow that is struck at this moment of deep excitement, must and will speedily involve every individual in a war, bearing ruin, woe, and desolation in its course. It matters but little how, where, or by whom the war may begin, when the work of destruction commences, we must all be borne onward by the storm, or crushed beneath its fury."

The saints were told that if they had one spark of gratitude they would not willingly plunge a people into civil war who had held out to them the friendly hand of assistance in the dark hour of their distress. A committee of ten was appointed to present these views to the leading elders among the "Mormons" with the understanding that if the saints would consent to move as requested, the gentlemen who had called the meeting, and now asked them to leave Clay county, would use all their influence to allay the excitement among the citizens of the county.

ANSWER OF THE SAINTS TO OBJECTIONS

The reply of the saints to the request to remove from Clay county was adopted at a general mass meeting, held two days after the citizens' meeting. In their reply they expressed their appreciation of the kindness shown them by the people of Clay county, and then proceeded to enter formal denial of the several things charged against them by those opposed to them, and which I quote from the body of their answer to the citizens of Clay county.

"We deny having claim to this, or any other county, or country, further than we shall purchase the land with money, or more than the Constitution and laws allow us as free American citizens. We have taken no part for or against slavery; but are opposed to the abolitionists, and consider that men have a right to hold slaves or not, according to law.

"We believe it just to preach the gospel to the nations of the earth, and warn the righteous to save themselves from the corruptions of the world; but we do not believe it right to interfere with bond-servants, nor preach the gospel to them, nor meddle with nor influence them in the least to cause them to be dissatisfied with their situation in this life; thereby jeopardizing the lives of men. Such interference we believe to be unlawful and unjust, and dangerous to the peace of every government allowing human beings to be held in servitude.

"We deny holding any communications with the Indians; and mean to hold ourselves as ready to defend our country against their barbarous ravages, as any other people. We believe that all men are bound to sustain and uphold the respective governments in which they reside, while protected in their inherent and inalienable rights by the laws of such governments; and that sedition and rebellion are unbecoming every citizen thus protected, and should be punished accordingly."

They held that it would be useless to enter further into detail of their faith or mention their sufferings on account of it; but—

"Resolved, first: For the sake of friendship, and to be in a covenant of peace with the citizens of Clay county, and they to be in a covenant of peace with us, notwithstanding the necessary loss of property, and expense we incur in moving, we comply with the requisitions of their resolutions in leaving Clay county, as explained by the preamble accompanying the same; and that we will use our exertions to have the church do the same and that we will also exert ourselves to stop the tide of emigration of our people to this county.

"Resolved, second: That we accept the friendly offer verbally tendered to us by the committee yesterday, to assist us in selecting a location, and removing to it."

The reply from the saints was perfectly satisfactory to the people of Clay county, and the latter made some arrangements to assist the former in complying with their request; that is, two persons from each township were appointed to raise money by subscription to aid the "Mormons" who might need assistance to leave the county, and also arrange for some suitable person to assist them in selecting a new location for settlement; and recommend the "Mormons" to the good treatment of the citizens in surrounding counties; and asked them to assist the exiles in selecting some abiding place, where they would be, in a measure, the only occupants of the land; and where none would be anxious to molest them.

At this time the whole northern part of Missouri was but sparsely settled, and but few counties were organized. It therefore seemed to be the most suitable place that could be suggested for their gathering together where they might live in peace, pending the arrival of that time when they could be restored to their possession in Jackson county—when Zion could be redeemed. It was to this region that influential friends in Clay county called the attention of the saints in the summer of 1836; and in the month of October a number of Latter-day Saint families began settling on Shoal Creek—a tributary of Grand river—about thirty or thirty-five miles north and a little east of Liberty in Clay county. They soon petitioned the legislature for an enactment organizing a new county. The petition was granted and the new county organized in December, 1836.

NEW COUNTIES ORGANIZED FOR THE SAINTS

It is worthy of note in passing that this arrangement of organizing a new county to be inhabited by the saints was looked upon as a happy solution of a difficult problem, as appears from the following statement in the History of Caldwell County:

"When the Mormon leaders had determined upon the occupation of this portion of Missouri, certain public men of the state thought they had discovered an easy and satisfactory solution of the Mormon problem. The Mormons had already selected Far West as their principal town and were clustering about it in considerable numbers, and at various points on lower Shoal Creek. They seemed well enough pleased with the county, and were coming by bands and companies every week.

"'Let us fix up a county expressly for the Mormons,' exclaimed certain politicians and public men. Let us send all the Mormons in the state to that county and induce all Gentiles therein to sell out and leave. The proposition suited everyone. The Gentiles said, 'If the Mormons are willing to go into that prairie country and settle, let them have it and welcome.' The Mormons said, 'If we may be allowed to remain peaceably and enjoy our religion, we will go into any country that may be set apart for us, no matter how wild and unbroken it may be, and we will make it to blossom as the rose. If we obtain political control of a county we will honestly administer it and be loyal in all things to the state government over us.'

"Arrangements were soon made. Every Gentile in the proposed new county that could be induced to sell his possessions at a reasonable price was bought out, and his place taken by a Mormon. The authorities of the church agreed that no Mormons should settle in any other county without the previous consent of the settlers already there." [^2]

It is evident that in the view of the Missourians the saints were getting no choice part of the state when they accepted this prairie country for their habitat. They were simply taking that which the Missourians thought to be worthless, [^3] hence the remark—above—"If the Mormons are willing to go into that prairie country and settle, let them have it and welcome."

Hon. Alexander W. Doniphan, then a representative from Clay county to the Missouri legislature, was doubtless the one who proposed this plan of settling the "Mormon" problem of that day, and to him in the state legislature was assigned the work of preparing the bill for the creation of the new county. Fearing that the organization of a county especially for the "Mormons" might meet with opposition, a bill creating two counties out of the northern part of what was Ray county, one to be named Caldwell and the other Daviess, [^4] was brought in by Doniphan and passed without much opposition. Of course the matter of Caldwell being a county created and set apart for "Mormon" settlement, as also the agreement on the part of the saints that they would not settle in other counties, "without the previous consent of the settlers already there," had to be merely an understanding between the Missourians and the saints, as no such agreement could be enacted into law since it would be an abdiction of one of the rights of citizenship under the Constitution on the part of the saints; and an assumption of unconstitutional power on the part of the Missourians, for them to forbid citizens of the state of Missouri or of any other state of the Union to settle where they pleased, since it is a part of the Constitution itself that "the citizens of each state shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of citizens in the several states." [^5]

EXODUS FROM CLAY TO THE NEW COUNTIES

Under this agreement the saints rapidly left Clay county and began taking possession of the new county created for them. It amounted to a second exodus, albeit a peaceful one. The saints made special agreements with the citizens of DeWitt in Carroll county, and with the citizens of Daviess county, by which they could settle among them. "It is claimed," says the writer of the History of Caldwell County, "that all the Mormons settled outside of this [Caldwell] county, were made with the prior consent of the inhabitants then living where the settlements were made; the consent was obtained, in nearly every instance, by the payment of money, either for the lands of the pioneer Gentiles or for some articles of personal property they owned. Money was scarce at that day, and although the pioneers did not approve Mormon doctrines, they did approve of Mormon gold and silver, and they were willing to tolerate the one if they could obtain the other. But afterward certain of the Gentiles claimed that the Mormon occupation had been by stealth and fraud, and perhaps in some instances this was true." [^6] The last remark is wholly gratuitous. It is not true, and there is no evidence that warrants the "perhaps" of the quotation.

DeWitt was located on the Missouri river, near the mouth of Grand river, which it was hoped could be made a navigable stream. [^7] By securing this location at the mouth of Grand river, and one about fifty miles higher up the stream, in Daviess county, a means of commercial ingress and egress to the upper Missouri country allotted to the saints had been provided that spoke well for the foresight of the church leaders. The right of the saints to settle in DeWitt was secured for the saints in the spring of 1838 by Elders George M. Hinkle and John Murdock.

The upper settlement on Grand river was called "Adam-ondi-Ahman," generally abbreviated to "Di-Ahman." The site was selected by Joseph Smith in May, 1838, and is in township sixty, ranges twenty-seven and twenty-eight, sections twenty-five, thirty-six, thirty-one and thirty. A number of families of saints had been settled at this point for several months before the arrival of Joseph Smith who called the place "Spring Hill;" "but by the mouth of the Lord," said the Prophet, "it was named Adam-ondi-Ahman" [^8] "because" said he, "it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people or the Ancient of Days shall sit as spoken of by Daniel the prophet." [^9]

A short distance south of Spring Hill, or Adam-ondi-Ahman, was the home of Lyman Wight, at the foot of "Tower Hill," a name given to the place by Joseph Smith "in consequence of the remains of an old Nephite altar or tower," he explains, "that stood there." [^10] A photogravure of Wight's house is published in this chapter, being the only "Mormon" home left standing in "Di-Ahman," or its vicinity. It may also be said to be a typical Missouri house of the period.

THE SITE OF FAR WEST

About thirty miles southwest of "Di-Ahman," in Caldwell county, was Far West, the principal settlement of the saints in upper Missouri. It was located about one mile south of Shoal Creek, a tributary of Grand river, running eastwardly through the middle of the county; while half a mile south ran Goose Creek, a tributary of Shoal. Both streams were capable of furnishing water power for manufacturing purposes. The city was five miles northwest of the town of Kingston, the present county seat of Caldwell county, and was the highest swell of land in that high rolling prairie country, and is visible from a long distance. [^11]

The site of Far West was chosen by John Whitmer and W. W. Phelps in the summer of 1836, the entry being filed on the 8th of August of that year. The north half was entered in the name of W. W. Phelps, the south half in the name of John Whitmer; but both Phelps and Whitmer held the land in trust for the church. [^12] Some misunderstandings arose in the church in Missouri concerning the entry of this town site by the above two brethren. The money used in the purchase of it had been collected among the saints in Kentucky and Tennessee (at least fourteen hundred dollars of it) by Elder Thomas B. Marsh, president of the twelve apostles, and Elder Elisha H. Groves, who turned over the amount named above to W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer, as constituting the proper authorities to receive it, they being the counselors in the presidency of the church in Missouri, and David Whitmer, the president, being absent in Kirtland. These two brethren so presumed to act independently of the high council of the church in Missouri, and without consultation with others, that they seemed to be conducting matters with a high hand, also in their own interests—for personal gain. They laid out the public square; they appointed and ordained a committee to supervise the building of a house unto the Lord—a temple; and appropriated to themselves the profits arising from the sale of town lots, though from these profits, it must be said for them, they made large donations or appropriations ($1,000 each) to the house of the Lord in contemplation. It is very probable that no wrong was intended by these brethren, but acting as they did without consultation with the high council and other brethren equally interested in the upbuilding of Zion with them, and in utter disregard of the principle that "all things shall be done by common consent in the church, by much prayer and faith," [^13] naturally gave offense, and awakened suspicion of wrong intentions. This, in the spring of 1837, led to a somewhat extended investigation of their conduct by the high council and two of the twelve apostles then in Missouri, Elders Thomas B. Marsh and David W. Patten. The protracted hearing finally resulted in an amicable adjustment of differences. The town site and some other lands entered by Elders Phelps and Whitmer, together with the profits arising from the sale of the lands, was turned over to the bishop of Zion—Edward Partridge—for the benefit of Zion, and the two brethren, Phelps and Whitmer, were released from the obligation to pay the $2,000 they had subscribed to the building of the proposed temple. [^14] This settlement was still further confirmed by a conference of the church held at Far West in November, 1837, at which the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon were present, and where both Elders Whitmer and Phelps made explanations and confessions of their error, and were continued in their ecclesiastical [^15] positions.

In laying out Far West the general plan of laying off the cities of Zion was followed, [^16] viz: The town site was made one mile square, divided by streets running at right angles into regular blocks, except that a large public square was laid off in the center of the town, designed for a temple site and other public buildings. This square was approached from the four points of the compass by avenues, eight rods wide. All the other streets were five rods wide. Such was the rapid influx of the saints into Caldwell county, however, that in November, 1837, it was decided to double the size of the city plat by making it two miles square, and the blocks were so enlarged as to contain four acres each instead of being, as at first designed, 396 feet square.

Such was the location at Far West. Caldwell county in 1836 was a wilderness. By the spring of 1838 the population was more than 5,000; of which more than 4,900 were Latter-day Saints. [^17] At Far West, by that time, there were one hundred and fifty houses, four dry goods stores, three family groceries, half a dozen blacksmith shops, a printing establishment and two hotels. A large and comfortable school house had been built in 1836, [^18] and served also as church and courthouse. During the summer of 1838 the population of Far West, together with all other settlements of the saints in upper Missouri, were greatly augmented from Canada—whence came one company of two hundred wagons; from the eastern states, and especially from Kirtland, Ohio, and its vicinity. One company of over five hundred souls—one hundred and five families—made the journey from Kirtland in one company, under the leadership of the first council of the seventy, and on arriving among the saints in upper Missouri, settled at "Di-Ahman," where they arrived on the 4th of October, having traveled nine hundred miles from Kirtland temple. [^19] They were given a most cordial welcome at Far West before moving to "Di-Ahman," and the description of that reception by the Prophet exhibits the spirit in which this gathering of the people was being carried out:

"The Kirtland camp arrived in Far West from Kirtland. I went in company with Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, Isaac Morley and George W. Robinson, and met them some miles out, and escorted them into the city, where they encamped on the public square directly south, and close by the excavation for the Lord's house. Here friends greeted friends in the name of the Lord. Isaac Morley, patriarch at Far West, furnished a beef for the camp. President Rigdon provided a supper for the sick, and the brethren provided for them like men of God, for they were hungry, having eaten but little for several days, and having traveled eleven miles this day; eight hundred and sixty miles from Kirtland, the way the camp traveled."

Of the camp's arrival at "Di-Ahman" the Prophet in his journal said:

"This is a day long to be remembered by that part of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, called 'The Camp,' or 'Kirtland Camp No. 1,' for they arrived at their destination and began to pitch their tents about sunset, when one of the brethren living in the place proclaimed with a loud voice: 'Brethren, your long and tedious journey is now ended; you are now on the public square of Adam-on-di-Ahman. This is the place where Adam blessed his posterity, when they rose up and called him Michael, the Prince, the Arch-angel, and he being full of the Holy Ghost predicted what should befall his posterity to the latest generation.'"

INDUSTRIAL VALUE OF THE SAINTS OF MISSOURI

It was most unfortunate for the state, that the "old settlers" throughout upper Missouri did not give to these people a hearty welcome; for they were of a class much needed at the time in that part of the state. The fact that the saints had many educated people among them, that school teachers were numerous in their rapidly forming settlements, and that they early gave attention to educational interests—has already been established by non-"Mormon" authority. [^20] The same authority, after saying that the majority of the "Mormons" were poor, that many of them were able only to enter and improve about forty acres of land; that most of their houses were cabins; that like other pioneers they had come to upper Missouri to better their conditions; that to worship God as they pleased and to be with their brethren were, of course, considerations; that every head of a family was guaranteed a home, and if he was unable to buy one it was given him from the lands held by the trustees of the church—then adds: "Among so many, however, there could but be those of some wealth, as well as craftsmen of various kinds, skilled mechanics and artisans. There were also many persons of education and accomplishments." [^21]

Had the writer of this History of Caldwell County tried to describe the ideal elements essential to successful colonization of a frontier country, instead of describing the Latter-day Saints and the motives that were the incentives to their coming to upper Missouri, and the motive power of their industrial activities, he could not have succeeded better than he has in giving his description of the Latter-day Saints. An enlightened statesmanship would have welcomed such a population to such a country as upper Missouri, and protected them in their property, religious, and political rights; for in this "Mormon" population, as described by this Caldwell county historian, is every motive and every element essential to successful colonization: conditions, in the main, which enforce small holdings in land, which means more careful and more intense cultivation; skilled artisans of a variety of vocations; industry; frugality; community sympathy touched by religious sentiments, that would make for mutual, individual and community helpfulness. What might not have been hoped for had this community been permitted, unmolested, to have worked out their destiny under the operation of these industrial, social and religious ideas?

Footnotes

"Those who wrote of the prairies at that day did not regard them with much favor. Mr. Lewis C. Beck, an accomplished scientist, writing in his Gazetteer of Missouri (1823), of Ray county, to which Caldwell then belonged, has this to say (p. 244) of the prairies:—'The prairies, although generally fertile, are so extensive that they must, for a great length of time, and perhaps forever, remain wild and uncultivated.'" (History of Caldwell County, p. 96, National Historical Co., 1886).

ADAM-ONDI-AHMAN "This earth was once a garden place With all her glories common, And men did live a holy race, And worship Jesus face to face, In Adam-ondi-Ahman. We read that Enoch walked with God, Above the power of mammon, And Zion spread herself abroad, And saints and angels sang aloud, In Adam-ondi-Ahman. Her land was good and greatly blessed, Beyond old Israel's Canaan, Her fame was known from east to west, Her peace was great, and pure the rest, Of Adam-ondi-Ahman. Hosanna to such days to come, The Savior's second coming, Then all the earth in glorious bloom Affords the saints a holy home, Like Adam-ondi-Ahman."—Messenger and Advocate, June, 1835.

---
Notas:
[^1] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 10-11.
[^2] The brethren who were present and with the Prophet signed this outgiving were: Joseph Smith, Jun., Thomas B. Marsh, David W. Patten, Brigham Young, Samuel H. Smith, George M. Hinkle, John Corrill, and Geo. W. Robinson.
[^3] It is so referred to in the communication of the Prophet to the faithful in Kirtland under date of March 29th, 1838. (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 12).
[^4] Elders Marsh and Patten had been acting as the presidency of the church in Missouri since David Whitmer and his counselors were deposed, in February. (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 6.)
[^5] Church Historians: On the day that the church was organized, April 6th, 1830, a commandment was given that a record of events should be kept in the church which of course implied that there must be a recorder and historian appointed. (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xx). During the first year of the church's existence Oliver Cowdery had evidently filled both these positions. On the 8th of March, 1831, John Whitmer was appointed "to keep the church record and history continually;" for "Oliver Cowdery," said the Lord, "I have appointed to another office." (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xlvii:3). This office of historian John Whitmer continued to hold until deposed and succeeded by elders John Corrill and Elias Higbee as related in the text above. Presidents Smith and Rigdon demanded the records and history kept by John Whitmer on his retirement from office, but he refused to give them up; (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 15, 16), nor could a copy of his history be obtained by the church until 1893. Said copy in Ms. is now on file in the Historian's Office at Salt Lake City.
[^6] George W. Robinson had been appointed to this office by the conference held at Kirtland on the 17th of September, 1837, (History of the Church, Period I. vol. ii, p. 513). So that the action at the Far West conference was confirmatory of his first appointment. It would seem also that Cowdery had acted as church recorder at Kirtland, since following the notice of Robinson's appointment, the announcement is made that he was elected "in place of Oliver Cowdery, who had removed to Missouri." Robinson was a native of Vermont, born in 1814; and was son-in-law to Sidney Rigdon, having married his eldest daughter, Athalia.
[^7] The rightfulness of their view is supported by the following instructions given by revelation in December, 1833, when the question of disposing of the Gilbert and Whitney store at Independence was being considered: "And again, I say unto you, it is contrary to my commandment, and my will, that my servant Sidney Gilbert should sell my storehouse, which I have appointed unto my people, into the hands of mine enemies. Let not that which I have appointed be polluted by mine enemies, by the consent of those who call themselves after my name. For this is a very sore and grievous sin against me, and against my people, in consequence of those things which I have decreed and which are soon to befall the nations. Therefore it is my will that my people should claim, and hold claim upon that which I have appointed unto them, though they should not be permitted to dwell thereon" (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. ci:96-99).
[^8] The action at Far West took place on the 5th of February; at Carter's Settlement, on the 6th; at Durphy's Settlement on the 7th; at Nahum Curtis' Settlement on the 8th; at Haun's Mills, on the 9th. (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 3-6).
[^9] The account of the hearing is to be found in the Far West High Council Record, Ms. pp. 123-130. During the hearing it was proved on the testimony of G. W. Harris that when Oliver Cowdery insinuated that the Prophet was guilty of adultery—when confronted by the Prophet and the question was directly put to him if Joseph had ever acknowledged that he was guilty of such a crime, Oliver answered—"No." (Minutes of trial, Far West Record, pp. 123-130). Harris' testimony is published in the Elders' Journal and sustained in the same article by the testimony of Thomas B. Marsh and George M. Hinkle, Elders' Journal, July, 1838, p. 45. Notwithstanding these positive denials by Cowdery, however, it was proven on the testimony of David W. Patten that he had made such insinuations.
[^10] These "rumors" connecting Cowdery with "the bogus business" (i. e. dealing in counterfeit money) relate to Kirtland, Ohio, not to Missouri.
[^11] The presidency of the church in Missouri—a local presidency—David Whitmer, president, and John Whitmer and W. W. Phelps, counselors, as will be seen by reference to preceding pages of this chapter, were deposed by a general assembly of the whole church at Far West and the several other settlements in upper Missouri; and this was strictly in accordance with the revelation to the church; for as "no person is to be ordained to any office in this church, where there is a regularly organized branch of the same, without the vote of that church" (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xx:65, also Kirtland edition, 1835, part ii, sec. ii:16), so also is it to be concluded that no officer in the church can continue to hold his place when the church, or that branch thereof over which he presides, or in which he functions, rejects him. David Whitmer, as also John Whitmer and W. W. Phelps and some of their friends took exceptions to the manner in which they were deposed, insisting that they should have been tried before the bishop of the church, (Edward Partridge) assisted by a special council of twelve high priests. In this, however, they misunderstood their own position in the church, and also the purpose of the special council to which reference is here made. This special council, consisting of the bishop of the church and twelve high priests, was instituted for the trial of a president of the high priesthood of the church, who is also of the presidency of the whole church. (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cvii:91, 92). "And in as much as a president of the high priesthood shall transgress, he shall be had in remembrance before the common council of the church, who shall be assisted by twelve councilors of the high priesthood; and their decision upon his head shall be an end of controversy concerning him." (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cvii; 81, 82). But the presidency of the church in Missouri was a local presidency, and hence they could not plead the right to be tried before this special council. Oliver Cowdery, who was one of the presidents of the high priesthood of the church, and of the presidency of the whole church, was tried before Bishop Partridge, who used the high council of Far West for the twelve high priests provided for in the revelation above quoted, to assist him, and in this respect his trial differed from the trial of David Whitmer who was tried before the high council. (See History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, ch. ii).
[^12] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 18, 19 and footnotes. Also Far West High Council Record, Ms.
[^13] See ante, ch. xxxi footnote 27.
[^14] See Corrill's Brief History of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, Ms., 1839, p. 30.
[^15] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 27.
[^16] St. Matt. v:13.
[^17] See Brochure on Sidney Rigdon, Jedediah M. Grant, p. 11. Also Brief History of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, Ms., Corrill, p. 30.
[^18] The document is published at length in Documents, Correspondence, Orders, etc., in Relation to the Disturbances with the Mormons, published by order of the Missouri legislature, p. 103 et seq. This now rare publication will be found in the collection of Tracts, vol, xv, No. 6, in the Church Historian's Library. Salt Lake City. Also in part in The Return, Ebenezer Robinson, pp. 146, 147.
[^19] The Return, Robinson, p. 147.
[^20] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 41.
[^21] See ante, ch. xxvii.
