B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XXXIII

POLITICAL MOTTO OF THE CHURCH—DISSENTERS AT FAR WEST—LATTER-DAY SAINT "DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE"—THE LAW OF TITHING—THE TWELVE APPOINTED ON A MISSION TO ENGLAND—EVENTS IN MISSOURI

JOSEPH SMITH arrived at Far West on the 14th of March, 1838. He was met "with open arms and warm hearts" by the saints. "You may be assured," he wrote to the faithful at Kirtland, "that so friendly a meeting and reception paid us well for our long seven years of servitude, persecution and affliction in the midst of our enemies in the land of Kirtland; yea, verily, our hearts were full, and we feel grateful to Almighty God for his kindness to us." [^1]

It was evident that the saints would become a political factor in Missouri, and that not only as controlling in Caldwell county, but also as affecting political conditions in the other counties, where they were settling. This made it important that their attitude in respect of politics should be declared. Accordingly, a few days after the arrival of the Prophet at Far West, while walking about the city in company with a number of brethren, he dictated the following as outlining those political sentiments and principles, by which the saints would be governed:

POLITICAL MOTTO

"The Constitution of our country formed by the Fathers of Liberty. Peace and good order in society. Love to God, and good will to man. All good and wholesome laws, virtue and truth above all things, and aristarchy, live for ever. But woe to tyrants, mobs, aristocracy, anarchy, and toryism, and all those who invent or seek out unrighteous and vexatious law suits, under the pretext and color of law, or office, either religious or political. Exalt the standard of democracy. Down with that of priestcraft, and let all the people say amen! that the blood of our fathers may not cry from the ground against us. Sacred is the memory of that blood, which bought for us our liberty." [^2]

This has become known in the church annals as the "political motto" of the church. [^3]

On the 6th of April a general conference was held at Far West at which Thomas B. Marsh was appointed president pro tempore of the church in Missouri, with Brigham Young and David W. Patten as counselors. [^4] The reason for appointing them pro tempore was because they were of the general authorities of the church called to act in a local capacity. John Corrill and Elias Higbee were appointed church historians; [^5] George W. Robinson, general church recorder and clerk to the first presidency; [^6] Ebenezer Robinson, clerk and recorder for Far West, and clerk of the high council of that stake. These appointments had become necessary because of the rejection of the local presidency of the church in Missouri, and the excommunication of the church historian, John Whitmer.

THE QUESTION AS TO JACKSON COUNTY LANDS

A question had arisen in the church as to the disposition that should be made of the lands still owned in Jackson county by the church and by individual members. Some held that to sell these lands would be an evidence of a lack of faith in the promises of God with reference to the establishment of the city of Zion in Jackson county. Indeed, in an "appeal" made to the world in July, 1834, after the disbandment of Zion's camp, and all hope of the immediate return of the saints to Jackson county was abandoned—in discussing the "old settlers" proposition to "buy or sell" lands the following occurs: "To sell our land would amount to a denial of our faith, as that land is the place where the Zion of God shall stand, according to our faith and belief in the revelations of God, and upon which Israel will be gathered, according to the prophets."

This view persisted in the minds of a great number of the brethren. [^7] Others again, feeling the pressure of present needs, thought it not amiss to sell those lands, in order to employ the means thus obtained in prosecution of their present enterprises, trusting to the future to develop ways and means for the redemption of Zion.

Among those who held this latter view were the Whitmers, W. W. Phelps, and Oliver Cowdery. Early in February, 1838—hence before the arrival of the Prophet in Far West—the presidency of the church in Missouri, David Whitmer, W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer were arraigned before a "committee of the whole church in Missouri, in general assembly," charged with selling their lands in Jackson county, and with other offenses—David Whitmer for persisting in the use of tea, coffee and tobacco, in violation of the Word of Wisdom; John Whitmer and W. W. Phelps for claiming money which really belonged to the church. The result of the meeting was the rejection of this local presidency by the saints in Far West, and in all the other settlements of the saints in upper Missouri. [^8]

Subsequently John Whitmer and W. W. Phelps were charged before the high council at Far West "for persisting in unchristian-like conduct"—presumably still claiming the money which belonged to the church. The accused brethren refused to appear before the high council on the ground that the tribunal was illegal, composed of men prejudiced against them, and who had already given an opinion or judgment regarding the matters at issue. This was conveyed to the council by a written communication, signed by them and David Whitmer in their official capacity as "presidents of the church of Christ, in Missouri," thus ignoring the action of the church in "committee of the whole" in rejecting them as a presidency, which was counted as adding to their offenses, and the two brethren who had been summoned before the council were excommunicated.

Later, namely, on the 7th of April, a series of charges were preferred against Oliver Cowdery to Bishop Partridge, and subsequently—on the 11th—to the high council of Far West, by Elder Seymour Brunson:

CHARGES AGAINST OLIVER COWDERY

"First—For persecuting the brethren by urging on vexatious law suits against them, and thus distressing the innocent.

"Second—For seeking to destroy the character of President Joseph Smith, Jun., by falsely insinuating that he was guilty of adultery. [^9]

"Third—For treating the church with contempt by not attending meetings.

"Fourth—For virtually denying the faith by declaring that he would not be governed by any ecclesiastical authority or revelations whatever, in his temporal affairs.

"Fifth—For selling his lands in Jackson county, contrary to the revelations.

"Sixth—For writing and sending an insulting letter to President Thomas B. Marsh, while the latter was on the high council, attending to the duties of his office as president of the council, and by insulting the high council with the contents of said letter.

"Seventh—For leaving his calling to which God had appointed him by revelation, for the sake of filthy lucre, and turning to the practice of law.

"Eighth—For disgracing the church by being connected in the bogus business, as common report says. [^10]

"Ninth—For dishonestly retaining notes after they had been paid; and finally, for leaving and forsaking the cause of God, and returning to the beggarly elements of the world, and neglecting his high and holy calling, according to his profession."

Due notice was served upon Oliver Cowdery of these charges by Bishop Partridge, but he declined to attend the council and announced his withdrawal from the church in the following communication:

COWDERY'S LETTER TO BISHOP PARTRIDGE

"Far West, Missouri, April 12, 1838.

"Dear Sir:—I received your note of the 9th inst., on the day of its date, containing a copy of nine charges preferred before yourself and council against me, by Elder Seymour Brunson.

"I could have wished that those charges might have been deferred until after my interview with President Smith; but as they are not, I must waive the anticipated pleasure with which I had flattered myself of an understanding on those points which are grounds of different opinions on some church regulations, and others which personally interest myself.

"The fifth charge reads as follows: 'For selling his lands in Jackson county contrary to the revelations.' So much of this charge 'for selling his lands in Jackson county,' I acknowledge to be true, and believe that a large majority of this church have already spent their judgment on that act, and pronounced it sufficient to warrant a disfellowship and also that you have concurred in its correctness, consequently, have no good reason for supposing you would give any decision contrary.

"Now, sir, the lands in our country are allodial in the strictest construction of that term, and have not the least shadow of feudal tenures attached to them, consequently, they may be disposed of by deeds of conveyance without the consent or even approbation of a superior.

"The fourth charge is in the following words, 'For virtually denying the faith by declaring that he would not be governed by any ecclesiastical authority nor revelation whatever in his temporal affairs.'

"With regard to this, I think I am warranted in saying, the judgment is also passed as on the matter of the fifth charge, consequently, I have no disposition to contend with the council; this charge covers simply the doctrine of the fifth, and if I were to be controlled by other than my own judgment, in a compulsory manner, in my temporal interests, of course, could not buy or sell without the consent of some real or supposed authority. Whether that clause contains the precise words, I am not certain—I think, however, they were these, 'I will not be influenced, governed, or controlled, in my temporal interests by any ecclesiastical authority or pretended revelation whatever, contrary to my own judgment.' Such being still my opinion shall only remark that the three great principles of English liberty, as laid down in the books, are 'the right of personal security, the right of personal liberty, and the right of private property.' My venerable ancestor was among the little band, who landed on the rocks of Plymouth in 1620—with him he brought those maxims, and a body of those laws which were the result and experience of many centuries, on the basis of which now stands our great and happy government; and they are so interwoven in my nature, have so long been inculcated into my mind by a liberal and intelligent ancestry that I am wholly unwilling to exchange them for anything less liberal, less benevolent, or less free.

"The very principle of which I conceive to be couched in an attempt to set up a kind of petty government, controlled and dictated by ecclesiastical influence, in the midst of this national and state government. You will, no doubt, say this is not correct; but the bare notice of these charges, over which you assume a right to decide, is, in my opinion, a direct attempt to make the secular power subservient to church direction—to the correctness of which I cannot in conscience subscribe—I believe that the principle never did fail to produce anarchy and confusion.

"This attempt to control me in my temporal interests, I conceive to be a disposition to take from me a portion of my constitutional privileges and inherent right—I only, respectfully, ask leave, therefore, to withdraw from a society assuming they have such right.

"So far as relates to the other seven charges, I shall lay them carefully away, and take such a course with regard to them, as I may feel bound by my honor, to answer to my rising posterity.

"I beg you, sir, to take no view of the foregoing remarks, other than my belief in the outward government of this church. I do not charge you, or any other person who differs with me on these points, of not being sincere, but such difference does exist, which I sincerely regret.

"With considerations of the highest respect, I am, your obedient servant,

(Signed.) "OLIVER COWDERY."

"Rev. Edward Partridge, Bishop of the Church of Latter-day Saints."

When the charges came up for hearing before the high council on the 12th of April, the fourth and fifth charges were rejected by the council, and the 6th was withdrawn. It is against the fourth and fifth charges that Elder Cowdery leveled his whole reply, but as those charges were rejected by the council they constituted no issue at all between Elder Cowdery and the church. As to the other charges it is to be regretted that Oliver did not attend the hearing before the council and either admit their truth, so far as they might be true, or specifically deny them. Under the circumstance of his refusing to be present the hearing was exparte, and on that necessarily one-sided presentation of evidence, the remaining charges were held to be proven, and he was excommunicated.

CHARGES AGAINST DAVID WHITMER

On the 13th of April a series of charges were preferred to the high council of Far West against David Whitmer as follows:

"First—For not observing the Word of Wisdom.

"Second—For unchristian-like conduct in neglecting to attend meetings, in uniting with and possessing the same spirit as the dissenters.

"Third—In writing letters to the dissenters in Kirtland unfavorable to the cause, and to the character of Joseph Smith, Jun.

"Fourth—In neglecting the duties of his calling, and separating himself from the church, while he had a name among us.

"Fifth—For signing himself 'President of the Church of Christ' in an insulting letter to the high council after he had been cut off [rejected] from the presidency."

Due notice was served upon David Whitmer of these charges and the hearing before the high council, but he declined to attend and withdrew from the fellowship of the church in the following communication:

DAVID WHITMER'S LETTER TO THE HIGH COUNCIL

"Far West, Mo., April 13, 1838.

"John Murdock:

"Sir:—I received a line from you bearing date the 9th inst. requesting me as a high priest to appear before the high council and answer to five several charges on this day at 12 o'clock.

"You, sir, with a majority of this church have decided that certain councils were legal by which it is said I have been deprived of my office as one of the presidents of this church. I have thought, and still think, they were not agreeable [legal] to the revelations of God, which I believe; and by now attending this council, and answering to charges, as a high priest, would be acknowledging the correctness and legality of those former assumed councils—which I shall not do. [^11]

"Believing as I verily do, that you and the leaders of the councils have a determination to pursue your unlawful course at all hazards, and to bring others to your standard in violation of the revelations, to spare you any further trouble I hereby withdraw from your fellowship and communion-choosing to seek a place among the meek and humble, where the revelations of heaven will be observed and the rights of men regarded.

(Signed.) "DAVID WHITMER."

"After reading the above letter," say the minutes of the high council, "it was not considered necessary to investigate the case, as he [David Whitmer] had offered contempt to the council by writing the above letter;" but it was decided to let the councilors speak upon the case, and give a decision. "The councilors then made a few remarks in which they spoke warmly of the contempt offered in the above letter, therefore thought he [David Whitmer] was not worthy to be a member in the church." And to this effect was the decision of the council. [^12]

The loss of these two men,—Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer—two of the three special witnesses to the Book of Mormon—was a misfortune. I have dealt with their excommunication at length because I deem it important, and have published their letters to the council in extenso that attention might be called to the fact that neither of them denies nor casts any doubt upon the facts in which the New Dispensation had its origin—the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and the ministration of angles to both Joseph Smith and themselves. Had there been fraud associated with these events; or had collusion existed between Joseph Smith and themselves with reference to events in which the New Dispensation had its inception, it would have been a very natural thing for men smarting under what they regarded as injustice, to have manifested that fact in these communications. Their silence at this critical time in their experience, and in the experience of the church, constitutes very strong presumptive evidence of the reality, to them, of these facts which brought the New Dispensation into existence.

On the day of action against David Whitmer, charges were also presented to the high council against Lyman E. Johnson, one of the twelve apostles. His offenses were encouraging litigation among the brethren and bringing distress upon the innocent; being united with the Kirtland dissenters and advocating their cause; absenting himself from the meetings of the church; not observing either prayer or the Word of Wisdom; assaulting a brother—Phineas Young, brother of Brigham Young; discrediting the officers of Caldwell county—the "Mormon" county; for falsehood and other unrighteous conduct. He declined to appear before the high council, and by letter withdrew from fellowship of the church. The council, however, as in the case of Oliver Cowdery, proceeded to hear the case ex parte. The charges by that testimony were sustained, and Lyman E. Johnson was dropped from the quorum of the twelve, and excommunicated from the church.

These troubles at Far West grew out of the unhappy conditions that had existed in Kirtland for some time. Oliver Cowdery had been in transgression at Kirtland, as publicly announced by the Prophet; [^13] both he and David Whitmer, while in Kirtland, had been in sympathy with the dissenters, which sympathy continued after their return to Missouri. Besides these leaders there were many others in upper Missouri who were disaffected, some for one cause and some for another. Many had made sacrifices for the sake of the church in Kirtland, loaning money to the presidency for the erection of the temple, and for the establishment of the various industries and mercantile establishments started in that place. Some of these persistently demanded a reimbursement, and because that was impossible on the part of the presidency, under conditions then existing, they became disaffected, and charged that to dishonesty which ought to have been assigned to a common misfortune in which the whole church was involved. [^14] Vexatious law suits were instituted among the saints, and systematic efforts made, apparently, to undermine and destroy the influence of the presidency of the church. Naturally these conditions called for protest on the part of the presidency, and under date of Sunday, May the 6th, the Prophet writes in his journal—speaking of a discourse he that day delivered:

"I cautioned the saints against men who came amongst them whining and growling about their money, because they had kept the saints, and borne some of the burden with others, and thus thinking that others, who are still poorer than themselves, and have borne greater burdens ought to make up their losses. I cautioned the saints to beware of such, for they were throwing out insinuations here and there, to level a dart at the best interests of the church, and if possible destroy the character of its presidency." [^15]

THE ERROR OF THE "SALT SERMON"

Sometime in June Elder Sidney Rigdon delivered what was afterwards called his "Salt Sermon," because he took as a text:

"Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost his savor, wherewith, shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men." [^16]

The doctrine of the text the speaker applied to the dissenting brethren and intimated that the "trodden under foot of men" should be literal, much to the scandalizing of the church, since the dissenters made capital of it to prejudice the minds of the non-"Mormons" of the surrounding counties. [^17] This, unfortunately, was followed shortly afterwards by a communication drawn up by Elder Rigdon, it is said, and addressed to the leading dissenters, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, John Whitmer, William W. Phelps and Lyman E. Johnson, commanding them to leave Caldwell county within three days under penalty of a "more fatal calamity" befalling them if they refused to depart. The document was signed by eighty-four men, more or less prominent in the church, [^18] but neither the Prophet's nor Sidney Rigdon's name is included among the signatures. This action was undoubtedly a departure from that strict adherence to legal procedure for which the church must stand or else accept the doctrine of the "old settlers" of Jackson county that there exists with the community, outside of legal procedure, the right to expel undesirable people from that community. These dissenters were undoubtedly a disturbing element; they both instituted and encouraged litigation among the people, which the unsettled state of affairs in a new country, and the brought-over troubles from Kirtland made not only possible but easy. They no doubt were insolent and defiant of local disapproval of their course—which ordinarily is sufficient to correct such evils—because it was easy to appeal to the prejudice and jealousies of the "old settlers" in the surrounding counties, and to menace the saints with mobs in the event of any attempt to interfere with them—the dissenters. These dissenters, or some of them, were accused of crimes, with stealing, with being associated with counterfeiters and blacklegs, with violating the postal laws by interfering with the mail. All which, even for the dissenters to be suspected of, was injurious to the reputation of the saints, and discreditable to the church of which they had been members. But if these accusations were true, they constituted crimes which lay open to the law, and should have been punished by the law. Those eighty-four citizens of Caldwell county were not justified in taking the law into their own hands and under threats of vengeance driving these dissenters from Far West, for that was the effect of these threats. The dissenters took hasty departure, late one afternoon in June, leaving their families to follow them, which they afterwards did. [^19]

"DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE"

The celebration of the 4th of July this year at Far West was made a notable event. That day the corner stones of a temple were laid amid elaborate ceremonies. The excavation made for the building was a hundred and ten feet long, by eighty feet wide. It was to have three floors, the first to be devoted to the purpose of public worship, the other two to educational purposes. It was meant therefore to be both a house of worship and an institution of learning. There was a band of music at the celebration, a long procession in which both militia and church authorities took part; also the ladies. But more important than parade or even laying the corner stones of the temple was what was afterwards called the "Mormon Declaration of Independence." The Prophet himself so characterizes it. "The day was spent," he writes, "in celebrating the 'Declaration of Independence of the United States of America,' and also by the saints making a 'Declaration of Independence' from all mobs and persecutions which have been inflicted upon them, time after time, until they could bear it no longer." [^20] Sidney Rigdon was the orator of the day, and the aforesaid "declaration," was embodied in his speech. The speech on the whole is very admirable, and worthy. The keynote of it, the motif that recurs here and there, leading to what must be regarded as its unfortunate climax, is the text on which the speech was built—

"Better, far better to sleep with the dead, than be oppressed among the living."

The speech expresses admiration for the free institutions of our government, and urges their maintenance; it extols religious freedom, and declares that all "attempts on the part of religious aspirants, to unite church and state, ought to be repelled with indignation;" it reviews the establishment of the church of Christ in the New Dispensation, its development, the nature of the religion being unfolded therein, with intelligence as a motive force, to develop which, this temple, the corner stones of which were being laid, was to be built; note is taken of what suffering has been endured for the sake of this cause—from foes without and from foes within; for it the saints have taken the spoiling of their goods; their cheeks have been given to the smiters and their heads to those who plucked off the hair; when smitten on one cheek, they have turned the other, and this repeatedly, until they are wearied of being smitten, and tired of being trampled upon; they had proved the world with kindness; they had suffered their abuse—abuse without cause—with patience, without resentment, until this day, and still persecution and violence do not cease:—

"But from this day and this hour we will suffer it no more. We take God and all the holy angels to witness, this day, that we warn all men, in the name of Jesus Christ to come on us no more for ever, for from this hour we will bear it no more; our rights shall no more be trampled on with impunity; the man, or the set of men who attempt it, do it at the expense of their lives. And that mob that comes on us to disturb us, it shall be between us and them a war of extermination; for we will follow them until the last drop of their blood is spilled; or else they will have to exterminate us, for we will carry the seat of war to their own houses and their own families, and one party or the other shall be utterly destroyed. Remember it then, all men. We will never be the aggressors, we will infringe on the rights of no people, but shall stand for our own until death. We claim our own right and are willing that all others shall enjoy theirs. No man shall be at liberty to come into our streets, to threaten us with mobs, for if he does he shall atone for it before he leaves the place; neither shall he be at liberty to villify and slander any of us, for suffer it we will not, in this place. We therefore take all men to record this day, that we proclaim our liberty this day, as did our fathers, and we pledge this day to one another our fortunes, our lives, and our sacred honors, to be delivered from the persecutions, which we have had to endure for the last nine years or nearly that time. Neither will we indulge any man, or set of men, in instituting vexatious law suits against us, to cheat us out of our rights; if they attempt it we say woe be unto them. We this day, then, proclaim ourselves free with a purpose and determination that never can be broken, No, never! No, never! No, never!"

This declaration was followed by the multitude present uniting in the shout of "Hosannah, hosannah, hosannah! Amen, Amen, Amen!" Thrice repeated.

Under all the circumstances, remembrance of past wrongs endured in Jackson county; then to be again threatened with mob violence by dissenters and some "old settlers," and to see movements on foot to arm again the red hand of a relentless persecution—it is not to be wondered at that these mortal men, though aspiring to be saints, should make a declaration of independence from mob rule, and threaten vengeance upon those who should again assail them. Moreover, it must be remembered that the saints in their difficulties in Jackson county were much embarrassed in their defense of their homes and families by a divided opinion among them as to how far they might justly proceed in resisting the assaults of their enemies; [^21] and in the presence of the likelihood of a recurrence of mob violence, it certainly was desirable to have that question definitely settled. And whatever of error may be thought to have been made by issuing this declaration, it should be remembered that it remained merely a declaration—an outburst of indignation when laboring under a sense of outraged justice. It was never translated into deeds; no war of extermination was attempted, though the contingency upon which such threat was made arose again and again within the experience of the saints during the next few months.

The historian more than four score and ten years after these occurrences, and in the calm of his study where he dispassionately weighs the deeds of men and passes judgment upon historical events, may find it easy to say that the out-giving of this "declaration of independence from mobs" by the saints, and proclaiming a war of extermination in the event of their being again assailed, was of doubtful propriety, even under all the existing provocation—unwise; impolitic; but it was a very human-like thing to do, albeit more likely to bring about than avert a conflict with the Missourians. Subsequent events proved this to be the effect of it; and certainly the speedy expulsion of the entire body of the church from Missouri, under such circumstances of cruelty and suffering as accompanied the expulsion, affords no ground for belief that there was any divine vindication of the attitude assumed by the saints on that fourth of July day, 1837.

One other thing the truth of history requires here, viz., the fixing of responsibility for this "declaration." The unwisdom of the utterance has been quite generally recognized by our writers, and by them responsibility for it has been placed upon the rather fervid imagination of Sidney Rigdon, who delivered the speech, [^22] and who quite generally is supposed to have been mainly or wholly responsible for it. This is not true. The speech was carefully prepared, written before delivery in fact, and read by other presiding elders of the church before its delivery. [^23] It immediately appeared in The Far West, a weekly newspaper published at Liberty, Clay county; and was also published in pamphlet form by Ebenezer Robinson on the press of the Elders' Journal. Joseph Smith in his journal speaks of it approvingly; [^24] and in the Elders' Journal, of which he was the editor, and in the editorial columns under his name, the speech is approvingly recommended to the saints. [^25] In view of these facts, if the "declaration" was of doubtful propriety, and unwise and impolitic, responsibility for it rests not alone on Sidney Rigdon, but upon the authorities of the church who approved it, and the people who accepted it by their acclamation.

Other events worthy of note occurring about this time were the restoration of Frederick G. Williams to the church, the establishment of the law of tithing, filling the vacancies in the quorum of the twelve, and appointing the quorum as a body to go to England in the following spring, to preach the gospel and bear record of the New Dispensation of it in that land.

Elder Williams had been rejected as a counselor in the first presidency at a conference in Missouri held on the 7th of November, 1837, and Hyrum Smith, brother of the Prophet, had been chosen in his place. He now sought restoration to complete fellowship with the saints, and accordingly was rebaptized, ordained an elder, and commanded to go from place to place and preach the gospel. A like opportunity was given to W. W. Phelps, but he did not at that time avail himself of it. [^26]

THE LAW OF TITHING INSTITUTED

The law of tithing was given by revelation on the eighth of July in answer to the question: "O, Lord, show unto thy servants how much thou requirest of the properties of the people for a tithing." The answer was, "All their surplus property to be put into the hands of the bishop of my church of Zion [Missouri]; for the building of mine house [the temple at Far West], and for the laying of the foundation of Zion, and for the priesthood, and for the debts of the presidency of my church."

This was to be the "beginning" of the tithing of the people. After that, those who had thus been tithed, were required to pay one-tenth of all their interests annually; "and this shall be a standing law unto them forever, for my holy priesthood, saith the Lord".

The law was applicable also to all who should thereafter gather to Zion. "And I say unto you," continues the revelation, "if my people observe not this law, to keep it holy, and by this law sanctify the land of Zion unto me that my statutes and my judgments may be kept thereon, that it may be most holy, behold, verily I say unto you, it shall not be a land of Zion unto you. And this shall be an example unto all the stakes of Zion. Even so. Amen." [^27]

Ten days later, by another revelation, the custodianship and disposition of the church revenues to arise from this law were lodged in a council composed of the first presidency of the church, the bishop of the church and his council [i. e. the presiding bishopric] "and by my high council [the traveling high council—the twelve apostles], and by mine own voice unto them, saith the Lord." [^28]

Thus the revenue law of the church was established. It is but a modification of the law of consecration and stewardship, first given to the church. [^29] In the first law consecration was to be made of all that was possessed, with subsequent consecrations from time to time of the surplus arising from the management of the stewardship received after consecration, or that resulted from the member's industry in gainful pursuits. In the law now given there was to be first, a consecration of the surplus possessed [^30]—not all; and afterwards a payment of one-tenth of a member's interests annually, instead of a consecration from time to time of all the surplus arising from his business or industry.

The men chosen to fill the vacancies in the quorum of the twelve, vacancies occasioned by the falling away of John Boynton, Luke S. Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson, and Wm. E. M'lellin, were John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff and Willard Richards. "And next spring," said the revelation, making these appointments, "let them"—referring to the whole quorum—"let them depart to go over the great waters, and there promulgate my gospel, the fulness thereof, and bear record of my name. Let them take leave of my saints in the city of Far West on the 26th day of April next, on the building spot of my house, saith the Lord."

In view of the events which intervened between the time this revelation was received and the time set for the twelve's departure for England, the boast of the mob that here was one of "Joe Smith's revelations at least that should fail of fulfillment;" and the equally great determination on the part of the twelve that it should not fail, makes the revelation of special interest, but the account of its fulfillment belongs to a future chapter.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Following the admission the historian continues: "A man by the name of Richard Weldon commenced to abuse a Mormon preacher and finally knocked him down. The blow was uncalled for, but it seems there were a few rough characters in favor of a fight and they got it." (History of Daviess County, Birdsall & Dean, Kansas City, publishers, 1882, p. 203). Again, "At the August election, 1838, a riot occurred at Gallatin between the Mormons and Gentiles. The latter would not allow the Mormons to vote, and it is admitted were the aggressors." (History of Caldwell and Livingston Counties, National Historical Co., publishers, 1886, p. 126.)
[^2] The History of Daviess County, Birdsall & Dean Co., 1882, gives the number two hundred (p. 204); Linn one hundred and fifty, and wrongfully assigns the command to "Dr. Avard" (Story of the Mormons, p. 198).
[^3] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 59-60.
[^4] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 60.
[^5] The document in extenso is published in History of the Church, Period I. vol. iii, p. 61.
[^6] Affidavit complete in History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 64, 65.
[^7] "They (the old settlers) are collecting from every part of the country, to Daviess county. Report says that they are collecting from eleven counties, to help take two men who had never resisted the law or officer, nor had they thought of doing so, and this their enemies knew at the same time, or many of them at least knew it. This looks a little too much like mobocracy, it foretells some evil intentions. The whole of upper Missouri is in an uproar and confusion." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 69).
[^8] History of Caldwell and Livingston Counties, National Historical Co. St. Louis, 1886 p. 124.
[^9] Documents published by order of the general assembly of Missouri pp 29-30. Church historian's collection of Tracts, vol. xv, No. 6.
[^10] Documents published by order of the general assembly of Missouri, p. 20.
[^11] Ante, ch. xxiv.
[^12] Throughout the summer of 1838, the Prophet sought to rectify this error by inducing all the people he could influence to form settlements, "according to the order of God." (See History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 55, 62, 66, 67, 68.) As an adjunct to this system of colonization the Prophet organized his people into large agricultural companies, designed to carry on their agriculture pursuits by co-operative methods. The largeness of his plans will appear in the following from his journal:
[^13] Doniphan's Report to Atchison, Documents published by order of the general assembly of Missouri, pp. 24-25.
[^14] Atchison's Report to Governor Boggs, Documents published by order of the general assembly of Missouri, pp. 27-28.
[^15] General H. G. Parks to the Governor, Documents, etc., published by order of the general assembly of Missouri, p. 32.
[^16] Ibid, p. 33.
[^17] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 84.
[^18] General Atchison to the Commander-in-chief, Governor Boggs, Sept. 27th, 1838, Documents, etc., p. 34.
[^19] Atchison's Report to Governor Boggs, of Oct. 5th, Documents, etc., pp. 35, 36.
[^20] General Atchison to the Governor, Documents, etc., p. 39.
[^21] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 157.
[^22] Ibid, p. 158.
[^23] Ibid, vol. iii, p. 158.
[^24] Ibid, pp. 159, 160.
[^25] This refers to Atchison's own command, the 3rd division, and serves notice on the governor that he will not serve in the event of the contingency named; also the reference to allowing the parties to "fight it out" as a means of settlement, is doubtless a covert sarcasm alluding to Governor Boggs' answer to Mr. Caldwell in the DeWitt affair.
[^26] The italics in the above are mine—The Author.
[^27] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 161.
[^28] Ibid, p. 163.
[^29] It was a cunning piece of diabolism which prompted the mob of Daviess county to set fire to their own log cabins, destroy some of their own property and then charge the crime to the saints. But it was not without a precedent in Missouri. Two years before that, something very similar occurred in Mercer county, just northeast of Daviess. In June of the year 1836, the Iowa Indians, then living near St. Joseph, made a friendly hunting excursion through the northern part of the state, and their line of travel led them through what was known as the "Heatherly settlement," in Mercer county. The Heatherlys who were ruffians of the lowest type, took advantage of the excitement produced by the incursion of the Indians, and circulated a report that they were robbing and killing the whites. During the excitement these Heatherlys murdered a man by the name of Dunbar, and another man against whom they had a grudge, and then fled to the settlements along the Missouri river, representing that they were fleeing from the Indians for their lives. This produced great excitement in the settlements in the surrounding counties; the people not knowing at what hour the Indians might be upon them, the militia was called out for their protection; but it was soon ascertained that the alarm was a false one. The Heatherlys were arrested, tried for murder, and some of them sent to the penitentiary. This circumstance occurring only two years before the action of the mob about Millport, and in a county adjacent to Daviess county, doubtless suggested the course pursued by the mob in burning their own houses and fleeing to all parts of the state with the report that the "Mormons" had done it, and were murdering and plundering the old settlers. The Heatherly incident is called the "Heatherly War" in Missouri annals, the circumstance is given at length in the History of Livingston County, Missouri, written and compiled by the National Historical Co., 1886, ch. iii, pp. 710-713.
[^30] Report of General Parks to General Atchison, Oct. 21, Documents, etc., p. 47.
