B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XXXIV

ARMED HOSTILITIES IN CALDWELL AND SURROUNDING COUNTIES—THE TREACHERY OF GENERAL PARKS—"DISMOUNTING" OF GENERAL DAVID R. ATCHISON

ACTIVE hostilities between the saints and the Missourians, which ultimately resulted in the expulsion of the former from Missouri, broke, out at an election held at Gallatin in Daviess county on the 6th of August. W. P. Peniston, candidate for representative to the state legislature from Daviess county had been for some time bitterly opposed to the saints. He was active in the agitation which caused their removal from Clay county, and fearing that they would not support him in the election he planned to prevent them from voting at all in Daviess county. This plan was made known to the brethren some two weeks before election by Judge Morin, who lived at Millport, near Gallatin. He advised the brethren to go to the polls prepared for an attack, to stand their ground, and maintain their rights. No heed was paid to the warning of the judge, however, and the saints went to the polls unarmed. Peniston was at the polls and harangued the voters against the "Mormons." He accused the leaders with being rascals, and the rank and file he denounced as dupes, and thieves. He declared that if the "Mormons" were allowed to vote the "old settlers" would soon lose their suffrage. In the midst of this abuse a local bully assaulted Samuel Brown, one of the brethren. It is admitted by Missouri's historical writers that the "old settlers" undertook to prevent the "Mormons" from voting; that they "began the row;" that the blow which began the hostilities was "uncalled for." [^1]

POLITICAL DIFFICULTIES IN DAVIESS COUNTY

Following the assault upon Brown the fight became general and a number on both sides were bruised and other-wise injured, though none were killed on either side. The "old settlers" were the first to withdraw to arouse their sympathizers and to arm themselves. Meantime the saints had become determined to maintain their rights and a renewal of the conflict seemed inevitable. Under these circumstances the county authorities in charge of the election came to the brethren and pleaded with them to withdraw, saying that the riot was a premeditated thing to prevent the "Mormons" from voting. The brethren being unarmed withdrew to their farms, collected their families, concealed them in the hazel thickets and stood guard over them through the night.

The following day an exaggerated report of this Gallatin affair reached Far West, such as that several of the brethren had been killed and the mob refused to allow them to be buried, and were determined to drive all the "Mormons" from Daviess county. These reports occasioned great excitement in Far West; and as soon as men could get ready they rode off in small squads to learn the extent of the outbreak against their brethren. Joseph Smith went with one of these companies, but the general command of the expedition was given to G. W. Robinson. How many left Far West on this errand is not known. They have been variously estimated from one to two hundred. [^2] They rendezvoused at "Di-Ahman" at the residence of Lyman Wight, and here met with some who had been at the disturbance at Gallatin, from whom they learned the truth, concerning the riot of the previous day. The next day was spent by Joseph Smith and others of the company from Far West in visiting "old settlers" in the vicinity of "Di-Ahman" to learn their dispositions towards their "Mormon" neighbors. Among others called upon was one Adam Black, a justice of the peace, and now judge-elect for Daviess county. Under these circumstances it was especially desirable to know this man's intentions, particularly as rumor had connected him with the mob element. He declared his intention to administer the law fairly, and also denying any connection with the mob. As the document is unique both in orthography and composition it is given in full as prepared and signed by the judge-elect:

"I, Adam Black, a justice of the peace of Daviess county do hereby certify to the people, called Mormon, that he is bound to support the Constitution of the state and of the United States and he is not attached to any mob, nor will he attach himself to any such people, and so long as they will not molest me, I will not molest them. This the 8th day of August, 1838.

"ADAM BLACK, J. P." [^3]

The same day a meeting was arranged for the 9th between some of the citizens of Millport, adjacent to Gallatin, and the leaders of the company from Far West. Among the former who met with the brethren from Far West were Joseph Morin, state senator-elect; John Williams, representative-elect; James B. Turner, clerk of the circuit court and others. The substance of the agreement entered into by these parties, as stated by Joseph Smith, is as follows:

"At this meeting both parties entered into covenant of peace to preserve each other's rights, and stand in each other's defense; that if men did wrong, neither party would uphold them or endeavor to screen them from justice, but deliver up all offenders to be dealt with according to law and justice." [^4]

THE RISING TIDE OF MISREPRESENTATION

On the 10th of August, however, W. P. Peniston, Wm. Bowman, Wilson McKenny and John Netherton appeared before Judge Austin A. King, of the fifth judicial circuit and made affidavit that they had good reason to believe, and did believe that there was collected in Daviess county a body of five hundred armed men whose movements were of a highly insurrectionary and unlawful character, that about one hundred and twenty of aforesaid insurrectionaries had committed violence against Adam Black by surrounding his house, and taking him in a violent manner and subjecting him to great indignities, by forcing him under threats of immediate death to sign a paper writing of a very disgraceful character, and by threatening to do the same to all the "old settlers" and citizens of Daviess county; that said armed body had threatened to put to instant death Wm. P. Peniston, one of the affiants, and he verily believed they would do it without they should be prevented; like threats were made against Wm. Bowman, another of the affiants. Joseph Smith, Jun., and Lyman Wight were declared to be the leaders of this body of armed men whose object it is "to take vengeance for some injuries, or imaginary injuries, done to some of their friends, and to drive from the county all the old citizens, and possess themselves of their lands, or to force such as do not leave, to come to measures and submit to their dictation." [^5]

In the latter part of the month of August, Adam Black confirmed in an affidavit much of what was sworn to by Peniston, especially that he had been threatened "with instant death" if he did not sign a writing binding himself as a justice of the peace "not to molest the people called Mormons." [^6]

On the affidavit of Peniston et al warrants were issued against Joseph Smith and Lyman Wight for being engaged in this alleged insurrectionary movement. It was reported that they would not submit to service of the warrants, nor to the law, and much was made of this report in the surrounding counties. When the sheriff of Daviess county notified Joseph Smith that he had a writ to take him to Daviess county and reference was made to these reports, the Prophet informed the sheriff that he intended always to submit to the laws of the county, but he wished to be tried in his own county, as the citizens of Daviess county were highly exasperated at him, and that the laws of the country granted him this privilege. Hearing this the sheriff declined serving the warrant until he could consult with Judge King, at Richmond, in Ray county. The Prophet agreed to remain at home until his return. On returning the sheriff stated that he had no jurisdiction in Caldwell county and retired.

This action on the part of the Prophet was construed and reported to be resistance to an officer of the law, and used to further inflame the country. Finally, acting under the counsel of his legal advisers, Messrs. David R. Atchison and A. W. Doniphan, Joseph Smith and Lyman Wight volunteered to be tried by Judge King in Daviess county, and much to their surprise they were bound over in five hundred dollar bonds to appear before the circuit court for trial.

Meantime all manner of exaggerated reports of these matters were circulated throughout all the counties of upper Missouri, mingled with downright misrepresentations as to the intentions and alleged warlike preparations of the "Mormons" to drive the "old settlers" from their homes; and doubtless the rumors of mob preparations in surrounding counties—such as that men were collecting from "eleven counties" to take into custody Joseph Smith and Lyman Wight for their part in the expedition into Daviess county [^7]—were equally exaggerated and untrue. But it was true that great excitement had been created against the saints throughout the counties of upper Missouri, that amounted to an "uproar." And because of these misrepresentations the "Mormons" were both feared and hated, save perhaps in Clay county, where they were best known and had a few staunch friends among some of the strongest men in western Missouri. "Ray county Gentiles," says one historian, after noting the absence of ill feeling in Clay county—"Ray county Gentiles hated them. Carroll county Gentiles detested them; and Daviess county Gentiles vowed hostilities against them." [^8]

No attempt is made in this general History to detail all the movements of mob and militia forces and the counter movements on the Latter-day Saints' side; only those actions necessary to a true understanding of the outcome are detailed.

Following the Adam Black affair various representations were made to Governor Boggs from citizens and some officers of Chariton, Carroll, Daviess and Livingston counties, representing, in the main, that the "Mormons" were in insurrection, refused to submit to law, had formed alliances with the Indians on the western frontier, and were preparing to make war upon the Missourians in the fall. And thence from time to time, as the conflict developed, petitions, affidavits, appeals and official reports flooded the chief executive of the state, generally to the disparagement of the saints, for seldom could the latter reach the governor's ear. Indeed in all the collection of affidavits, appeals and petitions published under the authority of the Missouri legislature, there is but one brief petition from "Certain Mormons to the Governor." The petition was signed by fifty of the saints at DeWitt, and recites the threats made against them by the mob, and appeals for executive protection. [^9]

THREATS OF EXTERMINATION

The first official act of a series which resulted in bringing against the people of Far West a body of more than 6,000 state troops, and expelling over twelve thousand people, men, women and children from the state, under threats of extermination—was an order of the executive through B. M. Lisle, adjutant general of the militia, to General David R. Atchison and six other major generals, to raise within their respective districts and hold in readiness for further orders, four hundred mounted men, armed and equipped as infantry or riflemen and formed into companies under officers already in commission. This made ready a body of soldiery 2,800 strong.

"Indications of Indian disturbances on Missouri's immediate frontier, and the recent civil disturbances in the counties of Caldwell, Daviess and Carroll," are said to render the order necessary as a precautionary measure. [^10] This order is dated the 30th of August.

The whole country was in a state of great excitment and squads of armed men were moving about making threats against the saints. The latter were at great disadvantage by reason of being widely scattered over a very large area of country; in this they neglected to follow the advice of the Prophet to form compact settlements and live in them; which, had they done, among other advantages of such a policy, already considered, [^11] they would have had better opportunities for self-defense. [^12]

The brethren from Far West were active in going from point to point, under the direction of the civil authorities of Caldwell county, wherever there was a threatened attack upon their people. Hearing that a wagon load of arms and ammunition was en route from Richmond to the mob investing the vicinity of "Di-Ahman," Captain Wm. Allred took a company of ten mounted men and started to intercept the transport. They found the wagon broken down, and the boxes of guns concealed near the roadside in the tall grass; but no one was in sight. Shortly after this party had discovered the arms, they saw moving over the prairie, from the direction of the mob's camp, two horsemen and behind them a third man driving a team. These parties came up to the broken down wagon and were arrested by Captain Allred, by virtue of a writ he held for them issued by the civil authorities of Caldwell county. The prisoners and the guns were taken to Far West, and after an examination before Albert Petty, justice of the peace, they were held to bail for their appearance at the next term of the circuit court. The names of these parties were, J. B. Comer, held as principal, and Wm. L. McHoney and Allen Miller as being in the employ of Comer, engaged in furnishing a mob with arms for an illegal purpose.

Judge King was immediately informed of the arrest of these men, and his advice was asked as to what disposal should be made of the prisoners. He replied that the prisoners must be turned loose and treated kindly. He had no advice to give about the guns, and was at a loss to know how to account for them being in the possession of Comer, as they belonged to the government, and had been in the custody of Captain Pollard, living in the vicinity of Richmond. The guns were distributed among the brethren to be used in self-defense. A few days afterwards the prisoners were delivered up to General A. W. Doniphan; and forty-two stands of the firearms were also collected and delivered to him.

The mob took a number of the brethren prisoners, and sent word to Far West and other settlements that they were torturing them in the most inhuman manner, by this means, doubtless, seeking to provoke retaliation.

Meantime the militia Governor Boggs had ordered to be held in readiness, was mustered into service. Under the direction of General Doniphan six companies of fifty men each were collected and armed from the militia of Clay county, and at once marched to the vicinity of "Di-Ahman." Here Doniphan found the citizens of Daviess and surrounding counties to the number of two or three hundred under arms, and commanded by Dr. Austin, from Carroll county. They claimed to have collected solely for the purpose of defending the people of Daviess county against the "Mormons." Doniphan read to them the order of his superior officer, General Atchison, to disperse, but this they refused to do.

"I had an interview," said Doniphan, "with Dr. Austin, and his professions were all pacific. But they [Austin's men] still continued under arms, marching and counter marching." The general also visited the encampment of the brethren under the command of Colonel Lyman Wight. Doniphan's report says:

"We held a conference with him, and he professed entire willingness to disband, and surrender up to me every one of the Mormons accused of crime; and required in return that the hostile forces collected by the other citizens of the county, should also disband." [^13]

As the mob refused to obey the order to disband, the safety of the brethren and their families required that men under Wight should continue under arms. General Doniphan took up a position between the two opposing forces, hoping that if the parties were kept apart, in a few days they would disband without coercion.

In the course of two or three days General Atchison arrived with a body of militia from Ray county. He at once ordered the citizens from the surrounding counties to repair to their respective homes, a movement they began to make with many signs of reluctance. Only about one hundred of them obeyed the order. Atchison reported to Governor Boggs, that he had received assurance from the "Mormons" that all those accused of a violation of the laws would be in for trial the very day on which his report was dated—the 17th of September. "And," says the report, "when that is done, the troops under my command will be no longer required in this county, if the people of the other counties will retire to their respective homes."

A day or two after this report, Atchison succeeded in disbanding the mob forces; and the brethren against whom charges were made appeared before a court of inquiry and entered into bonds to appear at the next session of the circuit court. This much having been accomplished, Atchison thought it no longer needful to keep his whole force of militia in the field, hence he dismissed all his forces except two companies, which were left in the vicinity, under the command of Brigadier-General H. G. Parks. In reporting these latter movements to the governor, Atchison says in conclusion:

"The Mormons of Daviess county, as I stated in a former report, were encamped in a town called Adam-ondi-Ahman, and they are headed by Lyman Wight, a bold, brave, skillful, and I may add, a desperate man; they appear to be acting on the defensive, and, I must further add, gave up the offenders with a good deal of promptness. The arms taken by the Mormons and the prisoners were also given up on demand with seeming cheerfulness." [^14]

The forces which had been called out by order of General Atchison were disbanded, except the two companies that were left under the command of General Parks. Parks and these men remained in the vicinity of "Di-Ahman," watching both "Mormons" and Gentiles, assisting in serving civil process, and reporting occasionally to his superior officers. As these reports come from a source that is other than a "Mormon" one, he is a witness to the uprightness of the acts of the "Mormon" people, at that time, of considerable importance; and this must be our justification for inserting several extracts from his official reports. In a report which Parks made to Governor Boggs, on the 25th of September, occurs the following:

"Whatever may have been the disposition of the people called Mormons before our arrival here, since we have made our appearance, they have shown no disposition to resist the law or of hostile intentions. * * * There has been so much prejudice and exaggeration concerned in this matter, that I found things entirely different from what I was prepared to expect. It is true that a great excitement did prevail between the parties, and I am happy to say that my exertions, as well as those of Major General Atchison, and the officers and men under my command, have been crowned with success. When we arrived here, we found a large body of men from the counties adjoining, armed and in the field, for the purpose, as I learned, of assisting the people of this county against the Mormons, without being called out by the proper authorities." [^15]

In the meantime, a committee of "old citizens" had agreed to meet with a committee appointed by the saints in Daviess county, for the purpose of making arrangements for either buying the property of the saints, or of selling theirs to the brethren. Speaking of this committee in a postscript to the above report, Parks says:

"I received information that if the committee do not agree, the determination of the Daviess county men is to drive the Mormons with powder and lead." [^16]

The committee met and the brethren entered into an agreement to purchase all the lands and possessions of those who desired to sell and leave Daviess county. Messengers immediately carried the news of the agreement to the Prophet at Far West, and he approved of the action and immediately appointed messengers to the churches east and south to raise the means to fulfill the contract. [^17] But continued conflicts on every hand prevented its consummation.

Two days later than the date of Parks' report, last quoted, General Atchison wrote to the governor, saying:

"The force under General Parks is deemed sufficient to execute the laws and keep the peace in Daviess county. Things are not so bad in that county as represented by rumor, and in fact from affidavits. I have no doubt your excellency has been deceived by the exaggerated statements of designing or half crazy men. I have found there is no cause for alarm on account of the Mormons; they are not to be feared; they are very much alarmed." [^18]

These statements, accompanied by the former statements of Atchison and Doniphan, which said the "Mormons" were only acting on the defensive, and had surrendered the arms they had taken from the mob together with the prisoners with promptness, prove that the saints in collecting and arming were merely acting in self-defense, and not with any desire to outrage the laws or injure the Missourians.

The mob forces thwarted for the present in their designs on "Di-Ahman," moved next upon DeWitt, in Carroll county, with the express purpose of expelling the "Mormons" from that place. No charge at all of unlawful conduct is made against the saints in DeWitt. The utmost that was said against them by the mob to the committee of citizens from Chariton county—who went to DeWitt to inquire into the trouble there—was, that they were unwilling for the "Mormons" to remain at DeWitt, "which was the cause of them waging war against them—they were waging a war of extermination, or to remove them from said county."

"We also went into DeWitt," says the committee's report. "We found them [the saints] in the act of defense, begging for peace, and wishing for the civil authorities to repair there and as early as possible settle the difficulties between the parties. Hostilities have commenced, and will continue until they are stopped by the civil authorities."

This report of the Chariton county committee was transmitted to the governor with General Atchison's report to him of October the 5th. [^19] General Atchison ordered General Parks to disperse the mob about DeWitt, but that officer reported his command as partaking "in a great degree of the mob spirit," so that no reliance could be placed upon it; [^20] and while General Atchison disagreed with this view it prevented General Parks from venturing upon any decisive measures against the mob, or giving relief to the saints of DeWitt.

DEWITT—THE FALL OF—CARROLL COUNTY

The Prophet, learning of the distress of the saints at DeWitt, made his way to them. He found the saints in sore straits, their food supplies exhausted, and a constantly increasing mob surrounding them. A number of non-"Mormon" citizens of DeWitt expressed a willingness to make affidavits respecting the treatment of the saints at the hands of the mob, and their present perilous situation; also their willingness to send a messenger with such affidavits to the governor. The affidavits accordingly were drawn up and placed in the hands of a Mr. Caldwell who presented them to Governor Boggs, but the executive of the state instead of giving the besieged citizens of DeWitt any hope of relief, said to Mr. Caldwell—

"The quarrel is between the Mormons and the mob, and they can fight it out!" [^21]

To the disgrace of Governor Boggs these affidavits of the non-"Mormon" citizens of DeWitt are not among the official papers reported to the Missouri legislature.

Shortly after this incident General Parks sent word to the people of DeWitt that his troops under Captain Bogart had mutinated and to prevent them from joining the mob he was under the necessity of drawing them away. [^22] The Prophet had no confidence in General Parks himself, and denounces him for making no move against the mob, and giving as his reason that "Bogart and his company were mutinous and mobocratic, that he dare not attempt a dispersion of the mob." [^23]

Deserted on every hand by the legal authorities who should have gone to their assitance, and the mob forces constantly increasing, there was nothing for the saints to do but to capitulate and leave DeWitt; and this they did, making a melancholy march to Far West, a number dying on the way from the effects of fatigue and privation. [^24]

The DeWitt affair may not be more fittingly closed than by the final official report of General Atchison to Governor Boggs, respecting it.

"Boonville, Oct. 16, 1838.

"To His Excellency, L. W. Boggs.

"Sir—From a communication received from General Parks, I learn that the Mormons in Carroll county have sold out and left, consequently everything is quiet there, but Parks reports that a portion of the men from Carroll county, with one piece of artillery, are on their march for Daviess county, where it is thought the same lawless game is to be played over, and the Mormons to be driven from that county and probably from Caldwell county. Nothing, in my opinion, but the strongest measures within the power of the executive, will put down this spirit of mobocracy.

"The troops ordered into the field, from Parks' report, partake, in a great degree, of the mob spirit, so that no reliance can be placed upon them; however, in this I believe Parks to be mistaken. I would respectfully suggest to your excellency the propriety of a visit to the scene of excitement in person, or at all events, a strong proclamation. The state of things which have existed in the counties of Daviess and Carroll for the last two months, has been, in a high degree, ruinous to the public, and disgraceful to the state. I would again respectfully suggest strong measures to put down this spirit of mob and misrule, or permit them to fight it out. If your excellency should conclude the latter expedient best calculated to produce quiet and restore order. issue an order to the major general, 3rd division, [^25] to discharge the troops now engaged in that service. [^26]

I have the honor, &c.,

"DAVID R. ATCHISON."

Encouraged by their success at DeWitt against an unoffending Latter-day Saint community—beyond the fact that they were "Mormons"—the mob hastened to Daviess county to repeat there, if possible, their DeWitt success.

While these events were occurring in Carroll county, Cornelius Gilliam was raising a mob in Platte and Clinton counties, west of Caldwell, for the purpose of assisting in this enterprise. General Doniphan learned of both these movements and sent word to Joseph Smith that a body of eight hundred men were moving upon the settlements of his people in Daviess county. He gave orders for a company of militia to be raised at Far West and marched at once into Daviess county, to defend those who were threatened, until he could raise the militia in Clay and adjoining counties to put down the insurrection. [^27] Accordingly a company of one hundred militiamen were gotten in readiness to march into Daviess county. The command was given to Colonel Hinkle and he started for "Di-Ahman."

After General Parks had left the vicinity of DeWitt, with his mutinous militia, he returned to "Di-Ahman," where he had left Colonel Thompson in command, and resumed control of affairs in that section.

The mob about "Di-Ahman," hearing of the fate of DeWitt, and learning of the approach of that mob and the efforts of Gilliam in raising a mob in the west, became bolder, and at once began to threaten the saints and to burn some of their houses and stacks of hay and grain. These depredations were committed chiefly in the vicinity of Millport, a short distance from "Di-Ahman."

General Parks passed these burning ruins, and they seemed to arouse within him a just indignation. He at once went to Lyman Wight and gave him orders to call out his companies of militiamen—Wight holding a Colonel's commission in the fifty-ninth regiment of the Missouri militia, commanded by General Parks—and gave him full authority to put down mobs wherever he should find them assembled. He said he wished it distinctly understood that Colonel Wight had full authority from him to suppress all mob violence. [^28] The militia that Colonel Wight called out was divided into two companies; one company, consisting of about sixty men, was placed under the command of Captain David W. Patten, and the other of about the same number was commanded by Wight in person.

Captain Patten was ordered to go to Gallatin. Here he found a body of the mob, about one hundred strong, who were amusing themselves by mocking and in various ways tantalizing a number of the saints whom they had captured. Seeing the approach of Patten's men, and knowing the determination of the leader, the mob broke and ran in the greatest confusion, leaving their prisoners behind them.

On his arrival at Millport, Colonel Wight found the whole country deserted by the mob which had infested it, and their houses in flames or in smouldering ruins. The mob having learned that General Parks had ordered out Wight's company of militia, was seized with sudden fear and swore vengeance, not only upon the "Mormons" but upon General Parks and Doniphan as well. To accomplish this purpose, they had loaded their most valuable personal effects into wagons, and seting fire to their log huts, they sent runners throughout the state with the lying report that the "Mormons" had "riz" and were burning the houses, destroying property, and murdering the "old settlers." [^29]

THE MILLPORT BURNINGS

The Gallatin-Millport events related above occurred on the 17th, 18th and 19th days of October; but General Parks who certainly had acted in a weak and unsoldierly way before DeWitt, and who was suspected of more or less sympathy with the mob forces, made no mention of the orders he had given to Lyman Wight to put down mob violence in Daviess county; but on the contrary makes in said report unfriendly allusions to a body of saints under arms at "Di-Ahman" who declared their intention to "defend that place." He reports also the desertion of Millport by the "old settlers;" expresses the belief that the "Mormons" had "become the aggressors;" that the excitement in Daviess county was "more deep and full of vengeance" than he had ever seen it before; and he would "not be surprised if some signal act of vengeance would be taken on these fanatics"—the "Mormons," of course. "I do not know what to do," he adds, "I will remain passive until I hear from you. I do not believe calling out the militia would avail anything towards restoring peace, unless they were called out in such force, as to frighten the Mormons and drive them from the country. This would satisfy the people, but I cannot agree to it." [^30]

THE NOBLE STAND OF GENERAL DAVID R. ATCHISON

On the strength of this report General Atchison sent the following remarkable communication to Governor Boggs, in which one may see struggling in the mind of the general deep disgust and just indignation at the course events had taken.

"Liberty, October 22, 1838.

"To His Excellency, the Commander-in-chief.

"Sir:—Almost every hour I receive information of outrage and violence—of burning and plundering in the county of Daviess. It seems that the Mormons have become desperate, and act like mad-men: they have burned a store in Gallatin; they have burnt Millport; they have, it is said, plundered several houses; and have taken away the arms from divers citizens of that county; a cannon that was employed in the siege of DeWitt, in Carroll county, and taken for a like purpose to Daviess county, has fallen into the hands of the Mormons. It is also reported that the anti-Mormons have, when opportunity offered, disarmed the Mormons, and burnt several of their houses.

"The great difficulty in settling this matter, seems to be in not being able to identify the offenders. I am convinced that nothing short of driving the Mormons from Daviess county will satisfy the parties opposed to them; and this I have not the power to do, as I conceive legally. There are no troops at this time in Daviess county, nor do I deem it expedient to send any there, for I am well convinced that it would but make matters worse; for, sir, I do not feel disposed to disgrace myself, or permit the troops under my command to disgrace the state and themselves by acting the part of a mob. If the Mormons are to be driven from their homes, let it be done without any color of law, and in open defiance thereof; let it be done by volunteers acting upon their own responsibilities. [^31]

"However, I deem it my duty to submit these matters to the commander-in-chief, and will conclude by saying it will be my greatest pleasure to execute any order your excellency shall think proper to give in this matter with promptness, and to the very letter.

I have the honor to be,

Your excellency's most ob't ser'vt.

"DAVID R. ATCHISON." [^32]

After this General Atchison took little part in the movements of the state militia against the saints. From Richmond, under date of the 28th of October, he joins in an official report with General Lucas, major general of the 4th division state militia—from Jackson county—saying that in consequence of "late outrages committed by the Mormons, civil war was inevitable;" that "they have set the laws of the country at defiance and are in open rebellion." The two officers announce that they have two thousand men under arms to keep the "Mormons" in check, and urge that his "excellency be at the seat of war as soon as possible." [^33]

On the 30th of October these two officers received the "Exterminating Order" of Governor Boggs, dated 27th of the same month. General A. W. Doniphan at the same time received "an order and a letter" from the governor instructing him to obey the orders of General John B. Clark when he should arrive and assume command, as he had been ordered to do. "The letter was very denunciatory of the Mormons, and declared among other things, that 'they must all be driven from the state of exterminated.'" The authority here quoted adds:

"It is asserted that General Atchison's orders or directions from the governor were to the same purport as Doniphan's letter from the governor, and that thereupon General Atchison withdrew from the military force, declaring that he would be no party to the enforcement of such inhuman commands. On the other hand, it is asserted that the governor's orders to Atchison relieved him from command, directing him to turn over his command to General Lucas. At any rate, General Atchison left the militia at Log Creek on receipt of the governor's orders, and returned to his home at Liberty, and General Lucas was left in sole command." [^34]

General Atchison would never clear up this uncertainty in relation to his retirement from these movements against the Latter-day Saint settlements. The author of the History of Caldwell County says: "Repeated letters to General Atchison on this subject have received no answer." [^35] Joseph Smith says that General Atchison "withdrew from the army at Richmond as soon as the governor's extermination order was received." [^36] General Doniphan says that Atchison was "dismounted" and sent back to Liberty, Clay county, by special order of Governor Boggs on the ground that he was inclined to be too merciful to the "Mormons." [^37] Governor Boggs himself says, in a communication to General Clark, November the 6th, that "General Atchison was not ordered out in this last affair [i. e. under the Exterminating Orders of Oct. 27th], for two reasons: one was, that I was aware as a member of the legislature he would have other duties to attend to; and another was, that there was much dissatisfaction manifested towards him by the people opposed to the Mormons." [^38]

The only regrettable thing in the whole course of General Atchison, and the only inconsistent thing, was his joining with General Lucas in that conjoint report to the governor of the 28th of October, charging "outrages committed by the Mormons;" and in this he was doubtless misled by General Parks' report to him of the 21st of October (see ante); also saying that "Mormons" had "set the laws of the country at defiance," and were in "open rebellion." In answer to all this it might be asked: when all the officers of the law refused to hear their complaints, and both civil and military authorities delivered them into the hands of merciless mobs to be plundered and outraged at their brutal pleasure, and all petitions for protection at the hands of the governor had been answered with—"It is a quarrel between the Mormons and the mob, and they must fight it out"—what was left for the Latter-day Saints to do but to arm themselves and stand in defense of their homes and families?

But this incident aside, whether he was "dismounted" for being too merciful to the "Mormons," or withdrew from the military forces moving upon the "Mormons" on receiving Governor Boggs' exterminating order, on the ground that he "would be no party to the enforcement of such inhuman commands"—his departure is equally honorable to General David R. Atchison. [^39]

Footnotes

"August 20—The inhabitants of the different parts of the county met to organize themselves into agricultural companies. I was present and took part in their deliberations. One company was formed, called the 'Western Agricultural Company,' which voted to enclose one field for grain containing twelve sections, seven thousand six hundred and eighty acres of land. Another company was also organized, called the 'Eastern Agricultural Company,' the extent of the field not decided.

"Tuesday 21—Another company was formed, called the 'Southern Agricultural Company,' the field to be as large as the first mentioned." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 63, 64).

---
Notas:
[^1] "To give up their leaders to be tried and punished. ALEXANDER W. DONIPHAN See Doniphan's Report to Atchison, Sept. 15, 1838, Documents, etc., pp. 24-25.
[^2] "To make an appropriation of their property, all who had taken up arms, to the payment of their debts, and indemnity for damage done by them. THE PERSONAL APPEARANCE OF GENERAL DONIPHAN Atchison's Reports, 17 and 20 Sept. Documents, etc., pp. 26-28.
[^3] "That the balance should leave the state, and be protected out by the militia, but to be permitted to remain under protection until further orders were received from the commander-in-chief. THE FRIENDSHIP OF JOSEPH SMITH AND GENERAL DONIPHAN Hence a mob. See General Parks' Report to the Governor, Sept. 25, Documents, etc., p. 32.
[^4] "To give up the arms of every description to be receipted for." [^47] Ibid., 33.
[^5] Included in Atchison's Report to Governor Boggs Oct. 5th. Documents, etc., pp. 35-36.
[^6] Atchison's Report to the Governor, Oct. 6th, Documents, etc., p. 39. It has already been noted that Atchison at that time believed Parks mistaken—but the report went to the Governor nevertheless.
[^7] Ibid.—same report.
[^8] Ibid.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] Atchison's Report to the Governor, Oct. 16th, Documents, etc., p. 39.
[^12] Atchison's Report to Governor Boggs, Oct. 22nd, 1838, Documents, etc., pp. 46, 47.
[^13] See Documents, etc., published by Missouri Legislature assembly, pp. 15-20.
[^14] Report of General Lucas to Governor Boggs, Documents, etc., p. 35.
[^15] See ante, chs. xxvi and xxvii.
[^16] See Documents, etc., published by Missouri Legislature, pp. 15.57.
[^17] See ante, ch. xxxiv.
[^18] Affidavit of Thomas B. Marsh, Documents, etc., published by Missouri Legislature, p. 57-59.
[^19] Ibid. The justest comment made upon the action of these two brethren, and perhaps the most just and intelligent comment that can be made upon their conduct, is that of the late President John Taylor—the apostle who subsequently was present with Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum in their martyrdom at Carthage, who was at Far West when Marsh and Hyde defaulted, and cognizant of all matters then taking place, and who at the time of his comment was president of the church—the third who had held that office. President Taylor said:
[^20] This "command" while consisting supposedly of state militia, made up of the mutinously inclined troops commanded by Bogart before DeWitt, were called out at first upon the authority of Bogart alone, ostensibly to patrol the line of Caldwell and Ray county to "prevent, if possible, any outrage on the county of Ray." In the same communication from which I quote, Bogart reports to General Atchison, that "the people of Ray are going to take the law into their own hands and put an end to the Mormon War." (Bogart's Report to Atchison, Documents, etc., p. 48.) On reception of Bogart's report of the 23rd General Atchison under the same date ordered Bogart to "range the line between Caldwell and Ray counties" with his "company of volunteers, and prevent, if possible, any invasion of Ray county by any persons in arms whatever." This "order" of Atchison's of course gave Bogart's command a legal standing which before it did not possess; the Caldwell county officials were ignorant of Atchison's order, and their proceedings on the 25th of October were against Bogart's command as a mob. (Atchison's "order" to Bogart is to be found in Documents, etc., p. 108).
[^21] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 169-170.
[^22] History of Caldwell and Livingston Counties, National Historical Co., 1886, pp. 129-30; and History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 169-171.
[^23] History of Caldwell County, National Historical Co., 1886, p. 131.
[^24] Report of Williams and Reese to Governor Boggs, Documents, etc., pp. 59, 60.
[^25] E. M. Ryland to Messrs. Williams and Reese, Documents, etc., pp. 59, 60.
[^26] Woods and Dickson to Governor Boggs, Documents, etc., p. 60.
[^27] David W. Patten was a member of the quorum of the twelve apostles and the son of Beneino Patten and Abigail Cole. He was born about the year 1800 at Theresa, near Indian River Falls, New York. In boyhood he left home and went to Michigan, where in 1828 he married Phoebe Ann Babcock. He first heard of the Book of Mormon in 1830, but did not join the church until June, 1832. He was ordained an elder and became one of the most active Missionaries of the New Dispensation. In all his labors he manifested a most intrepid spirit, and when he was appointed a captain in the Caldwell county militia, he was given the sobriquet of "Captain Fearnaught." Remarking upon his character, Joseph the Prophet said: "Brother Patten was a very worthy man, beloved by all good men who knew him. He was one of the twelve apostles, and died as he had lived, a man of God, and strong in the faith of a glorious resurrection, in a world where mobs will have no power or place. One of his last expressions to his wife was—'Whatever you do else, O! do not deny the faith'." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 171).
[^28] Governor Boggs' Order to General John B. Clark, October 26, 1838, Documents, etc., pp. 62, 63. One cannot help pausing a moment to notice the difference in the action of the state authorities in two cases that would have been alike, provided the report of those parties who fled from Daviess county, by the light of their burning homes, (fired by their own hands) had been true. In 1833 the saints were driven by brute force and under circumstances the most distressing, from their possessions in Jackson county; and not only was their property destroyed, but one was killed and a number of others wounded, while the number that was exiled amounted to twelve hundred. The state authorities had the fullest evidence of these outrages—in fact the very man who at the time of the Daviess county troubles was governor of the state—Boggs—was on the ground and knew all the circumstances of cruelty and outrage. But when those things came before the state authorities, it took more than two whole years of correspondence to come to an understanding of what could and should be done, and then the decision was that the exiles would do well to move still further on, get entirely away from that section of the country where they had made their homes, as the prejudices of the people were set against them, and the popular sentiment in this country was vox Dei! But now, when a mere rumor comes that the "Mormons" have been guilty of inflicting upon the Missourians the outrages which aforetime had been perpetuated against them, there is no halting on the part of the authorities, but on the contrary the most vigorous efforts are put forth to punish the alleged offenders, and more than three thousand troops are called into the field—besides the eighteen hundred already there—to reinstate the supposed exiles!
[^29] Documents, etc., p. 61.
[^30] Governor Boggs to General Clark, Nov. 1st, Documents, etc., pp. 76. 77.
[^31] Ibid., p. 76. Governor Boggs, however, informed Clark rather curtly in the above quoted letter that neither Atchison nor Lucas had been "called into service under the late order," except that Lucas had been ordered to raise four hundred men in his own division; and the "privilege" was offered him of commanding the troops from his own division, though subject to Clark's orders. (Documents, etc., p. 77). For some reason Governor Boggs preferred that Clark should carry out the Order of Extermination.
[^32] History of Caldwell County, National Historical Co., 1886, p. 133.
[^33] "Whatever of merit there was in the attack on Haun's Mill, and whatever of glory attaches to the famous history, must be given to Col. Wm. O. Jennings mainly. * * * True Jennings' subordinates must be given their share in proportion to the part they bore, but Col. Jennings stands among them all as Saul among his fellows, the Ajax Telemon of the conflict, the Hector of the fight! (History of Caldwell County, National Historical Co., 1886, p. 151.)
[^34] The names of the killed and wounded are given both in the History of Caldwell County, pp. 149, 150, and also in the Affidavit of Joseph Young who witnessed the massacre, History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 183, 186.
[^35] The History here quoted particularizes respecting the identity of this man in the footnote in the following manner: "Either a brother of a man who kept a ferry across Grand River, near Gallatin, or else the ferry man himself."
[^36] History of Caldwell County, p. 149.
[^37] Affidavit of Joseph Young, History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 183-186.
[^38] The charge of "looting" the settlement at Haun's Mill was denied by some of the militia and their friends. In the History of Caldwell County the matter is discussed pro-et-con as follows: "After the engagement was over, and all the able-bodied male Mormons had been killed, wounded or driven away, some of the militiamen began to 'loot' the houses and stables at the mill. A great deal of property was taken, much of it consisting of household articles and personal effects, but just how much can not now be stated. The Mormons claim there was a general pillage, and that in two or three instances the bodies of the slain were robbed. Some of the militia or their friends say only two or three wagons were taken, one to haul off the three wounded, [of the mob] and sufficient bedding to make their ride comfortable; but on the other hand two of those who were in a position to know say that the Mormon hamlet was pretty thoroughly rifled. One man carried away an empty 10 gallon keg, which he carried before him on his saddle and beat as a drum. Another had a woman's bonnet, which he said was for his sweetheart. Perhaps a dozen horses were taken." (p. 148.) The "keg" and "bonnet" incident will indicate the spirit in which this "campaign" was waged against the saints.
[^39] History of Caldwell County, p. 151.
