B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XXXV

FOES WITHOUT AND WITHIN—THE HEROISM OF GENERAL A. W. DONIPHAN

GOVERNOR BOGGS from the commencement of the troubles which arose in upper Missouri between the Latter-day Saints and the "old settlers" had taken wholly the representations of the latter, as to the cause and origin of those troubles. By those representations alone was he guided in all his official actions. It was in vain that the militia officers of his own appointing reported the fact—after arriving on the scene of action—that the Latter-day Saints were acting on the defensive; that they were willing to disband and surrender up every "Mormon" charged with violation of law if the armed forces which had come against them were also disbanded. [^1] It was in vain that General David R. Atchison reported again that the "Mormons" appeared "to be acting on the defensive:" that they gave up those charged with breaking the law "with a good deal of promptness;" that the arms and the prisoners they had taken were also given up on demand "with seeming cheerfulness." [^2] In vain General Parks reported to Atchison and he to the governor, that the Mormons since his arrival on the scene of conflict had shown no disposition to resist the law or of hostile intentions; that there had been so much prejudice and exaggeration respecting the upper Missouri troubles that he found things entirely different from what he had been prepared to expect; that he had found a large body of men from the surrounding counties, armed and in the field to assist the people of Daviess county against the "Mormons" without being called out by the proper authorities; [^3] that in the event of the conjoint committee of saints and "old settlers" appointed to consider the question of buying out the latter, it was the declared intention of the "old settlers" of Daviess county "to drive the Mormons with powder and ball." [^4] In vain General Atchison supplemented his former reports by saying that things were "not so bad as represented by rumor;" "that his excellency had been deceived by the ex-aggerated statements of designing or half crazy men;" that there was "no cause of alarm on account of the Mormons." In vain the committee of citizens of Chariton county reported to Governor Boggs that the only accusation brought against the saints at DeWitt was that they were "Mormons," and that they—the mob—"were not willing for them to remain in DeWitt on that account, and hence were waging a war upon them to remove them from the county." Also the committee represented that they found the "Mormons" of DeWitt "in the act of defense, begging for peace, and wishing for the civil authorities to repair there and as early as possible to settle the difficulties between the parties." [^5] In vain did General Parks report to General Atchison—and he to Governor Boggs—that the troops ordered into the field "partake in great degree of the mob spirit, so that no reliance can be placed upon them." [^6] In vain did General Atchison report to Governor Boggs, after the "Mormon" capitulation at DeWitt, that the men who had driven the "Mormons" from DeWitt were then marching into Daviess county with one piece of artillery; "where," he continued, "it is thought the same lawless game is to be played over, and the Mormons to be driven from that county and probably from Caldwell county." [^7] In vain did General Atchison say that "nothing," in his opinion, "but the strongest measures within the power of the executive, will put down this spirit of mobocracy." [^8] In vain did General Atchison say: "This state of things which has existed in the counties of Daviess and Carroll for the last two months, has been, in high degree, ruinous to the public, and disgraceful to the state." [^9] In vain did General Atchison suggest "strong measures to put down this spirit of mob and misrule, or permit them [saints and mob] to fight it out." [^10] In vain did General Atchison say in sarcasm that if his excellency should "conclude the latter expedient best calculated to produce quiet and order," then to "issue an order to the major general, 3rd division [himself] to discharge the troops now engaged in that service." [^11]

In vain did General Atchison report that nothing short of driving the "Mormons" from Daviess county would satisfy the parties opposed to them, and this he had no power to do, as he conceived, legally; that there were no troops in Daviess county, nor did he deem it expedient to send any since that would make matters worse; "for, sir," said he—

"I do not feel disposed to disgrace myself, or permit the troops under my command to disgrace the state and themselves by acting the part of a mob. If the Mormons are to be driven from their homes, let it be done without any color of law, and in open defiance thereof; let it be done by volunteers acting upon their own responsibilities!" [^12]

GOVERNOR BOGGS—ARCH-ENEMY OF THE SAINTS

All these reports and representations, I say, had no effect upon Governor Boggs—he gave heed to it not at all. But when Adam Black and other citizens of Daviess and of Livingston counties made the most extravagant and wild charges as to what "the Mormon banditti" were doing or contemplating, these received most cordial attention, [^13] and upon them the promptest action was taken; and apparent belief in them continued notwithstanding reports to the contrary by Atchison, Parks and Doniphan, as seen in the foregoing.

When General Samuel D.Lucas, passing DeWitt en route for Booneville heard rumors of a battle at the former place, he reported on the 4th of October to Governor Boggs as follows:

"If a fight has actually taken place, of which I have no doubt, it will create excitement in the whole upper Missouri, and those base and degraded beings will be exterminated from the face of the earth. If one of the citizens from Carroll should be killed, before five days I believe that there will be from four to five thousand volunteers in the field against the Mormons, and nothing but their blood will satisfy them. It is an unpleasant state of affairs. The remedy I do not pretend to suggest to your excellency. My troops, of the 4th division, were only dismissed subject to further orders, and can be called into the field at an hour's warning." [^14]

Lucas was commander of the fourth division of the state militia, a resident of Jackson county and a participant in the mob violence which drove the saints from that county five years before. [^15] His report of the troubles at DeWitt, his forecast of the unfavorable result to the saints, and his willingness to be called back into military service to achieve that result, was doubtless as music to the ears of Governor Boggs, who was also a resident of Jackson county and at least a mediate participant with Lucas in the disgraceful proceedings of five years before in that county. May it not be that these men were of the opinion that the expulsion of the "Mormons" from the entire state of Missouri would in some way be a vindication of the previous unwarranted and shameful expulsion of them from Jackson county?

Statements and reports of like spirit to this from Lucas came to the governor from General John B. Clark, inclosing appeals from the mob forces investing DeWitt to the people of Howard county; also similar statements from Captain Bogart, whose troops with himself were in insubordination, according to General Parks' reports; from Wm. P. Peniston; Samuel Venable; Johnathan J. Dryden; James Stone; fourteen citizens of Ray county; Thomas C. Burch; Judge Austin A. King, Adam Black and others. [^16] In all these reports, statements and affidavits the movements of the militia under Colonels Hinkle and Lyman Wight upon Gallatin and Millport—the two militia officers acting under orders of General Parks, be it remembered [^17]—were made the basis of their misrepresentations.

TESTIMONY OF FALSE BRETHREN

In addition to the exaggerations and misrepresentations of the "old settlers" in Daviess, Ray and other counties, must be added also the misrepresentations of false brethren, who, alarmed at the threatening portents gathering about the saints were not equal to the task of standing unmoved in the presence of the approaching storm. On the night of the 18th of October, Thomas B. Marsh, president of the quorum of twelve apostles, with Orson Hyde, also one of the twelve, left Far West and fled to Richmond; where, on the 24th of the month, they made affidavits that went far towards sustaining the false reports of the "old settlers" as to the purposes and actions of the leading elders and brethren of the church. The chief items in the affidavit of Marsh were as follows:

"They have among them a company, considered true Mormons, called the 'Danites,' who have taken an oath to support the heads of the church in all things that they say or do, whether right or wrong. Many, however, of this band are much dissatisfied with this oath, as being against moral and religious principles. On Saturday last, I am informed by the Mormons, that they had a meeting at Far West, at which they appointed a company of twelve, by the name of the 'Destruction Company,' for the purpose of burning and destroying, and that if the people of Buncombe came to do mischief upon the people of Caldwell, and committed depredations upon the Mormons, they were to burn Buncombe; and if the people of Clay and Ray made any movement against them, this destroying company were to burn Liberty and Richmond. * * * The Prophet inculcated the notion, and it is believed by every true Mormon, that Smith's prophecies are superior to the laws of the land. I have heard the Prophet say that he would yet tread down his enemies, and walk over their dead bodies; and if he was not let alone, he would be a second Mohammed to this generation, and that he would make it one gore of blood from the Rocky Mountains to the Atlantic Ocean; that like Mohammed whose motto in treating for peace was, 'the Alcoran or the Sword,' so would it be eventually with us, 'Joseph Smith or the Sword.' These last statements were made during the last summer. The number of armed men at Adam-ondi-Ahman was between three and four hundred." [^18]

The affidavit of Orson Hyde was to the effect that most of the statements "in the foregoing disclosure" he knew to be true, the remainder he believed to be true. [^19] This false testimony greatly strengthened the "old settlers" in their misrepresentations, and made the saints feel the bitterness of betrayal by false brethren.

BATTLE OF CROOKED RIVER—DAVID W. PATTEN

Meantime the saints in the main, had gathered into the two settlements of "Di-Ahman" and Far West and were preparing to defend themselves as best they could.

On the evening of the 24th of October word was brought into Far West of the operations of Captain Bogart's "command" [^20] in the south part of Caldwell county. The "command," about forty in number, called at the home of a brother Parsons, living on the east branch of Log Creek, and ordered him to leave by ten o'clock the next morning; Bogart saying that he expected to "give Far West hell," before noon of the following day, provided he joined forces with Niel Gilliam, who had raised men from Platte and Clinton counties—west of Clay and Caldwell respectively—to march against the "Mormons;" and who would camp within six miles of Far West that night, while Bogart himself would go into camp on Crooked river. The same day a detachment of Bogart's men entered the house of a brother Pinkham, took three men prisoners, also took four horses, some firearms and food, and warned Pinkham to leave the state at once or they "would have his d—d old scalp." These reports were brought into Far West about midnight; and Judge Elias Higbee—the first judge in Caldwell county, and the highest civil authority therein, and the officer in whom the state law vested the right to call upon the militia to enforce the law [^21]—immediately called upon Colonel George M. Hinkle to raise a company of militia to disperse the mob and rescue the prisoners. This was done and the command given to Captain David W. Patten, who at once marched upon Bogart's encampment on Crooked river, where he arrived at break of day on the 25th. Dismounting his company some distance from the river Patten formed them into three divisions, and advanced. They encountered one of Bogart's picket-men who fired upon them, mortally wounding young Patrick O'Banion. Patten ordered a charge upon the enemy and the conflict was hand to hand. Bogart's forces broke and fled, leaving their horses and camp equipment. In the charge Captain Patten was mortally wounded, Gideon Carter instantly killed, and nine others were wounded. Of the casualties in Bogart's forces the most reliable account fixes the number as one killed—Moses Rowland—and six wounded. [^22]

The results of this engagement between the company of Caldwell militia and Bogart's patrol was greatly exaggerated at the time. "The news of the fight on Crooked river spread rapidly," says one account, "all the Gentiles in the northern part of the county abandoned their homes and fled southward near Richmond and elsewhere for safety, believing that a general raid upon them by the Mormons was imminent. The Mormons had fired the first gun, and were to be considered the aggressors, and wherever the news was received there was a general and vehement demand that they be at once 'put down,' severely punished for what they had done, and effectually disposed of." [^23]

Wiley C. Williams and Amos Reese reporting the Crooked river encounter to General John B. Clark, who had been appointed to the chief command of the forces against the "Mormons," declared that Bogart's command of fifty had been attacked by "three hundred Mormons;" ten had been killed; many others wounded, most of the remainder had been taken prisoners, and these informants had but little hope but "these wretched desperadoes—will kill all those prisoners!" Also they reported that the "Mormons" had determined to attack and burn Richmond that night, and they had but little doubt but that they would attempt it; the women and children had all left Richmond and were fleeing for protection into surrounding counties. Of course the report was closed with a strong plea for something to be done and that speedily to stop these alleged proceedings of the "Mormons." [^24]

MOB REPORTS TO GOVERNOR BOGGS

Messrs. Williams and Reese were already en route to the governor with the reports of the Gallatin-Millport affair (having been appointed to that mission by a mass meeting of the citizens of Richmond, held on the 24th day of October) when E. M. Ryland sent after them rumors that reached Richmond of the Crooked river encounter. These were substantially the same as those already in the possession of Williams and Reese. They were urged by Ryland to hasten their journey to Jefferson City "spreading the reports of Mormon outrages as they went, calling upon volunteers to flock to the scene of conflict as fast as possible." Such volunteers were to be instructed to rendezvous with the full determination to exterminate the "Mormons," or expel them from the state en mass. "The Mormons must leave the state," said the communication, "or we will, one and all. And to this complexion it must come at last." [^25]

Sashiel Woods and Joseph Dickson reported to Governor Boggs from Carrolton (Carrolton county, east of Ray), that by express from Ray county, they had learned that "Captain Bogart and all his company, amounting to between fifty and sixty men were massacred by the Mormons at Buncombe, twelve miles north of Richmond, except three. This statement you may rely on as being true and last night they expected Richmond to be laid in ashes this morning. * * * We know not the hour or minute we will be laid in ashes—our country is ruined—for God's sake give us assistance, as quick as possible." [^26]

Meantime, the Caldwell militia having executed the order of the judge of the county, having dispersed Bogart's command and rescued the three prisoners, so far from meditating an attack upon Richmond, were mournfully returning to Far West with their own killed and wounded, where they arrived on the 26th, and the day following David W. Patten [^27] was buried with military honors.

Before arrival of Messrs. Williams and Reese in Jefferson city, Governor Boggs, acting upon the false reports that reached him concerning affairs at Gallatin and Millport, ordered into the field a large force of the state militia. Under date of 26th of October he ordered out four hundred men from each of the following divisions: the 1st, 4th, 5th, 6th, and 12th; making a body of 2,000 troops. At the same time General Willock of the 14th division was ordered to raise 500 men. Generals Doniphan and Parks were ordered to raise each five hundred men; but no steps were taken by them to carry out this order, doubtless for the reason that the rapid development of events gave them no opportunity to do so, and they were already in the field each in command of a large force, about eighteen hundred men in the two commands. The above military orders were issued by Governor Boggs in response to an application of the citizens of Daviess county to the governor "for protection, and to be restored to their homes and property." The orders were given because the governor claimed to have received "intelligence that the Mormons, with an armed force," had "expelled the inhabitants of that county from their homes," had "pillaged and burnt their dwellings, driven off their stock, and were destroying their crops. That they [the Mormons]" had "burnt to ashes the towns of Gallatin and Millport in said county; the former being the county seat of said county," and that there was "not now a civil officer within said county." [^28]

Shortly after the above order was issued Messrs. Williams and Reese arrived at Jefferson City with their reports of the Crooked river encounter, the supposed determination of the "Mormons" to burn Richmond, added to their false reports of Gallatin-Millport affairs. Upon this showing Governor Boggs issued a second order to General Clark, under date of the 27th of October, known as his "Order of Extermination;" which, on account of its importance in our history, is given in extenso:

GOVERNOR BOGGS' ORDER OF EXTERMINATION

"Headquarters of the Militia,

"City of Jefferson, Oct. 27, 1838.

"General John B. Clark:

"Sir—Since the order of this morning to you, directing you to cause four hundred mounted men to be raised within your division, I have received by Amos Reese, Esq., of Ray county, and Wiley C. Williams, Esq., one of my aids, information of the most appalling character, which entirely changes the face of things, and places the Mormons in the attitude of an open and avowed defiance of the laws, and of having made war upon the people of this state. Your orders are, therefore, to hasten your operation with all possible speed. The Mormons must be treated as enemies, and must be exterminated or driven from the state if necessary for the public peace—their outrages are beyond all description. If you can increase your force, you are authorized to do so to any extent you may consider necessary. I have just issued orders to Maj. Gen. Willock, of Marion county, to raise five hundred men, and to march them to the northern part of Daviess, and there unite with Gen. Doniphan, of Clay, who has been ordered with five hundred men to proceed to the same point for the purpose of intercepting the retreat of the Mormons to the north. They have been directed to communicate with you by express, you can also communicate with them if you find it necessary. Instead therefore of proceeding as at first directed to reinstate the citizens of Daviess in their homes, you will proceed immediately to Richmond and then operate against the Mormons. Brig. Gen. Parks of Ray, has been ordered to have four hundred of his brigade in readiness to join you at Richmond. The whole force will be placed under your command.

I am very respectfully,

your ob't serv't,

"L. W. Boggs, Commander-in-Chief." [^29]

Thus truth was eclipsed by falsehood; and Governor Boggs, no longer acting as the executive of a great common-wealth anxious to enforce the law and restore peace, changed his order to restore the "old settlers" of Daviess county to their homes, to a declaration of war upon the "Mormons,"—a war of extermination, the only alternative to which was banishment from the state. Nor did time for reflection change the determination of Governor Boggs; for writing to General Clark under date of November 1st, he, in effect, renewed the order for extermination: "It was considered by me," he writes to the general, "that full and ample powers were vested in you to carry into effect my former orders. The case is now a very plain one—the Mormons must be subdued and peace restored to the community. You will therefore proceed without delay to execute the former orders. * * * The ringleaders of this rebellion should be made an example of; and, if it should become necessary for the public peace, the Mormons should be exterminated or expelled from the state." [^30]

The Exterminating Order was forwarded by General Clark to General Atchison and Lucas on the 30th, with instructions "to act for the best until he could arrive." [^31] The effect of the arrival of this order to the officers in command of the militia forces we have already seen: Atchison either considered himself "dismounted," or else "withdrew" from the military force, "declaring that he would be no party to the enforcement of such inhuman commands." [^32] This left General Lucas in command of the militia in the field and he at once began the movement upon Far West.

THE HAUN'S MILL MASSACRE

On the day that the militia under Lucas were seen approaching Far West, came the report to its citizens of the massacre at Haun's Mill. Haun's Mill was situated on Shoal Creek, some ten or twelve miles due east of Far West. Here about thirty families of the saints had located, several of which had but recently arrived from the eastern states, and were camped in their wagons and tents. Two days before the massacre these people had entered into a treaty of peace with Colonel William O. Jennings of Livingston county. Each party to the treaty was to act with forebearance and exert itself to prevent hostilities. Two days later, several companies of state militia, numbering two hundred and forty in all, led by Colonel Wm. O. Jennings, [^33] Nehemiah Comstock, Thomas R. Ryan and William Mann rushed upon their encampment and began firing upon them; and though the saints offered but slight resistance and cried for peace, no quarter was granted. The utmost confusion existed, women and children fled in every direction, mainly to the woods; while the men, especially such as had arms, fled to the old blacksmith shop near the mill as a place of rendezvous from which they could make such defense as was possible against such overwhelming odds. The blacksmith shop was quickly surrounded and volley after volley fired into it; and such was the crowded condition of the shop and so numerous the crevices through which the assailants could fire that it proved to be a death trap rather than a place of safety. It was soon abandoned, and in the attempt to escape from it a number were shot down. In all seventeen were killed outright and twelve severely wounded. [^34]

Some of the murders in this massacre were wantonly barbarous. The History of Caldwell County, published at St. Louis by the National Historical Co., 1886, and frequently quoted in these pages, recited some of these atrocities in the following paragraph:

"Esq. Thos. McBride was an old soldier of the Revolution. He was lying wounded and helpless, his gun by his side. A militiaman named Rogers [^35] came up to him and demanded it. 'Take it,' said McBride. Rogers picked up the weapon, and finding that it was loaded, deliberately discharged it into the old man's breast. He then cut and hacked the old veteran's body with a rude sword, or 'corn knife' until it was frightfully mangled. Wm. Reynolds, a Livingston man, killed the little boy Sardius Smith, 10 years of age. The lad had run into the blacksmith shop and crawled under the bellows for safety. Upon entering the shop the cruel militiamen discovered the cowering trembling little fellow, and without even demanding his surrender fired upon and killed him, and afterwards boasted of the atrocious deed to Chas. R. Ross and others. He described, with fiendish glee, how the poor boy struggled in his dying agony, and justified his savage and inhuman conduct in killing a mere child by saying, 'Nits will make lice, and if he had lived he would have become a Mormon.'" [^36]

As soon as all in sight were killed or wounded the militia proceeded to loot the houses, wagons and tents of their victims, taking everything of value, and even in some cases stripped the dead. [^37] They drove off the horses and wagons, loaded with plunder, and left the widows and orphans of the slain destitute of the means of subsistence. [^38]

When night settled down over the scene those who had fled to the woods returned to learn the fate of their relatives and friends, and to care for the wounded. The next day, for want of time to provide a more decent burial—for they knew not what moment they might be again assailed—the survivors of the massacre gathered up the dead and threw their bodies into an unfinished well, which was afterwards filled up, and no one knows the exact spot of interment of these victims of misplaced hate.

FIRST FRUITS OF THE EXTERMINATING ORDER

This butchery was doubtless the first fruits of Governor Boggs' Exterminating Order. True, the History of Caldwell County says that Colonel Jennings "made the attack upon his own responsibility, without orders from Governor Boggs, or any superior authority;" but the historian makes the startling assertion that "the governor afterwards approved what was done!" [^39] But what was this massacre at Haun's Mill but carrying into effect the governor's Exterminating Order of the 27th of October? And why did Jennings change his pacific policy bound by special treaty, to one of assault and massacre towards these people at Haun's Mill? The only answer is that learning of the governor's Exterminating Order he forthwith proceeded to execute it. That he knew of that order admits of no doubt, since it was issued on the 27th of October; on the 28th it was received by General Clark and forwarded to Generals Atchison and Lucas on the 30th; [^40] by which time it was doubtless known to all the commands gathering about Far West, to Jennings' and Comstocks' with the rest, only they acted with more promptness than the other commanders of militia companies. In history the Haun's Mill massacre will stand as an incident in direct sequence of the issuance of Governor Boggs' Order of Extermination. [^41]

Naturally it was with grave alarm that the citizens of Far West saw the large forces of militia approaching their town on the afternoon of October 30th. They were ignorant of the several orders issued by Governor Boggs against them, and hence were not certain if the forces approaching were coming to protect them, or were a mob to destroy them. [^42]

There is some confusion as to the order of events for the next two or three days, owing to the annals on both sides being apparently defective by the omission or the confusion of some events that took place; but as nearly as the accounts may be harmonized the following is the order of events: On the approach of the several commands of militia under General Lucas on the evening of the 30th of October—the sun about one hour high—the militia of Caldwell county in Far West was drawn up in line just south of the city, the number estimated was between six and eight hundred, to oppose the advance of the formidable enemy. Both parties sent out a flag of truce, under which the representatives of the respective sides met. In answer to the inquiry of the citizens of Far West as to whom these hostile forces were and what their intentions, the answer was that they were state militia ordered out by the governor to stop the further depredations of the "Mormons;" that they wanted three persons out of the city before they assaulted it. The three persons named—one of them, Adam Lightner, not a "Mormon"—refused to leave the city. [^43] After this there is reported an interview between Charles C. Rich [^44] and General Doniphan—Rich was also the first flag-of-truce-man—in which Rich begged that hostilities might be deferred until morning. Doniphan pledged himself that it should be so, except that he would not be responsible for the actions of Neil Gilliam's forces which had just joined the main army and were going into camp. Gilliam's forces were from the west, painted and decorated as Indians, and frankly more mob than militia; hence the exception made by Doniphan. Rich also desired to see General Atchison, but Doniphan informed him that Atchison had been "dismounted" by order of Governor Boggs for being too friendly to the "Mormons," and he had retired to his home in Clay county. This ended the negotiations for the day. [^45] During the night the citizens in Far West were reinforced by the arrival of Colonel Lyman Wight and a small company of men from "Di-Ahman."

TREACHERY OF COLONEL HINKLE

The next morning Colonel George M. Hinkle, the highest militia officer in Caldwell county, sent a request to General Lucas for an interview. That officer, however, was so engrossed in receiving and encamping constantly arriving troops—among them the companies of militia fresh from the massacre at Haun's Mills-that he refused to meet Colonel Hinkle until two o'clock in the afternoon. At that time with his staff officers he met Colonel Hinkle, "and some other Mormons," [^46] at the place agreed upon. Hinkle stated his object to be—according to Lucas—to see "if there could not be some compromise or settlement of the difficulty without a resort to arms." He was furnished with a copy of Boggs' Exterminating Order, and Lucas proposed to him the following terms of capitulation:

"Colonel Hinkle agreed to this proposition readily," says Lucas, "but wished to postpone the matter until morning." "I then told him," says Lucas, "that I would require Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Parley P. Pratt and George W. Robinson as hostages for his faithful compliance with the terms, and would pledge myself and each of the officers present, that in case he, after reflecting and consulting upon the propositions during the night declined acceding to them, that the hostages should be returned to him in the morning, at the same point they were received, but it was understood, in case they did comply, they were to be held for trial as part of the leaders called for by the first stipulation; I then gave him until one hour by sun in the evening to produce and deliver them." [^48]

Colonel Hinkle returned to Far West and reported to Joseph Smith that the officers of the militia desired to have an interview with him and some others—naming those stipulated by General Lucas—hoping that the difficulties might be settled without carrying into effect the governor's Exterminating Orders. To this "interview", the brethren named readily assented, but judge of their surprise, when, on meeting General Lucas and the troops that came forward from the main body to receive them, Colonel Hinkle said: "General, these are the prisoners I agreed to deliver up." [^49] They were then surrounded and marched off as prisoners. On reaching the enemy's encampment, ninety men were called out to guard them. Thirty were on this duty at a time: two hours on and four hours off. The prisoners lay in the open air with nothing as a covering, and they were all drenched with rain before morning. All night long they were mocked and taunted by the guard, who demanded signs, saying, "Come Mr. Smith, show us an angel, give us some of your revelations, show us a miracle;" [^50] mingling these requests with the vilest oaths. Sidney Rigdon had an attack of apoplectic fits, which afforded much merriment to the brutal guard. All night long the prisoners were compelled to listen to the filthy obscenity of those who watched them, and hear them relate their deeds of rapine and murder, and boast of their conquest over virtuous wives and maidens by brute force. Thus the wretched night passed away.

The morning following, which was the 1st of November, Hyrum Smith and Amasa Lyman were also brought into the mob's camp as prisoners.

According to Hinkle's agreement, the militia in Far West were marched out of the city the next morning and grounded their arms which were taken possession of by Lucas, although they were not state arms, but were the private property of the men who carried them.

The mob was now let loose upon the unarmed citizens of Far West, and under the pretext of searching for arms they ransacked every house, tore up the floors, upset haystacks, wantonly destroyed much property, and shot down a number of cattle just for the sport it afforded them. The people were robbed of their most valuable property, insulted and whipped; but this was not the worst. The chastity of a number of women was defiled by force; some of them were strapped to benches and repeatedly ravished by brutes in human form until they died from the effects of this treatment. [^51]

COURT-MARTIAL—THE PROPHET et al SENTENCED BY

During the night a court-martial was held, consisting of some fourteen militia officers, among whom were Colonel Hinkle and about twenty priests of the different denominations. Sashiel Woods and Bogart, the Presbyterian ministers, were among them; and in addition to these spiritual dignitaries, there was the circuit judge, Austin A. King and the district attorney, Mr. Thomas Burch. The decision of the court was that the prisoners should be shot the following morning at eight o'clock, in the public square of Far West, as an example to the "Mormon" people.

Colonel Hinkle visited Hyrum Smith and told him that a court-martial had been held and that he had contended for his (Hyrum's) acquittal, but it availed nothing, and all were to be shot the next morning. General Wilson had made an effort during the day to corrupt Lyman Wight, and get him to testify to something against Joseph Smith, but in this he failed. About the time Hinkle went to Hyrum Smith, General Wilson took Lyman Wight aside and told him the decision of the court-martial. "Shoot and be damned," said Wight. About this time General Doniphan came up to Wilson and Wight and, addressing the latter, he said: "Colonel, the decision is a damned hard one, but I wash my hands against such cold-blooded murder." And he further said that he intended to remove his troops the following day as soon as light, that they should not witness such heartless murder. General Graham and a few others, whose names unfortunately have not been preserved, had voted against the decision of the court-martial, but it availed nothing.

THE BOLD STAND BY GENERAL A. W. DONIPHAN

The bold stand taken by General Doniphan in threatening to remove his troops and denouncing the execution of the prisoners as "cold-blooded murder," alarmed Lucas, and he changed his mind about executing the decision of the court-martial; in fact he revoked the decree, and placed the prisoners in charge of General Wilson with instructions to conduct them to Independence. [^52]

The fact of the court-martial and the sentence passed upon the prisoners does not rest upon Latter-day Saint testimony alone—although Lucas in his report to Governor Boggs is silent upon the subject. In the History of Caldwell County the matter is related as follows:

"The militia officers were not trifling; they really wished and intended to kill Smith and his companions in cold blood, and there were many threats and symptoms that if they were not formally executed they would be assassinated. Yielding to the pressure upon him, it is alleged that General Lucas, at about midnight, issued the following order to General Doniphan, in whose keeping the hostages were:

"'Brigadier-General Doniphan: Sir:—You will take Joseph Smith and the other prisoners into the public square of Far West, and shoot them at 9 o'clock tomorrow morning.

[Signed.] "'SAMUEL D. LUCAS,

"'Major-General Commanding.'

"But General Doniphan, in great and righteous indignation, promptly returned the following reply to his superior:

"'It is cold-blooded murder. I will not obey your order. My brigade shall march for Liberty tomorrow morning, at 8 o'clock; and if you execute these men, I will hold you responsible before an earthly tribunal, so help me God.

"'A. DONIPHAN,

"'Brigadier-General.'

"* * * Flagrantly insubordinate as was General Doniphan's refusal, he was never called to account for it." [^53]

It is quite possible that Lucas was conscious that he was acting largely upon his own responsibility, and had no direct authority from the governor for the above procedure; that it was to General Clark and not to him that the execution of the Exterminating Order had been intrusted; and when afterwards he learned—as shortly he did—that neither Generals Atchison nor Lucas had been called into service under the late order, [^54] (the order of the 27th of October, the Exterminating Order), Lucas doubtless felt that he himself was well out of an awkward predicament, without attempting to discipline General Doniphan for his insubordination.

NOTES

"The hero of the Chihuahua campaign of the Mexican war was born in Mason county, Kentucky, July 9, 1808. His father, Joseph Doniphan, was a native of King George county, and his mother of Fauquier county, Virginia, His mother's maiden name was Anne Smith, and her paternal ancestor was among the original colonists at Jamestown, Virginia, in 1607. His first ancestor in America of the name of Doniphan came from England to Virginia near the middle or latter part of the seventeenth century, and settled near what is known as the Northern Neck. The given name of that ancestor was Mott.* * *

"It is a tradition in the Doniphan family (a tradition which I neither avouch nor deny), traceable and fully believed by its members for more than a century, that it is of Spanish origin. According to the tradition, their ancestor, who separated himself from the parent stock in Spain, was a young Castilian, of noble blood, who served under Ferdinand and Isabella in the conquest of Granada, and was knighted by King Ferdinand for gallantry on the field. * * *

"* * * A lineage which is traceable to the chivalry of the battle-field and the highest devotion to conviction, will always command the respect and admiration of men. The seven hundred years of battle between the Spaniards and the Moors left the impress of supreme courage, undoubting faith and unconquerable will on the former, which easily made of them the foremost men of all christendom four centuries ago. Perhaps the tradition is true. If so, I can explain without looking further, the tinge of old romance in Col. Doniphan's character, his wonderfully delicate respect for women, and his stern adherence to sentiments of honor. * * *

"* * * At the age of fourteen years he was entered a student at Augusta College, in Bracken county, Kentucky. For many years it was an institution of very high repute. * * * He graduated there at the early age of eighteen years, with great distinction, particularly in classics. While at Augusta College, he had the benefit of the training and molding influences of several very able instructors. I mention as being among them, Drs. Durbin and Bascom. He constantly through life expressed his deep sense of obligation to those two gentlemen. * * * In his youth the predilection of Col. Doniphan, was for the law as a life profession, and this was largely through the influence of his mother, who was a woman of great and far-reaching mind. Upon quitting college, therefore, for the purpose of legal study, he entered the law office of the Hon. Martin P. Marshall, of Augusta, Kentucky. In the opinion of the pupil, his legal preceptor was one of the most learned and able of all the members of the famous Marshall family. * * * In 1833 he removed to Liberty, Missouri, where he made his home for the succeeding thirty years. There he found, already established in the practice, those eminent lawyers, David R. Atchison, Amos Reese, James M. Hughes, and General Andrew S. Hughes. His experience at Lexington had been preparatory; at Liberty his reputation attained its zenith. * * *

"From 1830 to 1860 he continued in the active practice of his profession. His fame was greatest as a criminal lawyer, and during that period there was no criminal cause of magnitude in northwest Missouri in which he was not retained for the defense. He never prosecuted. The reputation of a great advocate usually absorbs that of the counselor. * * *

"On December 21st, 1837, Col. Doniphan was married to Miss Elizabeth Jane Thornton, of Clay county. It was a perfect union of heart and intellect. She was a highly intellectual cultivated woman, and her grace of manner and charm in conversation made her the delight of society. * * * Of his marriage there were born only two children—both sons. They were youths of rare intellectual promise, and their father might well hope to prolong his life and fame in those of his children. One of them died from accidental poison, at Liberty, in 1853, and the other beneath the angry waves of a West Virginia brook, in 1858. From blows so severe as these, it can be well understood why the life of Col. Doniphan, during more than thirty years before its close, was void of ambition." [^55]

General Doniphan took a prominent and honorable part in the war between Mexico and the United States, making one of the few great historical marches into the interior of an enemy's country; and against what should have been overwhelming odds—his little army of less than one thousand men were confronted at the pass of the Sacramento, in view of the city of Chihuahua, by a Mexican force of four thousand six hundred men—he made himself master of the state of Chihuahua and practically of all northern Mexico. At the close of the war he laid aside the sword and resumed the practice of law at Liberty, Clay county, Missouri. During the preliminary agitation and political conflicts which finally resulted in the Civil War, General Doniphan strove earnestly for peace and the preservation of the Union; when he saw that war was inevitable he returned to his home unwilling to take part in the strife and awaited the result in deepest sorrow. He died at Richmond, on the 8th day of August, 1887; and is buried in the cemetery at Liberty, where a gray granite shaft, twenty-five feet in height, marks his last resting place.

"His personal appearance was truly imposing and magnificent. His was the grandest type of manly beauty. A stranger would not have failed to instantly note his presence in an assemblage. In height, he was six feet and four inches. His frame was proportioned to his height, and was full without the appearance of obesity. His face approached the Grecian ideal very closely, the essential variance being in the nose, which was aquiline without severity. His forehead was high, full and square; his eyes of the brightest hazel; and his lips symmetrical and smiling. When young, his complexion was extremely fair and delicate, and his hair sandy. At the peace conference in 1861, when introduced to Mr. Lincoln, the latter said to him: 'And this is the Col. Doniphan who made the wild march against the Navajos and Mexicans! You are the only man I ever met who, in appearance, came up to my previous expectation.'" [^56]

"Among the earliest associations of the Prophet with attorneys of character was that with Atchison & Doniphan, at Liberty, Clay county, Missouri, and after Atchison retired and Baldwin became Doniphan's partner, Joseph studied law in the latter's office. He respected and trusted Doniphan, and for over five years they were friends, and had much to do with each other. While others fell away from the Prophet, * * * it is not anywhere shown that Doniphan abandoned his old client, or lost sympathy and respect for him at any time. And his testimony concerning Joseph has come down through the years with that of Browning, Douglas, Josiah Quincy, and others, to the effect that he was a wonderful man—such indeed as none of them had ever seen or known. While they were loth to admit that he was a Prophet of God, and that 'Mormonism' is true, it stands everlastingly to the credit and honor of Alexander W. Doniphan that he lived to bear witness and to testify that he knew Joseph Smith was a prophet; for he heard him make a wonderful prediction, and saw for himself its literal fulfillment." [^57]

Footnotes

"Testimonies from these sources are not always reliable, and it is to be hoped, for the sake of the two brethren, that some things were added by our enemies that they did not assert; but enough was said to make this default and apostasy very terrible. I will here state that I was in Far West at the time these affidavits were made, and was mixed up with all prominent church affairs. I was there when Thomas B. Marsh and Orson Hyde left there; and there are others present who were there at the same time. And I know that these things, referred to in the affidavits, are not true. I have heard a good deal about Danites, but I never heard of them among the Latter-day Saints. If there was such an organization, I never was made acquainted with it. * * * Thomas B. Marsh was unquestionably instigated by the devil when he made this statement, which has been read in your hearing [the foregoing affidavit]. The consequence was, he was cut off from the church. * * * It would be here proper to state, however, that Orson Hyde had been sick with a violent fever for some time, and had not yet fully recovered therefrom, which, with the circumstances with which we were surrounded, and the influence of Thomas B. Marsh, may be offered as a slight palliation for his default. * * * Suffice it to say, in addition to what has previously been stated, he was cut off from the church, and of course lost his apostleship; and when he subsequently returned, and made all the satisfaction that was within his power, he was forgiven by the authorities and the people and was again re-instated in the quorum. (Address on Succession in Priesthood, 1881, Taylor, pp. 8-18.)

Schuyler Colfax, vice-president of the United States, in his discussion with the late President John Taylor on "The Mormon Question" in 1869, quoted these Marsh-Hyde affidavits, and Elder Taylor in reply said: "I am sorry to say that Thomas B. Marsh did make that affidavit, and that Orson Hyde stated that he knew part of it to be true and believed the other: and it would be disingenuous in me to deny it; but it is not true that these things existed, for I was there and knew to the contrary; and so did the people of Missouri, and so did the governor of Missouri. How do you account for their acts? Only on the score of the weakness of our common humanity. We were living in troublous times, and all men's nerves are not proof against such shocks as we then had to endure. I cannot defend the acts of Thomas B. Marsh or Orson Hyde, no more than I could defend the acts of Peter when he cursed and swore and denied Jesus; nor the acts of Judas who betrayed him." (The Mormon Question, the Taylor-Colfax Debate, 1869, p. 19.) Elder Hyde in his Autobiography, in referring to this incident in his life, says: "This summer [1838] I removed with my family to Far West, in Missouri, where I was taken sick, soon after my arrival, with billious fever, and did not fully recover until the spring of 1839. Few men pass through life without leaving some traces which they would gladly obliterate. Happy is he whose life is free from stain and blemish. In the month of October, 1838, with me it was a day of affliction and darkness. I sinned against God and my brethren; I acted foolishly. I will not allude to any causes for so doing save one, which was, that I did not possess the light of the Holy Ghost. I lost not my standing in the church, however; yet not because I was worthy to retain it, but because God and his servants were merciful. Everlasting thanks to God, and may his servants ever find mercy. Brothers Hyrum Smith and H. C. Kimball, men of noted kindness of heart, spake to me words of encouragement and comfort in the hour of my greatest sorrow. But Hyrum is gone! Peace to his ashes and blessings upon his posterity. Heber lives, and may he and his posterity live to tread upon the necks of the enemies of God. I seek pardon of all whom I have offended, and also of my God, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen. (Millennial Star, vol. xxvi, p. 792.)

Of all that grave apologists can write;

And though a Bishop try to cleanse the stain,

He'll rub and scour the crimson spot in vain."

As to the kind of treatment received by the people of Far West at the hands of the mob-militia after their surrender, and giving up their arms, the following communication from M. Arthur, Esq., addressed to the representatives in the legislature from Clay county under date of November 29th, 1838, will bear witness:

"Respected Friends:—Humanity to an injured people prompts me at present to address you thus. You were aware of the treatment (to some extent before you left home), received by that unfortunate race of beings called the 'Mormons,' from Daviess, in the form of human beings inhabiting Daviess, Livingston, and a part of Ray county; not being satisfied with the relinquishments of all their rights as citizens and human beings in the treaty forced upon them by General Lucas, by giving up their arms, and throwing themselves upon the mercy of the state, and their fellow-citizens generally, hoping thereby protection of their lives and property, are now receiving treatment from those demons, that makes humanity shudder, and the cold chills run over any man, not entirely destitute of any feeling of humanity. Those demons are now constantly strolling up and down Caldwell county, in small companies armed, insulting the women in any and every way, and plundering the poor devils of all their means of subsistence (scanty as it was) left them, and driving off their horses, cattle, hogs, etc., and rifling their houses and farms of everything therein, taking beds, bedding, wardrobe and all such things as they see they want, leaving the poor Mormons in a starving and naked condition. These are facts I have from authority that cannot be questioned, and can be maintained and substantiated at any time." (Documents, etc., published by the Missouri Legislature, p. 94).

---
Notas:
[^1] Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, p. 210. It will be recalled that Elder Pratt was one of the prisoners with the Prophet. Commenting on the above he says: "Of this prophecy I testify in the name of the Lord; and though spoken in secret its fulfillment and the miraculous escape of each one of us is too notorious to need my testimony."
[^2] Clark's Report to Boggs, Nov. 29th, Documents, etc., p. 89.
[^3] Ibid, p. 90.
[^4] This was the Sterling Price who afterwards became famous as a military leader on the side of the Confederacy during the Civil War, and whose command of twelve thousand men wrought havoc in Missouri in 1864. "In the course of his raid he marched 1434 miles, fought 43 battles and skirmishes, and according to his own calculations, destroyed upwards of $10,000,000 worth of property. A fair share of which belonged to his own friends." (History of Missouri, Carr. p. 360).
[^5] Pratt's description of this scene is worth preserving: "He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty. Chained and without a weapon; calm, unruffled and dignified as an angel, he looked upon the quailing guards, whose weapons were lowered or dropped to the ground; whose knees smote together, and who, shrinking into a corner, or crouching at his feet, begged his pardon, and remained quiet till a change of guards. I have seen the ministers of justice, clothed in magisterial robes, and criminals arraigned before them, while life was suspended on a breath, in the courts of England; I have witnessed a Congress in solemn session to give laws to a nation; I have tried to conceive of kings, of royal courts, of thrones and crowns; and of emperors assembled to decide the fate of kingdoms; but dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight in a dungeon, in an obscure village in Missouri." (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 228-230).
[^6] It appears that among the misrepresentations of that day was the statement here made by General Clark, that the "Mormons" "worshipped a man" and that man Joseph Smith! When the Prophet and his fellow-prisoners were at Independence in the hands of General Lucas they were visited by some ladies and gentlemen of that place, and one of the former very innocently asked one of the guards which one of the prisoners was the "Lord" whom the "Mormons" worshipped. The guard pointing to the Prophet, with a significant smile, said: "This is he." Whereupon the woman turning to the Prophet asked whether he professed to be the Lord and Savior, to which he answered, "I profess to be nothing but a man, and a minister of salvation sent by Jesus Christ, to preach the gospel." This answer so surprised the woman that she began to inquire into the "Mormon" doctrine and the Prophet preached her a discourse. (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 201.)
[^7] History of Caldwell and Livingston Counties, p. 140. This History besides giving this speech in extenso, gives the following account of it and makes the following comment:
[^8] Affidavit of Brigham Young, History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 436.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] Governor Boggs to General Clark, Documents, etc., pp. 81-82. The application of Clark for the opinion of the attorney-general of the state is in Clark's Communication to the Governor of Nov. 10th, Documents, etc., p. 67.
[^11] "Note—By the statutes of Missouri, if the examining court should be of opinion from the evidence, that an offense, as charged, had been committed, and that there was probable ground to charge the prisoner therewith, it is the duty of the court to commit or bind the prisoners over to the next court, at which time the charge is to be investigated by a grand jury. The above prisoners were subsequently indicted as charged above." (Note in Documents, etc., p. 151). And, needless to say, the grand juries in the respective counties, to which the prisoners were referred, were made up of their persecutors.
[^12] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 213. Perhaps part of the bitterness that was plainly apparent in the conduct of the judge, is traceable to the fact that Mr. Brazeal who was killed in one of the conflicts between the saints and the mob in Jackson county, during the troubles there in 1833, was his brother-in-law (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 248): and it was sufficient cause, in justice to have disqualified him for sitting on the case of the men brought before him in the above examination.
[^13] Shearer and Chase were dismissed after an imprisonment of five months, the grand jury not finding sufficient evidence to bring them to trial.
[^14] Evidence in Documents, etc., p. 97.
[^15] The name was doubtless suggested from the description of what the "Daughter of Zion" would do according to the prophecy of Micah, chapter iv: 11-15. "Now also many nations are gathered against thee, that say, Let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon Zion.
[^16] Avard's Testimony, Documents, etc., published by authority of the Missouri Legislature, pp. 101-2. The document itself bears witness to the weakness and folly of him who drew it. Believe me, if Joseph Smith or any responsible leader in the church had considered it necessary to organize such a society, its constitution would have been of different mould and spirit from this amateurish, silly concoction of nonsense. The document itself proclaims its author—Avard, or some one equally vain and weak.
[^17] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 178-181.
[^18] Ibid., p. 182.
[^19] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 231.
[^20] Referring to the denial of the Christ by Peter, President Taylor in his Discussion with U. S. Vice-President Colfax, remarks: "But afterwards Peter went out and wept bitterly. And so did brother Hyde weep bitterly. He came to me on a certain occasion, after Mr. Colfax came out here [to Utah] and quoted this and over again, if it were possible, to wipe out the recollection of that act; but I think, as I said before, that brother Hyde was scarcely in his right mind; he was laboring under a fever and was hardly himself. I would gladly hope it was so." (Succession in Priesthood, Taylor, 1881, p. 21.)
[^21] The letter of Phelps and the Prophet's reply are profoundly interesting as exhibiting the spirit of the New Dispensation, and of these leading men in it, hence the important paragraph in each is given:
[^22] Taylor's Succession in Priesthood, pp. 11-13; also Latter-day Saints' Biographical Encyclopedia, pp. 74-76.
[^23] Even Dr. Avard admitted that his testimony was inspired by fear: "Dr. Sampson Avard was the first brought before the court. He had previously told Mr. Oliver Olney that if he (Olney) wished to save himself, he must swear hard against the heads of the church, as they were the ones the court wanted to criminate; and if he could swear hard against them, they would not (that is neither court nor mob) disturb him. "I intend to do it," said he, "in order to escape, for if I do not, they will take my life." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 209-210.) General Clark admits in his last report to the governor that "but for the capture of Sampson Avard, a leading Mormon, I do not believe I could have obtained any useful facts. No one disclosed any useful matter until he was captured and brought in." (Clark's Report of Nov. 29, Documents, etc., p. 90.)
[^24] See II Nephi, x: 15. The Lord is represented as saying that in order to fulfill "my covenant to the children of men, * * * I must needs destroy the secret works of darkness, and of murders and of abominations." In the margin of the page whence this is taken thirty other references are given to passages of the book which condemn and denounce in the strongest terms murderous, secret organizations; and charge them with being the chief factors in destroying the governments and civilization of the western world.
[^25] E. M. Ryland to Messrs. Williams and Reese, Documents, etc., pp. 59, 60.
[^26] Woods and Dickson to Governor Boggs, Documents, etc., p. 60.
[^27] David W. Patten was a member of the quorum of the twelve apostles and the son of Beneino Patten and Abigail Cole. He was born about the year 1800 at Theresa, near Indian River Falls, New York. In boyhood he left home and went to Michigan, where in 1828 he married Phoebe Ann Babcock. He first heard of the Book of Mormon in 1830, but did not join the church until June, 1832. He was ordained an elder and became one of the most active Missionaries of the New Dispensation. In all his labors he manifested a most intrepid spirit, and when he was appointed a captain in the Caldwell county militia, he was given the sobriquet of "Captain Fearnaught." Remarking upon his character, Joseph the Prophet said: "Brother Patten was a very worthy man, beloved by all good men who knew him. He was one of the twelve apostles, and died as he had lived, a man of God, and strong in the faith of a glorious resurrection, in a world where mobs will have no power or place. One of his last expressions to his wife was—'Whatever you do else, O! do not deny the faith'." (History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 171).
[^28] Governor Boggs' Order to General John B. Clark, October 26, 1838, Documents, etc., pp. 62, 63. One cannot help pausing a moment to notice the difference in the action of the state authorities in two cases that would have been alike, provided the report of those parties who fled from Daviess county, by the light of their burning homes, (fired by their own hands) had been true. In 1833 the saints were driven by brute force and under circumstances the most distressing, from their possessions in Jackson county; and not only was their property destroyed, but one was killed and a number of others wounded, while the number that was exiled amounted to twelve hundred. The state authorities had the fullest evidence of these outrages—in fact the very man who at the time of the Daviess county troubles was governor of the state—Boggs—was on the ground and knew all the circumstances of cruelty and outrage. But when those things came before the state authorities, it took more than two whole years of correspondence to come to an understanding of what could and should be done, and then the decision was that the exiles would do well to move still further on, get entirely away from that section of the country where they had made their homes, as the prejudices of the people were set against them, and the popular sentiment in this country was vox Dei! But now, when a mere rumor comes that the "Mormons" have been guilty of inflicting upon the Missourians the outrages which aforetime had been perpetuated against them, there is no halting on the part of the authorities, but on the contrary the most vigorous efforts are put forth to punish the alleged offenders, and more than three thousand troops are called into the field—besides the eighteen hundred already there—to reinstate the supposed exiles!
[^29] Documents, etc., p. 61.
[^30] Governor Boggs to General Clark, Nov. 1st, Documents, etc., pp. 76. 77.
[^31] Ibid., p. 76. Governor Boggs, however, informed Clark rather curtly in the above quoted letter that neither Atchison nor Lucas had been "called into service under the late order," except that Lucas had been ordered to raise four hundred men in his own division; and the "privilege" was offered him of commanding the troops from his own division, though subject to Clark's orders. (Documents, etc., p. 77). For some reason Governor Boggs preferred that Clark should carry out the Order of Extermination.
[^32] History of Caldwell County, National Historical Co., 1886, p. 133.
[^33] "Whatever of merit there was in the attack on Haun's Mill, and whatever of glory attaches to the famous history, must be given to Col. Wm. O. Jennings mainly. * * * True Jennings' subordinates must be given their share in proportion to the part they bore, but Col. Jennings stands among them all as Saul among his fellows, the Ajax Telemon of the conflict, the Hector of the fight! (History of Caldwell County, National Historical Co., 1886, p. 151.)
[^34] The names of the killed and wounded are given both in the History of Caldwell County, pp. 149, 150, and also in the Affidavit of Joseph Young who witnessed the massacre, History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 183, 186.
[^35] The History here quoted particularizes respecting the identity of this man in the footnote in the following manner: "Either a brother of a man who kept a ferry across Grand River, near Gallatin, or else the ferry man himself."
[^36] History of Caldwell County, p. 149.
[^37] Affidavit of Joseph Young, History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 183-186.
[^38] The charge of "looting" the settlement at Haun's Mill was denied by some of the militia and their friends. In the History of Caldwell County the matter is discussed pro-et-con as follows: "After the engagement was over, and all the able-bodied male Mormons had been killed, wounded or driven away, some of the militiamen began to 'loot' the houses and stables at the mill. A great deal of property was taken, much of it consisting of household articles and personal effects, but just how much can not now be stated. The Mormons claim there was a general pillage, and that in two or three instances the bodies of the slain were robbed. Some of the militia or their friends say only two or three wagons were taken, one to haul off the three wounded, [of the mob] and sufficient bedding to make their ride comfortable; but on the other hand two of those who were in a position to know say that the Mormon hamlet was pretty thoroughly rifled. One man carried away an empty 10 gallon keg, which he carried before him on his saddle and beat as a drum. Another had a woman's bonnet, which he said was for his sweetheart. Perhaps a dozen horses were taken." (p. 148.) The "keg" and "bonnet" incident will indicate the spirit in which this "campaign" was waged against the saints.
[^39] History of Caldwell County, p. 151.
[^40] See Report of Clark to Governor Boggs, Documents etc., pp. 75, 76.
[^41] "A blot that will remain a blot, in spite
[^42] Affidavit of Hyrum Smith, History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 409.
[^43] The parties named were Adam Lightner, John Cleminson and wife. (Affidavit of Hyrum Smith, History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 410).
[^44] Charles Coulson Rich, mentioned in the text above, was son of Joseph Rich and Nancy O. Neal. He was born Aug. 21st, 1809, in Campbell county, Kentucky. He became a member of the church while residing in Tazewell county, Illinois, April, 1832, and shortly afterward was ordained an elder in the church. He moved with his father's family to Missouri in 1836, where he married Sarah D. Pea, Feb. 11th, 1837. He was second in command at the Crooked river fight, and when David W. Patten, fell mortally wounded, and while bullets were flying about him thick and fast, he laid down his sword and administered the ordinance of the laying on of hands for the healing of the sick to his dying comrade; then arose and led the charge upon the enemy. When going out with a flag of truce on the occasion mentioned in the text above he was fired upon by Captain Bogart of the Missouri militia, the flag of truce he carried apparently being no protection to him from assault. Subsequently, namely in 1849, he was ordained one of the twelve apostles by Brigham Young, and we shall see in the progress of this History that Charles C. Rich was a prominent figure in all the subsequent affairs of the church. He was a man of high character, of sound judgment, which made him invaluable as a counselor; of indomitable courage, he was a natural leader of men. He was one of the statesman-pioneers which the Church of the Latter-day Saints has given to the Intermountain West of the United States. His family is numbered among the most prominent and honorable in the church. He died at Paris, Idaho, November 17th, 1883.
[^45] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 188. The reports of Lucas are silent as to these first meetings under flags of truce.
[^46] 46. These "other Mormons" were Reed Peck and John Corrill, according to Corrill's statement (Brief History of the Church, Corrill, Ms., 1839, p. 40). Hinkle seems at this point to have taken matters into his own hands.
[^48] 48. Lucas' Report to Governor Boggs, Documents etc., pp. 73-75.
[^49] 49. Affidavit of Hyrum Smith, History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 413. Ibid., Affidavit of Lyman Wight, p. 445. Ibid., Affidavit of Joseph Smith, Jun., p. 189. Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt. pp. 203, 204.
[^50] 50. Parley P. Pratt's Autobiography, p. 204.
[^51] 51. History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii. Affidavits of Hyrum Smith, (p. 422), Brigham Young, (p. 434), and Sidney Rigdon, (p. 464). Statement of Joseph Smith's Journal, Ibid., pp. 192, 202.
[^52] 52. See affidavits of Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight, Parley P. Pratt and Sidney Rigdon et al, History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, Appendix, pp. 404-466.
[^53] 53. History of Caldwell County, p. 137. The History also adds: "The Mormons have always remembered General Doniphan's humanity on this occasion, as well as on others, and when, in 1874, he went to Salt Lake City, he was received with much feeling, and shown every regard and attention by Brigham Young and the other authorities of the church and city, and by even the masses of the people."
[^54] 54. Except that "General Lucas was directed to raise four hundred men in his division and place them under the command of a brigadier-general." (See Bogg's communications to General Clark, of 1st and 6th of November, Documents, etc., pp. 76, 77: and p. 69).
[^55] 55. From a Biographical Sketch by D. C. Allen, of Liberty, Missouri, in Doniphan's Expedition and Conquest of New Mexico, John T. Hughes, edition of 1907, pp. 15-45.
[^56] 56. Doniphan's Expedition, Allen.
[^57] 57. Junius F. Wells in Improvement Era, November, 1902. An account of the prediction referred to by Mr. Wells will be given in a subsequent chapter.
