B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XXXVII

THE EXODUS OF THE SAINTS FROM MISSOURI—ACTIVITIES OF BRIGHAM YOUNG AND HEBER C. KIMBALL—THE CAUSE OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS BEFORE THE MISSOURI LEGISLATURE

AT the conclusion of the examination of the prisoners before Judge King, and their departure for Liberty and Richmond respectively, the main body of the church began preparations for the enforced exodus by spring.

It was during these trying times that Brigham Young began to exhibit those executive qualities which so pre-eminently fitted him as a great leader. By the death of David W. Patten and the apostasy of Thomas B. Marsh, the presidency of the quorum of the twelve apostles devolved upon him, hence also the leadership of the church during the absence of the first presidency, since the quorum of the twelve apostles stands next in order to the first presidency, in the general presiding councils of the church, and is of equal authority with the council of the first presidency.

EXECUTIVE ACTIVITY OF BRIGHAM YOUNG

Elder Young called together those members of the high council of the Far West stake of Zion that still remained in Far West, and inquired of them as to their faith in the Latter-day work, first telling them that his own faith was unshaken. All the members present expressed their undying faith in the gospel, and their confidence in Joseph Smith as a prophet of God. The council was then reorganized; the vacancies caused by absence or apostasy were filled, and the council was prepared to do business. Elders John Taylor and John E. Page, both of whom had previously been chosen by revelation for the office, were ordained members of the quorum of the twelve apostles, on the nineteenth day of September, 1838, under the hands of Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball.

Elder Young's activity and zeal in caring for the poor were unbounded. A public meeting was called, not only of the saints but also of the citizens of Caldwell county, and the poverty and distress of many of the saints presented to them. Several gentlemen, not members of the church, expressed themselves as being of the opinion that an appeal should be made to the citizens of upper Missouri, inviting their assistance towards furnishing means to remove the poor from Caldwell county. It is doubtful if any appeal was made, as a resolution was adopted at the meeting as follows:

"Resolved, that it is the opinion of this meeting that an exertion should be made to ascertain how much means can be obtained from individuals of the society (church); and that it is the duty of those who have, to assist those who have not, that thereby we may, as far as possible, within and of ourselves, comply with the demands of the executive."

At a subsequent meeting similar in character to the first, Elder Young offered this resolution:

"Resolved, that we this day enter into a covenant to stand by and assist each other, to the utmost of our abilities, in removing from this state, and that we will never desert the poor who are worthy, till they shall be out of the reach of the general exterminating order of General Clark, acting for and in the name of the state," [^1]

This resolution was adopted, and a committee of seven appointed to superintend the removal of the saints.

A committee was also appointed to draft a covenant that should bind the members of the church in an agreement to assist each other to the extent of their available property to remove from the state of Missouri, in accordance with the orders of the governor; this covenant was drawn up in due form and signed by the faithful brethren. Elder Young secured eighty names to this covenant the first day he circulated it, and three hundred the next.

Agents were appointed to go down towards the Mississippi and make deposit of corn for the use of the saints as they should make their way out of the state. The agents were also to make contracts for ferriage and arrange whatever else might be necessary for comfort and security of the refugees.

No sooner had these arrangements been perfected than Elder Young, whose wisdom and activity had doubtless given offense to the enemies of the church, had to flee from Far West to escape the vengeance of the mob. He went to Illinois. In his labors Elder Young had been materially assisted by the support and counsel of Heber C. Kimball, John Taylor and the members of the various committees that had been appointed, to whom was now left the execution of the plans that had been evolved for the removal of the church.

By the twentieth of April nearly all the saints, variously estimated from twelve to fifteen thousand, had left the state where they had experienced so much sorrow; [^2] and found a temporary resting place in the state of Illinois, many in the city of Quincy and vicinity, but a few settled in the then territory of Iowa.

MEMORIAL OF THE SAINTS TO MISSOURI STATE LEGISLATURE

Before leaving the state—as early as the 10th of December, in fact—the saints memorialized the state legislature in behalf of the citizens of Caldwell county. The document is a temperate and straightforward statement of the wrongs suffered by the memorialists from their first settlement in Jackson county to the treaty forced upon them at Far West by Generals Lucas and Clark, and the outrages committed upon them after the surrender of their arms. It constitutes a terrible arraignment of the state and its officials, which is all the more powerful because of its moderation, which gives assurance of its truth.

After detailing the story of their wrongs, the memorial asked; first, that the legislature pass a law rescinding the exterminating order of Governor Boggs; second, an expression of the legislature disapproving the conduct of those who compelled the saints to sign a deed of trust at the muzzle of the musket, and of any man in consequence of that deed of trust taking their property and appropriating it to the payment of damages sustained, in consequence of trespasses committed by others; third, that they receive payment for the six hundred and thirty-five firearms that were taken from them, which were worth twelve or fifteen thousand dollars; fourth, that an appropriation be made to reimburse them from their loss of lands from which they had been driven in Jackson county. The petition closed in these words:

"In laying our case before your honorable body, we say that we are willing, and always have been, to conform to the Constitution and laws of the United States, and of this state. We ask in common with others the protection of the laws. We ask for the privileges guaranteed all free citizens of the United States and of this state to be extended to us, and that we may be permitted to settle and live where we please, and worship God according to the dictates of our own conscience without molestation. And while we ask for ourselves this privilege, we are willing all others should enjoy the same." [^3]

Elder David H. Redfield was appointed to present this petition to the legislature; and on that mission he arrived at Jefferson City on the seventeenth day of December.

Previous to the arrival of Redfield, the governor's Exterminating Order, General Clark's reports, the report of the ex parte investigation at Richmond, with other papers, had been forwarded to the legislature and referred to a special joint committee. That committee reported on the eighteenth day of December; and to show in what bad repute these documents were held by the committee, I need only say that it refused to allow them to be published with the sanction of the legislature, because the evidence adduced at Richmond in a great degree was ex parte and not of a character to be desired for the basis of a fair and candid investigation. Also because the grand juries in the several counties to which the charges against the "Mormon" prisoners would be referred would be required to act upon the same documentary evidence which the committee would be compelled to examine; by which circumstances two coordinate branches of government might be brought into collusion—a circumstance that should be avoided. Also the report of the committee previous to the trial of the "Mormon" prisoners might be prejudicial to them, and prevent a fair and impartial trial. The report concluded with three resolutions: one to the effect that it was inexpedient at that time to prosecute further the inquiry into the cause of the late disturbances; another to the effect that it was inexpedient to publish any of the documents accompanying the Governor's message in relation to those disturbances; the third favored the appointment of a joint committee from the house and senate to investigate the troubles in upper Missouri, and the conduct of the military operations to suppress them. These resolutions were referred to a joint select committee with instructions to report a bill in conformity thereto. [^4] On the nineteenth the petition from the saints was read amid the profound stillness of the house. At its conclusion an angry debate followed, in which quite a number of the members testified to the correctness of the statements made in the petition and to the cruelties practiced upon the saints, but they were in the minority.

On the sixteenth of January, Mr. A. W. Turner, the chairman of the special conjoint committee before alluded to, in conformity with the resolution passed, reported "a bill to provide for the investigation of the late disturbances in the state of Missouri." The bill consisted of twenty-three sections. It provided for a joint committee composed of two members of the senate and three members from the house, which was to meet at Richmond on the first Monday in May and thereafter at such time and places as it saw proper. The committee was to select its own officers; issue subpoenas and other processes, administer oaths, keep a record, etc.

This bill was introduced on the sixteenth of January, and on the fourth of February called up for its first reading, but on motion of Mr. Wright was laid on the table till the fourth day of July. He knew that by that time, since the governor's Exterminating Order was still in force, that the "Mormons" in obedience to that cruel edict, would all have left the state, and then there would be no need of an investigation; and that was the fate of the bill. It was never afterwards brought up. [^5]

THE MOCKERY OF LEGISLATIVE RELIEF FOR THE SAINTS

The legislature appropriated two thousand dollars to relieve the sufferings of the people in Daviess and Caldwell counties, the "Mormons" were to be included as beneficiaries of the act. And now came an opportunity for the Missourians of Daviess county to display their generosity. Having filled their homes with the household effects of the saints; their barns and stables with the stock they had stolen; their smoke houses with "Mormon" beef and pork; they concluded they could get along without their portion of the appropriation and allowed the two thousand dollars to be distributed among the "Mormons" of Caldwell county.

Judge Cameron and a Mr. McHenry superintended the distribution of this appropriation. The hogs owned by the brethren who had lived in Daviess county were driven down into Caldwell, shot down, and without further bleeding roughly dressed and divided among the saints at a high price. This and the "sweepings of some old stores" soon exhausted the legislative appropriation, which amounted to little or nothing in the way of relief to the exiled saints. [^6]

Subsequently this same legislature, while the petition of the saints for a redress of their wrongs was lying before it, appropriated two hundred thousand dollars to defray the expenses incurred in the "Mormon War!"

NOTES

"The Mormons began leaving at once, and continued until all were gone except a few who gave up their associates rather than their property, and who had friends among the citizens. Many sold out for what they could get, others left being unable to sell at all. Their leaders were prisoners, their means of defense as well as offense were taken from them, and the order of the governor caused some twelve thousand of them to be driven from the state. The official statement of the number killed and wounded on both sides in this Mormon War was officially stated as forty Mormons killed and several wounded, and one citizen killed and fifteen badly wounded." [^7]

"In the midst of an inclement winter, in December, 1838, and in January, 1839, many of the Mormon men, women, and children, the sick and the aged, as well as the young and strong, were turned out of their homes in this (Caldwell) county and Daviess, into the prairies and forests, without food, or sufficient protection from the weather. In some instances in Daviess, their houses were burnt before their eyes and they turned out into the deep snow. Only a few cabins in the southwestern part of Caldwell were burned at this time.

"Numerous families set out at once for Illinois, making the entire distance, in midwinter, on foot. A large majority, however, remained until spring as under the terms of the treaty they were allowed to remain in the county until that time. All through the winter and early spring those who remained prepared to leave. They offered their lands for sale at very small figures. In fact many bartered their farms for teams and wagons to get away on. Some traded for any sort of property. Charles Ross, of Black Oak, bought 40 acres of good land, north of Breckenridge, for a blind mare and a clock. Some tracts of good land north of Shoal Creek, in Kidder township, brought only fifty cents an acre. Many of the Mormons had not yet secured the patents to their lands, and though they had regularly entered them, they could not sell them; the Gentiles would not buy unless they could receive the government's deeds, as well as the grantor's. These kind of lands were abandoned altogether, in most instances, and afterwards settled upon by Gentiles who secured titles by keeping the taxes paid." [^8]

"These conditions [i.e., the terms enforced by Lucas and Clark] were certainly very hard, but they were the best that could be obtained; and if we may credit Mormon writers, it was owing to the determined stand of Alexander W. Doniphan that they were not more rigorous. As it was, the scenes that took place when the time came for carrying out these terms are said to have beggared description. The season was already far advanced, transportation was totally insufficient, and yet notwithstanding these silent appeals for delay some thousands of these unfortunate creatures of all ages, sizes, conditions, and of both sexes, were driven from their homes, and compelled to cross almost the entire northern part of the state before they could hope to find a resting place. As a rule, they were poor, had nothing but the small farms from which they were driven, but such was the pressure put upon them, or their anxiety to get away, that not infrequently 'a valuable farm was traded for an old wagon, a horse, a yoke of oxen, or anything that would furnish them with the means of leaving.' To take advantage of the necessities of a people so situated, even when their misfortunes were brought about by their own misdeeds [which they were not, as established by the text of this History] was certainly bad enough; but what adds immeasurably to the shame of the transaction is the fact that there are grounds for believing that not a little of the intolerance shown on this occasion may have been due to a desire on the part of the Gentiles to get possession of the Mormons' land. At least, this is the not unnatural inference from the statement made, not by one of themselves, but by a gentleman who has enjoyed exceptional advantages for acquainting himself with the facts of the case, and who tells us that 'in many instances conveyances of land were demanded and enforced at the mouth of a pistol or rifle.'" [^9]

In a note Carr adds: "Switzler, in The Commonwealth of Missouri, (p. 249). In the Succinct History, we are told, that 'several hundred persons were driven in a defenseless condition into a hollow square of armed fiends, and compelled to sign away their property to the republic of Missouri, to defray the expenses which had been incurred in committing these crimes.'" [^10]

"The surrender took place in November. The days were cold and bleak, but the clamor for the instant removal of the Mormons was so great that the old and young, the sick and feeble, delicate women and suckling children, almost without food and without clothing were compelled to abandon their homes and firesides to seek new homes in a distant state. Valuable farms were sold for a yoke of oxen, an old wagon or anything that would furnish means of transportation. Many of the poorer classes were compelled to walk. Before half their journey was accomplished the chilly blasts of winter howled about them and added to their general discomfort. The suffering they endured on this forced march, though great, was soon forgotten in the prosperity of Nauvoo, their new asylum. Their trials and sufferings instead of dampening the ardor of the saints, increased it tenfold. 'The blood of the martyrs became the seed of the church.'" [^11]

In the legislature which convened in 1840-41, the subject of the "Mormon" difficulties was again taken up on the recommendation of Governor Boggs in his message. By this time the unwarranted procedure of the executive of the state, the militia officers, and the previous legislature began to be known throughout the country and widely commented upon by the press, and very generally condemned. This produced great uneasiness in the mind of Governor Boggs, and in his message to the legislature of 1840-41 he suggested that:—

"To explain the attitude which we have been made to assume I would recommend the publication of all the events relating to the occurrence, and distributing the same to the chief authorities of each state," In pursuance of this recommendation the joint committee appointed from the senate and house made a collection of documents on the subject covering 162 pages. In the collection, however, there are none of the statements, petitions, or representations made to the public or to the legislature by the saints. The documents consist of the action of the respective houses in the appointment of committees and reports of those committees recommending investigations, etc.; of accusations against the saints of plundering the "old settlers" and burning settlements which were never set on fire, or else were fired by the "old settlers" themselves; of the reports and military orders of the militia generals; while the remainder of the pamphlet is made up of the ex parte testimony taken before Judge King at Richmond, concerning which testimony the Turner senate committee in reporting to the senate, under date of December 18, 1838, said: "It is manifestly not such evidence as ought to be received by the committee: First, because it is not authenticated; and, second, it is confined chiefly to the object of inquiry, namely, the investigation of criminal charges against individuals under arrest."

The action of the legislature was an attempt to vindicate the state of Missouri in her treatment of the Latter-day Saints. The effort, however, was in vain. The truth in relation to those transactions, in spite of all the efforts of the legislature was known, and the state's attempt to counteract its influence by a publication of documents giving a hearing practically to but one side of the case, only emphasized the crime. I say but one side of the question was given, that should be so far modified as to admit that in the petition and affidavits about three and a half pages of matter are from "Mormons" or persons favorable to them and in the second part, under the caption, "Evidence" there is about three pages of pro-"Mormon" evidence. The History of Caldwell County records the following concerning the publication of this collection of documents: "The same legislature [i.e., of 1839] also prohibited the publication of 'the orders, letters, evidences, and other documents relating to the Mormon disturbances,' and enjoined the secretary of state from 'furnishing or permitting to be taken copies of the same for any purpose whatsoever.' Two years later, however, this prohibition was rescinded. (See Acts 10th General Assembly, p. 334). Why the act was passed in the first place may better be conjectured than positively asserted." [^12]

"Extract of a letter from A. W. Turner, one of the members of the Missouri legislature; [also he was chairman of the committee on 'Mormon Investigation'] dated city of Jefferson, November 31st, 1838; taken from the Columbia Patriot, a Whig paper published in Missouri:

"'The Mormon War is the most exciting subject before the legislature or the community; it involves an inquiry the most critical of any ever presented to the legislature of this country; one in which the rights of a portion of the free citizens of the state is concerned on one side, and the rights of another portion of the same citizens on the other. Upon the decision of this subject the character of the state is suspended. If upon full investigation it is found (and reported by the committee to the legislature) that the Mormons are not the aggressors, and that some of them have been murdered, others driven from the state by military force, and others imprisoned by order of the executive, then our character will be established as the most lawless invaders of religious and civil rights.'

"Will the public believe that with the above view of the subject, the legislature avoided an investigation? Wonder and be astonished, O Americans!" [^13]

"What authority General Lucas had to make such a treaty and to impose such conditions is not clear. It would seem that he regarded the Mormons as composing a foreign nation, or at least as forming an army with belligerent rights, and with proper treaty-contracting powers. The truth was they were and had not ceased to be citizens of Missouri, amenable to and under the jurisdiction of its laws. If they had committed any crime they ought to have been punished, just the same as other criminals. There was no authority for taking their arms from them except that they were proved to be militia in a state of insubordination. There was no sort of authority for requiring them to pay the expense of the war. It was monstrously illegal and unjust to attempt to punish them for offenses for which they had not been tried and of which they had not been convicted. It would be a reasonable conclusion that in making his so-called treaty, General Lucas was guilty of illegal extortion, unwarranted assumption of power, usurpation of authority, and flagrant violation of the natural rights of man." [^14]

"The entire proceedings in the cases [i.e. the proceedings against Joseph Smith et al on the charge of 'treason against the state and murder, arson, robbery, etc.] were disgraceful in the extreme. There never was a handful of evidence that the accused were guilty of the crimes with which they were charged. Those who were tried were defended by General Doniphan and James S. Rollins. [^15]

"That Governor Boggs' order of banishment was illegal and contrary to the spirit of our institutions—as are all such, whether emanating from executives, courts, or mobs—cannot be controverted." [^16]

"From first to last—but especially in the outset of the troubles—the governor of the state was guilty of the most unpardonable remissness and partiality. He was formerly of Jackson county, and came into office with strong prejudices against the Mormons. At the time of the difficulty in Carrol, the Mormons sent and besought his interposition. He refused it, on the pretext of expense; but in a few weeks afterwards, ordered out against the Mormons, an army large enough to have prostrated ten times the force, supposed to be arrayed against it.

"The conduct too, of General Lucas, who commanded at the (so-called) surrender at Far West, was to the last degree absurd and tyrannical. Regarding the Mormons—not as American citizens—but as prisoners of war, belonging to a strange and a belligerent people, he imposed upon them a 'treaty' by which they bound themselves, through a committee to indemnify (the innocent for the guilty!) the sufferers in Daviess, and to quit the state. Such stipulations, so flagrantly at war with the law of the land and with common right, did this notable general officer, in the execution of his high and delicate trust, think fit to exact of his Mormon prisoners; supposing, as he doubtless did, that the Mormons were bound by it!" [^17]

"The general assembly of Missouri refused investigation of the origin and history of this unexampled persecution. They knew better than to do it. Impartial investigation would have implicated the state and many of its legislators too deeply. It was a series of enormities that would not bear the light; and they, therefore—so far as they could do it—have quenched it in the darkness." [^18]

Notwithstanding these and many other expressions of disapproval that found their way into current periodicals and books, yet there were, as stated by Parley P. Pratt, "Many state journals which tried to hide the iniquity of the state, by throwing a covering of lies over her atrocious deeds. But can they hide the governor's cruel order for extermination or banishment? Can they conceal the facts of the disgraceful treaty of the generals, with their own officers and men, at the city of Far West? Can they conceal the fact that ten or twelve thousand men, women and children, have been banished from the state without trial or condemnation. And this at an expense of two hundred thousand dollars, and this sum appropriated by the state legislature, in order to pay the troops for this act of lawless outrage? Can they conceal the fact that we have been imprisoned for many months, while our families, friends and witnesses have been driven away? Can they conceal the blood of the murdered husbands and fathers; or stifle the cries of the widow and the fatherless?" [^19]

Footnotes

The History of Caldwell County, published by the National Historical Co. 1886, p. 143, makes the following statement upon the subject:

"By an act of the legislature approved December 11, 1838, the sum of $2,000 was appropriated, for the purpose of relieving the indigent and suffering families in Caldwell and Daviess counties, and the following commissions were appointed to expend the sum and distribute 'food, raiment, and other necessaries' among the deserving; Anderson Martin, Wm. Thornton and John C. Richardson of Ray county; Elisha Cameron, John Thornton and Eli Casey, of Clay; Henry McHenry, of Caldwell, and M. T. Green, of Daviess. It is asserted that not a dollar of the appropriation was expended for the benefit of the Mormons, although the act itself did not especially exclude them. The Gentiles were the sole beneficiaries."

---
Notas:
[^1] McRae's letters to Deseret News—weekly—Nov. 2 and 9th, 1854; also Millennial Star, vol. xvii, pp. 135-7.
[^2] Affidavit of Hyrum Smith, History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 420.
[^3] McRae's letters to the Deseret News—weekly—Nov. 2 and 9th, 1854; also Millennial Star, vol. xvii, pp. 135-7.
[^4] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 264, 265.
[^5] Ibid, p. 258, McRae's letters to the Deseret News.
[^6] "The sheriff and jailer did not blame us for our attempt; it was a fine breach, and cost the county a round sum; but public opinion says that we ought to have been permitted to have made our escape; that then the disgrace would have been on us, but now it must come on the state; that there cannot be any charge sustained against us; and that the conduct of the mob, the murders committed at Haun's Mill, and the exterminating order of the governor, and the onesided, rascally proceedings of the legislature, have damned the state of Missouri to all eternity." (Joseph Smith's Letter to the Church, March 25th, 1839; History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 289 et seq.)
[^7] Ibid.
[^8] Ibid.
[^9] Epistle to the Church from Liberty Prison, March 25th, 1839, History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 289, et seq.
[^10] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 295-6.
[^11] Ibid., p. 304.
[^12] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. ci:76-80.
[^13] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 304.
[^14] Ibid., p. 304.
[^15] "Liberty Jail" faced the east, and was a scant two hundred yards from the court house. It was built of rough dressed limestone, of yellowish color. "Its dimensions were twenty by twenty-two feet, and the walls were two feet thick. It had two floors, hence two rooms—an upper one and a basement, which formed a dungeon. In the east end was a heavy door made strong, and of great thickness, by nailing inch oak boards together with iron spikes. In the south side of the upper room there was a small opening, a foot and a half square, with strong iron bars, two inches apart, firmly imbedded in the stones of the wall. It cost the county six hundred dollars; Solomon Fry being the contractor."
[^16] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxi; 1-6.
[^17] Ibid, vs. 6-11.
[^18] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxii:1-7.
[^19] Book of Mormon, Moroni, ch. vii.
