B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XXXVIII

LIBERTY JAIL—A PRISON-TEMPLE—ESCAPE OF THE PRISONERS

THE winter of 1838-9 was a trying one to President Joseph Smith and his associates immured in Liberty prison. The food was coarse and filthy. "We could not eat it until we were driven to it by hunger," says Alexander McRae. [^1] This hardship was sometimes relieved by the ministrations of friends in the neighborhood who brought them wholesome food and passed it through the prison window. One of the prisoners suspected that at one time an attempt was made to feed them upon "human flesh," basing his suspicion upon the appearance of the meat and the fact that one of the guards made sport of the prisoners, saying that he had fed them on "Mormon beef," [^2] but this boast might have arisen from the fact that "Mormon" cattle were brought in and killed for beef. Bad as the Missourians were, they are entitled to the benefit of the doubt that exists in the case of such a revolting crime.

Sometimes the prisoners were visited by their enemies, many of whom were very angry with the Prophet, especially, and would accuse him of killing a son, a brother, or some relative of theirs at what was called the "Battle of Crooked River." "This looked very strange to me," says Alexander McRae, one of the Prophet's fellow prisoners, "that so many should claim a son or a brother killed there, when they reported only one man killed." [^3]

EFFORTS AT LIBERATION

Of course every effort was made to secure the liberation of the prisoners. A hearing was obtained on writs of habeas

corpus before Judge Turnham, one of the judges of Clay county, and Sidney Rigdon was released; but the rest were remanded to prison. Such was the state of feeling existing even in Clay county, that although Elder Rigdon was released by the court, he had to leave the prison at night and by stealth, and flee from the state to escape the mob. [^4]

Word came into the prison that some of the most influential men in western Missouri had said in the streets of Liberty, that the "Mormon prisoners would have to be condemned or the character of the state would go down." Upon this the prisoners determined upon making an effort to escape by rushing from the prison when their evening meal was served. In this they failed, and the news that they had attempted an escape greatly excited the populace, and many threats of violence were made, but nothing came of them. [^5]

President Smith also alludes to another attempt at escape by making a breach in the prison wall, but they were discovered upon the very eve of its accomplishment. [^6] The prisoners also had some misunderstanding with their attorneys in the matter of conducting their case, and the Prophet was incensed at the course of General Atchison as his counsel. [^7]

"IN PRISON AND YE VISITED ME"

The succession of these unpleasantries was occasionally broken by the coming of a friend or a group of them to express their sympathy for the prisoners, and their confidence in the Prophet. All the prisoners, and especially the latter, appreciated these visits. "I was in prison and ye visited me," had a real meaning in his experience. "Those who have not been enclosed in the walls of a prison," he writes, "can have but little idea how sweet the voice of a friend is. One token of friendship from any source whatever awakens and calls into action every sympathetic feeling; it brings up in an instant everything that is passed; it seizes the present with the avidity of lightning; it grasps after the future with the fierceness of a tiger; it moves the mind backward and forward, from one thing to another, until finally all enmity, malice and hatred, and past differences, misunderstanding and mismanagement are slain victorious at the feet of hope." [^8]

These visiting friends also brought information concerning the progress of the church in leaving the state, which enabled the Prophet to give the saints counsel from time to time. Also he communicated with them by letter several times, and in these communications he loosened the flood tide of his over-wrought emotions, and in them the greatness of his soul is often revealed. The following salutation in one of these communications will exhibit the spirit in which he wrote to his people:

OUTGIVINGS OF THE PROPHET FROM LIBERTY PRISON-TEMPLE

"Your humble servant, Joseph Smith, Jun., prisoner for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the saints, taken and held by the power of mobocracy, under the exterminating reign of his Excellency, the Governor, Lilburn W. Boggs, in company with his fellow prisoners and beloved brethren, Caleb Baldwin, Lyman Wight, Hyrum Smith, and Alexander McRae, send unto you all greeting. May the grace of God the Father, and of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, rest upon you all, and abide with you forever. May knowledge be multiplied unto you by the mercy of God. And may faith and virtue, and knowledge and temperance, and patience and godliness, and brotherly kindness and charity be in you and abound, that you may not be barren in anything, nor unfruitful.

"For inasmuch as we know that the most of you are well acquainted with the wrongs and the high-handed injustice and cruelty that are practiced upon us; whereas we have been taken prisoners, charged falsely with every kind of evil, and thrown into prison, enclosed with strong walls, surrounded with a strong guard, who continually watch day and night as indefatigably as the devil does in tempting and laying snares for the people of God—

"Therefore, dearly beloved brethren, we are the more ready and willing to lay claim to your fellowship and love. For our circumstances are calculated to awaken our spirits to a sacred remembrance of everything, and we think that yours are also, and that nothing, therefore, can separate us from the love of God and fellowship one with another; and that every species of wickedness and cruelty practiced upon us will only tend to bind our hearts together and seal them together in love. We have no need to say to you that we are held in bonds without cause, neither is it needful that you say unto us, we are driven from our homes and smitten without cause. We mutually understand that if the inhabitants of the state of Missouri had let the saints alone, and had been as desirable of peace as they [the saints] were, there would have been nothing but peace and quietude in the state unto this day; we would not have been in this hell, surrounded with demons (if not those who are damned, they are those who shall be damned); and where we are compelled to hear nothing but blasphemous oaths, and witness a scene of blasphemy, and drunkenness, and hypocrisy, and debaucheries of every description." [^9]

The Prophet does not hesitate to indulge in self-criticism, and criticism of the saints in these communications. Having in mind the exalted station which the New Dispensation conferred upon the priesthood of the church, and upon the members, he said:

"How vain and trifling have been our spirits, our conferences, our councils, our meetings, our private as well as public conversations—too low, too mean, too vulgar, too condescending for the dignified characters of the called and chosen of God, according to the purposes of his will, formed before the foundation of the world! We are called to hold the keys of the mysteries of those things that have been kept hid from the foundation of the world until now. Some have tasted a little of these things, many of which are to be poured down from heaven upon the heads of babes; yea, upon the weak, obscure and despised ones of the earth. Therefore we beseech of you, brethren, that you bear with those who do not feel themselves more worthy than yourselves, while we exhort one another to a reformation with one and all, both old and young, teachers and taught, both high and low, rich and poor, bond and free, male and female; let honesty and sobriety and candor, and solemnity, and virtue, and pureness, and meekness, and simplicity crown our heads in every place; and in fine, become as little children, without malice, guile or hypocrisy." [^10]

The experiences in Missouri evidently had a broadening effect upon the Prophet's mind. He thus instructs his people in relation to the tolerance that should be exercised towards those not of the faith:

"We ought always to be aware of those prejudices which sometimes so strangely present themselves, and are so congenial to human nature, against our friends, neighbors, and brethren of the world, who choose to differ from us in opinion and in matters of faith. Our religion is between us and our God. Their religion is between them and their God. There is a love from God that should be exercised toward those of our faith, who walk uprightly, which is peculiar to itself, but it is without prejudice; it also gives scope to the mind, which enables us to conduct ourselves with greater liberality towards all that are not of our faith, than what they exercise toward one another." [^11]

In relation to civil duties and the sacredness and value of the Constitution of the United States, the Prophet thus taught his people from within the walls of his prison:

"Here is a principle also, which we are bound to be exercised with, that is, in common with all men, such as governments, and laws, and regulations in the civil concerns of life. This principle guarantees to all parties, sects, and denominations, and classes of religion, equal, inherent, and indefeasible rights; they are things that pertain to this life; therefore all are alike interested; they make up our responsibilities one towards another in matters of corruptible things, while the former principles respecting religion do not destroy the latter, but bind us stronger, and make up our responsibilities not only one to another, but unto God also. Hence we say, that the Constitution of the United States is a also. Hence we say, that the Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it is founded in the wisdom of God. [^12] It is a heavenly banner; it is to all those who are privileged with the sweets of its liberty, like the cooling shades and refreshing waters of a great rock in a thirsty and weary land. It is like a great tree under whose branches men from every clime can be shielded from the burning rays of the sun. We, brethren, are deprived of the protection of its glorious principles, by the cruelty of the cruel, by those who only look for the time being for pasturage, like the beasts of the field, only to fill themselves; and forget that the Mormons as well as the Presbyterians, and those of every other class and description, have equal rights to partake of the fruits of the great tree of our national liberty." [^13]

And this was the peroration of the epistle:

"We say that God is true; that the Constitution of the United States is true; that the Bible is true; that the Book of Mormon is true; that the Book of [Doctrine and] Covenants is true; that Christ is true; that the ministering angels sent forth from God are true; and that we know that we have 'an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, whose builder and maker is God,' a consolation which our oppressors cannot feel, when fortune, or fate, shall lay its iron hand on them as it has on us." [^14]

Such outgivings as these made Liberty jail, for a time, a center of instruction. The eyes of the saints were turned to it as the place whence would come encouragement, counsel—the word of the Lord. It was more temple than prison, [^15] so long as the Prophet was there. It was a place of meditation and prayer. A temple, first of all, is a place of prayer; and prayer is communion with God. It is the "infinite in man seeking the infinite in God." Where they find each other, there is holy sanctuary—a temple. Joseph Smith sought God in this rude prison, and found him. Out of the midst of his tribulations he called upon God in passionate earnestness—

SOUL-CRY OF THE PROPHET

"O God! where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place? How long shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from the eternal heavens, the wrongs of thy people, and of thy servants, and thine ear be penetrated with their cries? Yea, O Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions, before thine heart shall be softened towards them, and thy bowels be moved with compassion towards them? O Lord God Almighty, Maker of the heaven, earth, and seas, and of all things that in them are, and who controlleth and subjecteth the devil, and the dark and benighted dominion of Shayole! Stretch forth thy hand; let thine eye pierce; let thy pavilion be taken up; let thy hiding place no longer be covered; let thine ear be inclined; let thine heart be softened, and thy bowels moved with compassion towards us. Let thine anger be kindled against our enemies; and in the fury of thine heart, with thy sword avenge us of our wrongs. Remember thy suffering saints, O our God! and thy servants will rejoice in thy name forever." [^16]

And God answered, and said:—

"My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment; and then, if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes; thy friends do stand by thee, and they shall hail thee again, with warm hearts, and friendly hands; thou art not yet as Job; thy friends do not contend against thee, neither charge thee with transgression, as they did Job; and they who do charge thee with transgression, their hope shall be blasted, and their prospects shall melt away as the hoar frost melteth before the burning rays of the rising sun; [^17] * * * The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in derision, and hell shall rage against thee, while the pure in heart, and the wise, and the noble, and the virtuous, shall seek counsel, and authority, and blessings constantly from thy hand, and thy people shall never be turned against thee by the testimony of traitors; * * * If thou art called to pass through tribulation, if thou art in perils among false brethren, if thou art in perils among robbers, if thou art in perils by land or by sea, if thou art accused with all manner of false accusation, if thine enemies fall upon thee, if they tear thee from the society of thy father and mother and brethren and sisters, and if with a drawn sword thine enemies tear thee from the bosom of thy wife, and of thine offspring * * * And if thou shouldst be cast into the pit, or into the hands of murderers, and the sentence of death passed upon thee, if thou be cast into the deep, if the billowing surge conspire against thee, if fierce winds become thine enemy, if the heavens gather blackness, and all the elements combine to hedge up the way; and above all, if the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, Know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The son of man hath descended below them all; art thou greater than he?" [^18]

One other lesson came of that seven times heated furnace of Missouri experience. A lesson rich in great possibilities for the future peace and prosperity of the church. A lesson that bars priestcraft from the church, and enthrones there a true priesthood, moved to action by the pure love of God and man, which is charity. [^19] It establishes the government of the church as moral government, and moral government alone—God's government. [^20] That lesson also was put into form in that Prison-Temple, Liberty prison, and stands in the revelation as follows:

GOD'S MORAL GOVERNMENT

"Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen? Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson—That the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness. That they may be conferred upon us, it is time, but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control, or dominion, or compulsion, upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, amen to the priesthood, or the authority of that man. Behold, ere he is aware, he is left unto himself, to kick against the pricks; to persecute the saints, and to fight against God. We have learned, by sad experience, that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion. Hence, many are called but few are chosen. No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long suffering, by gentleness, and meekness, and by love unfeigned. By kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile. Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost, and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy; that he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death." [^21]

Truly the kingdom of the Christ is not of this world. If it were of this world its reliance would be upon effective government, the government which rests on force. "If my kingdom were of this world," said the Christ to Pilate, "then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now is my kingdom not from hence;" [^22] or, not of physical force, but of moral persuasion. "Every one," says Jesus, in concluding his conversation with Pilate here quoted—"Everyone that is of the truth, heareth my voice." [^23] And such as obey, of course, do so because persuaded of the truth. Again the master said:

"Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you; but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant: Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many." [^24]

Truly a kingdom not of this world. A kingdom of humility, not of pride; of service, not of mastery; of persuasion and teaching truth, not of physical force; of love, not of compulsion. And how admirably all this conjoins with the great truth announced from the Prison Temple at Liberty, quoted above. The Missouri experiences of the church were trying and sad. The days were filled with sorrow and the nights with terror; but if out of those fiery ordeals came this lesson, and the absolute truth and force of it could come to the church in no other way, it was worth to the church for its future guidance and to humanity, all that it cost the saints. Had the church been guided altogether in her later Missouri period by the principles of this revelation, her history in that state might have been somewhat different; but if the Son of Man had to learn obedience by the things which he suffered, [^25] it is not surprising if lesser men learn obedience in the same way, but more slowly.

ESCAPE OF THE PROPHET et al

In April of 1839 the prisoners so long held in Liberty jail were taken into Daviess county where it was expected they would be tried. In about ten days the grand jury reported indictments against them for "treason, murder, arson, theft and stealing." Considering that in Daviess county they would be tried before Judge Thomas C. Burch, who had been the prosecuting attorney in the ex parte examination of the charges against them before Judge King at Richmond in November preceding, and also connected, as a military officer, with the court-martial that condemned them to be shot at Far West; that some of the grand jury which had indicted them were men connected with the massacre at Haun's Mill; and having reason to believe that the trial jury would be men made up of the same class, the prisoners asked for a change of venue to Marion county. That was denied, but one was given them to Boone county, and Judge Burch made out the mittimus without date, name, or place; and the prisoners in charge of the sheriff and four other men and a two-horse team and wagon started for Boone county.

Passing through "Di-Ahman" the prisoners were allowed to purchase two horses of the guard, giving some clothing for one, and their note for the other. The third day out from Gallatin three of the guards and the sheriff got drunk and went to bed. The sheriff, previously having shown the prisoners the mittimus made out by Judge Burch, now also informed them that Burch had told him not to take the prisoners to Boone county. After exposing the plan that had been laid for their escape by the authorities, the sheriff assured the prisoners that he should take a good drink of whiskey and go to bed, and they could do as they pleased. Accordingly when all the guards but one were asleep, that one, who, by the way, was sober as well as awake, assisted them to mount their horses and escape. [^26] Ten days later they arrived among their friends in Illinois.

The other prisoners who had been left in Richmond during this dreary winter, in the spring were taken to Columbia, in Boone county, and during the summer also escaped and joined their fellow exiles in Illinois. [^27]

The escape of Joseph Smith and his associates from Liberty prison and the state of Missouri was not the last scene of "Mormon" experience in Missouri. This chapter can be closed with the record of a prophecy fulfilled. In closing chapter xxxiii of this History reference was made to an appointment in a revelation given on the 8th of July, 1838, requiring the quorum of apostles to take leave of the saints in Far West on the site of the "Lord's House," and thence depart "over the great waters"—Atlantic Ocean—"and there promulgate the gospel." Also reference was made to the boast of the mob that this was one of "Joe Smith's revelations that should fail."

THE FULFILLMENT OF A PROPHECY

At the time appointed, however, the twenty-sixth day of April, 1839, five of the twelve apostles arrived there, (i. e. in Far West) having come from Quincy, Illinois, by various routes to elude the vigilence of their enemies, together with a number of elders, high priests and other officers. The five apostles ordained Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith members of their quorum. They also ordained Darwin Chase and Norman Shearer, both newly released from Richmond prison, to the office of seventy. They excommunicated a number of persons from the church; prayer was offered up by the apostles in the order of their standing in the quorum. A hymn known to the saints as "Adam-Ondi-Ahman" [^28] was sung. After this hymn, Elder Alpheus Cutler, the master-workman of the Lord's House, laid the southeast corner stone in its position, and said: "In consequence of the peculiar situation of the saints, it is deemed prudent to discontinue continue further labor on the House until the Lord should open the way for its completion." The apostles then took leave of some seventeen saints, who were present, and started on their way to fill their missions "over the great waters." Thus was fulfilled that revelation in every particular, notwithstanding the boasts of the mob which said it should fail of fulfillment. [^29]

NOTE

ESCAPE OF JOSEPH SMITH AND ASSOCIATES FROM THEIR GUARDS

"Messrs. Smith, Wight, and other comrades in jail at Liberty took a change of venue to Boone county and the Daviess county officers started with the prisoners to their destination in Boone county. Some of the prisoners having no horses, William Bowman, the first sheriff of Daviess county, furnished the prisoners three and they left in charge of William Morgan, the sheriff of the county. The sheriff alone returned on horseback, the guard, who accompanied him, returning on foot or 'riding and tying' by turns. The sheriff reported that the prisoners had all escaped in the night, taking the horses with them, and that a search made for them proved unavailing. The people of Gallatin were greatly exercised and they disgraced themselves by very ruffianly conduct. They rode the sheriff on a rail, and Bowman was dragged over the square by the hair of the head. The men guilty of these dastardly acts accused the sheriff, Morgan, and ex-sheriff, Bowman, of complicity in the escape of the Mormon leaders; that Bowman furnished the horses and that Morgan allowed them to escape, and both got well paid for their treachery. The truth of history compels us to state that the charges were never sustained by any evidence adduced by the persons who committed this flagrant act of mob law." [^30]

"After some months of confinement Smith made his escape, it was said by the connivance of the sheriff who had him in charge, the authorities probably deeming this the easiest way of disposing of a troublesome case." [^31]

Footnotes

A photogravure of the rude structure accompanies this chapter, from a photograph taken some years ago, after the building was fallen into decay. The old building has since been removed.

---
Notas:
[^1] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 327.
[^2] See American Commonwealths, Missouri, p. 181. The statement rests upon the authority of discourses by President Geo. A. Smith, church historian, Salt Lake City, July 25th, 1869, also June 20th, 1869, Journal of Discourses, vol. xiii, p. 77.
[^3] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 294. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxi.
[^4] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 95.
[^5] Of which more later.
[^6] The above is from a letter of Mr. Lawson's under date of "New York City, Feb. 7th, 1902," addressed to "Mr. Junius F. Wells." Mr. Wells published Mr. Lawson's letter in extenso in the Improvement Era (Utah), of November, 1902, vol. vi, in an article under the caption "A Prophecy and Its Fulfillment."
[^7] Mr. Saxey's letter to Mr. Wells is given in extenso in Improvement Era, vol. vi, p. 10.
[^8] American Commonwealths, Missouri, p. 258.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] American Commonwealths, Missouri, p. 259.
[^11] The Fight for Missouri, Snead, p. 14.
[^12] American Commonwealths, Missouri, p. 288.
[^13] American Commonwealths, Missouri, p. 342.
[^14] History of Caldwell and Livingston Counties, p. 51.
[^15] American Commonwealths, Missouri, p. 351.
[^16] Ibid., p. 351.
[^17] History of Missouri, Carr, p. 360. General Price was the Colonel Sterling Price who held the Prophet Joseph in custody in Richmond in 1838, who shackled the brethren and whose scurrilous guards were so severely rebuked by the Prophet. See ante, ch. xxxvi.
[^18] Minutes of Citizens' Meeting, Clay County, History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 450.
[^19] "The character of much of this emigration may be gathered," says one historian, "from the fact that the Kansas Emigration Societies, Leagues and Committees * * * sent out men only; and that in some of their bands Sharp's rifles were more numerous than agricultural implements." (American Commonwealths, Carr, p. 243, note.)
[^20] History of Missouri, Carr, p. 158.
[^21] History of Missouri, Carr, p. 259.
[^22] General Halleck when he learned that the "jayhawking" leader, Lane, had been promoted to the command of a brigade, declared that such an appointment was "offering a premium for rascality and robbing generally;" and that it would "take twenty thousand men to counteract its effect in the state." (History of Missouri, Carr, p. 348.)
[^23] Spring's History of Kansas, p. 287.
[^24] These were bands of Kansas robbers, whose custom it was at intervals to dash into Missouri, seize horses and cattle—not omitting other and worse crimes on occasion—then to repair with their booty to Lawrence, where it was defiantly sold at auction." (History of Missouri, Carr, p. 348.)
[^25] On this point the late George Q. Cannon remarked in his Life of Joseph the Prophet: "Poor Missouri atoned with rivers of blood and tears for her sin against herself in permitting the executive to usurp unlawful authority. The precedent of Bogg's exercise of power was handed down. In the day of the persecution of the saints, a court had decided that belief in the Bible was treason against the government. The idea had moved with terrible momentum; for there we find in 1861, that, 'even verbal opposition to the governor's assumption of authority was constituted treason.' It is true that with any kind of population Missouri must have taken part either for or against the Union; but it is also true that the existence within her boundaries of thousands of lawless wretches who loved to plunder and rapine, largely increased her sufferings. The entire state was punished for permitting the massacre of the saints to go unchecked and for encouraging the spirit of plunder by rewarding the mobocrats with money from the state treasury. Men learned to live by murder and rapine. It cost Missouri dearly to get rid of the evil, but happily for her much of the bad element was eliminated. Many of the old mobocrats suffered all the tortures which they had inflicted. But Missouri largely purged herself of the vile element, and after the strife was ended better men and better sentiments came into the ascendency. Some of the men who had been averse to mobocratic violence against the Latter-day Saints believed that retribution would come. They lived to see the day of atonement and to participate in local reconstruction and a restoration of better things." (The Life of Joseph the Prophet, 1888, George Q. Cannon, ch. xliv.)
[^26] See Affidavit of Hyrum Smith, History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 423. Also note Ibid, p. 321, and Note, end of this chapter.
[^27] These were Parley P. Pratt, King Follett, and Morris Phelps. Held on a trumped-up charge of murder because of the part they took in the "Battle of Crooked River." The escape is graphically told in Pratt's Autobiography, chs. xxxi and xxxii.
[^28] See ch. xxxii, this History.
[^29] The minutes of this meeting of the twelve at Far West, are given at length in History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, pp. 336-9.
[^30] History of Daviess County, Birdsall and Dean, 1882, p. 206.
[^31] The Prophet of Palmyra, Gregg, p. 146.
