B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 1 ( 1930)

CHAPTER XXXIX

RETRIBUTION: WAS IT METED OUT TO MISSOURI

THERE have been, of course, more extensive persecutions, and more terrible, than those inflicted on the saints in Missouri in 1838-9. Viewed from the standpoint of its net results there were some fifty people, men, and children, killed outright; about as many more were wounded or cruelly beaten, and very many more, including delicate women, perished indirectly because of the exposure to which they were subjected during the exodus.

In round numbers it is estimated that between twelve and fifteen thousand people, citizens of the United States, after being dispossessed of their lands and many of their houses burned or otherwise destroyed were forcibly driven from the state.

NET RESULTS OF MISSOURI'S PERSECUTION OF THE SAINTS

Joseph Smith represents that before leaving Missouri he paid the lawyers at Richmond $34,000.00 in cash and land. One tract for which he was allowed, on account, $7,000.00, the lawyers were soon offered $10,000.00 for, but they refused to accept it. In vexatious suits others than those at Richmond, Ray county, he paid his lawyers $16,000.00. Making in all fifty thousand dollars. "For which," he remarks, "I received very little in return." [^1]

It is known that the saints paid to the United States government for land alone, three hundred and eighteen thousand dollars, which, at the minimum price of one dollar and a quarter per acre, would give them land holdings of over two hundred and fifty thousand acres, representing for that day very large interests. [^2]

To this list of results must be added the more horrible one of a number of cases of ravishment at Far West; and also, after barely escaping from the sentence of death pronounced by a court-martial, the cruel imprisonment through weary months of a number of the church leaders, including among them the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum.

THE GAUGE OF RESPONSIBILITY

In passing judgment upon such matters as these, account must be taken of the age and country in which they occurred; likewise the pretensions to right views of life, and devotion to freedom on the part of the perpetrators of the injustice. Undoubtedly a heavier debt is incurred to history, to humanity and to God, when the parties who resort to such acts of mob violence and injustice live in an enlightened age, and where the free institutions of their country guarantee both the freedom and the security of its citizens.

If in the jungle a man meet a tiger and is torn to pieces, no one thinks of holding the tiger to any moral accountability. Perhaps the hunt will be formed to destroy the beast, but that is merely to be rid of a dangerous animal, and prevent the repetition of the deed. If another meets a cruel death among savages, in heathen lands, while some moral responsibility would hold against them, according to their degree of enlightenment, yet the fact that it was the act of savages would be held to reduce the degree of moral turpitude. And likewise even in civilized states, in localities to which the vicious may gravitate, when acts of violence are committed there, some allowance may be, and generally is, made for the ignorance and general brutality of the particular neighborhood.

By this process of reasoning I think it will appear quite clear that moral responsibility, both on the part of individuals and communities or nations, increases in proportion to their enlightenment. If, therefore, this principle be kept in view, the persecution of the Latter-day Saints by the people of Missouri was a very heinous offense.

True it may be said that the worst acts of cruelty were perpetrated by low, brutish men among the mob or in the militia—for these bodies were convertible from one to the other on shortest possible notice, and wholly as the exigencies of the enemies of the saints demanded—but these were led and abetted by quite a different order of men; by lawyers, members of the state legislature, by county and district judges, by physicians, by professed ministers of the gospel, by merchants, by leading politicians, by captains, majors, colonels, and generals—of several grades—of the militia, by many other high officials of the state including the governor, and finally by the action of the state legislature which appropriated two hundred thousand dollars to defray the expenses incurred by the mob-militia in carrying out the governor's order to exterminate or drive the saints from the state. These facts are made apparent in the pages of this History of the Church. The facts cannot be questioned. They are written out most circumstantially. Times, places, and names are given of the incidents related, and the more important of these may be corroborated by histories of these events other than the annals of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

MISSOURI'S ACTS A CRIME AGAINST ENLIGHTENMENT

The persecutions then of the Latter-day Saints in Missouri, and their final expulsion from that state, were crimes against the enlightenment of the age and of the state where the acts occurred; a crime against the Constitutions and institutions both of the state of Missouri and of the United States; as also a crime against the Christian religion. All this must be borne in mind when speaking of the severity and cruelty of this Missouri persecution when compared with other persecutions. The state of Missouri was guilty of a greater crime when it permitted, and even participated in, the persecution of the Latter-day Saints than states were which in the barbarous times of the dark ages persecuted their people, though when estimated in net results there may have been more murders and robberies, greater destruction of property, and more widespread suffering in the latter than in the former.

But what of Missouri? Did she pay any penalty for her wrong-doing? Are states such entities as may be held to an accounting for breaches of public faith and public morals—constitutional immoralities? Is there within the state a public conscience to which an appeal can be made; and in the event of the public conscience failing to respond to appeals for justice, and persisting in unrighteousness is there retribution?

I answer these questions in the affirmative; and hold that Missouri paid dearly for the violations of her guarantees of religious freedom, and for her many acts of lawlessness and her cruelties practiced towards the Latter-day Saints. That is to say, the vicious tendencies in lawlessness engendered by the acts of mobs and by the state's course towards the saints, established such precedents, and begot such a disregard for law that the events to be related in the experience of Missouri as establishing retribution for violation of the plain dictates of justice, became possible. Let me say also before reciting those events, that the results to be pointed out here were specifically predicted by Joseph Smith in the following prophecies:

"Cursed are all those that shall lift up the heel against mine anointed, saith the Lord, and cry they have sinned when they have not sinned before me, saith the Lord, but have done that which was mete in mine eyes, and which I commanded them. But those who cry transgression, do it because they are the servants of sin, and are the children of disobedience themselves. And those who swear falsely against my servants, that they might bring them into bondage, and death—Woe unto them! because they have offended my little ones, they shall be severed from the ordinances of mine house; their basket shall not be full, their houses and their barns shall perish, and they themselves shall be despised by those that flattered them. They shall not have right to the priesthood, nor their posterity after them, from generation to generation. It had been better for them that a millstone had been hanged about their necks, and they drowned in the depth of the sea. Woe unto all those that discomfort my people, and drive, and murder, and testify against them, saith the Lord of Hosts; a generation of vipers shall not escape the damnation of hell. Behold mine eyes see and know all their works, and I have in reserve a swift judgment in the season thereof, for them all." [^3]

The letter from which this prediction—given as the Word of the Lord—is taken, was written from Liberty prison, March 25, 1839. Again, on the 29th of November, 1843, in the city of Nauvoo, when reviewing in the presence of a number of brethren the course taken by Missouri against the saints, the Prophet said:

"They shall be oppressed as they have oppressed us, not by Mormons, but by others in power. They shall drink a drink offering, the bitterest dregs, not from the Mormons, but from a mightier source than themselves, God shall curse them." [^4]

A PROPHETIC INCIDENT—DONIPHAN

The following prophetic incident is given upon the authority of Mr. Leonidas M. Lawson, now of New York City, formerly a resident of Clay county, Missouri, and a brother-in-law of General Doniphan's. "In the year 1863," says Mr. Lawson, "I visited General A. W. Doniphan at his home in Liberty, Clay county, Missouri. This was soon after the devastation of Jackson county, Missouri, under what is known as 'Order No. 11.' [^5] This devastation was complete. Farms were everywhere destroyed, and the farm houses were burned. During this visit General Doniphan related the following historical facts and personal incidents." Then follows in Mr. Lawson's account a recital of the treatment meted out to the saints in Missouri from the time of their first arrival in 1831, to their expulsion, including recitals of the personal relations of General Doniphan and Joseph Smith, in which the following incident occurred during the Prophet's imprisonment in Liberty jail:

"On one occasion General Doniphan caused the sheriff of the county to bring Joseph Smith from the prison to his law office, for the purpose of consultation about his defense. During Smith's presence in the office, a resident of Jackson county, Missouri, came in for the purpose of paying a fee which was due by him to the firm of Doniphan & Baldwin, and offered in payment a tract of land in Jackson county.

"Doniphan told him that his partner, Mr. Baldwin, was absent at the moment, but as soon as he had an opportunity he would consult him and decide about the matter. When the Jackson county man retired, Joseph Smith, who had overheard the conversation, addressed General Doniphan about as follows:

"'Doniphan, I advise you not to take Jackson county land in payment of the debt. God's wrath hangs over Jackson county. God's people have been ruthlessly driven from it, and you will live to see the day when it will be visited by fire and sword. The Lord of Hosts will sweep it with the besom of destruction. The fields and farms and houses will be destroyed, and only the chimneys will be left to mark the desolation.'

"General Doniphan said to me that the devastation of Jackson county forcibly reminded him of this remarkable prediction of the 'Mormon' Prophet.

Yours sincerely,

[Signed.] "L. M. LAWSON." [^6]

In a letter from Mr. A Saxey of Spanish Fork, Utah, to Mr. Junius Wells treating further of the fulfillment of this prophecy, so well attested, Mr. Saxey under date of Aug. 25, 1902, says:

"In the spring of 1862, my regiment went south, and it was during that time that 'Order No. 11' was issued, but I was back there again in 1864, during the Price raid, and saw the condition of the country. The duty of executing the order was committed to Col. W. R. Penick's regiment, and there is no doubt but that he carried it into effect, from the howl the copperhead papers made at the time. I went down the Blue river, we found houses, barns, outbuildings, nearly all burned down, and nothing left standing but the chimneys which had, according to the fashion of the time, been built on the outside of the buildings. I remember very well that the country looked a veritable desolation." [^7]

There can be no question then but what Joseph Smith predicted retribution upon Missouri for the injustice she practiced towards the Latter-day Saints; for the violation of her own laws and Constitution. She had sown the wind, and must reap the whirlwind. I here submit the evidence in the case:

MISSOURI'S RELATIONSHIP TO SLAVERY

By the political compromise which bore her name, Missouri became a "cape of slavery thrust into free territory." Except for the state of Missouri alone, her southern boundary line was to mark the furthermost point northward beyond which slavery must not be extended into the western territory of the United States. In 1854, however, the Missouri Compromise was practically overthrown by the introduction into congress of the "Kansas-Nebraska Act," by Stephen A. Douglas, United States senator from Illinois. This act provided for the organization of the two new territories from the Louisiana purchase, west of Missouri and Iowa. The act proposed that the new territories should be open to slavery if their inhabitants desired it. This left the question of slavery in the status it occupied previous to the Missouri Compromise, and left the people in the prospective states to determine for themselves whether slavery should or should not prevail in their state. This opened again the slavery question, and there was begun that agitation which finally resulted in the great American war between the states.

As soon as it became apparent that the people of new territories were to determine for themselves the question of slavery, each party began a struggle for possession of the new territory according as its sentiments or interests dictated. The struggle began by the abolition party of the north organizing "Emigrant Aid Societies," and sending emigrants of their own faith into Kansas. The slaveholders of the south, but chiefly those of Missouri, also went settlers representing their faith and interests into the new territory in the hope of bringing Kansas into the Union as a slave state. This brought on a border warfare in which the settlements of western Missouri and eastern Kansas alternately suffered from the raids and counter raids of the respective parties through some six years before the outbreak of the war between the states. As to which were the more lawless or cruel, the fanatical abolitionists or the pro-slavery party, the "jayhawkers," as the organized bands of ruffians of the former party were called, or the "bushwhackers," as the similarly organized bands of the pro-slavery men were called, is not a question necessary to be discussed here. Both held the laws in contempt, and vied with each other in committing atrocities. The western counties of Missouri, where the Latter-day Saints had suffered so cruelly at the hands of the people of those counties some eighteen or twenty years before, were in this border warfare and sorely distressed. The hardships the Missourians had inflicted upon the saints were now frequently visited upon their heads, only more abundantly.

Brigadier-General Daniel M. Frost, who had been employed in repressing lawlessness in the western counties of Missouri, in reporting conditions prevailing there in November, 1860, said:

"The deserted and charred remains of once happy homes, combined with the general terror that prevailed amongst the citizens who still clung to their possessions, gave but too certain proof of the persecution to which they had all been subjected, and which they would again have to endure, with renewed violence, so soon as armed protection should be withdrawn." [^8]

"In view of this condition of affairs," continues the historian of Missouri, I am quoting, "and in order to carry out fully Governor Stewart's order 'to repel invasions and restore peace to the border,' Frost determined to leave a considerable force in the threatened district. Accordingly, a battalion of volunteers, consisting of three companies of rangers and one of artillery, [^9] was enlisted, and Lieutenant-Colonel John S. Bowen, who afterwards rose to high rank in the Confederate service, was chosen to the command."

"With the organization of this force, and perhaps owing also, in some degree, to the inclemency of the season, 'jayhawking,' as such, came to an end, though the thing itself, during the first two or three years of the Civil War, and, in fact, as long as there was anything left on the Missouri side of the border worth taking, flourished more vigorously than ever. The old jayhawking leaders, however, now came with United States commissions in their pockets and at the head of regularly enlisted troops, in which guise they carried on a system of robbery and murder that left a good portion of the frontier south of the Missouri river as perfect a waste as Germany was at the end of the Thirty Years' War." [^10]

Speaking of the situation in Missouri in 1861, the outgoing governor, Robert M. Stewart, in his address to the legislature, and referring to Missouri and her right to be heard on the slavery question, said:

"Missouri has a right to speak on this subject, because she has suffered. Bounded on three sides by free territory, her border counties have been the frequent scenes of kidnapping and violence, and this state has probably lost as much, in the last two years, in the abduction of slaves, as all the rest of the southern states. At this moment several of the western counties are desolated, and almost depopulated, from fear of a bandit horde, who have been committing depredations—arson, theft, and foul murder—upon the adjacent border." [^11]

While this description confines the scenes of violence and rapine to the border counties south of the Missouri river,—it included Jackson county, however, which was one of the heaviest sufferers both in this border warfare and subsequently during the Civil War—still, the counties north of that stream also suffered from lawlessness and violence.

RELATION OF THE STATE OF MISSOURI TO THE WAR BETWEEN THE STATES

At the outbreak of the Civil War Missouri was peculiarly situated. The great majority of her own people were for the Union, but her government, with Clairborne Jackson as the state's executive, was in sympathy with the south. As the extreme southern states one after another seceded from the Union, Missouri was confronted with the question: What position ought she to assume in the impending conflict? The question was referred to a state convention in which appeared no secessionists. Indeed, the people of Missouri in this election by a majority of eighty thousand decided against secession. The convention, in setting forth the attitude of the state on the subject, said that Missouri's position was, "evidently that of a state whose interests are bound up in the maintenance of the Union, and whose kind feelings and strong sympathies are with the people of the southern states, with whom we are connected by ties of friendship and blood. We want the peace and harmony of the country restored, and we want them with us. To go with them as they are now * * * is to ruin ourselves without doing them any good." [^12]

While this doubtless voiced the sentiment of a great majority of Missouri's people, the government of the state and many thousands of its inhabitants sympathized with the south. The general assembly of the state authorized the raising and equipment of large military forces held subject, of course, to the orders of the governor, under the pretense of being prepared to repel invasion from any quarter whatsoever, and enable the state to maintain a neutral attitude. The governor refused to raise Missouri's quota of four regiments under President Lincoln's first call for seventy-five thousand men to suppress the rebellion, on the ground that these regiments were intended to form "part of the president's army, to make war upon the people of the seceded states." This he declared to be illegal, unconstitutional, and therefore an order with which he could not comply. This precipitated a conflict between the state and the national forces that resulted in a civil war within the state since some of her citizens sided with the general government and some with the state government.

"We are now," says Horace Greeley, in his American Conflict, and commenting upon this situation in Missouri—

"We are now to contemplate more directly the spectacle of a state plunged into secession and civil war, not in obedience to, but in defiance of, the action of her convention and the express will of her people—not, even by any direct act of her legislature, but by the will of her executive alone. * * * The state schoolfund, the money provided to pay the July interest on the heavy state debt, and all other available means, amounting in the aggregate to over three millions of dollars, were appropriated to military uses, and placed at the disposal of [governor] Jackson, under the pretense of arming the state against any emergency. By another act the governor was invested with despotic power—even verbal opposition to his assumptions of authority being constituted treason; while every citizen liable to military duty was declared subject to draft into active service at Jackson's will, and an oath of obedience to the state executive exacted."

On the 20th of April, 1861, the Missouri state militia under the governor's orders captured the federal arsenal at Liberty, Clay county, and in the nineteen months following that event "over three hundred battles and skirmishes were fought within the limits of the state;" and it is assumed that in the last two years of the war, there were half as many more; "and it may be said of them," continues our historian, "that they were relatively more destructive of life, as by this time the contest had degenerated into a disgraceful internecine struggle." [^13]

General John C. Fremont, August 31, 1861, then in command of the western department of the forces of the United States, declared martial law in the state of Missouri. In justification of this act he said:

"Circumstances, in my judgment of sufficient urgency, render it necessary that the commanding general of this department should assume the administrative powers of the state. Its disorganized condition, the helplessness of its civil authority, the total insecurity of life, and the devastation of property by bands of murderers and marauders, who infest nearly every county in the state, and avail themselves of the public misfortunes and the vicinity of a hostile force, to gratify private and neighborhood vengeance, and who find an enemy wherever they find plunder,—finally demand the severest measures to repress the daily increasing crimes and outrages, which are driving off the inhabitants and ruining the state. In this condition, the public safety and the success of our arms require unity of purpose: without let or hindrance, to the prompt administration of affairs.

"In order therefore, to suppress disorders, to maintain as far as now practicable the public peace, and to give security and protection to the persons and property of loyal citizens, I do hereby extend, and declare established, martial law throughout the state of Missouri. The lines of the army of occupation in this state are for the present declared to extend from Leavenworth, by way of the posts of Jefferson City, Rolla and Ironton, to Cape Girardeau, on the Mississippi river.

"All persons who shall be taken with arms in their hands within these lines shall be tried by court-martial, and if found guilty, will be shot."

Upon the subject of the slaves, in the same proclamation, the general said:—

"The property, real and personal, of all persons in the state of Missouri who shall take up arms against the United States, and who shall be directly proven to have taken active part with their enemies in the field, is declared to be confiscated to the public use; and their slaves, if any they have, are hereby declared free men."

ORDER NO. 11

In August, 1863, the celebrated "Order No. 11" was issued from Kansas City by General Thomas Ewing, By this "Order"—

"All persons living in Cass, Jackson, and Bates counties, Missouri, and in that part of Vernon included in this district, except those living within one mile of the limits of Independence, Hickman's Mills, Pleasant Hill, and Harrisonville, and except those in that part of Kaw township, Jackson county, north of Brush creek and west of the Big Blue, embracing Kansas City and Westport, are hereby ordered to remove from their present places of residence within fifteen days from the date thereof. Those who, within that time, establish their loyalty to the satisfaction of the commanding officer of the military station nearest their present place of residence, will receive from him certificates stating the fact of their loyalty, and the names of the witnesses by whom it can be shown. All who receive such certificates will be permitted to remove to any military station in this district, or to any part of the state of Kansas, except the counties on the eastern borders of the state. All others shall remove out of this district. Officers commanding companies and detachments serving in the counties named will see that this paragraph is promptly obeyed." [^14]

The admonition in the last clause to commanding officers was rigidly followed; and within the district named scenes of violence and cruelty were appalling. This order with its cruel execution has been more severely criticized than any other act during the Civil War. The justification for it has been urged on the ground that Jackson county afforded a field of operations for Confederates; that here the bushwacking marauders recruited their forces, and found the means of support; that the policy was necessary on the ground of putting an end to that kind of warfare. On the other hand, it is contended that "tried by any known standard," the people in that section of Missouri were as loyal to the Union as were their neighbors in Kansas. "They had voted against secession; they had not only, thus far, kept their quota in the Union army full, and that without draft or bounty, but they continued to do so; and if they did not protect themselves against the outrages alike of Confederate bushwackers and Union jayhawkers, it was because early in the war they had been disarmed by federal authority and were consequently without the means of defense." [^15]

JACKSON COUNTY REAPS THE "WHIRLWIND"

By the execution of the order, however, the people in the districts named "were driven from their homes, their dwellings burned, their farms laid waste, and the great bulk of their movable property handed over, without let or hindrance, to the Kansas jayhawkers. It was a brutal order, ruthlessly enforced, but so far from expelling or exterminating the guerrillas, it simply handed the whole district over to them." "Indeed," continues Lucien Carr, "we are assured by one who was on the ground, that from this time until the end of the war, no one wearing the federal uniform dared risk his life within the devastated region. The only people whom the enforcement of the order did injure were some thousands of those whom it was Ewing's duty to protect." [^16]

Whether justified or not by the attitude of the Jackson county people in the Civil War, the execution of "Order No. 11" certainly was but a re-enactment, though upon a larger scale, of those scenes which the inhabitants of that section of the country thirty years before had perpetrated upon the Latter-day Saints in expelling them from Jackson county. The awful scenes then enacted inspired the now celebrated painting by G. C. Bingham, bearing the title Civil War, and dedicated by the artist "to all who cherish the principles of civil liberty," a photogravure reproduction of which accompanies this chapter.

In the fall of 1864, General Sterling Price penetrated the state of Missouri at the head of twelve thousand men; captured Lexington, in Ray county, and Independence, in Jackson county, and thence made his escape into Arkansas. "In the course of this raid he marched 1,434 miles, fought forty-three battles and skirmishes, and according to his own calculation destroyed upwards of 'ten million dollars worth of property,' a fair share of which belonged to his own friends." [^17]

The following passages from a work by Rev. W. M. Leftwich, D. D. on Martyrdom in Missouri, a History of Religious Persecution, the Seizure of Churches, and the Persecution of Ministers of the Gospel in the State of Missouri During the Civil War, and Under the Test Oaths of the New Constitution, 1870, will further depict the horrors of the Civil War period in Missouri, and demonstrate that she reaped the whirlwind of the furies, the wind of which she sowed in the preceding generation, when the Latter-day Saints were the victims of her lawlessness:

MISSOURI'S SCARLET RECORD OF BLOOD AND CRIME

"The extremists, north and south, whether religious or political, found the heartiest supporters in Missouri; and that which brought the two sections together in organized warfare brought the citizens of the same neighborhood in Missouri, and even members of the same family, into the sharpest personal conflict. The great battles of Bull Run, Fredericksburg, Vicksburg, the Wilderness, Seven Pines and Gettysburg were reproduced on a limited scale in a thousand places in Missouri. The brush, the prairie, the glen, the roadside all over the state sheltered concealed foes, and often witnessed the deadliest combats between neighbors and brothers. Here 'houses were divided, two against three and three against two,' 'a man was set at variance with his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law, and a man's foes were they of his own household.' There was in many instances a literal fulfillment of the prediction that 'the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child, and the children shall rise up against their parents and cause them to be put to death;' and the spirit of contention was too rife to confine itself to the hostile armies, or even the lawless bands of armed men, who, in the name of one party or the other, satiated their diabolical hatred and inordinate cupidity by robbery, plunder, pillage, and depopulation with fire and sword.

"It is no marvel that the most relentless and inhuman spirit of the war found encouragement, if not protection, and expended its force and fury upon the non-combatant and helpless population of Missouri; for this state furnished the bravest men for the armies and the most dastardly cowards for 'home protection.' While her brave sons fought and fell upon the fields of honor, making the very blood and death of battle illustrious by an unchallenged heroism, the warfare at home presented scenes of outrage and horror unsurpassed by anything in the annals of civilized warfare, if, indeed, there can be such a thing as civilized warfare, for everything about it is intensely savage.

"Between the 'jayhawkers' of Kansas and the 'bushwackers' of Missouri some whole counties were plundered, some were desolated by fire and sword, and some were almost depopulated. Widows' homes were pillaged and burned, delicate mothers and daughters were captured, taken to camp and compelled to cook and wash for ruffian bands of armed men, to say nothing of nameless indignities and the most horrible crimes. Churches and dwellings were seized, converted into barracks for soldiers, stables for horses, and often burned to the ground in wanton destruction. It was often heard in boast that the track of armies, or more properly predatory bands, should be lighted through entire counties by the glare of burning buildings, and the threat was too often witnessed in all the midnight glare of faithful execution by the pallid and panic-stricken old men, women and children in midwinter. But the heart sickens at the recital, as the enlightened conscience revolted then at the reality. These statements must suffice to recall the scenes which were enacted and the men who educated and then hardened the public conscience for the crimes committed during the war, against God and his chosen ministers and church, and for the subsequent legislative proscription of ministers of the gospel, as a class, and christianity as an institution. (pp. 118-120) * * * It was a time (i.e. the war period) of widespread iniquity with almost all classes. Crime, in every conceivable form reveled without shame, and hesitated at no atrocity. The officers of law and the courts were alike powerless to punish crime and protect innocence; 'and because iniquity did abound the love of many waxed cold,' and the man of God who could be faithful to the souls of men without fear or favor had nerve, courage, faith.

"His home was at the mercy of lawless bands whose nameless crimes his last sermon rebuked, and his head was a target for the assassin's bullet whose cowardly heart felt the sting of conscious guilt under the searchings of God's truth—a guilt, too, of which the minister was wholly ignorant. More than one faithful watchman, during those 'times that tried men's souls,' went from his pulpit to find his home in ashes, his wife and children shelterless in the storm, and breadless and friendless in the world; and more than one, who did not know that they had an enemy in the world, were called from their beds at midnight to be shot down like dogs, or butchered like hogs in the very presence of their families, without warning, without any known provocation, and without knowing their murderers.

"Some of the brightest and purest lights of the church went out at midnight—suddenly, appallingly—and their 'souls were under the altar' many long, weary hours before the news of their murder could pass beyond the family threshold, and often days before it could even reach the family itself. Many of these murders are wholly unaccountable upon any other hypothesis than that intimated above, as the victims hereafter to be named had kept themselves from strife, and had pursued, with 'singleness of heart as unto the Lord,' their one calling; they had taken neither part nor lot in war, one way or the other, and, indeed, were not all of one political faith, their sympathies were—some for the Union and some for the South. (pp. 124-5).

* * * It is confidently believed that when a true history of the war is written, it will appear that, in its recklessness of life and wantonness of destruction, and in all its most shameless, and revolting, and nameless crimes perpetrated upon the unoffending, the innocent and the helpless, the non-combatant population of Missouri has suffered more than any other class of people in any state. And much of the sufferings of this class of people is justly chargeable to those into whose hands the conduct of the war in this state was first placed. The just judgment of posterity and the just retributions of eternity will hold to a righteous accountability those who, under whatever pretense, made war upon ministers of the gospel, unoffending old men, and helpless women and children, dragging them to prison and death, while the pretext for it was found only in the hasty expression of sympathy, or the constructive connection with one side or the other based upon church affiliations.

"For instance, southern Methodists, and southern Baptists, and southern Presbyterians were by the Union men and forces constructively identified with secession and rebellion, and put in sympathy with the southern cause. The first from the beginning, the last two after the virtual disruption of those respective churches. Under the heat of party passion many innocent victims suffered the spoiling of their goods, and often the loss of life itself, only upon this constructive evidence. The principal portions of the state were always held by the Union forces, and their subordinate officers and independent, predatory bands were either commissioned to make war upon these innocent and defenseless people or they did it without commission. Certain it is that it was done, and done, too, relentlessly and indiscriminately. (pp. 131-2).

"* * * It was assumed that all men had sympathies for one party or the other, and an expression of them in any way was sure to provoke the hostility of those who assumed the guardianship of human sensibilities. Property belonging to persons of opposing sympathies was confiscated and appropriated to the use of the officers and men taking it; and at this stage of the war the effort was made to force the sympathies of men through their property. Many a well stocked farm was stripped of everything that could be carried off and the dwellings burned to the ground, because it was said the family had southern sympathies; and many a helpless man and woman, too, had to prove themselves innocent of crimes of which they were assumed to be guilty to save them from an uncoffined grave.

"Armed brigands came down from Kansas and Iowa, and over from Illinois, to plunder and rob the rich farmers of Missouri, and many of the poor ones, too, in the name of the Union, and to preserve the Constitution. They carried away wagons, horses, mules and stock of every description, plundered houses of silver plate, jewelry, beds, and bedding, carpets, clothing of men, women and children—even the mementoes of ladies and the toys of children—everything that could gratify their cupidity or vex and mortify the original owners. All this for the preservation of the Union, by enriching the houses and pockets of men who cared for no higher distinction.

"Ministers of the gospel suffered in common with others, especially those of the southern Methodist church, and others who were suspected of disloyal sentiments. Many of them had to 'take the spoiling of their goods joyfully,' or otherwise, and were wholly broken up and reduced to penury and want, and yet many of them were honestly and earnestly laboring to abate the feverish excitement, allay the bitterness of feeling and promote 'on earth peace and good will toward men.' (pp. 136-7).

"* * * Armed bands appeared in every part of the state—some on one side and some on the other, some with authority and some without, but all subsisting as they could, and but few caring how. These bands, many of which were irresponsible brigands and marauders, usually 'foraged' on the citizens whose sympathies were on the opposite side. They did not always stop at the necessary supplies for subsistence, but were robbers of houses, and many of them indiscriminate and general thieves, taking horses, mules, cattle, wagons, corn, hay, flour, bacon, fruit, blankets, quilts, featherbeds, carpets, clothing of every kind, from elegant silks, furs and shawls to children's shoes and toys; money, watches, and jewelry were often taken from the persons of ladies. These highwaymen would often put the torch to dwelling houses at night and take a fiendish pleasure in seeing the awakened inmates make their escape or perish in the flames. Men were shot down by them on the highway, in the fields, the woods and at the doors of their houses as though life was of little value, and its appreciation was about equal to the effect of one bootless, midnight murder upon the great question of union or division. At all events, after the battle of Lexington, September 21, 1861, and the rapid movements of armies which followed, human life was at the caprice of the armed banditti that multiplied so rapidly over the state.

"Many defenseless citizens suffered such indignities and insults from them in addition to the loss of all they had on earth, that they fled to the army for protection, or to the brush and banded together for revenge. Men, whose houses were destroyed, and whose wives, and daughters, and sisters had been worse than insulted by inhuman ruffians, swore the direst vengeance, and with unsparing recklessness scattered desolation and death in their tortuous track. For their deeds military commanders of posts would hold defenseless communities responsible, levy blackmail upon them, sometimes to the full value of their property, and institute a system of espionage that would put an eavesdropper under nearly every man's window and a detective in every social circle and public assembly. Property and life were thus put at the mercy of unprincipled detectives and spies, selected often from the lowest and most unscrupulous classes of men and women. With such a system of military despotism no man's life was safe, and indeed many men were accused, arrested, imprisoned, tried, convicted and put to death without ever knowing the charges against them.

"It is not difficult to conjecture the effect of this state of things upon the public mind. To say that the people in some whole counties along the borders of Iowa and Kansas were seized with panic and consternation is not more than the truth. Men and families broke up, and taking what they could with convenience and safety fled for life and protection, some north, some south, some to Canada, some to California, some to the army, some to the large cities, and some to the brush. Some men ordered and some frightened their neighbors away, and then, to furnish them means to travel, bought their stock and lands at a nominal price—in some instances for a mere song. What a farmer, or mechanic, or merchant left behind in his flight was seized as lawful prey by the first that found it and appropriated to private use. Indeed, in one instance, a whole county was depopulated outside of the town, by military order, and devoted to pillage and plunder and that the third county of the state in population and wealth.

"It was even worse, if possible, in the track of large armies and in those parts of the country upon which they subsisted.

"No part of the state suffered more than the southwest, extending from a line that would strike Rolla, Sedalia and Fort Scott, in Kansas, to the state of Arkansas. Many parts of that section of the state were literally laid waste, and made a desolation by fire and sword. The breath of war, like the simoon, swept over the country, leaving a wide waste of desolation and death, which the benignity of peace and the hand of industry can not reclaim and rebuild for many long years.

"To say that public sentiment in the state was demoralized by such scenes before the end of 1861 is an expression too tame to reflect adequately the real fact. The moral forces of society were paralyzed, social restraints were broken down, and even religious character was powerless either for protection or public good. The old standards of virtue, integrity, honest and right principle were broken down and swept away, and men became reckless of the laws of God and man. In the fury and fire of partisan strife, and amid the familiar scenes of blood and death, men trampled upon right, crucified truth, murdered innocence, loved vengeance, despised virtue, abandoned principle, forgot their loves, left their dead unburied and their buried uncoffined, and hung upon the bloody war path like avenging furies." (pp. 163-166).

The heart sickens at such recitals as these. If Missouri in the preceding generation had sown to the wind when the Latter-day Saints were the victims of their cruel lawlessness, Missouri in the Civil War period reaped the whirlwind. The measure they had meted out to the saints was surely meted out to them again, pressed down and running over more than a hundred fold was the measure increased unto her, of which, what is quoted above, is the evidence.

PARALLEL OF MISSOURI'S CHARGES AGAINST THE SAINTS AND WHAT SHE SUFFERED

That a just retribution overtook the entire state, as well as the inhabitants of Jackson county, and other western counties, I think must be conceded by all who are familiar with the events of Missouri's history in the Civil War. That which she did to an inoffensive people was done to her inhabitants, especially to those living within the districts formerly occupied by the Latter-day Saints; only the measure meted out to the Missourians was heaped up, pressed down, and made to run over.

The western Missourians had complained that the Latter-day Saints were eastern men, whose manners, habits, customs, and even dialect were different from their own; [^18] but the Missourians lived to see great throngs of those same eastern men flock into an adjoining territory and infest their border, so that the settlers of western Missouri became accustomed to, and learned to endure the strange manners, customs and dialects so different from their own.

The western Missourians complained of the rapidity with which the saints were gathering in the state to establish their Zion; but the Missourians lived to see hordes of the detested easterners gather into their region of country by continuous streams of emigrant trains, sent there by the "Emigrant Aid Societies" of New England.

The western Missourians falsely charged that the coming of "Zion camp" into Missouri to aid their brethren to repossess their homes in Jackson county, was an armed invasion of the state; but the western Missourians lived to see formidable hosts of eastern and northern men gather upon their frontiers and who frequently invaded the state. [^19]

The western Missourians had falsely charged the saints with abolition madness, with tampering with their slaves, with inviting free negroes into the state to corrupt their blacks, whose very presence would render their institution of slave labor insecure: but the men of western Missouri lived to see their system of slave labor abolished by the setting free of some one hundred and fifteen thousand slaves, valued at $40,000,000, eight thousand of whom were "martialed and disciplined for war" in the federal armies, and many of them marched to war against their former masters.

Governor Dunklin and his advisors in the government of Missouri claimed that there was no warrant of authority under the laws and Constitution of the state for calling out a permanent military force to protect the saints in the peaceful possession of their homes until the civil authority proved itself competent to keep the peace and protect the citizens in the enjoyment of their guaranteed rights: but the people in the western part of Missouri saw the time come when they themselves prayed for the same protection; and Governor Stewart, unlike Governor Dunklin, approved the appointment of a battalion of volunteers consisting of three companies of rangers and one of artillery, all of which were placed under command of Lieutenant-Colonel John L. Bowen, to do the very thing the saints had prayed might be done in their case. [^20] But even this provision for their protection did not avail; for their old jayhawking enemies soon reappeared under new conditions—which will be stated in the next paragraph—under which they renewed their incursions of rapine and murder.

The state authorities of Missouri converted the mobs which had plundered the saints, burned their homes and laid waste their lands, into the state militia, which gave the former mob a legal status, under which guise they plundered the saints, compelled them to sign away their property and agree to leave the state. To resist this mob-militia was to be guilty of treason. But the people of western Missouri lived to see a like policy pursued towards themselves. They suffered much in Jackson and other western counties in the border war, previous to the opening of the Civil War, from the inroads of abolition jayhawkers in the interest of anti-slavery. For a time this was in part suppressed by the state militia under General Frost and by the permanent force stationed on the border under Lieutenant-Colonel Bowen. But later, and when the Civil War broke out, these old jayhawking leaders "now came with United States commissions in their pockets, and at the head of regularly enlisted troops, in which guise they carried on a system of robbery and murder that left a good portion of the frontier south of the Missouri river as perfect a waste as Germany was at the end of the Thirty Years War." [^21]

Such wretches as Generals Lane and Jennison, though Union officers, and denounced alike by Governor Robinson of Kansas—of course a strong Union man—and General Halleck, [^22] commander-in-chief of the western armies of the Union, were permitted to disgrace alike the Union cause and our human nature by their unspeakable atrocities. But they were retained in office, nevertheless. It was the outrages committed by these men and their commands, and the Kansas "Red Legs" that led to the equally savage reprisals on the people of Kansas. In revenge for what western Missouri had suffered, outlawed Missourians sacked Lawrence, Kansas, a Union city, massacred one hundred and eighty-three of its inhabitants, and left it in flames. In justification of their act of savagery, they declared: "Jennison has laid waste our homes, and the 'Red Legs' have perpetrated unheard of crimes. Houses have been plundered and burned, defenseless men shot down, and women outraged. We are here for revenge—and we have got it." [^23] How nearly this language of the Missourians—and there can be no question that it describes what had been done in Missouri by Lane, Jennison, and their commands, and the Kansas "Red Legs" [^24]—follows the complaint justly made by the Latter-day Saints years before against the Missourians! But there are recorded against the saints no such horrible deeds of reprisal.

The western Missourians falsely charged that the saints held illicit communication with the Indian tribes then assembled near the frontiers of the state, and pretended to an alarm that their state might be invaded by the savages, prompted thereto by "Mormon" fanaticism: but these same Missourians lived to see cause for real fear of such an invasion when the governor of an adjoining state—Arkansas—authorized Brigadier General Albert Pike to raise two mounted regiments of Choctaw and Chickasaw Indians to actually invade the state of Missouri. These regiments of savages were engaged in the Battle of Pea Ridge, on the southwest borders of Missouri; General Pike, who led them in that battle, dressed himself in gaudy, savage costume, and wore a large plume on his head—a la Niel Gilliam at Far West—to please the Indians. It is also charged that before the Battle of Pea Ridge, he maddened his Indians with liquor "that they might allow the savage nature of their race to have unchecked development. In their fury they respected none of wounded, and committed atrocities too horrible to mention." The "fear" expressed by the Missourians respecting the alleged illicit communication of the saints with the Indians was mere feigning, but with this example before them, and know-the usages of civilized warfare, but scalped the helplessing that there were many thousands of Indians on their frontiers that might be similarly induced to take up arms, their former feigned fears became real ones.

The Missourians instead of demanding the execution of the law in support of the liberties of the saints, expressed the fear that the presence of the saints would give rise to "civil war," in which none could be neutrals, since their homes must be the theater on which it would be fought, so they drove the saints away; but the Missourians lived to see the outbreak of a "civil war" in their state that was one of the most appalling men ever witnessed; and Missouri, when all things are considered, and especially western Missouri, suffered more than any other state of the Union. In other states the war lasted at most but four years; but counting her western border warfare in the struggle for Kansas, the war was waged in western Missouri from 1855 to 1865, ten years; and for many years after the close of the Civil War, a guerrilla warfare was intermittently carried on by bands of outlaws harbored in western Missouri—especially in Jackson, Ray, Caldwell and Clay counties—that terrorized the community and shocked the world by the daring and atrocity of their crimes—including bank robberies in open day, express train wrecking and robberies, and murders. Not until 1881 was this effectually stopped by the betrayal and murder of the outlaw chief of these bands.

THE SUM OF MISSOURI'S PAYMENT

Missouri sent into the Union armies one hundred and nine thousand of her sons, including eight thousand negroes. About thirty thousand enlisted in the Confederate army. According to official reports the percentage of troops to population in the western states and territories was 13.6 per cent., and in the New England States 12 per cent; whilst in Missouri, if there be added to her quota sent to the northern army the thirty thousand sent to the Confederate army, her percentage was fourteen per cent., or sixty per cent. of those who were subject to military duty. Of the deaths among these enlisted men, only approximate estimates may be made, since of the mortality among the Confederates no official records were kept. But of those who entered the Union service, thirteen thousand eight hundred and eighty-five deaths are officially reported. The rate of mortality in the Confederate forces, owing to the greater hardships they endured, and the lack of medical attendants to care for the wounded, was much higher, and is generally estimated at twelve thousand, (most of whom were from western Missouri), which added to the deaths of those in the Union army would aggregate the loss among the troops from Missouri to twenty-five thousand eight hundred and eighty-five. "This estimate," says Lucien Carr, "does not cover those who were killed in the skirmishes that took place between the home guards and the guerrillas; nor does it include those who were not in either army, but who were shot down by the 'bushwackers' and 'bushwacking' federal soldiers. Of these latter there is no record, though there were but few sections of the state in which such scenes were not more or less frequent. Assuming the deaths from these two sources to have been 1,200, and summing up the results, it will be found that the number of Missourians who were killed in the war and died from disease during their term of service amounted to not less than 27,000 men."

The loss in treasure was in full proportion to the loss of life. The state expended $7,000,000 in fitting out and maintaining her Union troops in the field. She lost $40,000,000 in slave property; and four years after the close of the war—two of which, 1867-8, were remarkably prosperous—the taxable wealth of the state was $46,000,000 less than it was in 1860. "In many portions of the state," says the historian to whom I am indebted for so many of the facts relating to Missouri in these pages, "especially in the southern and western borders, whole counties had been devastated. The houses were burned, and the fences destroyed, and the farms laid waste. Much of the live stock of the state had disappeared; and everywhere, even in those sections that were comparatively quiet and peaceful, the quantity of land in cultivation was much less than it had been at the outbreak of the war. Added to these sources of decline, and in some measure a cause of them, was the considerable emigration from the state which now took place, and particularly from those regions that lay in the pathway of the armies, or from those neighborhoods that were given over to the 'bushwackers.' The amount of loss from these different sources cannot be accurately gauged, but some idea may be formed of it, and of the unsettled condition of affairs, from the fact that only 41 out of the 113 counties in the state receipted for the tax books for 1861; and in these counties, only $250,000 out of the $600,000 charged against them were collected."

This only in a general way indicates the losses in property sustained by the state during the period under consideration, but it assists one to understand somewhat the enormity of those losses.

It is true, of course, that in any event Missouri must have participated in the war between the states; and situated as she was, and her people divided in their sympathies between the north and the south would suffer beyond other states. But what immeasurably added to her suffering, and especially to the suffering of western Missouri, was the spirit of lawlessness, rapine, murder and mobocracy engendered in the minds of the inhabitants of that section of the state, by their treatment of the Latter-day Saints, and the course the state pursued with reference to them. [^25]

It is in no spirit of gloating exultation that the foregoing facts in Missouri's history are referred to here. It gives no gratification to the writer to recount the woes of Missouri, and his hope is that it will give none to the reader. These facts of history are set down only because they are valuable for the lesson they teach. It may be that visible retribution does not always follow in the wake of state or national wrong-doing; but it is well that it should sometimes do so, lest men should come to think that Eternal Justice sleeps, or that she may be thwarted, or, what would be worst of all, that she does not exist. I say it is well, therefore, that sometimes visible retribution should follow state and national as well as individual transgressions, that the truth of the great principle that "as men sow, so shall they reap," may be vindicated. Missouri in her treatment of the Latter-day Saints during the years 1833-9, sowed the wind; in the disastrous events which overtook her during the years 1855-1880, she reaped the whirlwind. Let us hope that in those events Justice was fully vindicated so far as the state of Missouri is concerned; and that the lessons of her sad experience may not be lost to the world.

Footnotes

Of course the "Blue Lodges" of Missouri organized largely on the same principle as the "Emigrant Aid Societies" of New England, and adopted practically the same methods, expecting to add Kansas to the list of slave states. But "certainly," remarks Lucien Carr, "if a company of so-called northern emigrants, in which there were two hundred and twenty-five men and only five women, whose wagons contained no visible furniture, agricultural implements or mechanical tools, but abounded in all the requisite articles for camping and campaigning purposes, were considered as bona fide settlers and permitted to vote, there could not have been a sufficient reason for ruling out any band of Missourians who ever crossed the border and declared their intention of remaining, even though they left the next day. (History of Missouri, Carr, 245.)

Among the men sent to the borders of Missouri by the "Emigrant Aid Societies" of New England were some of the most desperate adventurers; and the Missourians who had pretended to be alarmed at the coming of "Zion's camp," and feigned to regard it as an armed invasion of the state, saw their state repeatedly invaded—especially Jackson county—by the bands of Union "jayhawkers" organized from among these desperate eastern and northern men, who ruthlessly laid waste their homes and farms.

---
Notas:
[^1] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 327.
[^2] See American Commonwealths, Missouri, p. 181. The statement rests upon the authority of discourses by President Geo. A. Smith, church historian, Salt Lake City, July 25th, 1869, also June 20th, 1869, Journal of Discourses, vol. xiii, p. 77.
[^3] History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 294. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxi.
[^4] History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi, p. 95.
[^5] Of which more later.
[^6] The above is from a letter of Mr. Lawson's under date of "New York City, Feb. 7th, 1902," addressed to "Mr. Junius F. Wells." Mr. Wells published Mr. Lawson's letter in extenso in the Improvement Era (Utah), of November, 1902, vol. vi, in an article under the caption "A Prophecy and Its Fulfillment."
[^7] Mr. Saxey's letter to Mr. Wells is given in extenso in Improvement Era, vol. vi, p. 10.
[^8] American Commonwealths, Missouri, p. 258.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] American Commonwealths, Missouri, p. 259.
[^11] The Fight for Missouri, Snead, p. 14.
[^12] American Commonwealths, Missouri, p. 288.
[^13] American Commonwealths, Missouri, p. 342.
[^14] History of Caldwell and Livingston Counties, p. 51.
[^15] American Commonwealths, Missouri, p. 351.
[^16] Ibid., p. 351.
[^17] History of Missouri, Carr, p. 360. General Price was the Colonel Sterling Price who held the Prophet Joseph in custody in Richmond in 1838, who shackled the brethren and whose scurrilous guards were so severely rebuked by the Prophet. See ante, ch. xxxvi.
[^18] Minutes of Citizens' Meeting, Clay County, History of the Church, Period I, vol. iii, p. 450.
[^19] "The character of much of this emigration may be gathered," says one historian, "from the fact that the Kansas Emigration Societies, Leagues and Committees * * * sent out men only; and that in some of their bands Sharp's rifles were more numerous than agricultural implements." (American Commonwealths, Carr, p. 243, note.)
[^20] History of Missouri, Carr, p. 158.
[^21] History of Missouri, Carr, p. 259.
[^22] General Halleck when he learned that the "jayhawking" leader, Lane, had been promoted to the command of a brigade, declared that such an appointment was "offering a premium for rascality and robbing generally;" and that it would "take twenty thousand men to counteract its effect in the state." (History of Missouri, Carr, p. 348.)
[^23] Spring's History of Kansas, p. 287.
[^24] These were bands of Kansas robbers, whose custom it was at intervals to dash into Missouri, seize horses and cattle—not omitting other and worse crimes on occasion—then to repair with their booty to Lawrence, where it was defiantly sold at auction." (History of Missouri, Carr, p. 348.)
[^25] On this point the late George Q. Cannon remarked in his Life of Joseph the Prophet: "Poor Missouri atoned with rivers of blood and tears for her sin against herself in permitting the executive to usurp unlawful authority. The precedent of Bogg's exercise of power was handed down. In the day of the persecution of the saints, a court had decided that belief in the Bible was treason against the government. The idea had moved with terrible momentum; for there we find in 1861, that, 'even verbal opposition to the governor's assumption of authority was constituted treason.' It is true that with any kind of population Missouri must have taken part either for or against the Union; but it is also true that the existence within her boundaries of thousands of lawless wretches who loved to plunder and rapine, largely increased her sufferings. The entire state was punished for permitting the massacre of the saints to go unchecked and for encouraging the spirit of plunder by rewarding the mobocrats with money from the state treasury. Men learned to live by murder and rapine. It cost Missouri dearly to get rid of the evil, but happily for her much of the bad element was eliminated. Many of the old mobocrats suffered all the tortures which they had inflicted. But Missouri largely purged herself of the vile element, and after the strife was ended better men and better sentiments came into the ascendency. Some of the men who had been averse to mobocratic violence against the Latter-day Saints believed that retribution would come. They lived to see the day of atonement and to participate in local reconstruction and a restoration of better things." (The Life of Joseph the Prophet, 1888, George Q. Cannon, ch. xliv.)
