Richard J. Marshall, Home Teaching with Purpose and Power ( 1990)

2

A Halfhearted Home Teacher Repents

The red car continued swiftly down the freeway, but inside was consternation and concern.

"Plant corn? Plant corn? Now wait a minute! If you're saying I must sprinkle seeds of friendship in those homes if I want a friendly response from each family—if you're saying I have to plan better meetings so—!"

The father-in-law cut Fred's harangue short merely by holding up his hand. With feigned benevolence he declared, "From what you've told me, you don't really seem to understand what to do once you and your companion are inside the home, or that you need considerable preparation before you even get there. You seem adrift. You'll appreciate this old Chinese saying: 'If you don't know where you're going—then you're on your way.' "

The Chinese saying did not erase Fred's frown. "And Sally wants you to teach me how to home teach on our golfing day?"

"Look, if I have an advantage over you, it's not in golf—it's in priesthood experience. If I could offer some suggestions that might make your home teaching—" But now he stopped in midsentence as his son-in-law's hand went up.

"And I thank you for your kind offer to help me," the younger man said pleasantly enough. "But you did not hear me a minute ago. I said I want out! I am still going to insist that the bishop release me as a home teacher."

"But didn't you just agree it was an inspired program?"

"True enough—inspired for others, but not for me." Fred glanced sideways at his father-in-law. "The Church has many callings. No person fits them all. Not everyone can lead the choir, conduct a sacrament service, or balance the ward budget." He paused for emphasis. "And not everyone fits the mold of a home teacher. I'm one of those. I don't fit the mold—and I don't want to continue going pointlessly into those homes anymore!" The older man shut his eyes tight and made a terrible grimace. He held it for his companion to see.

"I know, I know," was the young man's response. "And I get the feeling you're not going to give up, keeping your teeth clamped on my leg all day." He laughed to relieve the other. "Look, you're more than my father-in-law. You're a true friend. But you also remind me of the senior officer who interviewed me just before I was supposed to be released from the Navy. He tried every possible argument to get me to re-enlist. I was determined not to. I finally told him that even if they made me an admiral and gave me a fleet to command with Miss America as my adjutant, I still would not re-enlist. I thought that I'd finally made my point, because he shrugged, wrote a notation on my personal file, and dismissed me.

"But as I walked past him, I glanced at what he had written. In the space marked 'Re-enlistment Plans,' he had neatly printed: 'Undecided.' "

The father-in-law remained silent.

"Look, you have a convincing argument that home teaching is the will of the Lord," the young man continued. "It existed from Adam's day down to the Apostle James and was lauded by good King Benjamin on his tower, yet I still don't want to do it!" A little vexation had crept into the younger man's voice. "It is all too new to me. I've been an outsider for most of my life. I'm still learning. I have nothing to teach anyone—let alone those five families who are stuck with me. And most of all, I'm just plain uncomfortable trying to posture as an inspired home teacher. I want out!"

The father-in-law reflected as the red car flew past a herd of grazing dairy cows. "Your talk about being an outsider stirs my memory," he said. "In the early history of the Church, everyone who joined was an outsider. Yet, unproven men like Parley Pratt and Wilford Woodruff were baptized, ordained, and called on missions within a handful of days, and they were great, productive missionaries."

"I'm no Parley Pratt."

"All right, that does it," exclaimed the father-in-law in a cheery voice. He bent down and rustled through his briefcase once again. "I didn't think I'd have to refer to this, but you've pushed me too far with your argument about being 'new' and being an 'outsider.' So when Sally said home teaching was your very big problem, I brought along my home teaching file, little things I've collected over the years."

He thumbed through several publications and peered at one. "Yes, this is it." He waved several pages at Fred. "Now, listen to this. It's a treasure—a historic statement of William Cahoon, who joined the Church October 16, 1830, just six and a half months after the revelation setting forth home teaching responsibilities—the 20th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, which I quoted earlier. Let me read young Cahoon to you: 'I was called and ordained to act as a ward teacher to visit the families of the saints. I got along very well 'till I found that I was obliged to pay a visit to the Prophet. Being young, only about 17 years of age, I felt my weakness in visiting the Prophet and his family in the capacity of a teacher. I almost felt like shrinking from duty. Finally, I went to his door and knocked, and in a minute the Prophet came to the door. I stood there trembling and said to him, "Brother Joseph, I have come to visit you in the capacity of a ward teacher, if it is convenient for you." He said, "Brother William, come right in; I am glad to see you, sit down in that chair there, and I will go call my family in."

" 'They soon came in and took seats. He then said, "Brother William, I submit myself and family into your hands," and took his seat. "Now, Brother William," he said, "ask all the questions you feel like."

" 'By this time my fears and trembling had ceased, and I said, "Brother Joseph, are you trying to live your religion?"

" 'He answered, "Yes."

" 'Then I said, "Do you pray in your family?"

" 'He said, "Yes."

" ' "Do you teach your family the principles of the gospel?"

" 'He replied, "Yes, I am trying to do it."

" ' "Do you ask a blessing on your food?"

" 'He answered, "Yes."

" ' "Are you trying to live in peace and harmony with all your family?"

" 'He said that he was.

" 'I turned to Sister Emma, his wife, and said, "Sister Emma, are you trying to live your religion? Do you teach your children to obey their parents? Do you try to teach them to pray?"

" 'To all these questions, she answered, "Yes, I am trying to do so."

" 'I then turned to Joseph and said, "I am now through with my questions as a teacher; and now if you have any instructions to give, I shall be happy to receive them."

" 'He said, "God bless you, Brother William; and if you are humble and faithful, you shall have power to settle all difficulties that may come before you in the capacity of a teacher."

" 'I then left my parting blessing upon him and his family, as a teacher, and took my departure.' " [^1]

The father-in-law laid the pages in his lap, looked at Fred, and said, "Isn't that a remarkable statement? A brand-new convert, just seventeen years old, and he marches right into the home of the Prophet himself, all alone, and puts Joseph's feet to the fire, does the job, leaves a blessing, and goes on his way with an indelible experience we can still read about today, over 160 years later."

Fred gripped the wheel and gritted his teeth.

"So you want out of home teaching because you're an outsider?" the father-in-law asked rhetorically. "That teenage boy had just joined the Church. But he was fulfilling a priesthood assignment as best he could."

He rifled through more papers. "Now let's talk about the age spectrum for home teachers. If William Cahoon was only seventeen, what about old men? What is the cut-off age for home teachers? Let me read you a quotation from Joseph F. Smith, who was president of the Church when he made this statement in 1914: 'We have had called to our attention, recently, the fact that some men who are of long standing in the Church—indeed, some of them born and reared in the Church, and who are occupying prominent positions in some of the quorums of the priesthood—when their presidents or their bishops of the wards in which they live call upon them to visit the Saints, teach the principles of the Gospel and perform the duties of teachers, they coolly inform their bishops that they have graduated from that calling, and refuse to act as teachers. Brother Charles W. Penrose [an apostle] is eighty-two years of age. I am going on seventy-six, and I believe that I am older than several of these good men who have graduated from the duties in the Lesser Priesthood, and I want to tell them and you that we are not too old to act as teachers, if you will call us to do it—not one of us. There is never a time, there never will come a time to those who hold the priesthood in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, when men can say of themselves that they have done enough. So long as life lasts, and so long as we possess ability to do good, to labor for the upbuilding of Zion and for the benefit of the human family, we ought, with willingness, to yield with alacrity to the requirements made of us to do our duty, little or great.' " [^2]

" 'So long as life lasts'?" asked the bemused driver. "Priesthood holders never ask to be released from home teaching?"

"Never." His passenger replied in a voice of pretended harshness but then laughed easily. "So I've just read you a Church president saying that age doesn't matter, and that even busy apostles will serve as home teachers if called. But that's a pretty big 'if.' I mean, who is going to call a busy apostle to be a home teacher to three or four neighborhood families?"

"Who indeed?" echoed the son-in-law.

"May I share with you, then, a most remarkable exhibition of home teaching, one that I personally witnessed?" And without waiting for an answer, the passenger continued. "This occurred just before general conference during a Regional Representatives' meeting in the Church Office Building auditorium in Salt Lake City, with all the General Authorities and auxiliary leaders joining in." He paused. "I'm guessing it was around 1975 or 1976. The Presiding Bishop, Victor L. Brown, was talking about the importance of properly involving the Aaronic Priesthood young men as companions in home teaching. As an important feature in his demonstration, he called up a young teachers quorum president, a boy who had been sitting totally unnoticed on the front row facing the stage, sitting there beside the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve.

"Bishop Brown asked the boy his name, his ward and stake, and so forth, while standing before the microphone with his arm comfortingly around him. And then he queried him about his home teaching assignment. Did he have one? Yes. Did he get out every month? Yes, every month. Did he enjoy home teaching? You bet. What was his Melchizedek Priesthood holder companion like? A wonderful person, the boy said. Did they ever prepare their lessons before going out? Yes, every time, and days in advance. Was he personally assigned something to do with the families? Always."

The father-in-law's face filled with pleasure. He was reliving a sterling moment among his memories.

"Finally, he asked the boy—addressing him as 'president,' honoring the fact that he presided over his small quorum of teachers—he asked him how he felt, personally felt, about his senior partner in all of this. The youth, standing tall and straight for all his fifteen years, standing bravely in front of this intimidating assemblage, said that his home teaching companion was the finest man he had ever known—next to his own father. He admired him; he loved teaching with him; he had learned much from him. 'And is he with us here today?' the bishop asked. Yes, he is here. 'And will you please go bring him up here—to join us in front of this marvelous group of priesthood leaders?' Yes, the boy would do that.

"He stepped down off the low podium, stepped one pace down, right in front of the First Presidency, and took the waiting hand of a smiling N. Eldon Tanner, first counselor to President Spencer W. Kimball."

"Good heavens!" exclaimed the surprised driver.

"Good heavens is right," replied his father-in-law. "The perfect exclamation. God is in his heavens and all is well with the world because even today's busy apostles can find time to home teach—just as President Joseph F. Smith suggested so many years ago." He reached over, patting his son-in-law on the shoulder. "And is there a big message in all of that for you?" "Okay, you've made me say uncle! I'll have to give up. You win. I won't ask to be released. But it becomes obvious that I have missed something very necessary in preparing myself as a home teacher—or somebody somewhere should have given me some training and confidence I don't now have." He sighed audibly. "Obviously neither you nor Sally is going to let me just fade away and quit." His face then became awash with the relaxed grin he had worn earlier when they were just leaving the city. "So now that you've beaten me up about not being a conscientious home teacher, you've got to give me some suggestions about how to do it, how to improve my performance." He stole a look at his passenger and added, "And stifle my ugly attitude."

"Not to worry," the pleased father-in-law said. "For we have many more miles to travel and thirty-six holes of golf to play. I've got a head full of proven home teaching ideas you might enjoy hearing and chewing on."

He leaned over the papers in his lap, returning them to the file in the briefcase at his feet. He paused, peered down, then looked over at his son-in-law once again.

"But before I put this stuff away, let me show you the most famous home teacher today—uh, in my judgment. You might be amused at this." And he held up a sheaf of pages stapled together. "See, here is his picture on the cover of Time magazine. I clipped it and his cover story years ago—forgot I'd put them in this home teaching file. Let me read the introduction to you." The father-in-law adjusted his glasses, holding the pages comfortably before him.

"The man featured in this magazine story is Jack Anderson, the syndicated columnist who has long been known—as it says right here—as the 'pre-eminent scourge of Washington D.C.' " And he commenced reading: " 'When Washington correspondent Hays Gorey began calling on Jack Anderson to interview him for this week's cover story in the Press section, there was no need to get acquainted. They first met 25 years ago when both were young newsmen for the Salt Lake City Tribune. Their contact then was slight, but, says Gorey, "When I came to Washington for TIME in 1965, the first telephone call I got was from Jack Anderson. He had heard—he hears everything—that I had arrived, and he wanted to take me to lunch."

" 'They met frequently after that when Anderson made hour-long monthly visits to the Gorey household. He came not to talk politics or scandal, but religion. Anderson is a lay teacher for the Mormon Church, responsible for keeping in touch with a number of Mormons in the neighborhood, and Mrs. Gorey is one of them.' " [^3]

"Good heavens again!" gushed the son-in-law.

The older man laid the magazine article in his lap and mused out loud: "Now, isn't that a marvelous thing for Jack Anderson?"

"A marvelous thing?"

"Why, yes. Hear it again," and the father-in-law lifted up the pages and read: " 'Anderson is a lay teacher for the Mormon Church, responsible for keeping in touch with a number of Mormons in the neighborhood.' See, Jack Anderson has been doing exactly what the Lord commanded back in 1830: he's been watching over the Church by visiting the homes of his assigned families. He's been responsive to his stewardship as a home teacher. Those families know that; his bishop knows that; the recording angels know that; and now millions of Time magazine readers also know that. Jack Anderson is a dutiful home teacher."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 121:44.
[^2] Priesthood Home Teaching Handbook (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-days Saints, 1967), p. 1.
[^3] Mosiah 2:17.
