Richard J. Marshall, Home Teaching with Purpose and Power ( 1990)

3

Being There—The Most Important Thing in Home Teaching

Leaving the red car rushing onward toward the golf course, the scene now shifts from Saturday to Sunday, from the great outdoors to the spacious interior of a crowded LDS chapel filled wall to wall with eager faces. The doors to the cultural hall were pulled apart and more chairs set up to accommodate the overflowing congregation. The meeting was a stake conference in a major metropolis on the east coast of the United States.

A well-rehearsed choir sat behind the speaker. Flowers festooned the stand. The entire congregation had just sat down, having sung an exhilarating hymn. The new stake president was at the pulpit, just getting into his talk: "I don't suppose any of you were more surprised to see me called as president of this great stake than I was." A spattering of laughter followed this remark, for everyone admired the speaker. "I enjoyed being bishop these past five years, perhaps the greatest five years of my life." He looked fondly down at the front row where his beaming family was seated.

"I frankly thought that when I was released as bishop, I'd go from 'who's who' to 'who's he?' " More light-hearted laughter came from the congregation, for he had gladdened and charmed them all as a high councilor. His spirituality and eagerness to help had made him popular and welcome throughout the stake.

"But for my first address as stake president, I would like to speak out on what I believe to be one of the most important programs in the Church—and perhaps the least appreciated by many of us sitting right here today." He paused, looked about, and measured his audience once more.

"I'm talking about home teaching, high-quality home teaching, the kind that encourages, inspires, and lifts the hearts and minds of all of us, the weak and the wayward, the strong and the stout. I'm talking about home teaching that is motivated by only one quality: the pure love of Christ—home teaching with no other incentive than just to be there, in the home of friends you've made, helping parents, encouraging their children. It doesn't matter if someone is married or not, has children or not. An individual living alone constitutes a family unit in the eyes of the Lord—yes, and in the eyes of his church.

"I'm talking about home teaching that has no reward other than the shared fellowship and enduring faithfulness that, as the Lord has said, 'is stronger than the cords of death.' [^1]

"President Harold B. Lee once said, 'Home teaching is the instrument by which we see to it, through the priesthood, that every program in the Church is made available to parents and their children.' [^2]

"So I would like to tell you a true story that happened right here among us, a story that illustrates what President Lee said." The speaker looked again across his entire congregation, from the sunlit chapel back to the distant and dim figures sitting in the obscurity of the cultural hall stage.

"It is the story of a stranger who came into our midst many years ago, came here to this great city seeking employment, came here from having been raised virtually in the shadows of the temple back in Utah. But Bob—let us call him Bob—had another reason for venturing this far from his home: he wanted to put as much distance between himself and the LDS Church as possible.

"Bob's bitterness involved a number of problems. He had fallen into bad habits as a teenager. His not living the Word of Wisdom alienated him from some of his friends. His inactivity in his ward had become a source of antagonism between him and his family. The new friends he made helped feed his rancor. They convinced each other that the Mormon Church so dominated their community that they would never find the kind of freedom they desired in such a 'smothering environment.' Bob's mind began soaking up this animosity, sopping up all its bitter juices. And about the time his high school classmates were being called on missions, Bob decided he would also leave town, leave to go away to college and never return.

"But the university he chose was in a nearby state, and there were still plenty of Mormons on campus. The Church influence seemed to be everywhere. So when he married a nonmember girl, she had already agreed with him that they should get as far away as possible to build their life and rear their children. And so they came to this great city—where they could lose themselves from their former lives—with hardly a word to family or friends as to exactly where they were going."

The stake president had given many a talk in his day. He was easy to listen to. He was a storyteller. He loved to quote the scriptures. His speaking stance was to grasp both sides of the rostrum, lean slightly forward, and look directly out into the faces of his listeners. He released his hold only to leaf through the Standard Works or to make a powerful gesture. But there were no scriptures now as he continued his story of the elusive, recalcitrant Bob, the stumbling soul from Utah who had purposefully lost his way and fled to the metropolis.

"Bob and his wife both found work here and rented a little apartment, and life for them settled into a quiet routine for half a year. If they missed their families in the West, they were too caught up in the excitement of their new marriage, their new employment, the big-city horizons.

"And then one night, just after they had eaten a simple meal and were settled back in their rented furniture, there came a knock at the door. Who could that possibly be? They knew almost no one in their building, and no one at all in the neighborhood. It was the wife who answered the door while Bob, newspaper in hand, paused to listen.

" 'Excuse me, Madam,' a stranger said in a voice heavy with a European accent. And then he proceeded to inquire if this was Bob's apartment, using Bob's full name, even his middle initial. The wife was quite surprised to hear his inquiry and admitted that, yes, it was Bob's apartment all right. 'Ach, goot,' said the man. He said it with relief and enthusiasm, adding: 'Then ve have found him at last. Let me introduce ourselves, ve are your home teachers. May ve come in, please?' " The stake president gestured with his hand, held it high, signaling that a significant point was now to be made.

"And up to this time in her young life, Bob's wife had never heard the term home teacher, had never met a home teacher, did not know that home teaching was the basic communications function of Mormonism. She could not know, at that moment, what a monumental thing was happening at her humble threshold: that here in our great city, among millions of strangers, and several thousands of miles from her original home, diligent home teachers on assignment from a well-organized branch president were about to turn her young life completely around.

"She was not sensitive to this singular fact: that it was the priesthood of Almighty God standing at her entranceway asking to come in. But she did indeed invite them in, at which time the astonished husband jumped up, brushed aside the introductions, dropped his paper on the floor, and announced that he had to hurry out. And he did so, grabbing his coat and rushing down the hall, leaving the two home teachers and his wife standing a bit bewildered right there in the middle of the tiny living room."

The speaker took a long pause, staring down at the empty pulpit, though it was bare of notes. He looked up and continued.

"Bob returned to the apartment only after he was assured the two priesthood holders had gone by listening outside his door. His wife, however, was still quite animated with the pleasure she had received from their visit. He should have stayed, she told him. He would have enjoyed their visit, she said, learning the background of the two men, especially the older one, the dear old man from Austria. She would have continued on, telling more, except Bob stopped her, explaining that home teachers were part of the onerous system he thought they had escaped when they left the West. He informed her that this renewed contact with the LDS Church was distasteful to him and that he never wanted to see the home teachers again.

"But they did come again," the stake president continued. "They came back a few weeks later. This time Bob was legitimately out of the apartment, so his pleasant wife invited them in and thoroughly enjoyed their second visit, enjoyed it even more than the first. She went out of her way not to tell Bob about it or that she had surreptitiously agreed on still other visits in the months to come.

"It was the fourth month when the home teachers came—without Bob's foreknowledge—and caught him home. He was trapped in the kitchen, for he would not come out. So he stayed there and pretended not to hear or care what the home teachers taught his wife.

"They were now aware that she was not a member and that Bob had no desire to fellowship with them or the other Saints in the little branch. But they kept coming faithfully, and each time they explained more of the gospel to Bob's interested wife. For she turned out to be one of the golden ones, the kind the missionaries knock on a thousand apartment doors trying to find. She believed every word they taught her, and she waited for their visits, wanting to hear more, to read more.

"By their eighth visit, Bob found himself listening very carefully from the kitchen. In fact, he made sure she told him when they were coming so he could be home. And by the ninth visit, he was also looking forward to the home teachers' arrival. It was on the tenth visit that he finally crept out and joined the other three in his living room. He even participated, answering questions about his employment, his background, his home and childhood in Utah. And as he relived those early years, the happy years of his childhood, those wonderful years with his family and friends—"

Suddenly the stake president's voice broke. He stood there at the pulpit unable to go on, wrestling silently for control of turbulent emotions. His listeners waited and wondered. Then he swallowed hard and spoke again.

"Yes," he said, quite overcome, "it was I."

Out came a snow-white handkerchief, and he dabbed at his eyes and waited.

"It was I who tried to run away from the Church and never tell my dear wife about the gospel and all she was missing. But the home teachers came, and they told her. Yes, and I was right there listening and learning and agreeing with them. A peculiar thing about Brother Gottlieb—some of you from the Third and Eighth Wards should remember him—Brother Gottlieb, our wonderful home teacher. He told us that in the German language his name literally means 'God-lover.' And he surely was. And he put into practice a powerful message from the Book of Mormon: that 'when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God.' " [^3]

He fumbled again at his face with his handkerchief.

"Well, wonderful old Brother Gottlieb was so kind and thoughtful of my wife and me that when he encouraged us to come meet the rest of the branch, all my resistance melted away. He took us into that old red brick building up on 83rd Street and introduced us to everyone as though we were his own family. We had never felt such warmth and friendship since arriving here.

"Looking back through the years, it is easy to see that I came to feel about Brother Gottlieb just as I had felt about my own father, buried back in Utah while I was in my youth."

Again the stake president held high a hand.

"And here is the point I wish to make in all of this," and he looked down at his wife, sitting surrounded by their children. "That Brother Gottlieb did something for my wife and me that all home teachers are capable of doing—but that all too many fail to do. And that is this: he was diligent in seeing us! He was faithful in continuously coming to teach us. He was enthusiastic in bringing his kind spirit right into our home. He did not teach us great sermons with mighty messages. He spoke softly about celestial things, about eternal marriage, about temples and prophets. And now and then he read to us meaningful passages from the scriptures and told us about the word of God, and that God loved us—and that he, Brother Gottlieb, loved us." Another hard swallow.

"He and the young boys who came with him never left without pronouncing a simple, heartfelt blessing on our tiny apartment and on us. We became convinced that he was sincerely interested in us. He fanned a spark of gospel concern in my heart, fanned it into flame, into a burning desire to win back what I had lost. He did this with his touching display of care and concern. He baptized my wife. He introduced us to everyone as his dear friends. He sat beside us in classes. He took us places in his car. He testified often of the truthfulness of the gospel—and we could not doubt him!"

The stake president carefully folded away his handkerchief and tucked it into his inside pocket.

"Brothers and sisters, when our leaders tell us that God himself has commanded priesthood holders to visit the homes of all members, to strengthen them and lift them up, and to encourage them to do their duty—well, I'm a believer. More than that, I stand before you all this day as a testimony to the fruits of home teaching. All that I am, all that I have and hold dear, I owe to this inspired program of the Lord.

"And I would pay this final tribute to dear old Brother Gottlieb, a lover of God, a lover of me and my family, by saying that he taught us the single most important thing in home teaching—"

The stake president raised both arms high above his head and solemnly said: "Brethren of the priesthood, the single most important thing in home teaching is simply being there—getting out of your house or apartment and getting into the homes of those families assigned for you to watch over. Sisters of Zion, for you it is in encouraging your husbands and sons to be constant in fulfilling their assigned stewardship. Nothing happens in home teaching until home teachers come into the home!"

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See D&C 121:37.
[^2] Hebrews 12:12.
[^3] 1 Nephi 4:13.
