Richard J. Marshall, Home Teaching with Purpose and Power ( 1990)

4

Achieving the Incredible Goal: 100-Percent Home Teaching

"I don't wish you to be offended at this question, Bishop, and let me remind you that we served together for three years on the high council before you were called as bishop, but are you really qualifying for that 100 percent in home teaching I see each month on your reports?"

The bishop stopped himself from laughing out loud. But he did display a big grin.

"Homer, my good brother, I should be offended. But you're not the first person in this stake to raise an eyebrow or throw a fiery dart of suspicion at those hard-won statistics we claim our brethren here are achieving every month."

"Well, then, answer my question," pressed the high councilor. He was slouched comfortably back in his chair. Both were seated in the bishop's office, having just completed a financial audit, having thanked and dismissed the ward clerk.

"Of course we're getting 100 percent, but we're also getting a little weary about all the kidding we have to take over it. So let me ask you a question." The bishop hunched forward, both elbows on his desk, his fingers laced together.

"Why does a perfect home teaching record each month seem so incredible to everyone?"

"Why?" The high councilor lingered on the word, then squeezed his eyelids together into tight slits, his slate-blue eyes fixed firmly on the bishop. "Because 100 percent in anything is perfection, and perfection isn't obtainable in this life—or so we're told."

"Drivel," retorted the bishop. "You pay a full tithing. That's perfection right there. You're a 100-percent tithe payer."

"Yes, and I usually home teach all four of my families in a given month, as do many other brethren in this stake," the high councilor replied. "But you're saying that all of your home teachers are visiting all of their families every single month, month after month. Always. Always. It's the logistics of all those perfect numbers that boggle the mind, make it unbelievable. You're saying to the rest of the stake that your ward, collectively, is a perfect home teaching ward. And that's incredible."

The bishop delicately tapped his outstretched fingers in front of his open mouth, pretending a wide yawn. "No, seriously," said the high councilor. "To my knowledge, no ward in this stake—or maybe any stake—had ever claimed perfect home teaching for even one month. Your ward has reported perfection ever since you became the bishop." He glanced at the wall calendar. "Let's see, that's at least six months straight."

"And no one thinks it can be done? Has been done?" asked the amused bishop.

"No one thinks it can be done without jiggering the numbers somehow. That's why you have a lot of doubting Thomases among the other bishoprics, the other quorum presidencies. They can't do it. So how can you?" The high councilor held up the stake quarterly report that had been lying on the desktop. "Back to my original question: are you really getting the 100-percent home teaching you're reporting, or do you have a special way of computing your records?"

The bishop crossed his legs and frowned. "I should be offended at that question, Homer. But I'm not. What I really am is surprised that the other bishops and quorum presidencies are upset because of what we are accomplishing. They could accomplish it too—except for one big reason: they don't really try. If the truth were known, 100-percent home teaching really isn't that hard to get in a compact neighborhood like ours."

"So how do you get it?"

"All right, I'll tell you," said the bishop pleasantly. "I thought you'd never ask. But let's start at the beginning. You will remember that one of my assignments while I was on the high council was home teaching." He waited for a nod. "And one of the things I was doing was continually making presentations to bishoprics and quorum presidencies, trying to work up some enthusiasm for doing a better job of home teaching than our stake had been doing."

"So?"

"So when our ward was divided and I was called to be the bishop of a brand-new ward—after the initial shock had worn off—I found myself faced with the proposition of needing to organize the entire ward home teaching from the ground up." He paused, ruminating.

"And?"

"And so I did some very deep thinking, yes, and some considerable praying—praying about home teaching. Reading about home teaching. And there really hasn't been that much written about how to do it, certainly not in the scriptures. But Church leaders have always been preaching about it to us, telling us how vital it is. So I've become convinced. And since I had been running through the stake waving my arms and shouting, trying to convince the other wards they should increase their efforts, and since no dramatic increase ever happened because of my efforts, well, I decided I now had the perfect opportunity to prove to myself, or to anyone, that 100-percent home teaching was possible."

"I'm listening."

"And so I remembered a story my old stake president used to tell us when I lived back east, where the stake took in an entire city, where you didn't have three or four families to home teach, you had eight or ten, or even more! You couldn't step out of your home and start teaching across the street, the way we do here, but you had to drive miles and miles in a car—if you had one. The stake president was disappointed that we only had 66-percent home teaching for an entire year. We thought that was exceptional; he hated it. So he called the priesthood leaders together and told us about his three daughters—pretty teenage daughters.

"The stake president said that a few nights before, all three daughters had dates. Three boys came by, one at a time, and drove off with his three precious girls. He was lying in bed later that night wondering about them when he heard the first one come home. She stuck her head in the bedroom and reported that she was back and all was well. She went off to bed. Soon he heard the front door open again, and his second daughter came into the bedroom to report that she was back safe and sound. At that point, the stake president told us all, hammering on the pulpit as he said it—I remember his face getting red—that by our home teaching standards he could now turn out the light and go to sleep because he had 66 percent of his daughters safe and accounted for! He was very powerfully exercised. He really shook us up."

"And that story sparked you to set your new ward goals for 100-percent home teaching?" asked the waiting high councilor with a touch of skepticism.

"Not just the story, no," replied the bishop. "It was all a question of comparative attitudes."

"Say what?"

"Comparative attitudes," repeated the bishop. "Far away in that big city is a stake president beating on the pulpit and turning red because he is worried that only 66 percent of his people are being home taught, and here in our splendid suburb, just minutes from a temple, where almost half the people are LDS and transportation is no problem, it doesn't seem to matter to anybody that we're limping along with home teaching percentages below his. That's a don't-care attitude. It upset me.

"No one really listened when I came around as the high councilor trying to build home teaching fires under them. So I decided—as a new bishop in a new ward—that I would exercise a little concern and prove we could do better. I pledged myself to never miss a family on any given month. And I did it after reasoning that if everyone is important to the Lord then everyone should be important to me." After a few seconds he unclasped his hands, made a big fist of one of them, and dropped it with a thump on the desk.

"I got my new counselors to agree that we three would home teach the entire ward by ourselves that first month, though the ward wasn't even organized until the middle of the month."

"Now wait a minute," the surprised high councilor spoke up. "How could you possibly do that, just the three of you?"

Sunshine spread across the bishop's face as he continued. "We divided the ward into three sections. We took our three new ward clerks as companions. We simply dedicated the necessary nights to doing the job we'd prayerfully pledged ourselves to do."

"But you have—150 families?" asked the high councilor, not waiting for an answer. "That's fifty families you each had to teach."

"Yes, fifty families each, and only two weeks to home teach them in." The bishop folded his arms on his chest and slowly said, "And it was easy—easy and fun."

"Fun?"

"We didn't even need two weeks. We did it, home taught the entire 150 families in less than a week. We did it by simply walking through the ward, going from door to door the first several nights. LDS families are so concentrated in our neighborhood—unlike in that big city—that we found many at home. People who weren't home we would phone the next day and make a firm appointment. We didn't stop and lounge around when we entered a home, and we didn't prattle about things that didn't matter. We introduced ourselves as the new bishopric. We inquired as to the well-being of the family—talked for a few meaningful minutes, mentioning that this was a home teaching visit and that we were doing the entire ward ourselves just to let all the people know this first month that we loved them. Then we asked if we might leave a blessing, and we left.

"We had nothing but success," the bishop said with energy. "We all knocked off at 9:30 each night and met, the three sets of us, at an ice-cream store, where we reported matters of note. One of the statements we kept hearing was from people who said they had rarely—in several cases never—been visited by home teachers."

"I cannot believe you could do that," the still-doubting high councilor exclaimed. "Fifty families in one week?"

"Well, ten a night for five nights; it was a grand start for us," the bishop responded. "It sent up a glorious signal to everyone, a signal that said everyone was important to the new bishopric. Can you imagine the kind of emphasis we put on home teaching to our priesthood brethren the next month when they got their families assigned? We made a big point of the fact that just three sets of home teachers visited the entire ward—fifty families each—and did not miss a single one." The bishop motioned behind him at the large organizational chart fixed to the wall.

"Sure, it took some scrambling and rearranging and a lot of phoning," he said. "But the important thing is—we did it. And it was like a big banner reading '100-PERCENT HOME TEACHING,' a banner we might have run up a flagpole—if we had had a flagpole. Everyone could see we had done it. From that month on, no pair of home teachers was willing to drop the ball, miss visiting their own families." His voice was confiding as he said, "Who would want to be the first failing home teachers after that?"

"But surely," protested the high councilor, "not everyone in the ward has your dedication for maintaining that pledge for perfection. Someone is bound to mess it up, miss a family—some busy elder, some careless high priest. Some family will slip out of town on vacation before being home taught. Eventually someone is bound to ruin your record." Another pause. "And maybe they already have. Just how can you be sure?"

The bishop was waiting for this question. "You're right. At the outset some indifferent brethren surfaced, brethren who don't care a bit about missing a family or two, months on end. Some are very lukewarm to the whole idea of home teaching. So we work with them. We attempt to convince them—lovingly, persuasively—that each family is important to us, not for the statistical report, not to 'gratify vain ambition,' [^1] but because they are part of our ward family, and because we love them."

"But the logistics of this thing!" exclaimed the high councilor incredulously. "There are just too many people out there to keep track of, too many cracks for them to fall through.

"Yes, indeed," agreed the bishop. "And the worst problem is the priesthood holders who mislead us, saying they'll do it and don't, saying they did it—and didn't."

"But how can you keep track of all that?"

"It's become a polished plan now, and a strong one. It works. But in the beginning we were holding it together with bailing wire and Band-Aids."

"Oh, yes, a polished plan," the doubtful high councilor repeated. "This I've got to hear."

The bishop looked at him hard, staring for a long minute before continuing.

"Most wards don't tally up home teaching till the end of the month. Some wards only do it quarterly, that is, wait three months before asking the home teachers whom they've taught, whom they've missed."

"That's when the stake report is due," offered the high councilor. "That's why they wait three months."

"Exactly," replied the bishop. "And in our program, that just won't work. That means we don't know where we stand until it's too late to do anything about it. It means that we wouldn't know that a family has been missed until it's too late to go back in and make sure they do get home taught. So our closing date for home teaching is the twentieth of the month." He paused, pleased to note his listener's genuine attentiveness.

"If, for whatever reason, a family isn't visited by the twentieth of the month, then we take back the family and teach them ourselves, the quorum leaders or the bishopric. We call it 'original jurisdiction.' "

"Original what?" the high councilor howled, much galvanized by this term. "You can't do that. You can't send in substitute home teachers just because the proper home teachers didn't meet your arbitrary deadline."

"We can," said the bishop pleasantly, "and we do."

"No!" protested the high councilor. "That means that if your regular priesthood brethren drop the ball on a given month, you rush in the second string to save the day. Is that the thing to do? Does that let the family feel they're being loved, that they're important when they never know from one month to the next who their home teachers will be?"

"It's not the best way," said the bishop quietly. "But it's better than no home teachers at all. And it does send out several messages."

"What messages?"

"First, a message that the priesthood leaders and the bishopric do think each family is important. We're not going to let them go unvisited under any circumstances. And second, it tells them that their regular home teachers had a problem: too busy, out of town, forgot about them, or just simply failed to meet the ward's deadline." The bishop's eyes were fastened to his visitor. "And our experience has been that when we have applied original jurisdiction, the hit-or-miss home teachers quickly rededicate themselves, never letting it happen again."

"But is that really home teaching—having your minutemen rushing in after the twentieth of the month?" the high councilor persisted.

"We have established our priorities, Homer. First, we visit every home at least monthly. Second, we train the priesthood how to home teach properly. But the visits are more important than training the priesthood. That is, if an elder is unwilling to do his job, we will do it for him. If he continues to die on us, we'll rescind his calling as a home teacher." Then the bishop thoughtfully added, "But that hasn't happened yet."

"Oh, I don't know about this thing you're telling me," the high councilor wailed. "You're too willing to throw out a weak home teacher. Doesn't the gospel teach us to be longsuffering? to 'lift up the hands which hang down'?" [^2]

"It does. But our first concern must be for the family, for fulfilling the Lord's commandment that worthy priesthood brethren visit in their home. If a home teacher can't do that, then it's somewhat like that difficult situation Nephi faced."

"Nephi? Nephi had problems with home teachers?" The high councilor could be droll when feeling cornered, but the bishop brushed his question aside.

"You'll recall that Nephi was commanded by the Spirit to cut off Laban's head one dark night in Jerusalem. Laban had refused to turn over Nephi's family records, though he'd already been paid an agreed price for them. But Nephi balked at killing Laban, now lying drunken and helpless at his feet. The Spirit insisted and thereby gives us a divine directive, saying: 'It is better that one man should perish than that a nation should dwindle and perish in unbelief.' [^3] So in our ward, we think it is better that one disinclined home teacher should be released than that a family should dwindle and perish from his neglect."

"Well, maybe that makes sense," Homer said a bit grudgingly.

But the bishop pressed his point. "Let me give you an example of this. I was once in a ward where a well-meaning bishop attempted to activate a very wayward elder by calling him to teach the deacons quorum. As a consequence, ten or twelve deacons dwindled and nearly perished in unbelief before their unruly, uncaring, incapable adviser was released."

"Well, yes, but—"

"You know, Homer, you remind me of one of the young husbands in our ward. My counselor had just thanked the home teachers during priesthood meeting in the chapel for maintaining our 100-percent performance, as we had just finished the month. But when I came down off the stand, this young man stopped me and said, 'Bishop, we couldn't have had 100 percent because no one home taught us.' I reminded him that his home teachers couldn't find anyone at his apartment and so reported to me. I informed them that his wife was in the hospital, isolated, and that I could get in but they couldn't. So I instructed them that I would be his home teacher for that month. He heard me out and said, 'But you're not our home teacher; you're our bishop.' "

The bishop reached into a drawer and withdrew a pamphlet. "I had him step into this office and read him a paragraph from this little booklet. Here, let me read it to you: 'The family is the most important organization in time or eternity. The Church and all its organizations are service agencies to help families and individuals. Home teachers represent the Lord, the bishop, and the priesthood leader in making available to the family and the individual the help of the Church and all its organizations.' [^4]

"I read him that very statement and explained that since his home teachers represent me, and when they could not find him at home—for he was with her almost every night—I simply took back my original jurisdiction." The high councilor was softening. "So that's your program? When the home teachers can't do their visits, for whatever reason, then you fall back on the quorum leaders? you have them do it? Hmmm. And if they can't do it, then you, as the bishop, step in and qualify yourself."

"Neatly put, Homer. Yes, that's the way we've been getting a perfect record every month. It was awfully hard at first, putting a real workload on the high priest group leaders and the elders quorum presidency. But after a couple of months it evened out. The bishopric is almost never needed in the home teaching loop any more. It's the quorum leaders who have to keep things humming—lots of phone calls, lots of checking up. They're the ones running around trying to patch things up and locate missing persons. And you know what? I've never seen them happier with what they've accomplished. Successful home teaching is very rewarding, very meaningful."

"Well, yes, I—"

"We're really enthusiastic about this record we've got going. It's a team effort. The whole ward is involved. Now, when someone is going to be gone for the rest of the month and hasn't been home taught, they call their home teachers and hurry them up, or they even call me. They know they're important to us. They know they'll be missed; and no one wants to be the first family missed." The bishop tilted back his chair, hands locked behind his head. "You see, Homer, it isn't the numbers we're interested in, although it may appear that way to outsiders. We want to minister instead of administer, just as the Savior did, one on one, touching individual lives. But to be able to minister, we have to learn to administer. We want to shepherd our flock instead of merely count sheep. But we have to know who they are—count the ninety and nine—before we can identify the one that's missing. We want to use home teaching, an inspired program that is often neglected or abused, to bless people, all the people in our ward family. And we know that God can't direct our footsteps until we move our feet. So it's up to us. We have to get out and hustle."

Homer had drunk in every word. He was touched by the bishop's honest concern about families. "And what about that doubting husband?" he asked. "Did he ever buy the fact that you could be his home teacher?"

The bishop laughed. "He was disappointed that he hadn't caught us—what was your word?—jiggering the home teaching report. He had to be reminded that I was with his wife and him in the hospital three evenings that month. And one time, I recalled, I even taught him how to administer to his wife with consecrated oil. So in a very real sense, I told him, I was not just a priesthood visitor, but I was also genuinely teaching him an important function of the priesthood."

The bishop picked up the pamphlet again and opened it, saying: "But listen to this. There is still another statement in this home teaching booklet I wanted him to hear, reminding him how important his own calling was as a home teacher. Listen to what this latter-day apostle writes: " 'I adjudge this [home teaching] to be one of the greatest positions in the Church, a job of mammoth proportions. I think Paul put in perspective our positions in the Church when he said, identifying the true church, "God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps . . . " (1 Corinthians 12:28). The Lord's perspective is that the true position of a teacher, of one who gets inspiration and does what these revelations appoint, places him in the number three position in the Church, just after those who guide and direct its destinies.' " [^5] The high councilor sat in silence, pondering the weight of all he had been learning from the bishop. Deeply absorbed, he slowly nodded his agreement. When he finally stood to go, he was all smiles.

"Well, talk about teaching! That's powerful stuff you've been teaching me tonight. And the mystery is solved. I now know how you do it and why you work so hard to do it. It's a remarkable record you've established—yes, and a worthy one. I hope you always make your 100-percent goal." The bishop stood up and they shook hands warmly. "You would have been pleased with your elders quorum presidency last month," the high councilor said. "They handled themselves well on this very subject. I was sitting there in that room full of quorum presidencies, and just before the meeting started, some of them were kidding your leaders. They were claiming that in their wards they were concentrating on qualitative home teaching whereas your ward was merely concentrating on quantitative home teaching. This was obviously a classic case of sour grapes. Your president, Henry, came right back at them. He said: 'We believe you can't improve the quality unless you actually make the visit. And that's quantity.' " The high councilor took a step toward the door.

"Oops," the bishop blurted out, holding up a hand to stop his visitor from leaving. He lifted still another pamphlet from his open drawer, saying, "When our critics in the other wards try to position quality over quantity, my elders have been schooled to remember this great statement by President Ezra Taft Benson:

" 'Remember, both the quality and quantity of home teaching are essential in being an effective home teacher. You should have quality visits, but you should also make contact with each of your families each month. As shepherds to all of your families, both active and less active, you should not be content with only reaching the ninety and nine. Your goal should be 100 percent home teaching every month.' " [^6]

The high councilor shook his head in agreement and patted the bishop affectionately on the back. "You've taught your brethren very well. You can be proud of them. They are obviously dedicated leaders of an unusually effective team, one with a marvelous drive toward perfection."

Then lowering his voice he added: "I wasn't going to admit this to you when I was challenging your records earlier, but you might as well hear it now, now that you've explained how serious home teaching is." He paused again, a little pain etching into his expression as he sighed and spoke. "My wife reminded me just the other day that we haven't had home teachers visit us since before last Christmas. She asks, 'Who have we offended to be so abandoned?' "

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Ezra Taft Benson, Conference Report, April 1987.
[^2] Marion G. Romney, Conference Report, April 1966.
[^3] 1 Nephi 4:13.
[^4] Bruce R. McConkie, Let Every Man Learn His Duty (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints), p. 2.
[^5] Ibid., p. 10.
[^6] Conference Report, April 1987, p. 63.
