Richard J. Marshall, Home Teaching with Purpose and Power ( 1990)

5

Home Teaching: An Outsider's Inside View

Brother Larrabee was always amused when he first entered a corporate manager's office. Furnishings were the focus of power. They conveyed the company image: traditional, leading-edge, or iconoclastic. Wood panels, hushed tones, leather chairs, and book-lined shelves—as an example—clearly signaled "traditional" to his trained eyes. The one thing he always found in a corporate manager's office was spaciousness, large windows with a commanding view, and elegant furnishings demonstrating a designer's expensive taste and flair.

However, this was his first time in a stake president's office, and he had been curious about how it would look. Now that he was sitting there he found himself surprised at its austerity: painfully small, no view, one large table, and a few chairs. The only special touches were two pictures on the wall: a recent photograph of the First Presidency and a large gold frame featuring an excellent color print, a famous painting of the Savior.

Brother Larrabee was a nationally recognized and widely read thinker and writer on modern organizations and the discipline of management. So on this first occasion in an administrative church office, he was warmly greeted and comfortably seated. If the stake president was guilty of gushing over his guest, it was excusable.

A few weeks back, having learned of Brother Larrabee's forthcoming baptism in his stake, the president had rushed to purchase the latest Larrabee book, a book for the decision-maker in the management of service institutions. The stake president had been able to identify with the many rewarding messages therein. The book had provoked him to rethink his own management of his business and of his stake. It opened his mind to wider horizons. It was after reading the book—and, especially, having been told of Brother Larrabee's sincere conversion—that the president had decided to ask him to speak in their forthcoming stake conference.

But today, being somewhat intimidated by the proximity of this famous author in his office, the president proffered the invitation to speak almost as soon as they were seated. Brother Larrabee admitted later to his wife that he was quite surprised with the abruptness of this challenge to address a Mormon audience, for he would certainly be out of his normal element—the familiar fields and faces of business managers. He was flattered to be asked. But Brother Larrabee was a meditative man. He did not rush to give a hasty answer. So the two sat facing each other for a few moments, each reflected in the burnished surface of the mahogany table. The new convert allowed his gaze to drift just beyond the waiting president, resting on the heavily framed picture of the Savior before he finally found himself agreeing to it.

Yes, he would be honored to speak in stake conference.

"You certainly won't have any trouble as a speaker," said the stake president earnestly after thanking him for accepting. "We all know of your tremendous success as a writer. You've obviously been in much demand as a speaker."

"I've spoken around," Brother Larrabee agreed with honest modesty. "However, you are not asking me to speak as an analyst of management orthodoxy but as what? the newest baptized member of the stake?"

"Well, yes, certainly. Everyone knows of your coming into the Church last week. We were all so pleased. And because of your prominence, well, there's going to be a lot of interest in the story of your conversion." The president did not want this business expert to feel his testimony was being exploited. After all, he was no stranger to Mormonism, so he added, "Because your children and wife have been active Latter-day Saints many years. Everyone knows that, too."

Brother Larrabee looked steadily at the president. "It is true my—what shall we call it, change of heart?—did not come fast. It is also true that I now have a burgeoning conviction this is Christ's church. I'll be pleased to speak on my newly settled belief."

"Well, hmmm, yes, that is what we would like to hear." The president was still a little embarrassed that he might seem to be rushing this conspicuous convert to the pulpit too swiftly, so to slacken any strain he was feeling, he threw in some small talk. "So tell me, Brother Larrabee, just what was the hardest thing you had to do to come into the Church?"

"The hardest thing I had to do was admit that for eighteen years my wife has been right."

The stake president's face creased into a bright smile. "Yes, I see. You've a nice sense of humor."

"No. I'm very serious," came the convert's calm reply. "I now accept the gospel as being thoroughly true. And while I am deeply in debt to my wife for eighteen years of perseverance, I still credit my immediate turnabout to the Mormon home teaching program—and to one home teacher in particular."

"Home teaching?"

Another glance at the Savior's portrait and Brother Larrabee continued. "Yes, I've experienced eighteen great years of growth, living happily with my wife, and eighteen years of silently observing a very revealing performance from a parade of widely vacillating home teachers."

"Come again?"

"I don't want to be unkind, President, but I believe I've run the gamut on types of home teachers. I've seen good home teachers, bad home teachers, and indifferent home teachers. And since we moved into your stake, well, I've been significantly influenced, seeking baptism, because of great home teachers."

"Hmmm, wait a moment. Bad home teachers?"

"Forgive me. I shouldn't say 'bad.' I suppose bad home teachers are those who never even bothered to knock on our door, for we have gone months and months with none at all. But in the many places we've lived, and over these many years, I have taken a keen interest in the LDS home teaching program. I am willing to say it is the sleeping giant of Mormonism. In fact, I've even used some of it in the management philosophy I've been responsible for. For me, home teaching is a special thing. I firmly believe it embraces what the academician would call 'afflatus theopneusty'—the divine influence."

Brother Larrabee's eyes never left his stake president's face. He was intense in what he said. "I heard every session of general conference last month, and I was especially uplifted to hear the president of the Church himself speak on home teaching, saying it was 'inspired from its inception—a program that touches hearts, changes lives, spiritually renews.' [^1] And that's exactly what home teaching has done for me—and right here in your stake these past months."

"My goodness," the stake president responded. "Well, we're certainly pleased to hear that. And I'm impressed that you have been so attentive in your observations of home teaching."

"Yes, and I think I have finally caught the vision of what the Lord has set up in terms of tractable control through managerial communications for the entire Church. And I marvel at the ingeniousness of the program, that home teaching will work in any setting—for the rich and the poor, in any climate, in any culture, in any economy. And while I wouldn't pretend to have done any serious research, yet I believe I've recently uncovered the capstone statement for home teaching. In business we would call this the 'vision' or the 'mission statement.' Interesting ecclesiastical terms," he said as an aside, "but now being used every day by progressive commercial organizations. I have even jotted that statement down. Here, let me read it to you."

And reaching into his inside coat pocket, Brother Larrabee drew out a small brown notebook from which he read: " 'Home teaching, properly functioning, brings to the house of each member two priesthood bearers divinely commissioned and authoritatively called into the service by their priesthood leader and bishop.' " [^2]

"That's the most marvelous of mission statements for a communications resolve. It has cyclopean proportions," the convert stated, with some animation in his voice. "As a professional, dedicated as I am to organizational management, it is as strong a sign of the divinity of the Mormon Church as is the Book of Mormon!"

The stake president was surprised. "Why, I can't believe you are so caught up in home teaching that you actually carry around statements about it."

"Oh, my dear president, home teaching is one of the great treasures I've uncovered in my years of looking closely at your church."

"Our church," the president corrected.

"Our church," echoed the convert with a smile.

Now it was the president's turn to sit quietly and study the engaging face across the table. But only for a few moments, and then he stirred and spoke with a lowered voice, with confidentiality.

"Brother Larrabee, you have some special gifts, some special insights you obviously bring to Mormonism. You are the classic example of having been an accomplished outsider looking in. And before I ask you the question I'm anxious to ask, let me turn the tables on you and prove the value I place on your own wisdom." And as he spoke, the stake president reached out and picked up a large notebook lying on the table in front of him. Turning a few pages, he looked up and said with a note of triumph, "Ah, now, allow me to read something you wrote that I consider important enough to write down for my own use. Yes, and to share with my high council and bishops." And the president read: " 'Making resources productive is the specific job of management. Productivity of work is not the responsibility of the worker but the responsibility of management.' "

The stake president was delighted he could prove he had dug deeply into the Larrabee philosophy. "You see, that statement hit me very hard. You have said that if the productivity of my stake is to improve, then it must start with me."

The president closed the book but kept his finger between its pages. "I look at our stake statistics—our recorded productivity—and feel deeply the need to improve them. How can I get priesthood holders up and down the line to improve? How can I communicate the need for more support for the individual families? Well, your statement, simple though it seems, says that I should be making better use, more efficient use, of resources already available."

Brother Larrabee was pleasantly stirred. "Well now, president," he said, his eyes gleaming, "we have just come full cycle. The answer to your utilizing more of the unused resources of your stake lies in your own wonderful home teaching program. It's already in place. It just needs to be worked harder, used more properly—more consistently."

"Then let me ask you my burning question about home teaching," the president cut in, "because it represents a paradox that has puzzled me since long before I was called as president. Why will an active Latter-day Saint accept a mission call, sacrifice everything to travel to the other side of the world to fulfill it, knock on the doors of ten thousand strangers—and yet procrastinate simply traveling a few blocks or miles once a month to home teach his friends and neighbors, families of his faith?"

"Ah," the management analyst responded with gathering excitement. "That is a burning question. But there is no puzzle in it. Let me point out—in my humble opinion—the broad difference in the two callings. First, when a Mormon goes on a mission, it calls for a general celebration in the neighborhood: slaps on the back, a crowded farewell, laudatory speeches, his favorite hymns, and so on. He gets a grand sendoff at the airport with flags flying, bands playing, plenty of tears and hoopla. And even during his mission, he is continually reinforced with letters and packages of encouragement from home. It's hard for him to fail because of so many people in the system to prop him up, keeping him productive, keeping him going. He's almost guaranteed a repeat celebration at the airport when he completes his two years, and another crowded sacrament meeting for his homecoming. Plus," and Brother Larrabee held up his index finger, "he now wears a big medal on his chest, invisible though it may be, that says 'Honorably Returned Missionary.' "

The stake president sat, admiring this colorful convert's depth of understanding.

"But just measure the change of pace when that same excited, returned missionary receives the simple assignment of becoming a plain, everyday home teacher," the convert went on. "Missionaries are special; home teachers are everywhere. There may be a feeling that no fire-in-the-belly spirituality is needed for home teaching. For without proper understanding and vision, home teaching could seem humdrum to most priesthood holders. And there are no bands or shouts to send a home teacher off on his designated rounds every thirty days. His calling is now perfunctory, mechanical, ordinary, drab. He's expected to perform month after month, endlessly. There's no conclusion in sight, no let up, no special commendation, no celebration for a job well done."

The convert leaned forward, lowering his voice but charged with energy. "He's still going to be a home teacher when he dies, sometimes just stumbling along for years. Just a hit-or-miss, catch-as-catch-can home teacher." He sat back and sighed. "There's not a lot of glory in it. Glory is the stuff of missions."

The stake president was in painful agreement with what he was hearing. "But you've already qualified home teaching as being divinely inspired. Why can't the brethren be ignited, catch fire as home teachers—the same way you've just pointed out they feel when called as missionaries?"

"Ah, but my dear president, they can! And many of them do! It is true that home teaching is a lifetime task, and that over the years there may be an endless buildup of scar tissue. But dedicated and visionary home teachers also know that God isn't going to scrutinize them as much for degrees and diplomas as for scars. So to improve the home teaching in your stake, our brethren must catch the vision of what the Lord wants from his home teachers. And who is in charge of giving them that vision? Who makes the stake's 'resources productive and available to the stake's work force'?"

The stake president tapped the closed notebook still lying in his lap.

"Right!" thundered the convert. "It is the stake's appointed manager. It is you! And as I understand your chain of command, it is also your bishops, and then your quorum leaders." Brother Larrabee now rose to his feet. He always felt more comfortable standing or pacing as he talked.

"The best part about home teaching in your stake—our stake—is that it is working marvelously for some of us. I believe that home teaching is one of the most remarkable communication disciplines I've ever run across. Just imagine the scope of it! In the LDS membership, a church numbering in the millions, there is an inner corps of hundreds of thousands of men and boys—all volunteers, for no one is paid—who willingly take an assignment to visit that entire membership of millions at least once a month! That is astonishing in its scope. Where else in the world can you find such an amazing work force dedicated to doing so much good, and on such a continuous basis? Here, let me read you something I received in the mail today. You'll be amused at its timeliness."

Reaching into his inside coat pocket, Brother Larrabee retrieved his notebook and took from within its pages an envelope from which he withdrew several handwritten pages.

"This is a letter I just happened to receive today at my office. My wife hasn't even had a chance to read it yet. It is from our oldest daughter who is studying in Cambridge, England. Listen to her comments:

" 'It takes about half an hour to bike to our LDS church here, but it is well worth it. There are plenty of beautiful, huge chapels all over Cambridge where exquisite music is played. I have been to several Church of England services here, one of them in the most incredible cathedral. It is more stunning than Westminster and was begun in the year 1083. The music was glorious, but the service could not compare to the humble, strong spirit I feel in our little LDS meetinghouse. Those professional ministers conduct their worship service more for show. I don't think they care for the people gathered in their grand cathedral. They certainly don't check to see if anyone did his home teaching.' "

Brother Larrabee looked up. "While I appreciate the fact that my daughter has a splendid bias where religion is concerned, yet she is right about Episcopalian home teaching. It doesn't happen. It doesn't exist. No Church of England bishop has ever had the inspiration—or the interest—in setting up that spectacular network of people caring for people on a well-organized and consistent basis, laymen looking in, on assignment, over all the fellow members of their congregation. That is exclusively found in Mormonism. That's our home teaching with its amazing capability, producing astonishing results for families and individuals—and it surely turned me around these past months."

Brother Larrabee stopped his pacing and gazed again at the picture of the Savior. "But there is another side to home teaching, namely, that many of your priesthood holders fail to live up to its . . . " he cast about for the right words, "awesome potential. High potential is what you've got. What you want is high performance."

The stake president squirmed visibly. "I already know that much, unfortunately. But tell me more about why it works and why it doesn't. I would be genuinely interested in your analysis, your criticism."

"Criticism?" responded the convert quickly. "I didn't think that Mormon leadership took kindly to criticism." His smile returned as he said this, and he sank back into his chair, signaling a desire to continue the interview.

"You're right," said the president warmly. "But only criticism of Church doctrine. Any attempt to nullify or subvert the word of the Lord, the scriptures, or an inspired leader's counsel, is not tolerated. But a constructive critique of our own mortal efforts to fulfill divine counsel or to serve our membership—as we are striving to do with home teaching—yes, I want to hear that. That's constructive."

Then lifting the notebook in his lap back onto the table he added, "Criticism may not be agreeable sometimes, but it is necessary—and it can be helpful. I have heard it compared to the function of pain in the human body: it calls attention to an unhealthy state of things. And that can save lives. I suppose my own high council can be very critical of programs we are struggling to initiate or refine. But their criticism is given in a most helpful and uplifting manner. They're not pulling down. They're attempting to build up."

The president was amused to catch himself flailing out both arms to help demonstrate his high council's uplifting criticism. "But please, Brother Larrabee, do continue. Tell me how we can improve home teaching."

"I don't know what my observations are worth, limited as they are to my own home. But I will share my honest feelings with you," said the analyst, now relaxed in his chair. "But with this caution—that I don't pretend to be an expert in the Mormon mindset." He paused.

"However, I am an organizational observer, and I have silently monitored several dozen sets of home teachers who have come into my home over those eighteen years. Some did the job; some didn't. Some tried; some just didn't care." He halted this easy flow of words and then said, "We had one bright young man come to us when we lived on the coast who wanted to be a home teacher in the worst way—and that's how he did it."

"In the worst way?"

"Exactly."

The stake president's easy smile revealed his amusement, and the convert continued: "We lived in one ward where the bishopric decided that home teaching statistics would improve if all the home teachers met in the chapel—on a given night, men and boys together—where they would hear a rousing pep talk by their leaders on the dynamics of home teaching, and then everyone could rush out to complete all their monthly visits on that very same evening, ensuring that it all got done. They tried it and ended up laughing heartily over the futility of it all, because what they found, in fact, when they entered each home was that there were few complete families to hear their messages—only the sisters and children were there. The fathers and young men were out home teaching."

Twisting inwardly, the stake president remembered that as a new bishop, he had once toyed with the same idea.

"One of the most memorable home teaching visits I had occurred right after my wife joined the Church. That was before we had any children, and we had just purchased our first home, an old house with poor plumbing. My wife was gone and I was floundering to unplug the drain system when two gentlemen came to my door, strangers all dressed up in suits and ties, asking for my wife. I explained that she was gone. They explained that they were her home teachers. I don't believe I'd ever heard the term. Before I knew what was happening, however, they got it out of me that our drains were clogged and that I wasn't really smart enough to solve that situation. It became evident, as we three discussed the problem, that they had solutions—and were more than willing to share them with me.

"When my wife walked up our street, she was astonished to discover a man in a business suit crouching on top of our roof poking our garden hose down a pipe. She hurried inside and found still another well-dressed gentleman perched on the edge of her bathtub stuffing a towel into the sink; and as she stood there bewildered, she could hear my muffled voice coming from beneath the bathroom floor shouting, 'Shall I turn it on? Can you hear me?' "

Brother Larrabee's eyes wrinkled in merriment at the memory of this scene. Then he said reflectively, "Looking back now, President, I do believe those two first brothers possibly summed up the entire essence of home teaching. They had come unbidden to my door, uncovered a problem that obviously overwhelmed me, recognized I needed help—and then neither of them hesitated climbing onto my roof and splashing water on their suits in finally solving my difficulties. And though I can't remember their names now, and that was the first time I had ever met them, yet I would have to label them great exemplars of Mormon home teaching." He paused and added, "They were a class act."

"Hmmm, a class act indeed." The president once again studied the face of his guest, then asked, "Tell me, Brother Larrabee, I hear that term again and again. What does it mean to you, a class act?"

The merry eyes smoothed out, narrowed, penetrated. "I was reading the other day about William McKinley campaigning for reelection as president of the United States in 1900. He was standing at the back of the train as it slowly pulled away from the crowd that had just listened to his campaign speech. He had taken off his leather gloves while speaking and then to wave, and now that the crowd was nearly out of sight he pulled them on to warm his cold hands. Expensive pigskin gloves, they were. But he fumbled one, and it fell over the railing and off the back of the train right onto the track. He immediately pulled off the other glove and threw it out, and it landed beside its mate. The several men standing with him were astonished at this sudden act until he explained, 'There is nothing more maddening or more disappointing than finding just one glove.'

"I thought to myself when I read that, now that is a class act—totally unselfish, thoughtful of others, and done in an instant. No mulling over the thing, arguing mentally what was best to do. And you see, President, that is what I got from those two well-dressed home teachers the day my drain was clogged. They never hesitated once they saw the problem. They were totally committed to doing the best thing to help me—no strings attached. Yes, I'll put them right there alongside President McKinley. They were a class act."

"What other home teachers stand out in your mind?" the president asked.

"When we lived in Washington, D.C., we had a difficult one. He rarely missed seeing us monthly, but when he came, always alone, he would dominate any effort at family dialogue. He loved to quote scriptures, so his visits were more like a one-man scriptural treatise, a sermon. This somewhat embarrassed my wife, for I was especially not interested in looking at Mormonism then, and he was determined to convert me through his eloquent and liberal quotations from the Bible and Book of Mormon. He had an additional fetish, however. He never called ahead for an appointment. He liked to surprise us. So often I would not be home when he just dropped in, and my wife would admit later that without me he turned the full fire of his sermonizing on our little children.

"My wife tried to insulate me from him. For you must understand that she suffered a fundamental ambivalence when he was around. Two truly conflicting emotions: she wanted very much for me to become interested in the Church, but she didn't want me exposed to the only representative of the Church coming into our home, this oppressive and bombastic home teacher. And my dear wife—she would never think of asking a bishop to reassign our home teacher—finally agreed that one of her worst moments came the night he dropped in and found her dragging around under the weather and struggling with two sick children, one of them a babe in arms who continually cried. The house was in a mess, and she had left two older children unattended in the bathtub to answer the door. And there she found her home teacher ready to stride in, once again without an appointment.

"So he plunked himself right down on the couch and launched into his scriptural presentation regardless of the water fight or shrieks going on in the bathroom, or the two wailing children in her lap. It was a masterpiece of insensitivity. He wasn't concerned with her needs. He had prepared a scriptural message. He enjoyed ventilating his ideas, and he was determined to give them, come what may."

Brother Larrabee rubbed his hands thoughtfully.

"She was in tears when I finally got home. After I calmed her down, I asked her what his message had been. She said she didn't know because she couldn't hear it for the clamor of the children squirming in her lap."

Both men frowned sympathetically at each other. But the president was quick to break the silence. "So you've had some interesting times with home teachers over the years, and you've said you had some that cared and some that didn't. Tell me, would you feel it's easy—early on—to discern strong home teachers from weak ones?"

Brother Larrabee was amused. "Strong versus weak? Let's call them effective versus ineffective, because that's the way we have to evaluate workers in the business world. They are all measured against the effectiveness of their performance." He said these last words slowly, with emphasis. "And they are paid accordingly, rewarded, given proper bonuses as dictated by the profitability they produce." He paused. "And the other side of the coin—ineffectiveness—is very serious. If they prove to be nonproducers, then we have only three alternatives: one, we can retrain them; two, we can transfer them to something less demanding, less rewarding; or three, we can simply take them off the payroll and eliminate their salaries from bloating our overhead. We terminate them. And that's unpleasant. But then, my Mormon children have always sung a song about 'the world has no use for the drone.' "

The two men sat silent for a long moment.

"And the business world agrees with that sentiment," the president said with finality.

"Because all service in the Mormon Church is voluntary," Brother Larrabee went on, "you can't just fire people. You've got to be grateful for whatever service they freely give. But in the case of home teachers, why should Mormon managers tolerate a slothful, unproductive effort any more than concerned business executives do? Home teaching is too vital, too valuable a function when it's properly done." That last comment was added with a steely-eyed smile.

The president was pricked by another twinge of conscience from this management analyst's high opinion of a Church program he'd always dismissed as being rather routine. "It's obvious you have certainly experienced a broad spectrum of effectiveness with your home teachers," he said. "But answer my original question: how early can you as a discerning father measure effective versus ineffective teachers new in your home?"

"It's almost immediate. Almost as soon as they walk through the door, come into the house. Some basic home teaching mistakes will inevitably tip the family off that we have got ourselves another pair of heedless, nonchalant, unmotivated teachers."

"Inevitably? Explain that, please."

"Inevitability," repeated Brother Larrabee, "is like that story they tell about a National League umpire we used to watch when we went to baseball games in New York. After an overzealous rookie threw his bat high into the air to protest a called strike, the umpire said, 'Son, if that bat comes down, you're out of this game.' " He chuckled to himself.

"So when I took the measure of the ineffective performance of a new set of home teachers, I could tell they were not going to have the skills or concern to help my family. And they certainly wouldn't be able to persuade me to get closer to the gospel—which my wife and children wanted. They had flung the bat in the air. It was inevitable that they were out of the game, the game they were playing so ineptly in my own living room."

"An excellent analogy," the president commented, tapped his fingers on his notebook as he reflected and then said: "But on balance you say you've had good home teachers too?"

"Oh, President, not good ones—great ones! A few years back—and at that time I was a chain smoker, had smoked long before my wife joined the Church—we had a home teacher that really concentrated on me, on things I was interested in. When he discovered I took an inordinate delight in trout fishing, he invited me to join him and several of his LDS friends on an overnight hike up to a remote mountain lake. I agreed to go and got quite excited about the trip. I felt I was in as good a shape physically as were he and his two friends when we started out, but by the time we reached the top of the ridge, and with the fifty-pound pack I was carrying, why, I was astonishingly out of breath. We stood there, the four of us, drinking in the scene below, standing high on the cliff overlooking our lake. And all we could hear in the silence of that glorious setting was my labored breathing.

"It became so obvious that I couldn't catch my breath, and that their lungs were in great shape, that I acknowledged my weakness by taking out the four packages of cigarettes from my pack and throwing them as far out over that beautiful valley as I could. It was a mortifying moment of total acquiescence for me."

"But a great teaching moment regarding the Word of Wisdom?" the stake president inquired.

"No, my great teaching moment caught up with me the next day when I found myself spending all morning stumbling through the rocks and brush at the foot of the cliff—searching hopelessly for my cigarettes." The analyst studied the fingers that for so many years had held his cigarettes. "And I haven't smoked since that very revealing trip with my home teacher."

He looked back up at the president and said, "But the home teacher we've enjoyed these past months since coming into your stake, he is one of the finest men I have ever met—in or out of the Church. I couldn't be too effusive in my praise of him. He approaches the ideal prototype as a home teacher."

"That's high praise."

"High praise, but merited," the convert replied. "I know a dozen companies that would pay a high price to get a man of Bob Crabtree's sensitivities on their management team."

"Bob Crabtree, the elders quorum president?"

"He's my home teacher, yes," replied Brother Larrabee with a little ring of pride in his voice. "It was he who personally led me down those white tile steps and into the waters of baptism last week. And let me compliment our ward leaders on assigning him to our family, to me. I have since learned that the Church program now is to send the strongest home teachers to the most needful homes. Assigning Bob Crabtree to me was right on target. For if anyone in the ward needed a great home teacher, I did. And you talk about my sensing the inevitable, why, I knew the minute he crossed our threshold that he was going to have the spirituality to finally answer my most difficult questions, bring me all the way into the Church." Brother Larrabee leaned forward. "You should have Bob Crabtree write the how-to manual on becoming a winning home teacher. He has the vision; he knows how to articulate the Lord's program."

The president's interest continued to climb. "So tell me, Brother Larrabee, what immediate signs did you recognize when Brother Crabtree came into your home, those positive signs that told you he was going to be effective?"

"He did everything right. He did his homework. He knew all about us—about me. He counseled with our previous home teachers. He talked privately with my wife. He knew the children already, and they really were attracted to him. He told me he was going to be our home teacher before I actually met him. Then he called for an appointment on the phone and was so pleasant in that quick conversation that he had my interest up. And when he came into our house, well, you could actually feel his genuine concern for us. He didn't barge in like so many. He was quiet, respectful, careful in introducing the young man with him, unobtrusive in introducing himself. And best of all, he didn't wait until the end of the month to make his visit. In fact, as he built a strong relationship with me, he came more often than your mandated thirty days. You see, he was sincerely interested in us.

"He made a strong point in explaining that though he knew I was not a member of the church he represented, and that his religious affiliation was only with my wife and children, yet he and his young companion regarded me as the head of the home. He said they would always defer to me, abide by my wishes. Then he asked if they might hear from me. Would I give them direction in what they should present to my family? That's the best any home teacher had ever made me feel."

"And you requested a religious message each time?" asked the president.

"Well, that's where I came to enjoy Bob Crabtree so much. We always chatted about a specific subject for our next visit. It wasn't always a doctrinal subject; but it always involved achieving a happier life. And I came to discover that's really the essence of the gospel anyway.

"When they returned, they both came thoroughly prepared. The meat of their message wasn't aimed at me only but very much involved my whole family. And they always asked questions, getting participation from all of us and letting my children feel that their opinions were important. Brother Crabtree even made assignments to us, getting everyone in the family united, which made it very pleasant for each of us to contribute during the next visit—as we had been assigned. And he cheered us on lustily, was high in his praise of us."

The convert's face was aglow in praise of his home teacher. "He was most considerate and helpful; didn't embarrass any of us. And he didn't lean on me—as so many have in the past—trying to provoke me into being baptized, trying to prove I was making a big mistake in not being LDS. And best of all, he was punctual and pleasant, and he always left us wanting to hear more. Those qualities are rare in your everyday home teachers. They are rare in the business world."

"Hmmm," murmured the president reflectively. "And so just what kinds of things did he teach you?"

"We had quite an interesting little review, that very first meeting, of what would be helpful to me, to my wife and children. We suggested some goals to each other, the home teachers and the family together, talked about where those various subjects would lead us. Then each visit with Brother Crabtree and his young companions—for they were changed around—progressively kept my family and me on track accomplishing those goals. It was a remarkable unfolding of vital information about life and its purposes, death and its meaning, family relations and how to improve them. I came to discover these were all essential gospel subjects.

"I became quite intrigued about what we were being taught, what I was learning, and I had to start reading the books that were being quoted in our meetings just to keep up with my children. It was an amazing period of growth for me. It was a wonder for my wife to see me finally taking hold."

Brother Larrabee tugged at his ear, remembering the pleasure of those experiences. "And there were plenty of occasions when I threw their train off the track—my family and the home teachers—with questions coming off the wall, playing the devil's advocate. But they were very patient with me, and Brother Crabtree was very wise in acting as facilitator, fielding my questions and pulling many doctrinal answers for me from my own wife and children."

In his enthusiasm, the convert had worked his way forward, perching on the edge of his chair. The president thought he might spring up at any moment.

"You see, he knew I would be surprised, even astonished—yes, and pleased—to see this demonstration right within my own home: that Sunday School lessons had deeply qualified my children, even the younger ones, to understand life and its significant values, better—oh, so much, much better than their father." He clapped his hand on his knee. "And there was always time, before and after what was obviously the meat of these instructive visits, for miscellaneous talk, where Brother Crabtree always managed to pull whatever subject I happened to bring up right back into gospel focus."

"Explain that."

"Well, no matter what I would say, no matter how extraneous or far afield from gospel subjects I would wander in feeding my own interests, he would artfully refocus my subjects back to something pertaining to a teaching message on the Church. If I started talking baseball, he would casually mention that the great Dale Murphy or Harmon Killibrew were LDS. If it was golf, he could name the current Latter-day Saints on the pro tour. If I talked fishing, he reminded me that the Apostle Peter was a fisherman. If I mentioned politics, he soon had us discussing the fact that Ezra Taft Benson was once the United States Secretary of Agriculture—and the only original cabinet member to stay with the president for all eight years of the Eisenhower administration."

Brother Larrabee folded his arms with finality over his chest. "Yes, he kept me on a straight and productive course. And he did it with good taste and humor, and with touching spirituality." Another long pause, and then his voice caught as he went on. "He was the first man who ever helped me find the courage to pray before my family. It was something we worked on privately. And when I finally knelt and prayed that first time, why, he was kneeling right beside me." A painful pause. "And with everyone's eyes shut, Bob slipped an arm around my shoulders."

The convert was charged with strong emotion. But he concluded with a shining smile.

"My home teacher, Brother Crabtree, has become a wonderful friend—and a marvelous advocate for Christ. I would have to say that it was his spirituality, his pure love of God, his continually expressing his testimony as to the validity of all the Church stands for—it was the weight of all of it that persuaded me to start my own personal prayers, my concerned study of the scriptures, and finally my request to be baptized."

He was finished. The convert had given rich and convincing testimony to the attentive stake president of his solid conversion to the gospel of Jesus Christ. He would make a touching contribution at the forthcoming stake conference, the president thought to himself. Yes, there was inspiration in asking him to speak. No doubt about that.

They fell silent one final time, looking affably at one another. Then the president spoke: "This has been a most enlightening interview for me, good brother. I feel very close to you because of it. I will look forward with great interest to your conference address."

The convert smiled, nodded his accord.

"But I would like to point out that you have done something very special for me in this brief conversation, Brother Larrabee. You have awakened some things within me regarding home teaching. A sleeping giant, you called it. As powerful a proof that our church is true as is the Book of Mormon, you said."

The convert smiled steadily; his gaze never wavered.

"High potential is what we have, but high performance is what we need. You said that also." The president looked around the empty room. "And so you have stirred up some strong creative juices within me." He turned his head back, carefully considering the convert reflected in the polished table. "You've caused some ideas to foment, which, I suppose, is why you have earned the reputation you have."

The convert's eyes stayed fastened to the president's face.

"So I am making an additional request of you. This discussion of ours has provoked me to feel there is much more I can do personally in managing the home teaching in this stake. We've already agreed, you and I, that I am in charge of training priesthood leaders, and, well, I suspect I may have been somewhat derelict—in regards to home teaching. I want to call a special meeting of some key stake people and set up a panel to review some of the ways we could improve ourselves in that sacred assignment." The president was an energetic and decisive man, but now he paused dramatically.

"And I would like you to be a resource member of that discussion group." The president opened his notebook and turned to a calendar. "You say your home teacher should write the how-to book on home teaching. No, dear brother. It is you who have seen the good, the bad, the indifferent. Best of all, it is you who have the professional skills to make a transcending contribution to the rest of us. You see our program with the freshness of outside eyes. We want your point of view."

The convert moved to speak, but the president pressed on. "I would like you to make a presentation to our discussion group where you profile the effective home teacher, where you outline his attributes, his attitudes, his skills. I know you can do this. And the Lord will inspire you in the doing. This will be your first calling as a Latter-day Saint, to make your special contribution in helping us define and understand home teaching effectiveness."

As the president leaned forward, reaching his right hand across the wide table, he said, "I believe some of the home teachers in this stake would improve themselves if they could catch the marvelous spirit and vision of inspired home teaching. Will you help me in this task? Help us to bring others closer to Christ as you have just experienced—through inspired home teaching?"

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Chapin Collins in the Montesano, Washington, Vidette.
[^2] D&C 121:41-46.
