Richard J. Marshall, Home Teaching with Purpose and Power ( 1990)

6

Seeking the Spirit

The multipurpose room in the stake center could seat seventy or eighty people comfortably. On this occasion, however, the priesthood leadership turnout to hear the results of the stake president's study on home teaching had created an unaccustomed crush. Some of this heightened interest had been stirred up by the rumor that Brother Larrabee, "one of the foremost philosophers of American business management," was going to present a critical analysis—an "outsider's" critique—of home teaching.

Measuring the heavy turnout with his eye, the stake executive secretary suggested they remove themselves into the cultural hall and set up chairs there. But, no, the president desired the intimate control of this smaller room. Additional chairs were quickly crowded in and everyone was finally seated. Following the hymn and prayer, the stake president was on his feet greeting, introducing, conducting.

"Brethren, we have an unusual opportunity tonight. A little later on, you are going to be given a printed outline, a booklet profiling the prototype of what this task group considers to be a Christlike home teacher—not an easy enterprise for this little group on the front row. But let me point out that this committee includes a bishop who has led his ward in achieving 100-percent home teaching since it was organized, two erstwhile mission presidents, a former regional representative of the Council of the Twelve, and three hard-working elders quorum presidents, as well as two senior high councilors and, of course, your stake presidency—all home teachers with vast years of experience on the front lines.

"Another key member of our committee is Brother Larrabee, whom we all enjoyed hearing last stake conference. His was a singular contribution, not because he has been an effective home teacher or even a longtime home teacher but, more important perhaps, because his recent conversion was precipitated by effective home teaching. His value to our task group was his newness, his freshness. He is so very new in the Church that he still represents an outsider looking in. Oftentimes we get a different perspective when we see ourselves through other people's eyes. And that was most helpful."

The president said this because he was keenly aware that rumors had run rife about Brother Larrabee. It had been suggested by some that because he was not "church-broke" he had played the devil's advocate when orthodox discussions were probing the depths of home teaching techniques. Whispers also had it that his corporate management expertise made him a standout maverick on the committee. Mutterings and murmurings had been spent speculating over his value, asking what genuine contribution such a lifetime gentile might make to a disciplined committee of fourth-generation Mormons reviewing a function as fundamental as home teaching.

"In this regard," the president was saying, "allow me now to share with you part of an essay I first read some years ago: 'I don't care whether it's a business association, a labor union, a political party, or a church—all are guilty of the sin of talking to themselves. Democrats attend Democratic meetings, Republicans turn out for Republican rallies, union members go to their meetings, and the business people attend theirs. They all usually invite, and applaud, speakers they already agree with, and the speakers feel gratified because they evoke hearty applause. But nobody has had his opinions challenged, nor his beliefs questioned.' " [^1]

The president looked up from the paper in his hand. "So our first presenter tonight is Brother Larrabee, a priest in the Ninth Ward, and doubtless the least experienced home teacher among us. I have asked him to share his feelings about home teaching—especially after the many meetings and discussions he has sat through since being called as a resource person to this committee. He will also introduce a written declaration to which we have all contributed. We feel it will be very helpful as you strengthen the individuals and families within your assigned stewardships. It is titled simply, "Guidelines for Home Teachers." And Brother Larrabee will also review some foundation qualities we all feel to be necessary for an achieving home teacher."

Even as he stood to address the group, Brother Larrabee noted there was not a smile in fifteen rows of faces. "Gentlemen—ahem, brethren—and I'll just have to get used to this new terminology. Please be patient with me." He noted a rash of faint smiles break out. "I greatly appreciate the opportunity our stake president has given in allowing me to lead off this evening. I see that some of you have notebooks. Excellent. The shortest pencil is more permanent than the longest memory." He was a born teacher and could never resist scattering about his homilies. "But the major thrust of our presentation is already printed and will be passed out later." He gestured toward a pile of booklets stacked on the table behind him.

"Let me explain what a refreshing change of pace it has been for me to work with this committee, this task group, a group that always prayed in Christ's name before and after every meeting, petitioning our Father in heaven for success. That was an astonishing anomaly for me. I was also vitally interested in observing our stake president in action—leading discussions, defining our mission, assigning the gathering and sifting and collating of selected materials. Let me say very simply that I have come through this experience convinced that God indeed inspires our president. Under his enlivened direction we have researched and drawn from a wealth of powerful statements already made on the subject of the home teaching program."

Brother Larrabee looked about—a commanding figure, though he was not tall—making sure he had eye contact with each attentive row of faces.

"You have just heard in our president's introduction of me that I participated in our attempt to profile the perfect home teacher. That is too ambitious a task for mere mortals, and especially for me, an obvious outsider. But I am naive enough that I truly tried to help. There were many times when I apologized to my associates on the committee for my great lack of knowledge, for my perpetual challenging of what was being done and why. I suspect it made some of them feel they were being put on the defensive. Therefore, I must acknowledge that I hold out great respect for each of them, and for you—all of you—priesthood leaders. You may not know what strength you hold as a body of dedicated men."

His humility and appreciation were genuine, and the sea of bland faces was warming up. He continued: "Since I am quick to admit that you already know much more about our subject than do I, please bear with me. Most of what I shall say now is from me, my observations of qualities I have discovered and identified for myself in sifting through so much that has been written and said regarding home teaching. I am sharing with you, therefore, a neophyte's fragile and superficial observations." He reached behind him, picking up a booklet from the table. "But the materials collected in here under the direction of our stake presidency, well, they are solid gold.

"So to commence my own presentation, allow me, please, to involve you with an illustration, a revealing little story that I believe has everything to do with our discussion tonight. It is the story of a young married man whose company required him to spend a few weeks in New York City to receive some training at the corporate offices. Because of the length of his stay, he was allowed to bring his wife and little boy with him, and it was arranged that they would stay in one of the company's apartments on 5th Avenue, overlooking Central Park. It became a routine for the young man, after spending a hard day in training, to take the little boy for a walk in Central Park. So every day the father and son would stroll through this pleasant park, and every day they would end their walk in front of the famous bronze statue of General William Tecumseh Sherman, towering fifteen feet in the air, a heroic figure in full military regalia sitting astride a great horse and with his sword upraised, symbolically pointing skyward.

"On their first confrontation with General Sherman's grandiose statue, the father—the weather being chilly—took off his hat in mock salute and said, 'Hello, Sherman.' The little boy took off his own small cap in the same manner and mimicked his father, 'Hello, Sherman.'

"This practice continued every working day during their weeks in the city until that sad day when they took their final stroll before their departure for home. So this walk was especially touching, even a bit nostalgic. They had thoroughly enjoyed their wanderings through the park together.

"This time when they ended up at Sherman's statue, the father altered his routine. Instead of saluting by holding high his hat, he now placed it over his heart and sorrowfully said, 'Good-bye, Sherman.' The little boy followed suit: 'Good-bye, Sherman.'

"And after this touching little ritual, while they both held their pose before this dynamic military leader, the little boy spoke up again, asking, 'Daddy, who is that man sitting on Sherman?' "

Surprised laughter erupted in the crowded room.

Brother Larrabee waited till it faded and then said, "Brethren, tonight we are talking about the difference between perception and reality!" He lifted a hand into the air. "Tonight we are going to see if you view your home teaching assignments as a mere monthly function, a social call, a quasi-spiritual quick fix—with a little teaching here and a scripture thrown in there, mingled with comments on the weather or the social scene in the ward. Or whether you see home teaching for what it really is, one of the most powerful communications tools ever devised by our loving Father—and commanded by him of honorable men, men such as yourselves, men especially called to serve the spiritual and temporal needs of families and individuals in God's kingdom on earth.

"With what eyes do you view the home teaching assignment you've been given? Are you like the wise and mature father standing before Sherman's statue, seeing—recognizing—with awe and respect one of the greatest military strategists in the history of American warfare?" He seemed to tower over them, waiting to pounce on anyone who would dare attempt an answer. "Or are you like the ingenuous, candid little boy, who sees only a horse?"

Fifteen rows of eyes were riveted to him.

"How do you minister to the families you've been assigned? Are you concentrating the God-given powers of your priesthood, stirring up the abundance of charity in your heart for them, praying and preparing anxiously for your visits to be effective and motivating? Are you concerned? solicitous? troubled? uneasy? watchful? cautious? vigilant? circumspect? Are you striving continually to identify and support their needs? Or are you seeing only the horse? Saying with a little boy's childish view of things that there's really no need to look deeply at this family. No troubles here. No need for concern. All's well, yea, verily, all's well in Zion. In fact, some may say, if we didn't even look in on them this month, why, it wouldn't really matter. All's well!"

He was a new convert, but he knew his Book of Mormon.

"Gentlemen, I'm not here to reproach anyone. I'm here to tell you how overwhelmed I have become with the greatness of the Mormon organization. I believe it to be inspired. I joined this Church because of that conviction. Home teaching can bond the Saints together and bring the spirit of the gospel into every home and family, regardless of their measure of faith, their love of God, or even their attendance in Sabbath meetings.

"It is a fact that my family had home teachers assigned eighteen years ago, immediately after my wife's baptism. Therefore I have had this singular advantage—that for eighteen years I have been looking directly at Mormonism. My view, my focus of the Church—because I never attended any meetings—came by looking through the only window that was opened to me—our home teachers."

He was beginning to pace before the group now.

"In all candor I must confess to you that sometimes the window was too dark to see much, while at other times it was crystal clear. Yet, during some periods, it was entirely shut, for no one came to us. My vision, my view of God's true church, all depended on the caliber and capacity of my home teachers. If the quality of home teachers was indispensable to my seeing the light of the gospel, I suggest it could be just as paramount to others, to stumbling, searching souls you and your quorums are called and assigned to home teach right now.

"I learned long ago from a pair of excellent home teachers that Joseph Smith was once asked by a journalist what the difference was between Mormonism and all of the other churches. This question begged for a very involved answer because there is a labyrinthian wealth of differences, vast disparities, between Mormonism and any other religion. But Joseph Smith—wise man that he was—stated all of those difference in one simple sentence: 'We have the Holy Ghost.' "

Brother Larrabee stopped pacing. "Let me ask you a reflective, rhetorical question: Do your own home teachers bring the Holy Ghost with them when they enter your home? Can you feel it? When you and your companion home teach, do you ever agonize in your own spiritual preparation before going into the homes of others? Do you plead that the Holy Ghost will be companion to you in all that you do and say? Have you been moved by that Spirit to praise your families' good works? Have you been spiritually moved to love them? spiritually motivated to encourage them? to chide them? to challenge them? to call them to repentance?"

He moved again, several steps to the center, until he was directly in front of the stake president.

"President, I was not LDS when my wife encouraged me to take her through the visitors' center at Liberty Jail one summer when we were driving through Missouri. But I was most interested in inspecting firsthand that restructured dungeon with its original stone floor where Joseph Smith had been chained in 1838. I saw those very stones upon which he was forced to sleep for six bitter winter months. Then I looked up and read the astonishing revelation God had given him while he was so cruelly shackled to those stones. It is a sublime and heavenly message, now artfully, carefully carved in the great marble wall that surrounds that little jail."

He had spoken directly to the president in a loud voice for all to hear, but now he looked up, his narrowed eyes sweeping the entire group. "When I considered Joseph's miserable circumstances—illegally held by his enemies while his Latter-day Saints were being scattered and driven across snowbound Missouri, forced to abandon farms and homes by the governor's wretched order to exterminate them—I wondered how a prophet would comment on such a seeming defeat. What would a true prophet be inspired to write in the midst of such monumental misery?

"And I reminded myself that this was the same prophet who had already offended many by announcing that only his church had the gift of the Holy Ghost." Brother Larrabee now picked up one of the booklets again, holding it high, then brought it down to his eye level and opened it.

"Let me read you what he wrote from our booklet 'Guidelines for Home Teachers.' And let me say that I had entirely forgotten it until members of the committee brought it forth and made it the center of our major discussion." The convert seemed to draw himself up, standing straighter, taller than before. "These words were spiritually whispered to an imprisoned, impoverished prophet. However, I agree with our president: they should be transcendent in the minds of home teachers everywhere whenever we plan our visits, whenever we are in the homes assigned to us—and whenever we are in our own homes. This is God's counsel on how priesthood holders should use priesthood authority. These instructions—in my judgment, and as a newcomer to the Church, yes, but one with some considerable experience in assessing organizations—these instructions, I repeat, are the consummate guide for home teachers who would honorably fulfill their assignments."

Having said all of this, Brother Larrabee now read with a clear, ringing voice, the following: 'No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile—reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy; that he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death.

" 'Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven. The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and with-out compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever.' " [^2]

The speaker read these solemn words with a clarion voice, causing them to resound through the thronged room. He read with impact and emphasis. He made the words seem wonderfully new, a refreshing revelation just announced, directly germane to home teaching in today's troubled world. When he was through, he lowered the booklet and studied again the variety of faces in the assembly.

"Brethren, what does it cost us to have the Holy Ghost as a companion? What price must we pay?" He paused, knowing no answer would be called out.

"Joseph Smith, in that same Liberty Jail revelation, wrote that the powers of heaven can only be controlled upon principles of righteousness, and that we cannot do so while covering our sins or gratifying our pride or our vain ambition, nor can we exercise authority over others. [^3] So we discover that being a home teacher for Christ takes more than just dropping in once a month. It takes spirituality—as I believe we have unequivocally established—but it also takes other qualities: judgment, energy, integrity, courage, good manners, thoughtfulness. We could go on, but better still, let me illustrate how some of these qualities combine in an outstanding home teacher.

"I have been researching home teaching on assignment from the stake president, gathering facts and feelings from some of the Church members I know. One bishop related to me a home teaching situation in his ward that had caused him and others great distress. It seems that one of his young married couples, a couple he was just activating, had started shying away from attending their meetings, shunning him when they did come out. When he went to their home one night, when he sat and asked what was happening in their lives (for he had been preparing them for temple marriage), he was told by the tearful wife that she was appalled at the 'lack of feeling' expressed by the ward members and, to his greater surprise, by him, the bishop.

"He was personally dismayed at hearing this and pressed to find the reason for her frustration. He discovered that her sister, her only nearby relative, had recently died in a most painful and sudden manner—and no one in the ward had said a word in sympathy to her. She and her husband had mourned all alone, stood forlorn and painfully alone beside the casket on the night of the viewing. She was quite bitter about it. Where were the ward members? she asked. Where was the bishop? she lamented."

Brother Larrabee held up the committee's printed booklet once again, waving it as a signal. "Some of you may know that my own home teacher, Brother Crabtree sitting over there, baptized me several weeks back. And one of the things he and I did, in preparation for my becoming one of the 'fold of God,' was to review God's baptismal covenant.

"What did we all really agree to when we came into God's fold? into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints? I was much impressed with the baptismal covenant Brother Crabtree and I read together. I was warmed by it, heartened by it. I rejoiced in uniting with such a concerned and harmonious group of Christians, to join with them, the wonderful Mormons. But—the tearful wife in our little story, she may have once felt a close kinship to her ward family, yet now she was alienated from them. Why? Why was she feeling terribly let down?

"It was because no one in her ward—including the bishop—lived up to the baptismal covenant. That's where they failed her. I want to read that covenant to you now. It has been included in your booklet. In fact, it is also found in the Book of Mormon, but sometimes we glide right over it without feeling the power of this pledge, the unconditional adherence it cries out for."

Again he stopped pacing. Standing straight and tall he said, "I want to read it very slowly because of the impact of commitment these words carry, sacred words, words of seriousness and sanctity—words every Mormon ostensibly agreed to before being baptized. Simply stated, gentlemen," he said forthrightly, "this is a covenant, a contract, that binds us to God, that binds us to each other. The prophet Alma is speaking: 'Behold, here are the waters of Mormon (for thus were they called) and now, as ye are desirous to come into the fold of God, and to be called his people, and are willing to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light; yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort, and to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that ye may be in, even until death, that ye may be redeemed of God, and be numbered with those of the first resurrection, that ye may have eternal life—now I say unto you, if this be the desire of your hearts, what have you against being baptized in the name of the Lord, as a witness before him that ye have entered into a covenant with him, that ye will serve him and keep his commandments, that he may pour out his Spirit more abundantly upon you?' [^4]

"You see, brethren, this young wife had waited for someone to come and help her bear her heavy burden, mourn with her over the sudden death of her dear sister, put an arm around her, support her in her grief. When no one came, she obviously felt she was outside the 'fold of God.' All she had in all of this great city to comfort her were her baby and her husband, the inactive, indifferent husband the bishop had been toiling with to kindle desires to be a better husband, to take her to the temple."

Brother Larrabee stared again at the covenant printed in the booklet, then dropped it on the table behind him. "But the bishop protested," he said, his voice rising. "He had not known of her dear sister's death. He surely would have come—as would the rest of the ward—if only they had known. Why hadn't she told him? told someone?

"And here she had him, for she looked up with tears swimming in her eyes and explained she had told someone. She had told her home teacher! She had told her friendly home teacher, she said, because she knew he represented the bishop when he came into her apartment. Telling the home teacher was like telling the bishop, she said. Yes, and now she did have the bishop, had him cold, left without excuse, as the scripture says."

Throwing up both hands in resignation, Brother Larrabee went on. "It didn't matter what protests the bishop made after that. Her bitterness was not ameliorated one bit when he attempted to explain his ignorance by repeating that the home teacher had not passed that important news on to him." Brother Larrabee lowered his voice and said confidingly: "Incidentally, she was right in her feelings that the home teacher would report the news of her tragedy to the bishop. Home teaching is a two-way communications conduit: messages should be carried back and forth by the home teacher. That is the Lord's program.

"I asked the bishop what followed that sorry scene. He nearly quoted me verbatim from that 'Guidelines for Home Teachers' I just read you, saying he had been so moved upon by the Spirit to reprove the offending home teacher with sharpness that he called him onto the carpet in the bishop's office and surprised himself with the vigor of his expressed feelings. And while showing forth an increase of love to the thoughtless elder afterward, the bishop decided that he wouldn't have him replaced as the weeping wife's home teacher, that even though there was obvious damage to their relationship, yet, maybe the best thing for the embittered couple and the home teacher was to continue that association with renewed concern, exploiting the unspent spirituality."

When he was making a major point, Brother Larrabee often rubbed his hands. He rubbed them now and said: "The bishop could hardly believe his ears when the same weeping wife called him on the phone two weeks later to report—directly to him—the sudden death of her baby. What? Another catastrophe? Yes, a double disaster. The baby's death now layered heavily, heartlessly, on top of the sister's passing.

"But this death was different. With full knowledge of the needs the young couple had, the bishop was able to use the marvelous resources of the entire ward to mourn, share burdens, give comfort. The rebirth of the home teacher was something to behold. He was the most earnest, the most considerate of all the ward members in supporting the weeping wife and her spiritually feeble husband. The home teacher was later to say he had never felt finer than the day of the burial when he stood beside the bishop at the graveside, stood there throughout the little service in a driving rainstorm, a heartless downpour. He claimed he came away soaked to the skin, had ruined his suit, and had been monumentally aglow with the Spirit.

"But that is not where the story ends," cautioned Brother Larrabee. "Although the repentant home teacher had performed well, yet there was an even more important role he was to take, voluntarily, and it occurred some days after the funeral.

"The weeping wife told the bishop that after all the crowds and comfort had drifted away, after funeral flowers had wilted and phone calls and visits had ceased, she and her husband sat in their tiny living room that next Saturday staring at the empty playpen and the vacant crib that had been such an important part of their little boy's life. And as they sat, they wondered out loud to each other if the gospel was really true. For if it was, they asked themselves, how could a loving Father have so cruelly stolen away—denied them—their sweet baby?

"They were at the breaking point. There was neither substance nor strength left in their faith.

"They were sitting there overwhelmed with their loss, numbed by the reality that their little boy was permanently gone. The high excitement and support that came with the funeral had floated off. They were alone and adrift, and their frail spiritual boat had a bad leak. They were slowly sinking, despairing, sitting there staring dully at the infant's empty furniture—when someone came up to their big window, peered in, waved, and walked right into their apartment without knocking.

"It was their home teacher," Brother Larrabee said exuberantly. "The penitent one, the one who'd sacrificed a suit in the rainstorm and felt uplifted by it. It was he who walked in smiling, waved, and started speaking pleasantly and encouragingly while taking several tools out of his pockets.

"All the time he was chatting, he was dismantling their baby's furniture, first the crib, then the playpen. He told the couple he'd been praying about them, about their sudden losses, about their lives and their faith and their need to stay closer to the Lord. He testified to them again and again that God lived—yes, and loved them. And all the time he was pleasantly working at his task. God loved them and had great things for them to accomplish, he said, if they only continued keeping faith and trust in the Lord.

"Their home teacher reiterated what they had heard during the small funeral about the plan of salvation and the eternal significance of the covenants and ordinances of holy temples that can bind families together. Finally, in a gesture reflecting his great sensitivity to them, he suggested that until the next child arrived, he would carry the playpen down to the apartment storage area. Brother Larrabee's eyes glistened. His face seemed lit from within.

"He filled them full of hope for the future, full of appreciation for the past, for their splendid little boy—so very special to God. He asked if he might be voice to their family prayer. (They had not prayed since the baby's death.) He knelt with them, the three of them holding hands as families sometimes do, and thanked the Lord for their blessings.

"This insightful home teacher was so vivid in his vision of their future, he was so profound in his expressions of gratitude for the goodness of God in their lives, for their little angel, for their fine marriage, their home, their health, their hopes, that they too began to see life renewed through his vision. He got them excited about going to the temple and having the little boy sealed to them as an eternal family. He carried away the baby's furniture, but he came back again and again, came back into that home and taught them more about God's great plan of salvation."

Brother Larrabee rubbed his hands. "The bishop concluded by saying that this one home teacher—who had failed once—completely turned the young couple's lives around. When they went to the temple, it was he, the home teacher, who knelt at the altar representing their son. When the new baby was born, another boy, it was given the home teacher's name. Yes, and it was that same home teacher who without being asked went down into the basement storeroom and retrieved the crib—and pleasantly rehearsed with the couple that Heavenly Father had certainly been swift in answering their prayers—all while he reassembled it."

He held both hands outstretched, imploringly. "Brethren, brethren, that is home teaching! That is what it's all about. That is the spirit of the gospel. That is compassion. That is Christlike service to others. That is stewardship in its richest form." He lowered his arms. "And though there will never be a manual written that dictates the broad variety of options home teachers might exercise in life's multitudinous situations, yet still the Spirit can lead you. The Spirit can direct honest, searching home teachers. And that is what the Lord wants for his home teachers—to be led by the Spirit."

His arms hung down, he bowed his head sightly and concluded by saying: "That is my testimony. That is what I have learned and absorbed and retained while serving on this marvelous committee, led by a president who himself is guided and inspired by the Spirit of the Lord."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Ask questions. You cannot know the family's needs unless you ask appropriate questions and listen carefully to their answers. Make your visits prayerfully. You are on the Lord's errand. Pray for his help and direction. Always pray in the home if agreeable to the family. A sincere concern for us and our family. After a few short months we felt free to discuss any of our problems with them and knew that we would receive a helpful answer. W. Grant Bangerter, First Quorum of Seventy meeting, September 27, 1979.
[^2] Concentrate on what they say. Too many times we merely pretend to listen, waiting for that moment when we can jump back in and take control of the conversation. Listen intently. Soak up what they are saying. Prepare your companionship for the visit: have a goal and a plan. The strong testimony our home teachers bore to us made us know that the Church is true and that it is important for us to put forth a special effort to better ourselves. Matthew 4:11.
[^3] Repeat back what they have just said. When it is appropriate for you to respond, do so by repeating the essence of what they have just told you, for example, "Then you believe that . . . " And so on. This lets them know you have heard what they said. It gives them a chance to continue talking. They know you are listening. Be kind and encouraging during your visit. Praise whenever possible. We were quite surprised when our home teachers asked us if we would join with them in prayer. Those prayers were always in our behalf and just what we needed. [^8] History of the Church, 1:302-12.
[^4] Do not change the subject. Stay with what they are telling you. When they are quite finished, help them to continue talking by asking another related question. Show sincere interest in the family you visit. Rejoice, weep, mourn, console, enjoy. Concentrate on them, on their needs. D&C 88:81-84.
