Richard J. Marshall, Home Teaching with Purpose and Power ( 1990)

7

Home Teaching—a Serious Business

Brother Larrabee had concluded his presentation, and the president immediately introduced the next speaker. This was Brother Wheeler, a high councilor also on the home teaching committee sitting in the front row. The president put an arm around him and warmly pointed out to the assembled priesthood leaders that not every high council in the Church was blessed with a man of Brother Wheeler's background—a bishop, a Ph.D. in clinical psychology, a department head at the local university, and a writer producing weekly columns on family relations in the metropolitan paper.

"Thank you, president, not just for this assignment to speak tonight," Brother Wheeler said looking down at the men seated on front row, "but for allowing me to serve on a most entertaining and provocative committee. I've thoroughly enjoyed all our sessions." Then looking up at the sea of faces, he said: "Brethren, we have been anxiously engaged in a grand engineering project: plumbing the depths and dimensions, testing the productive alignment, determining the widths and weaknesses in this stake's home teaching program. Does it hold water? Are there leaks?" He paused, smiling. "We have made the measure and decided we are doing only a fair job. Extended possibilities are bottomless."

He spoke as he wrote—witty and wordy.

"Hammering on home teaching carried me back to my calling as an elders quorum president. We set up a grand home teaching organization. It looked like a Jell-O mold—colorful and shimmering—that is, until things warmed up and we had a meltdown. Try as we might, our home teaching slowly softened. We never could firm it up, get any solid support. When I was finally released, the stake president back in those days asked me my feelings. I told him that I felt much like Senator Adlai Stevenson after his second defeat in running for president of the United States: 'I'm too old to cry, and it hurts too much to laugh.'

"Brethren, home teaching is a serious business. We represent the Lord to our assigned families. I didn't really understand that until later when I became counselor to an especially wise bishop. He was so dedicated to having a strong home teaching program that we all used to joke about it. We privately called his frenetic executive secretary 'Fang.' There was a fierce determination from the bishop and Fang to get good home teaching done at all cost.

"In a quiet moment alone, I gently chided the bishop. I told him he made it sound as though home teaching was a matter of life or death. He looked at me a long time and replied, 'Oh, no, it's much more important than that.' "

The speaker's eye rested on a very youthful quorum president, and he added: "This bishop was a spiritual colossus in my young life. I have many fond memories of those great learning years.

"It has been special these past weeks to work so closely with our inspired stake president. I enjoyed Brother Larrabee's poignant story about the little boy confusing General Sherman with his horse.

"That little boy reminded me of an occasion when a similar misunderstanding in communication occurred. I had built our family home evening around a little cardboard sign that read: 'I belong to a family that loves me.' I had each of our children hold it while we talked about him or her. Then we taped it to the refrigerator door for a month or so. During that period one of my daughter's friends asked her privately: 'Sarah, why does your family love that refrigerator so much?' "

The audience laughed appreciatively; the brethren were with him.

"I liked what Brother Larrabee said about the imperative of having the Holy Ghost as a companion when we home teach. Being guided by the Spirit, wouldn't that be a marvelous way to run our workaday lives? At one of our committee meetings discussing spirituality, I mentioned a curious spiritual message delivered to a mission president by an apostle when I was a young missionary. Our stake president has asked that I share it with you all tonight because it deals with being led by the Spirit. But before I do, let me tell you a little more about the apostle. Matthew Cowley was one of the great Church leaders who came into our mission. We hung on his every word. He had a lively sense of humor and a profound testimony of the gospel.

"During his visit to our mission headquarters, Brother Cowley was invited to speak at the Rotary Club luncheon. The mission president reported to us later that his talk on Mormon welfare was so amusing, so enthusiastically received by the Rotarians, that many of them crowded around him in the hotel lobby afterward, lingering to catch his parting words and to offer their congratulations. This included a local politician, a Rotary officer who had sat next to our apostle at the head table during the lunch. He had become a bit weary of remaining silent while all this attention was being heaped on Brother Cowley, so he decided to establish his own brand of humor. He stepped up to the apostle during his thronged parting and said, 'Mister Cowley, tell us before you leave, how does it feel to be a Mormon and know you're going to hell?'

"This was said in high good humor, you understand, though some of the Rotarians were shocked. But the apostle had them all whooping when he immediately grinned, a twinkle in his eye, and replied: 'First, sir, you must tell us how it feels to be a politician and not know where in hell you are going!' "

Brother Wheeler kept a straight face until it was quiet.

"Not everyone," he said in a more serious voice, "can dish out humor without offending people. Matthew Cowley was a master at it. But as a psychologist, I'd like to make this first point in my comments tonight—that humor is negative. Nearly always. This means that every time a joke is made, someone or something is usually being made fun of. Somewhere someone gets lampooned and hurt.

"On the other hand, Christ's gospel is totally positive. And because his plan of salvation is so very serious, you will not find anything humorous or foolish in the scriptures. And you won't find it in the temples or the solemn assemblies or other sacred places. The Lord counsels us to avoid loud laughter and being light-minded about sacred things. The work of the Lord is holy. Holiness is serious.

"Life and death? No, teaching the gospel is much more important than that." He leaned back against the big table. "So the first point I'd like to make tonight is that humor—warming, uplifting humor—can be extremely helpful in getting close to people. But," and Brother Wheeler held up his hand, palm out like the traffic policeman, "humor must be used selectively, carefully. Effective humor calls for judgment and good taste."

He folded his arms and smiled. "You see, my wonderful bishop had great balance in his dealing with people. Like Matthew Cowley, he used humor well. He could easily laugh at his executive secretary being called Fang because he knew his man, knew Fang enjoyed the name and notoriety. Fang was laughing too.

"But let's get back to Matthew Cowley, the apostle. The meat of my message about him occurred the day after his Rotary talk, when he was about to leave the mission home. We were standing on the wide veranda, he and the president. I was there, having just put his suitcase in the waiting car. He had set my new mission president apart that very morning, and the president was concerned over not having some important questions answered. You see, this assignment to preside had come only recently, unexpectedly. He and his wife were originally called as proselyting missionaries. Then our original president became ill and was rushed home, and now Brother Cowley had come out, given the new president his calling and setting apart, and was himself rushing off.

"So the new president inquired anxiously of the departing apostle if there weren't some special instructions he was yet to receive.

" 'Instructions?' the apostle asked, puzzled. 'Why, yes,' my mission president stammered. 'Aren't you going to give me some specific counsel on what I must do to be the mission president? Aren't there some important things I should know?'

"The apostle smiled benevolently, smiled even as he signaled the driver that he was coming. 'Oh, yes, forgive me. I forgot. I will give you the same counsel President Heber J. Grant gave me after ordaining me an apostle and then announcing he was hurrying off to lunch before the next session of conference. I was thunderstruck by all that had just happened and asked him your very question: Weren't there some special, secret instructions I must be given to function as a new member of the Council of the Twelve? President Grant paused at the door, thanked me for asking, then instructed me to wear long socks and to be sure I pulled them up straight before sitting on the stand at stake conferences. Long socks? Yes, he said, explaining that if I wore those little half socks, the congregation would see my naked calf when I crossed my legs. That would not be dignified for a member of the Twelve, he told me—and he hurried out of the temple rooms.'

"My new mission president and I were both bewildered at this answer. But the apostle threw us a wave and a fleeting smile, hurried down the porch steps, and jumped into the car.

"I had to wait until the next day to ask my president what that meant, the strange message about pulling up socks. He seemed remarkably improved and relieved from the day before. I thought he had seemed to be in pain as we watched the car carry off the only man around with the authority to enlighten him. And my new president admitted as much, for he confided to me that he had certainly felt abandoned.

"He said he was forced into spending much of that night praying and searching the scriptures. And only then did the full weight of Matthew Cowley's message hit him. He had discovered for himself, come to realize that instructions for mission presidents and apostles were to be found by searching the scriptures, by praying and pondering, by seeking the Spirit, by getting closer to God!"

Brother Wheeler, the astute academic doctor of clinical psychology, said with emphasis, "My new president had discovered overnight that the secret to good human relations was to be found in praying and in searching out and pondering the word of the Lord."

He now turned, reached over to the pile of pamphlets, the new home teaching booklet, and picked one up.

"That is not only true for apostles and mission presidents but also for bishops, quorum leaders, and—home teachers. The Lord governs his church through the whisperings of the Spirit, inspiring anxious and responsible leaders. As for home teachers, there is no manual big enough to cover all the spiritual problems one pair of home teachers might uncover in providing a true stewardship over their little handful of assigned souls."

He peered down again at the task committee in front of him. "So my second point is that this committee our stake president called together is in total agreement that the Spirit is the best guide for divinely directing home teachers. This little booklet we are introducing to you merely contains a few scriptural guidelines, some listings and other how-to counsel to direct home teachers into doing exactly what President Heber J. Grant said—which was, I think, to pull up your socks and lean on the Spirit. Grand counsel in human relations."

He touched his fingertips to his lower lip, reflecting.

"I like that," he said and repeated it softly: "Pull up your socks and lean on the Spirit." He opened the booklet and leafed through several pages.

"Let me get into the booklet now, but not without sharing with you some painful comments about home teaching from one of my co-workers. As our stake president has said, I am on the university faculty. There is only one other Mormon in my department. When she learned I was putting some materials together for home teaching she said, 'Oh, dear, I wish someone would take our home teacher aside and tell him how weary we've become of his forever using our living room as a forum to vent his strong personal feelings about things. They are almost always about empty things, things that have no meaning for me and my family but are important to him. He has really become an embarrassment. But how do we switch him to another channel?'

"Mark her use of the word 'empty,' brethren. Because one of the first things you will find in your copy of our booklet is this quotation from a General Authority who is also apprehensive about empty home teaching." And Brother Wheeler opened the booklet and read: 'To make the gospel effective . . . home teaching is really intended to be the vehicle by which the gospel will be administered to members of the Church. Most home teachers either do not go or they go empty—that means their vehicle is either broken or it is unloaded. I think you have all seen those empty pickup trucks running around the ward in great profusion.' [^1]

"My associate at the university has her home teachers coming regularly. That's wonderful! But then she says they deliver an empty load. They say little that is uplifting or has application for her family. They are confusing activity with accuracy. They are driving over to her house every month, but they're bringing nothing in their pickup. And why is that? Perhaps it is because they lack the simple skills in discovering the needs of others."

Brother Wheeler tugged at his chin again. "Let me make my next point out of our booklet by asking some questions. Which of you, as a home teacher, can say that someone over whom you have a priesthood stewardship doesn't seriously need counsel and encouragement, need someone to talk to, a nonjudgmental listener, someone to rejoice with and share deep feelings? How can you know? How can you be sure—unless you have asked them?

"Brethren, you are all home teachers. Are you asking questions to discover what's best to teach? or how to help? Are you seeking specific answers for your families? Are you prayerfully offering your support? When did you last do something for your family other than sit on their couch and talk about some abstract subject of your choice? Worse still, do you have any idea what they think of your visits? Isn't that a threatening thing to consider? Just ask yourself: What might they tell their friends privately about me, about my performance?"

He stopped completely and stuffed his hands deep in his pockets.

"Perhaps one of you out there is the home teacher that disappoints my department associate—because she lives in this stake!" Then he lowered his voice and added: "And if it isn't you, then it's someone you supervise. How can you find him? How can you help him? For that is your job—helping home teachers. And let me say it loud and clear: Learning what people feel means asking questions and listening with sensitivity.

"But let's talk about your families. I ask you this: Is your spiritual vision so clouded by the cataract of indifference that you cannot recognize and identify the needs of others? so you cannot help them? support them? Even the Savior himself, as a mortal, needed comfort and, indeed, received it from angels that were sent to visit him for that very purpose. [^2] Are you really confident you are comforting people? confident you are doing a good job as a home teacher?" He frowned and sniffed. "I had a distressed patient tell me the other day that confidence was the feeling he had before he understood the problem.

"Permit me," Brother Wheeler continued, "to use a little humor now, whimsey to illustrate a vital point in human relations. It demonstrates one of the most important sources of confusion between people. In my story, a woman goes to her attorney and explains that she would like a divorce. He asks if she has grounds. 'Yes,' she says, 'we have two acres.' 'No, no, do you have a grudge?' 'No,' she answers, 'we have a carport.' The lawyer casts about for another opening and finally asks if her husband beats her up. 'Oh, no,' she replies, 'I'm usually starting breakfast even before he is awake.' Thoroughly frustrated, the lawyer inquires if she is serious about wanting a divorce. 'Actually, I don't want one,' she mutters. 'It's my husband's idea. He claims we don't communicate.'

"So communication is the key to good human relations. And listening is the lever to opening that door. Listen, then, while I read to you a list of eight guidelines you will find in your booklet."

Eight Keys in Communicating

Brother Wheeler stopped reading and grimaced. "This little booklet has many lists of things home teachers might wish to repeatedly consider and review. And I want to make a big point of this, because someone is bound to say lists are sophomoric and unnecessary. Nonsense! Lists are productive. They can be extremely helpful. The Lord himself uses lists. We have ten commandments, thirteen articles of faith. Bible scholars have labeled the beatitudes as 'nine declarations of supreme blessedness.' "

He pointed into the crowd: "You bishops have a specific list of printed questions to ask every temple-recommend applicant. And if anything on that list puts someone on a guilt trip, then it has served its purpose, and you have an excellent opportunity to discuss his or her problem.

"I learned in the mission field," the high councilor continued, "to make lists for my self-improvement, writing down my goals, making daily entries in my journal—a list of my activities and feelings. Some years ago I clipped an item from Newsweek magazine about a popular Mormon golfer and the little lists he made for himself. We didn't put this in your home teaching booklet, but let me read it to you now:

" 'Johnny Miller, 27, the first professional golfer ever to win the first three tournaments of any year (which he did this year), thinks a golfer's best game is in his head, and he takes great pains to record every nuance of the sport. He carries around an old brown envelope on which he jots down little reminders to himself: Take the club back slowly . . . You must keep the head still . . . Make sure you are comfortable before starting the swing.

" 'Miller readily admits that all this sounds corny but, he says, I believe the brain is a computer. If you keep feeding things into it, it remembers and transfers them to the body. That's why all the sayings are positive. Actually, they're commands.' " Brother Wheeler mused over the clipping then held it up for all to see.

"But you don't need to make a list of little reminders on how to be a better home teacher, not on a brown envelope. They are already printed in our booklet. They may not seem important at first glance, but they are basic—and powerful. Any earnest priesthood holder can improve his performance. As Johnny Miller says, our best game may be in our head.

"As early as 1832, Joseph Smith received the important revelation he chose to call the 'Olive Leaf . . . plucked from the Tree of Paradise.' [^3] In this revelation, the Lord tells us we must 'testify and warn the people . . . therefore, they are left without excuse . . . ' and to 'be perfect in your ministry . . . to prepare the saints for the hour of judgment which is to come.' [^4]

"There it is! Your instruction from the Lord on how to home teach involves preparation. You are to prepare the Saints—your home teaching families—for the judgment which is to come. Brethren! Being able to teach preparation requires preparation—and preparation calls for training. And training is what our little booklet is all about, simple as our lists might seem."

Having said this, Brother Wheeler lifted up a visual aid on the table behind him and read it slowly and loudly:

" 'Training Is Everything.

" 'The peach was once a bitter almond; cauliflower is nothing but cabbage with a college education.' [^5]

"Brethren, this folksy endorsement of training was made by a man born just three years after Joseph Smith received that revelation on preparation. This man was destined to be a simple printer on the Missouri frontier—until he trained himself as a writer. A great writer. A world-class writer. Every one of us in this room has at some time read and been stirred by the powerful, glowing prose of the man whose pen name was Mark Twain.

"His philosophy was simple. He believed that a human being is the product of two factors: heredity and training. He said, 'Since heredity cannot be altered after the fact, training is the only important variable in human success.' [^6] Thus, training for Mark Twain, this towering literary genius, was everything. It is true he did not understand the workings of the Holy Ghost or that 'the Spirit of Christ is given to every man,' [^7] and he certainly didn't know how to pull up his socks and seek the Spirit. But he did know that training is the key to preparation. And in that he was right.

"Permit me now to read quickly through the ten governing rules for home teachers. Later on you can read these in your booklet and study them and pray about them and absorb the training they can teach you."

Ten Governing Rules for Home Teachers

With the booklet still open in his hands, Brother Wheeler continued, "Right after these ten governing rules, we have included an interesting item we found in the Church News. Since it told of the successful activation of a couple by their home teachers, specifically citing the effective exercise of three of our ten governing rules, we have included it in the booklet as follows:

Three Things Home Teachers Did That Activated Us

When the home teachers came to our home for the first time, we expected a long lesson or sermon about our inactivity in the Church. We were very surprised to find it a friendly visit with:

Brother Wheeler patted the next page. "Now, take a minute and consider this question: What are the little things active home teachers do that irritate their families? We took a survey right in this stake, and we identified seven things concerned home teachers should never do. These too are in your booklet, and I shall read them to you now. Listen and ponder—yes, and ask yourself if you are guilty of some of these."

Seven Things Home Teachers Should Never Do

Â Never just drop in unannounced.

Â Never use the family as a captive audience for your ego.

Â Never talk of things that interest only you.

Â Never ask embarrassing questions.

Â Never dominate the discussion.

Â Never stay too long.

Â Never encourage negative remarks.

The presenting high councilor read all of the above without departing, and he testified that these suggestions, the essence of lengthy discussions by the stake committee, could also be added upon—increased or decreased—as the Spirit directed. But the basic seven, he said, should be considered as training helps, guidelines, to expand effectiveness in the home teacher's determination to improve himself.

"Now, my brethren, priesthood leaders of our great stake, I come to a very exciting part of my presentation, a few comments about people and personality styles and what makes us different.

"Right now our best ethnological researchers estimate there are over five billion people living in the world. That simply means there are over five billion differing personalities. No two people are identical or have equivalent feelings at all times. President Kimball used to talk about the genealogy load the Church must work through, and stated on several occasions that there have been sixty-nine billion people who have lived on the earth since Adam's day. To the functioning clinical psychologist, that means sixty-nine billion personalities deviating in sixty-nine billion heterogeneous directions.

"People can be broadly categorized, broken down into galaxies of homogeneous groupings. That helps academicians organize an understanding of our fellow humans. But even in using the broadest of brush strokes, personality styles are terribly complex, difficult for the best trained professionals to understand. Then what about home teachers and their understanding of their assigned families?

"You are certainly not going into psychoanalysis, let alone psychotherapy. But it is important that you open your minds to the simple fact that people are different, vastly different. You cannot present an identical message to four dissimilar families and have four identical responses. No, they each respond differentially as families, and divergently as individuals within the family.

"People differ drastically in age. And that too affects their needs. During a home teaching visit, you sit there facing babes in arms, grandparents, teenagers, young marrieds: a big demographic mishmash waiting to hear what you have prepared for them. And let me remind you again that a person who is single is considered a family unit on Church records. How is it possible to accommodate all these age groups and circumstances with one message?

"But allow me to pause on the age factor for a minute. Just because a person is old does not mean he or she is too old to be instructed, to be encouraged to change, to improve, to be better prepared in something. What on earth is 'too old'? Moses was eighty when he led the Twelve Tribes out of Egypt. Benjamin Franklin helped frame the United States Constitution at eighty-one. Golda Meir became prime minister of Israel at seventy-one. Lorenzo Snow was shocked when the Lord called on him to become president of the Church at eighty-four, but Ezra Taft Benson became president at eighty-six. George Bernard Shaw wrote and produced a great play at ninety-four. Many professional athletes drop out in their early thirties, but the legendary Ted Williams slammed a home run in his last official time at bat—at the remarkable age of forty-two.

"As for the youthful side of mortality, what is 'too young'? Joseph Smith was fourteen when he was given the most astonishing of all commissions. William Pitt was twenty-four when he became prime minister of Great Britain. Benjamin Franklin was an established newspaper columnist at sixteen. Joseph F. Smith was sixteen when called on his first mission. Mozart was just seven when his first composition was published. And Mickey Mantle hit twenty-three home runs his first year in the major leagues—at age twenty.

"But let's stay with my subject of people and personalities. I do some consulting work for a national corporation. To aid their sales force, they have attempted to classify all prospective customers into four basic personality groups. This was done for a wisely calculated reason, because if a salesman can identify the individuality of the person he is trying to sell—why, he has a major advantage.

"These four behavioral profiles have been developed and classified by psychologists through empirical research, that is, gained from observation or experimentation rather than theorized. The profiles are labeled as (1) the pragmatic personality, (2) the analytical personality, (3) the amiable personality, and (4) the extrovert."

Brother Wheeler came to a full stop, put on his most serious face, and, shaking his head, said: "Now let me make my point. It is this—that scientists can put together, in layman's terms, a focused description of basic personalities that has commercial value to those who are willing to study and memorize such material. But—and this is the point—this information will never be as useful in understanding people as will seeking the Spirit and the power of discernment.

"And as a psychologist I can tell you that the best thing I've heard about understanding people is God's counsel that we be willing to 'bear one another's burdens.'

"There was another reason for my exercise in sharing with you those four personality sketches. It is to open up our minds to the fact that a lot of work has been done in the world to understand the complexities of our fellow mortals. But the Lord says it best: 'Succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees.' [^9] No, brethren, I know of no group that has your stability, your grasp of life and its meaning.

"What does the world know of the workings of the Spirit? Those of you who love George Frederic Handel's ultimate triumph, his immortal choral music, Messiah, may be familiar with the fact that he composed this towering work—four hours of sublime chorals, solos, and orchestrations—in just twenty-four days. We believe he was inspired of the Lord. He said he had 'companionship of the Spirit.' Recently some psychiatrists presented a more worldly answer to that divine influence. They claimed he suffered from a mood disorder, that he was a manic depressive, that he wrote his masterpiece during an intense psychotic change of disposition. He hallucinated!"

He took a paper from his coat pocket and unfolded it. "I was reading just the other night a serious essay by a man who has won the Pulitzer Prize for his writing and his wisdom. He states, 'The human soul is a house of many fantastic chambers.' Then he asks a touching question: 'What ruled this curious thing called human existence?—what forces swayed it most wholly and made it pageant or tragedy or only gray succession of lackluster days?' [^10]

"He asks his question but has no answer. Just think how you and your testimony of Christ could bring light into his life. Think what a pair of dedicated home teachers could teach him if he would listen.

"One parting comment," Brother Wheeler said in a quiet voice, leaning back against the big table and folding up the paper. "It is about a Harvard professor of neuropathology, a Dr. Murray who in the late thirties reasoned that since the study of mental illness always involved neurotic and psychopathic people, he would launch a study of people who were mentally healthy. He wanted to learn what made healthy people so well-adjusted. At first, he used Harvard students, but he discovered to his amazement that they all had hidden symptoms of mental distress—though they were performing normally.

"He next studied healthy blue-collar workers and discovered the same thing. They each showed latent signs of serious mental problems but gave no evidence of it in their activities. So it was that he moved from one group to another until he was able to externalize for us this amazing conclusion—that all healthy people have concealed mental problems that they keep under control!

"Now here comes the kicker. From Dr. Murray's research, we can make an interesting analogy: that from birth each of us carries congenital mental weaknesses, which can be likened to a bag of rocks. And as we stumble through life, some of us can handle our big bag and some of us cannot. Some are overcome, overburdened, and drop the bag, or lose some or all of the rocks, or fall off life's twisting course desperately clutching their load while trying to keep their balance. Those are the people that need various degrees of encouragement, or even professional mental help, or serious medical help. But the point Dr. Murray makes is that every mortal, every one of us, carries a heavy load through life.

"And I say to you, brethren, that this being true—and I believe it is—it is vital that we look about us, at ourselves and our loved ones, at our assigned home teaching families, and remember that each person needs our persuasion, our teaching, our testimony, our help."

Brother Wheeler suddenly seemed drained of energy. He had given them much to think upon. But he held up his traffic policeman's hand for one last word.

"You don't need a Ph.D. in anything to be an earnest, humble, effective home teacher. What you need is the Spirit. I leave you with the most powerful counsel I could possibly give, the sure word of the Lord from the scriptures, saying: 'The elders, priests and teachers of this church shall teach the principles of my gospel, which are in the Bible and the Book of Mormon, in the which is the fulness of the gospel. And they shall observe the covenants and church articles to do them, and these shall be their teachings, as they shall be directed by the Spirit. And the Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith.' " [^11]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Must be a man of God. One who has status with respect to his reputation and esteem. Live to enjoy the companionship of the Holy Ghost and act under his influence as a home teacher. Making personal visits to their home or apartment. Set this up in advance with each family. No surprises. Plan prayerfully with your companion for each monthly visit. During your first visits, you might write down such vital information as names and birth dates—background information that would help you build your relationship with the family and as you communicate with appropriate priesthood leaders about their needs. Encourage them to pray, individually and as a family. If they need welfare assistance from the bishop, you should recognize this and notify your quorum leader or bishop. These challenges are invitations to become stronger in specified gospel areas where present weakness is recognized. Be available at any time. They should believe in you and trust you as they would the bishop. Marion G. Romney, Conference Report, April 1966.
[^2] Walking in his ways. One who is permanent and unchanging. Encourage the parents to whom you have assignment to obtain the blessings of the temple. Communicating—as needed—by phone. Make these arrangements at their convenience. Block out a specific time to meet with your companion to plan what you will teach, set up your visiting goals, make assignments, etc. Inquire, when appropriate and after building a relationship of trust, about temple ordinances. If these have been neglected, encourage their completion. Encourage them to study the scriptures daily. Teach personal and family preparedness for emergency circumstances. Challenges may be subtle, passive, implied, or quite forceful—as spiritually directed. The family should call you rather than the bishop for most needs. In all of your dealings, emulate qualities the Savior has taught us. D&C 107:99.
[^3] Keeping his commandments. One who is not moving, but stationary. Encourage children not born under the covenant to be sealed to their parents. Sending written messages such as letters, notes, seasonal cards, and remembrances. Let your family know your concern for them is genuine, not just to get credit for an end-of-the-month effort. Use the scriptures to teach your families, whenever possible. Counsel parents in making sure all ordinances have been performed at the proper times, such as blessings, baptisms, and ordinations. Encourage them to hold family home evening. Encourage and teach your family to be financially self-reliant, such as avoiding debt, etc. (Do this without prying into the family's financial matters.) Challenges should not be so difficult as to discourage, not so simple as to fail to elicit a response. Remember that your families measure you in your integrity, truthfulness, attitudes, sincerity, and so on.
[^4] Must receive the authority to preach and teach. Encourage unmarried members to set goals for missionary service and temple marriage. Counseling with others when they request it. Bring an assigned companion, your assigned member of the Aaronic Priesthood or fellow quorum member. In certain circumstances, it is appropriate to take your wife as assigned by priesthood leaders. Try to present a specific teaching subject each visit, one that will have general interest for the family. Invite family members to participate in the appropriate auxiliary organizations. If they are not doing so, convey this information to your quorum leader who will follow through in the Ward Correlation Council. Encourage them to become involved in writing personal and family histories. Encourage your family to have a plan for physical fitness. Challenges should be worthy, appealing, specific, achievable.
[^5] Must be a just man. Encourage family prayers night and morning. Introducing them around the ward or neighborhood appropriately. Come with humility. You represent Jesus Christ. Consider teaching the monthly message from the First Presidency found at the beginning of every Ensign magazine. Act as a liaison, carrying back and forth between priesthood and auxiliary leaders and the family members any information that will help the family participate in the programs of the Church. Encourage them to do genealogy work. Encourage your family to use gospel principles in coping with the social, moral, and emotional challenges of today's world. The best challenge has a time schedule affixed.
[^6] Must watch over the people (as assigned). Encourage consistent personal prayer. Offering to look after their interests in their absence. Be careful not to pontificate, preach, or talk only of yourselves, your ideas. Some information from the family will be sensitive. You must carefully guard the privacy of those you are helping. Encourage the young men and boys to plan on a mission. Every young man who qualifies should become a missionary. Many young women desire to serve as missionaries. Older couples may be encouraged to consider a call as missionaries. You are in a position to reassure potential missionaries of the joy of serving the Lord in the mission field. Avoid blanket challenges, those given to the entire family, if you think they will retard individual action. On the other hand, a challenge for the family to pray together or attend church together has great merit.
[^7] Nourishing them pertaining to righteousness. Teach other gospel doctrine and standards and encourage their personal application. Sitting with them in meetings. Remember that your personal testimony of gospel principles is the vital capstone in building relationships of trust. Counsel with the head of the home about special needs, feelings, failings, misunderstandings, and hopes of family members. Give your counsel prayerfully. Encourage adult family members to attend the temple regularly. All challenges should have doctrinal substance. You are asking the person to do what the Lord has specified for all his children to do in keeping his commandments.
[^9] Remembering the poor and needy. Teach that children should be blessed and baptized in harmony with Church revelations. Drawing them into the circle of your friends. Your visit should be structured—have a beginning, an ending, a purpose to achieve, a goal to accomplish. Sometimes you may be informed of difficulties you cannot correct. For example, only the bishop can judge the worthiness of ward members. On such serious matters, you should stop being counselor and confidant, immediately suggesting setting up an appointment with the bishop. Encourage the family to observe the fast and instruct them in the merits of contributing to the fast-offering fund. Once the challenge is given and accepted, build upon the person's desire to fulfill it.
[^10] Remembering the sick and afflicted. Teach that ordinations in the priesthood are merited and obtained in proper season. Remembering significant events, such as graduations, achievements, birthdays, awards, recognitions, and special occasions of gladness. Enter the home with a totally uplifting attitude. Call all family members by their names, expressing special interest in each person, down to the youngest. Each is important to the Lord; you represent him. Encourage the family to take up a project of their choice where they can make some essential sacrifice to benefit others, enjoying the fruits of compassionate service.
[^11] Seeing there is no iniquity. Persuade priesthood bearers to attend their priesthood meetings and meet assigned obligations. Doing little thoughtful things on other occasions. Smile. Be warm, happy, effusive in your greetings, showing pleasure at seeing them. Be sensitive to a sudden change in their situation, for example, if they have just received unexpected guests, sickness, problems, etc. They would appreciate your cutting your visit short with a promise to visit another time. If they are having unforeseen difficulties, you should offer appropriate help. Asking appropriate questions, especially early in your relationship as home teacher, unlocks the floodgate of wholesome communications. Be careful, however, not to be prying, inquiring about improper or personal things. But try to identify the major interests of each family member. Encourage the family to support the programs of the Church, including attendance at sacrament and other meetings.
