Richard J. Marshall, Home Teaching with Purpose and Power ( 1990)

8

The Effective Home Teacher

"As I have told you before, in this stake it had better be an unusually good meeting to be better than no meeting at all." The stake president said this after thanking Brother Wheeler for his words and testimony. "And I firmly believe this has been a great meeting thus far, thanks to Brothers Larrabee and Wheeler. And you will appreciate it even more when you take home the booklets that we have just passed out to you.

"Please turn to page 6 in your booklet and let us examine this overview of the Church: The mission of the Church is to bring souls to Christ. This is accomplished by (1) proclaiming the gospel—worldwide missionary work, (2) perfecting the Saints—progress for the living, and (3) redeeming the dead—family history and temple work.

"As a committee studying home teaching, we are especially focused on the second one, perfecting the Saints, which includes an emphasis on spiritual and temporal welfare. When asked during our first committee meeting, Brother Larrabee admitted that most well-functioning organizations today develop a mission statement, adopting it as a transcending guide or goal or vision.

"We took up this challenge for home teaching, searching the scriptures and reviewing statements made by contemporary prophets and apostles. I would like you now to continue with me down the page as I read this inspiring statement giving a home teacher the consummate purpose and direction for his labors:

" 'A Mission Statement for Home Teachers

" 'Home teaching, properly functioning, brings to the house of each member two priesthood bearers divinely commissioned and authoritatively called into the service by their priesthood leader and bishop. These home teachers—priesthood bearers—carry the heavy and glorious responsibility of representing the Lord Jesus Christ in looking after the welfare of each Church member. They are to encourage and inspire every member to discharge his duty to both family and church.' [^1]

"That statement was made by Marion G. Romney of the First Presidency a few years back. Nothing has been altered since he gave the Church that vision of the sacred mission of home teachers. We prayerfully gathered together a wealth of wonderful statements and felt this one said it best.

"I endorse all that the two brethren who spoke before me have said about the companionship of the Holy Ghost and about truly representing our Lord Jesus Christ. Solemn thoughts." He stood silent, gazing down at the booklet in his hand.

"Solemn thoughts indeed," he echoed. This was a man they could follow. This was a man—their president—with a testimony that touched them. He could not mention the Savior's name without being moved by it, by the sacredness of it, and without moving others.

"We have set up for ourselves the sober task of profiling the effective home teacher," he continued. "What does he do? What does he teach? What does he look for as he holds stewardship over his little flock? How does he represent his quorum leader, his bishop, and the Savior?

"Let us first read the scripture that precedes that profile:

" 'Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence.' [^2]

"This booklet, with its many statements and scriptures and lists, is a collection of what we believe the Lord wants each home teacher to know if he is willing to 'learn his duty.' And, incidentally," the president said, looking up, "the verse that follows carries a powerful warning for those of us who aren't interested: 'He that is slothful shall not be counted worthy to stand.'

"Dear brethren, we need to learn our duty as home teachers and to act and perform with full vigor, vitality, and commitment. But there is a difference between responsibility and duty. Those of us who have served in the military understand that difference. You might shirk your responsibility, but you have no options with duty. Duty is firmly outlined, described, dictated to the serviceman. It is not an assignment he can dodge. It is a duty that must be done, first and foremost. In the military, duty has fierce penalties for failure to perform. It is the same in the army of the Lord.

"What we have done to outline duties for home teachers is to carefully collate and critically compare key scriptures that describe priesthood duties, such as the following."

Key Scriptures That Define Duties for Home Teachers

Trust no one to be your teacher nor your minister, except he be a man of God, walking in his ways and keeping his commandments . . . and none were consecrated except they were just men. Therefore they did watch over their people, and did nourish them with things pertaining to righteousness. (Mosiah 23:14, 17, 18.)

Remember in all things the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted, for he that doeth not these things, the same is not my disciple. (D&C 52:40.)

The teacher's duty is to watch over the church always, and be with and strengthen them; and see that there is no iniquity in the church, neither hardness with each other, neither lying, backbiting, nor evil speaking; and see that the church meet together often, and also see that all the members do their duty. (D&C 20:53-55.)

The high priest and the elder are to administer in spiritual things, agreeable to the covenants and commandments of the church. (D&C 107:12.)

Verily I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness; for the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves. And inasmuch as men do good they shall in nowise lose their reward. (D&C 58:26-27.)

The deacons and teachers should be appointed to watch over the church, to be standing ministers unto the church. (D&C 84:111.)

"Now, my brethren," the president said after reading these several scriptures, "we have developed an outline from those verses that highlight qualities necessary in a home teacher." And again he read to them as they followed:

Scripturally Defined Qualities of a Dutiful Home Teacher

"Brethren, I hope you appreciate that the Lord has said so very much, and in so very many places. We have merely organized it in a helpful outline form. And you'll note that next we have taken up that final point about being a standing minister. What is a standing minister? The wordmasters on our committee checked their lexicons and have attempted to define the term as follows."

Definitions of a Standing Minister

"For many years I have kept a quotation of Benjamin Disraeli framed in my office at work. He was prime minister of England when he said it a century ago, but he might have made a great standing minister in the Lord's home teaching program today. He said, 'The secret of success is constancy of purpose.' That is what the standing minister represents to me, a home teacher who is always there, going into the homes of his families with 'constancy of purpose' until he is released.

"So let us now turn the page. We have discussed the difference between duty and responsibility, duty being mandated, duty meaning we must watch over our families by visiting in their homes. But responsibility is oftentimes shirked. We might visit in the home, doing our duty, but as Brother Wheeler said, drive in with an empty load. Responsibility involves stewardship and accountability. It relates to 'how,' not 'whether or not' we do our duty.

"In striving to organize so many facets of home teaching, we have included thirteen of the basic responsibilities a home teacher should acknowledge in doing his duty." The president looked up once more. "And be assured, brethren, that you may add a great many more responsibilities as the Spirit moves you in serving your own families. But we feel these thirteen are essential."

Thirteen Fundamental Responsibilities of Home Teachers

"What is it we heard a little earlier tonight? Do not mistake activity for achievement? Excellent counsel. Driving an empty pickup from home to home does not advance the cause of Christ." He closed the booklet, tucking it under his arm. "I would like to comment on whoever it is in this stake that home teaches Brother Wheeler's associate at the university, that talkative home teacher we just learned about." He smiled at Brother Wheeler back on the front row.

"I think your fellow faculty members in the psychology department would agree with me, Professor Wheeler, that with all of our struggles in carrying bags of rocks, the ability to talk about one's self to others is a sign of great inner strength and confidence—unless it is done excessively. If it is painful or annoying to others, then it becomes something else; then it displays some grave weaknesses of character.

"What is that old saying? 'They don't care how much you know until they know how much you care.' I reason that any of us can get credit for having horse sense simply by bridling our tongue. I further challenge that if this garrulous home teacher in our stake made a concerted effort to fulfill the thirteen fundamental responsibilities we have just reviewed, then he wouldn't have any time left to weary his families with empty, ego-centered prattling." The president brushed his hand across his forehead and added, "I am embarrassed to admit that we once had home teachers coming to my house who provoked my oldest son to say facetiously, 'Every time our home teachers come I get my excitement level lowered.' "

The president leafed through his booklet once again, pausing to read a few lines silently. Then he addressed the group.

"What we have on the page following the thirteen responsibilities is a long list—a potpourri, if you will—of virtually everything any home teacher might wish to consider doing. Some of these items were already identified in the earlier material. Just be patient with us. We wanted to compile the most comprehensive itemization possible.

"And you will note that it is far too long, too detailed for me to present it orally, but I would like you to glance at it, just run your eyes down it. And remember, this is a list from which a concerned home teacher may build strong, helpful relationships:"

112 Considerations for a Concerned Home Teacher

Â Recognize that you were divinely called to hold a sacred and specific stewardship to watch over each family assigned you.

Always remember that you officially represent your quorum leader, the bishop—and the lord.

You may watch over your families in a variety of ways:

Schedule a personal visit, sitting with them in their homes at least monthly.

Plan and carry off successfully a monthly home visit.

Know individual family members—their activities, progress, and special needs. Use that information to help them.

Be a continuing source of encouragement to your families.

Help your families to become self-reliant.

Challenge your families to progress.

Make your companionship an example of service and concern worthy of the Savior himself.

Ponder and pray over your families' needs.

Earn the trust of your families.

Have a satisfying and motivating evaluation meeting at least monthly with your priesthood leader.

The stake president had allowed only a few minutes for the priesthood leaders to examine the lengthy list. But even as they became absorbed in the scanning, he broke into their concentration.

"Brethren!" He raised his voice above the growing groundswell of whispered comments. "Forgive me for moving us along, for this is an important list. It is so important that I want you to carry it home, carry it into your quorums, review it, study it, pray about it, ponder it. And let me suggest that it is not a laundry list of things home teachers should do. It is a poignant, powerful, refined inventory of things home teachers could do! Brother Wheeler has already cautioned the committee that lists might make people feel guilty. That isn't our intention. Our singular caution is this: no one can possibly do all of these things. But we should be familiar with them and consider them as ideas, suggestions. We may see where some item might genuinely help us improve our performance."

When their stake president became intense, his face colored, reddened. It was a ruddy pink now.

"I strongly suspect no one here among us has articulated even the majority of listed actions. But who here is not willing to try to do more? try to improve? This is the work of the Lord. This is as important as missionary work or temple work. This is the work of perfecting the Saints.

"And did you notice how many times we read key words like 'encourage,' 'persuade,' 'discuss'?

"There are over one hundred items listed here, with enough substance to them that no home teacher who studied and attempted to work that list should ever have to drive around 'empty.' " Then he offered as an afterthought, "And I'm sure all of you could add even more to the list with your collective experience."

The president cast about him, with a seeming loss of words. "During these past few weeks," he said finally, lowering his voice, "I have become overwhelmed with the incredible sweep and scope of the home teacher's duty and responsibilities. Gathering together this amalgam of all the Lord has commanded us regarding home teaching—commanded us in the scriptures and through inspired priesthood leaders—has stirred something deep within me. Looking back over the years, I realize now that I could have been much more helpful to families I home taught, and, sad to say, home teachers I directed.

"But we still have some chestnuts to roast," he said brightly. "Let me lead you rapidly through the final pages. They are as indispensable and as valid, in my judgment, as the materials just presented."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Plan every home teaching visit together. Can a member of the Church participate in missionary activities without holding the priesthood? The answer, of course, is yes. Leonard J. Arrington, Speeches of the Year (Provo UT: BYU Press, 1974), p. 294.
[^2] Assign your companion to prepare and deliver a short inspirational thought, or to read and review a helpful scripture. Can a member of the Church participate in welfare-oriented activities without holding the priesthood? The answer, of course, is yes. Boyd K. Packer, Teach Ye Diligently (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1975), p. 210.
