Richard J. Marshall, Home Teaching with Purpose and Power ( 1990)

9

Summing Up for Serious Home Teachers

"That certainly is a long itemization of ideas for home teachers," the stake president remarked as he prepared to launch into the final pages of the booklet. "Surely you can use at least one of them on your very next visit. Try it! Select one and apply it right away. Then identify needs that others might fill from time to time. I promise that you will find yourselves actually looking forward to your home teaching work. And work it is! The Lord's 'work and glory.'

"But what of those who want no gospel conversation in their homes? 'You can come, but don't preach to me and don't try to get my kids to come to church. And if you try to pray like those last two who came, you'll find yourselves unwelcome here,' they say. All of you know the soft, caring approach of friendship and concern neighbors want to give each other. Try to establish a relationship of trust and perhaps someday, even years hence, they will respond. But they will have to feel a need before that will happen. Who knows when a crisis will occur that will send them right into your lives? The important thing is that the relationship already exists and they know they can call on you because you care about them. And maybe you are the only people they know in the Church. Be there for them!"

The president continued to clarify his feelings about the previous presentation. "I don't know if I agree with everything Brother Wheeler claimed about humor. I believe the scriptural cautions about light-mindedness. And I suspect he's right about humor being negative. But it would be a long day indeed if we couldn't see a lot in our lives to laugh about—especially if it only meant making fun of ourselves.

"General Authorities have lifted up our spirits with appropriate humor. I recall President Gordon B. Hinckley's rushing from the airport to a huge stake fireside some years back. He apologized for having such a tight time schedule, and then he said it reminded him of the man driving down a country lane who just had to stop his car when he noticed a farmer with a huge pig in his arms, holding it up to eat ripe apples off a tree. 'Isn't that time-consuming?' the incredulous man inquired. 'Sure,' answered the farmer, 'but what's time to a pig?'

"A recent Church historian, having carefully researched the life of Joseph Smith, wrote these words: 'The Prophet recognized as unhealthy the mind which lacked balance, perspective, and humor.' [^1] And I have a similar quotation from Elder Boyd K. Packer, who said, 'A good sense of humor is a characteristic of a well-balanced person.' [^2] I agree, brethren, that we must be extremely careful when using humor to teach the gospel in the homes of the Saints. But the right kind of humor could certainly warm them up to listen."

The stake president was well established and appreciated for his humor. "I saw a delightful bumper sticker this week that said, 'Trust Allah, but tie up your camel.' I suppose, Brother Wheeler, only camels would be offended at that one. On the other hand, someone this very evening asked me, 'How many home teachers does it take to change a light bulb?' And I just dreaded learning the answer: 'It takes only two, but they won't come till the last day of the month.'

"When I was bishop of the Third Ward, we were working on a massive reassessment of our home teachers, attempting to match up strengths with weaknesses, that is, placing strong home teachers with weak, needful families, and assigning weak home teachers to strong, active families. As we reviewed all those names, it became apparent that one of our sticky difficulties was in deciding, on the one hand, where to place those few brethren who didn't even want to home teach, while on the other hand figuring out who we would assign to those very few families who didn't really want home teachers.

"When someone finally said, 'Let's give them to each other,' we all laughed uproariously. It wasn't really that funny, but I suppose humor is more infectious late at night. And we were very tired." Now the president's broad smile faded to a thoughtful frown. He shook his head.

"Joking around that night provoked someone else to tell us still another humorous story—as he supposed—with home teaching as the focus of his joke. He described, very light-heartedly, as I recall, a creative pair of home teachers in our ward who had just established a unique visiting schedule: they waited till the last day of the month to home teach and then visited their same families again the very next day, which was the first day of the following month. That way, he explained to us, laughing as he told it, they got sixty days without having to make a visit."

The president's frown lengthened into a scowl. No one moved.

"As a case in point," he said in a stern voice, "after his humor fell flat, we looked up the several families those foolish home teachers were assigned. There were three families, and as their bishop I knew that each family had significant needs, one of them being their three inactive teenagers. None of those families would have been able to see and appreciate the insensitive humor of being visited every sixty days, two days in a row. What nonsense! What a commitment to foolishness! And all being done by the priesthood—and in the name of the Lord.

"No, my brethren, home teaching is the Lord's way of encouraging us to help each other, to deal with people's lives, with their faith, their hopes, their doubts, their needs. That is serious, solemn stuff." He gestured with a sweep of his arm. "You returned missionaries out there, did you ever attempt a door approach with humor, introducing yourself and your companion at some stranger's door with jests or jokes? No, no. Missionary work is also holy and of the Lord. Home teaching is a sacred calling. It is a sanctified trust."

He opened the booklet in his hand.

"One of the most significant scriptures printed in your booklet is on page 15. Let me read it to you: 'As ye are agents, ye are on the Lord's errand; and whatever ye do according to the will of the Lord is the Lord's business.' [^3]

"Many of our home teachers don't recognize the seriousness of their assignments or the astonishing influence they might have, but are failing to achieve. Let me share with you several illustrations.

"As a bishop, I heard that one of our young couples was moving out of their apartment. I went to see them, to see if the ward could help them in the moving, to say farewell, to say I was sorry they hadn't been more active in the year they'd lived among us and could have enjoyed fellowshipping with the truly fine members we have in the Third Ward.

"The husband was very sour during my visit. He didn't rise to shake my hand but just sat staring at the floor. But the wife was quite talkative and animated. She admitted they were moving because—and I was caught off balance hearing this for the first time—they had decided to get a divorce. As all you bishops out there can well imagine, I immediately pulled on my marriage counselor's hat and tried carefully to get her (and him) to rehearse with me their problems. But she stopped me cold.

" 'No, no, bishop,' she said firmly, 'it's much too late for a reconciliation. We've both hired attorneys. The die is cast. We've divided up the furniture. We are not going back.' No amount of reasoning on my part could even get her to let me examine their expiring marriage. It was over. So then my pleadings turned into a lament. 'Oh,' I said, 'if only I had known sooner. If only you had told me your troubles earlier—'

"But she cut me off right there. She snapped back with considerable harshness, saying that she had revealed many months ago the threatening trend their marriage was taking. She had poured out her heart to the home teachers one dark night. Told them everything. And she fully expected that they would come tell me and that I would show up and start the healing process between her and her husband.

" 'Your home teachers,' I complained. 'They never told me, not a word.'

" 'Not my home teachers,' she corrected me bitterly. 'Those were your home teachers! I always thought home teachers represented the bishop. I thought that what I told them would certainly get back to you. And I spent many nights, many weeks, crying and waiting for you to call, to come. And when you never did, I just gave up. I only had the raw courage to tell that awful story just once. That was months ago. If only you had come then maybe we might have turned this mess around,' she said glancing over at her silent husband. 'But not now. It's too late now.' She was adamant about that."

The president shook his head in remembered disappointment and frustration.

"I felt so bad after hearing all that, the wife so cynical, the husband staring sadly at the floor. Nothing could be done. So I left. But I resolved to confront her home teachers. And I did. I called them into the bishop's office, and we reviewed that plaintive night she had described to me. When she saw them last, they were hurrying off, out into the night. And they had never returned in the months since.

" 'Why didn't you come see me? tell me?' I asked them both, and believe me, this was a genuine, hard-as-nails reproach from their bishop, provoked by the Spirit. I was really put out. They were both elders, both active, responsive, bright and helpful in the ward. But both sat there looking at each other and down at the floor much like the failed husband the night before. 'What were you thinking of when she confided to you the desperate situation in her marriage?' I asked them. 'What were you going to do with this terrible message she'd just revealed? She opened her heart and soul to you two. What on earth were you both thinking of when you left her?' "

The president waited for this question to sink in.

"One of them finally got the courage to speak up and answer my question. 'Well, bishop,' he said lamely, 'actually we were both so embarrassed for her, for what she had told us, that we didn't tell anyone. And we never did have the heart to go back again. It was such a bad visit, such an ugly situation.'

"They were embarrassed!" the president protested. "Did you hear that? They were on this sacred assignment, they had a high and holy calling to represent the quorum president, their bishop, and the Lord himself—and they were embarrassed!" The president gritted his teeth, waved a fist over his head. "And what did I say to the two of them? I told them that I was embarrassed, monstrously embarrassed—for them! I was embarrassed that they were so selfish as to think only of themselves, their unpleasantness, their bad visit. An ugly situation, they had called it. But I called it their weak-willed dereliction of duty to the Lord and that miserable couple.

"I am rarely so spiritually upset with anyone as I was with those two negligent home teachers that night in my office. Talk about bad nights." The president's face had reddened up again.

"But I calmed down. We talked it out. I made sure they felt an increase in my love for them—just as the scripture we have referred to earlier counsels us. [^4]

"We ended with a kneeling prayer together, and by the time they left my office, they had made a joint decision to hurry over to that gloomy couple and offer to do anything possible to help them both move out in their differing directions. You see, it finally occurred to them they had never been released. They were still home teachers—assigned to a family needing help."

The stake president glanced over at Brother Larrabee.

"That example, like the touching story told us about the weeping wife who had lost her sister and baby, illustrates again the profound weakness of some home teachers to communicate vital information properly. We can't hear often enough how important it is to communicate important messages.

"Now let us turn our attention to still another vital subject: time. Home teachers must make a sacrifice of their time to fulfill their stewardship. I remember a cartoon of a guard standing on duty in front of the Louvre—the celebrated international art gallery in Paris. An American couple are rushing up to him hand in hand, and the husband shouts, 'Quick, where is the Mona Lisa? We're double parked.'

"Some people home teach that way, in a 'honk and wave' kind of approach to their calling. President Benson once recalled, in a conference address on home teaching, a story President Marion G. Romney used to tell. A so-called home teacher called at the Romney home on a cold night. He kept his hat in his hand and shifted nervously when invited in to give his message, but he said he wouldn't come in. His message at the door was that it was so cold he had left his car engine running so it wouldn't stop. Then he added: 'I just stopped in so I could tell the bishop I made my calls.' [^5]

"Dear brethren, what a vague, hollow visit. Home teaching should express love, compassion. True compassion is spontaneous; it doesn't wait till the end of the month to be expressed. And yet—" and the president exhaled a long audible breath, as in sorrow, "—at least he made this fumbling effort to contact his assigned family, and on a very cold night.

"But listen to this indictment against home teaching—the way we've been doing it—from an apostle who was trained as an attorney and learned to use words with real steel in them. This is from the late Elder Bruce R. McConkie, who minced no words when he said, 'Without question the greatest defect of the home teaching system in the Church is that it remains almost unused.' [^6]

He looked fondly down at the booklet. "And that is what we hope this brief booklet might help us do, to learn to use more of the power in the Lord's program." He cleared his throat and raised his voice.

"Before we finish with these final pages, let me share two classic stories of effective home teachers. The first happened in our own Eighth Ward. Some of you are familiar with it. It is a simple story. The home teachers there discovered a brother who had been hurt in an accident at the neighborhood gas station he owned and ran. He had no insurance. He had heavy payments to the bank that he managed to keep up only as he ran the station.

"While he was worrying about finances, lying in the hospital on his bed of pain, his home teachers were the first visitors there to give him a blessing—two members of his elders quorum. They knew his business would be in jeopardy, so they also asked what could be done to keep it going. He and his wife had been beside themselves with grief and worry. The faithful home teachers promised that they would find some solutions. And they did.

"They reported his plight to their quorum presidency immediately. In this emergency, quorum volunteers were rushed over to keep the station open. On Sunday, the entire quorum voted to take turns running the business until their sick brother was on his feet again. The quorum also decided that as long as they were running the station, they might as well purchase all their gas and oil there. They circulated that plan to the high priests quorum and the Relief Society. The whole ward got behind the home teachers' inspired project.

"Though many of you know about that quorum project—and even supported it—few of you know how deeply it touched the entire family of the ailing elder. He hadn't been to church for years. But as he lay in the hospital getting day-to-day reports on this booming new business, he began to think about his life. His most frequent visitors were the two persistent home teachers. They were following through on their exciting quorum project, keeping him informed, cheering him up, giving him courage, expressing their fellowship—teaching him faith.

"He is on his feet now, active in a very successful business, active in the Church, active as a father and husband. May I share with you a touching and penetrating statement he made to me the other night as I countersigned his first temple recommend? He put it this way: 'Gratitude is a great eye-opener.' "

The president reached into his breast pocket and drew out a letter, which he unfolded.

"After setting up this ad hoc committee to improve our home teaching, I phoned one of the great leaders in the Church and asked if he would put down on paper the testimony on home teaching I heard him bear years ago to a room full of prospective elders and their wives. He is a business and community leader, a stake president, and has chaired a major committee for the Church. But in the beginning, he was totally inactive." The president adjusted his glasses and read:

How Being Even a Reluctant Home Teacher Changed My Life

I have written my home teaching story out as simply as I could—and once more have experienced those feelings I had at the time I came into Church activity. Like many others I have been a reluctant home teacher. I was, that is, until a change came into my life.

I had recently come into activity after being many years outside the influence of the Church. The bishop assigned me as a senior home teacher with my returned missionary companion as the junior member. (The bishop was working on me psychologically.) We were assigned to two families where I could do little damage. A sweet widow lady said one night, "Why don't you call on the young family in the old rented house behind us. I believe they are members of the Church." I replied that we would report this to the bishop because we hadn't been assigned. We did report it to the bishop, who then said, "Why don't you call on this family?" And then we had no excuse.

The first night we visited this young family, there was a row of empty beer bottles on the front porch, and I thought, "Now, there's a man I can relate to." Timidly we knocked on the door. We could hear a baby crying in the background. The girl who answered the door was sixteen years old and very pregnant. The crying in the background was from a very sick baby. The young mother had swollen eyes as if she had been crying. She invited us in and told us that she would have to continue ironing a huge stack of clothes while we were there, and so we fumbled a great deal in our conversation in the visit and left after about fifteen minutes, telling her, "The Lord loves you." A few days later, my wife, Geneva, took a complete meal to them.

The next month, our visit was almost a repeat of that first occasion. It was near the end of the month. Again, the baby was crying in the background, and the young mother was getting closer to delivery. Again, she had been crying. After floundering a bit to make conversation and asking how we could help her, when it was obvious what we might have done, we left. And I went home rather indignantly. I said to my wife, "Why does the Church have a home teaching program that requires us to inflict ourselves on other people? Why isn't it set up so that the families can call us if they need us?"

Geneva said, "I think you'd better pray about it." I did pray, but somewhat belligerently.

The following Sunday was Fast Sunday. (You see how it works out, home teaching the last day of the month?) And I had promised Geneva I would try to give a name and blessing to our new baby. I determined I would sit on the front row so that I wouldn't carry a crying baby all the way up from the audience. Then, when I was called upon, I would merely stand in the circle and get the job done and sit down. Once I struggled through the procedure, I realized I was trapped. There was no way I could leave the meeting from the front row. I hadn't attended a testimony meeting for at least twenty years.

Near the end of the meeting, in a row near the back, a young girl stood up. I recognized her voice because of the tears in it. She said, "I've come to this testimony meeting to thank my Heavenly Father. We've lived in a home that we can't afford, and so we're moving. My husband is working two jobs, and I'm concerned about some of his other activities that are endangering our marriage. I came from a small town in Southern Utah and was married way too early. Our baby seems to have always been sick, and as you can see, it won't be long before we'll have another one. Twice in our marriage I was so discouraged I felt that I couldn't go on and would have to do something drastic with myself and my children. Each time I felt this way, I prayed as hard as I could—and each time our Heavenly Father sent the home teachers. I got past the desperate moments so that I could go on. I came here to thank my Heavenly Father for sending the home teachers."

This young mother had received an answer to her prayers—and I had an answer to mine. That's why I believe in the home teaching program of the Lord.

P.S. When the young family moved, my partner and I found their new address and, with the help of our bishop, called their new bishop and Relief Society president so there would be a follow-up for help. [^7]

"Even a reluctant home teacher," said the president in a soft voice, "can be a marvelous tool in the hands of the Lord." He turned slowly through the final pages in his booklet and announced: "Page 16 now. I will simply read right through these, brethren, but you have them to take home, to study, to weigh, and to read again and again."

Melchizedek Responsibility to Aaronic Priesthood

Melchizedek Priesthood bearers, when you have an Aaronic Priesthood young man as your companion, train him well. Use him effectively in working with your families and in teaching them. Have these young men feel of your love of home teaching so that when they become senior companions, they will love their callings and magnify them as you have.

President Ezra Taft Benson

General Conference, April 4, 1987

Eight Ways to Support Your Aaronic Priesthood Companion

Counsel from the Prophet About Preparation

Home teachers should have a purpose or goal in mind and should plan each visit to help meet that purpose. Before making their visits, home teaching partners should meet together to pray, to review instructions from their leaders, to go over the message they will take to the families, and to discuss any special needs.

Home teachers should present an important message that they have prepared or that they bring from priesthood leaders. We strongly recommend that the home teachers use the monthly message from the First Presidency printed in the Ensign and the Church's international magazines. The head of the family may also request a special message for family members.

President Ezra Taft Benson

General Conference, April 4, 1987

Home Teaching Is the Basic Priesthood Activity

The significance of priesthood home teaching as it relates to the priesthood programs might best be illustrated as you answer these questions:

But concerning priesthood home teaching, only those who hold the priesthood are called to perform this activity.

Boyd K. Packer

Regional Representatives Seminar, October 2, 1968

The Biggest Hindrance to Home Teachers Is Procrastination

For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors . . . I beseech of you that ye do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end.

Alma 34:32-33

Making Friends of Your Home Teaching Families

To perform fully our duty as home teachers we should be continually aware of the attitudes, the activities and interests, the problems, the employment, the health, the happiness, the plans and purposes, the physical, temporal, and spiritual needs and circumstances of everyone—of every child, every youth, and every adult in the homes and families who have been placed in our trust and care as bearers of the Priesthood and as representatives of the Bishop.

President David O. McKay

Priesthood Home Teaching Handbook

Home Teaching Is Highly Valued by Church Leaders

I feel impressed to speak to you about a priesthood program that has been inspired from its inception, a program that touches hearts, that changes lives, and that saves souls; a program that has the stamp of approval of our Father in Heaven; a program so vital that, if faithfully followed, it will help to spiritually renew the Church and exalt its individual members and families. I am speaking about priesthood home teaching. . . . It is the priesthood way of watching over the Saints and accomplishing the mission of the Church. Home teaching is not just an assignment. It is a sacred calling.

President Ezra Taft Benson

General Conference, April 4, 1987

Home teaching is one of our most urgent and most rewarding opportunities to nurture and inspire, to counsel and direct our Father's children. . . . It is a divine service, a divine call. It is our duty as Home Teachers to carry the divine spirit into every home and heart. To love the work and do our best will bring unbounded peace, joy, and satisfaction to a noble, dedicated teacher of God's children.

President David O. McKay

Quoted by President Marion G. Romney

General Conference, April 8, 1966

There is no work in the Church where there is opportunity for selfless service of greater importance than that of the home teaching work. The Lord will bless you in the assignment where you are serving in proportion to your dedication to your assignment.

President Hugh B. Brown

Church News, March 18, 1967

Home teaching is the pivot on which all other programs turn. Home teaching is not just another program. It relates to all the programs of the Church. The Lord put the responsibility of the home teaching program on the Priesthood.

President N. Eldon Tanner

Lesson 8, 1967 priesthood manual

Home teachers are divinely commissioned . . . called into service by their priesthood leader after he has consulted and agreed with the bishop; they are guided in that service by the home teaching program sponsored and directed by the General Authorities. . . . The service itself, however . . . originated in the mind of the Lord Himself and was revealed by Him.

President Marion G. Romney

General Conference, April 8, 1966

Home teachers are an essential part of the power line that transmits the mind and will of the Lord through the channels he has ordained to the family and the individual. If there is a break in this line . . . the Lord's people are denied the full blessings which a perfect organization would bring them.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie

Regional Representatives Seminar, April 1973

Home teaching isn't just one of the programs. . . . home teaching is the instrument by which we see to it, through the Priesthood, that every program in the Church is made available to parents and their children.

President Harold B. Lee

Priesthood Home Teaching Handbook

We expect to see the day . . . when every council of the priesthood . . . will understand its duty; will assume its own responsibility, will magnify its calling, and fill its place in the Church to the uttermost. . . . When that day shall come there will not be so much necessity for work that is now being done by the auxiliary organizations, because it will be done by the regular quorums of the priesthood.

President Joseph F. Smith

Priesthood Home Teaching Handbook

When you were called, bishop, you were given an extension of your family—several hundred souls—old and young, some responsive, some responsible, a few not quite so responsible . . . but all of them are individuals. . . . You must not lose sight of that. You are teamed up in a powerful way with Melchizedek Priesthood quorums. . . . You have under-shepherds, the home teachers.

Elder Boyd K. Packer

Regional Representatives Seminar, October 2, 1968

The most effective reactivation is always on a one-to-one basis, on a family-to-family basis. It is personal contacting. It is friendshipping. It is done by the home teachers! Use the home teachers to reactivate! There is no substitute for home teaching.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie

Regional Representatives Seminar, October 1974

It is right to have the home teacher carry his responsibility of looking after the welfare of each individual. Assignments can properly be made so that every man who holds authority, which comes by direct revelation, may recognize his ecclesiastical duties by exercising the authority which he holds. . . . God bless you and give you inspiration . . . that every individual will be brought to a consciousness of the priesthood which comes direct from the Son of God.

President David O. McKay

Improvement Era, July 1963, p. 580

In 1963 home teaching was introduced to the Church. This differed from ward teaching in that greater emphasis was placed on watching over the family, rather than just making a monthly visit. . . . The home teacher is to keep in touch with the families, to watch over them, to contact them in whatever manner necessary, in order to watch over them. We were told that home teaching is not just the one visit a month, but that home teaching is never done.

Elder James A. Cullimore

General Conference, October 8, 1972

You can't magnify your priesthood and reject your call to do home teaching.

President Marion G. Romney

Church News, April 22, 1967

The home is the basis of a righteous life, and no other instrumentality can take its place nor fulfill its essential functions. The problems of these difficult times cannot better be solved in any other place, by any other agency, by any other means, than by love and righteousness, and precept and example, and devotion to duty in the home. . . . No other success can compensate for failure in the home.

President David O. McKay

Church News, January 7, 1967

Priesthood home teaching is here to stay. . . . There isn't any other way. All other activities are helpful. Some of them vital. But all are only part solutions. The only solution that can succeed is the one that relates directly to the family. Home teachers are the ones authorized to work directly with the family.

Elder Boyd K. Packer

Regional Representatives Seminar, October 2, 1968

The priesthood home teacher must think in terms of the needs of the family, not just another home to visit. And when he can feel the needs of individuals and, in his heart, when he can love them and has a yearning to help, he can give courage to struggling souls as they try to climb homeward in these perilous times.

Elder Rex C. Reeve

Regional Representatives Seminar, December 12, 1970

They had come to the last page of the booklet. Their stake president held his finger in place and looked up, glancing about. "Brethren of this great stake, I hope you see the awesome responsibility we have as home teachers. We cannot possibly do all of the things suggested in this little booklet. But we can do better than we have done. This final page is very special, for we wished to end on the highest of notes. It involves the magnifying of our priesthood. I ask myself continually that question: Am I truly magnifying my priesthood?

"Let me tell you about magnification. I once saw a demonstration in Washington, D.C., of a great sunglass measuring three feet across. It was a gigantic magnifying glass that gathered in the rays of the sun and focused them on a single point a few feet away, making that spot of magnified sunshine so hot that it melted a steel plate as easily as a hot knife passes through warm butter. I was told that scientists have not been able to accurately calibrate this enormous magnification of sunshine because it melts their instruments." With his finger still on the final page he peered over his glasses.

"Just think of that, what power only three feet of pleasant sunshine can create—when magnified!

"But we're down to the end of our time. We've come to the end of this little booklet on home teaching, and as we read the final page I must give you my own definition of home teaching. It is people helping people—but under the influence of the Lord, being guided by the Spirit." His face was quite flushed now. "And I must also tell you this: that the gospel of Jesus Christ is overwhelmingly uplifting to me. It is positive! It is exciting! We have felt the spirit of it here tonight. And that is an infectious spirit, a spirit that catches, communicates, is communicable. That is remarkable!

"It is this grand spirit that we find printed in these final pages, concluding counsel from a member of the First Presidency living in our day, followed by the word of the Lord—his anchoring statement on priesthood:"

Magnify the Priesthood with Diligence and Enthusiasm

We magnify our priesthood and enlarge our calling when we serve with diligence and enthusiasm in those responsibilities to which we are called. . . . I emphasize the words, diligence and enthusiasm. The Lord needs men, both young and old, who will carry the banners of His kingdom with positive strength and determined purpose.

President Gordon B. Hinckley

Ensign, May 1989

The Oath and Covenant of the Priesthood of God

For whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I [Christ] have spoken, and the magnifiying their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies. They become the sons of Moses and of Aaron and the seed of Abraham, and the church and kingdom, and the elect of God. And also all they who receive this priesthood receive me, saith the Lord; for he that receiveth my servants receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth my Father; and he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him. And this is according to the oath and covenant which belongeth to the priesthood. Therefore, all those who receive the priesthood, receive this oath and covenant of my Father, which he cannot break, neither can it be moved. But whoso breaketh this covenant after he hath received it, and altogether turneth therefrom, shall not have forgiveness of sins in this world nor in the world to come. (D&C 84:33-41.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Plan every home teaching visit together. Can a member of the Church participate in missionary activities without holding the priesthood? The answer, of course, is yes. Leonard J. Arrington, Speeches of the Year (Provo UT: BYU Press, 1974), p. 294.
[^2] Assign your companion to prepare and deliver a short inspirational thought, or to read and review a helpful scripture. Can a member of the Church participate in welfare-oriented activities without holding the priesthood? The answer, of course, is yes. Boyd K. Packer, Teach Ye Diligently (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1975), p. 210.
[^3] Include him in discussions held with the family being taught. Ask his opinion. Encourage his participation. Can a member of the Church participate in genealogical activities without holding the priesthood? The answer, of course, is yes. D&C 42:29.
[^4] Help him learn how to contact families to make the appointments. D&C 121:43.
[^5] Plan visits at a time convenient to him as well as the family. If he can't go at a certain time, try to rearrange the schedule before attempting to get a substitute companion. President Ezra Taft Benson, Conference Report, April 1987.
[^6] Counsel with him regarding specific things that could be done to help the family, such as shoveling a single mother's snow in winter, helping with yard work in the summer, and so on. Bruce R. McConkie, Regional Representatives Seminar, October 1974.
[^7] Get to know him. Encourage him in all aspects of his life. Make sure he knows you are his friend. Letter from President Keith C. Brown, September 27, 1988.
