Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

1

Return with Honor

Congratulations! You have just completed the most difficult task that God requires of his faithful sons and daughters to this point in their lives. If you served with honor, you probably had mixed feelings about coming home. You wanted to stay and continue in the work that has become a way of life for you, but you were also ready to move on to an exciting future. Unfortunately, you can't do both!

You were called for eighteen months or for two years of missionary service, and now it is time to turn your attention to the future. You may feel as if you are breaking a rule as you spend so much time considering your options. The objective of this book is to give you some ideas about things you may want to consider. Ideas for this book came over a three-year period while I served as a mission president with my wife. Many returned missionaries told us that coming home is a more difficult adjustment than entering the mission area. These young men and women didn't want to lose the spiritual growth they had achieved, and they wanted to know how to live so they wouldn't "fall off the table" spiritually as they entered into the uncharted territory of social life, marriage, career, and raising a family. It is hoped that the practical advice given here will lessen the difficulty of your reentry into civilian life.

This book focuses on practical, reasonable ideas that are gospel-related. This book is not intended to be an exhaustive scriptural treatise. The scriptures themselves should be your handbook for successful living. Although various scriptures will be cited, the major emphasis of the book will be on the principles behind the scriptures. Inspiring quotes from various Church leaders will be used.

A lifetime study of the scriptures and the latter-day prophets will "lead the man [or woman] of Christ in a strait and narrow course across that everlasting gulf of misery which is prepared to engulf the wicked—and land their souls, yea, their immortal souls, at the right hand of God in the kingdom of heaven, to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and with Jacob, and with all our holy fathers, to go no more out" (Helaman 3:29-30).

This book is a compilation of ideas and thoughts we found helpful as we counseled missionaries who were about to return home. However, it is not intended to replace the advice you receive from your local priesthood leaders. I have tried to avoid "fringe doctrine" or advice that would lead you away from the kingdom of God. My hope is that this book will help you make good decisions, establish good habits, and rededicate yourself or continue to dedicate yourself to living the gospel, that you may find real joy in life. The final portion of the book will present practical advice aimed at helping you find an eternal companion.

The challenge in life is to find a Christlike balance. Before your mission you may have emphasized sports or dating or academic development far more than you emphasized spiritual development. During your mission, your main focus was on spiritual development. Yes, your intellectual understanding of the gospel also grew at an awe-inspiring rate, but that was not your main objective. Now that you are returning home, you may wonder if your spiritual development overshadows the other three areas. Or you may discover that instead of being overdeveloped spiritually, you have just now caught up in that crucial area.

If all of these four aspects of your life—spiritual, intellectual, social, and physical—are in proper balance, your life will proceed more smoothly. If any one of the four areas gets too much emphasis or is neglected, the results will be evident as you lose your balance and become a little lopsided. If the imbalance continues, the very foundations of your spiritual well-being may be shaken. Although there may be times when one area is emphasized, that is not normal or desirable as a permanent state. During the next few years, for example, you may focus on completing school. If you postpone your spiritual development until your schooling is complete, however, you may not be motivated to return to developing this important aspect of your life later on.

Serious evaluation and proper perspective will help you avoid getting out of balance. Members do not lose their testimonies or fall away from the Church unless they neglect opportunities to consult with God and to get his divine input on how to solve problems. Prayer and scripture study are so important that they need to be mentioned even in this introductory chapter.

The other factor that will help you maintain a proper balance is your willingness to study and follow the counsel of the living prophets. You will never fall away into forbidden paths if you heed the counsel of those whom God has chosen to guide us through these difficult times.

Again, congratulations on completing a successful mission. Now let's talk about moving forward in the great game of life.
