Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

2

Being Released without Returning

Almost all missionaries I have worked with and interviewed are afraid of coming home and losing their spirituality. You have worked hard to make progress. You may have seen other returned missionaries literally return to their old ways, tossing to the wind their spirituality, testimony, and Christlike lifestyle. Yet I have never talked to a missionary yet who planned on reverting back to old ways when he or she was released. What can you do to ensure that this does not happen to you?

It begins with getting rid of the term returned and replacing it with released. Forget the idea of going back. Even if you want to, you will never be able to fit back into life exactly the way you did before you left. Most friends will have changed. Some will be married, others will still be serving missions, some will be away at school, and others will have full-time jobs. A few will be about the same as when you left. You will probably wonder how they could be so concerned with things you now think are of absolutely no consequence. Some will still live to party every night. They look forward not to the second coming of Christ but to the concert next month or the dance this weekend. They rarely, if ever, consider their eternal future or welfare. You will probably not be as inclined to be close friends with them as you thought you would be. Your value systems are too different. Your interests are too diverse. These old buddies may want to include you in their circle of friends, but you will soon discover that the condition they attach is that you join them in their parties and activities. When you attend their parties but refuse to drink or participate in unwholesome things, it will make them uncomfortable. They know they are doing wrong, and your continued presence will only put a damper on their "fun." Don't be surprised if you are invited less and less often to join them.

How do you keep from feeling a spiritual drop when your stake president releases you? You probably will feel a drop, but it doesn't have to be a dramatic drop—just a dip. If you feel the need, ask the stake president to give you a blessing when he releases you. His inspired counsel may give you direction that will make your readjustment easier. Your father or another Melchizedek Priesthood holder could also give you a blessing. The Lord is not going to abandon you because you have completed your mission. However, you will probably come to a sober realization of how much your Heavenly Father was sustaining you (or even carrying you!) during your mission.

Full-time missionaries are not the only ones who are entitled to have the Spirit as a constant companion. If you stay active in missionary-related activities and other righteous pursuits, the Spirit will stay with you.

If you show the least bit of interest in missionary work when you return, you may be called to a position involving missionary work in your new ward or stake. When I was a recently released missionary from Samoa, I was called to be a stake missionary. At the request of a neighbor friend, I taught his aunt the six discussions. It was a fiasco! I had to say everything in Samoan and then translate it into English. If the gospel were not true and the Spirit were not willing to make up for my inadequacies, she never would have joined. But she did join! The next week the stake president called me to be the first counselor in the stake mission presidency. Before very many months, the stake mission president was called to be a bishop, and at the ripe old age of twenty-one I was called as the new stake mission president—an office that I held and loved until I was married at age twenty-four. I believe that it was the stake mission experience that helped me learn how to teach the gospel in English.

If you are not called on a stake mission, that certainly does not mean that you can't do missionary work. Remember how disappointed you were when members weren't very involved in missionary work? Well, now you are one of those members! Let's see how you perform. You may live in an area where there are very few who are not members of the Church. Don't let that stop you. Many people need to have their testimonies revived from smoking embers into flaming fires. You can do that even without a formal calling. How? Think back to what you did to bring the Spirit into a missionary discussion. You prayed, read scriptures, shared spiritual experiences, sang songs, resolved concerns, and so on. Those same principles will revive the spiritually sleeping. What a wonderful resource you are for the bishop; you can help him perfect the Saints. In losing yourself in the service of others, you will find yourself (see Matthew 16:25).

Released missionaries who spend their time pushing people from the ends of the earth towards Zion (see D&C 58:45) will not fall. It is only when you focus on yourself that you begin to shrivel spiritually. Service cures the spiritual doldrums!

Another way to continue growing spiritually is to intensify your study of the scriptures. Many returned missionaries are still trying to teach the "specialty lessons" they developed in the mission field. As great as those lessons may have been, you need to keep growing. Without some added effort, the crispness of gospel knowledge and scriptural insight will grow stale with the passing of time.

You may have known the most scriptures in the entire mission, but compared to what there is to know about the scriptures, there is still much to learn. Some returned missionaries give the impression that they know "all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal" (Article of Faith 9), and many things that He has not revealed. In a priesthood or Sunday School class, these returned missionaries just sit pompously back and sneer at the struggling teacher when a class discussion is floundering.

Other returned missionaries humbly recognize that they know relatively little compared to how much there is to know. They are like sponges: they soak up knowledge, understanding, and insight. They ask questions for their own understanding but also to help clarify principles that they know but that others are struggling to grasp. When they attend a Sunday School or other auxiliary class, they take some of the responsibility for how the class is going. If the discussion is dragging, they try to help the teacher be successful.

Regular, ongoing scripture study is a part of your continuing spiritual growth and development. Chapter four, "Sensible Scheduling," discusses how to establish a realistic study schedule. If you feel the Spirit decreasing, evaluate your scripture study.

An important way to ensure that the Spirit does not withdraw is to pray. Remember in the mission field when an investigator was not progressing as planned? Very often when you asked these individuals about their follow-through on the scripture reading and prayer commitments, they would answer, "No, I'm just not comfortable praying!" When investigators would pray, read the scriptures, and attend church, they were almost assured of gaining the desired testimony unless other parts of their lives were grossly out of focus.

So it is with you. If you become lax in your prayers, either in frequency or sincerity, the Spirit withdraws. Remember Nephi's wise counsel: "It grieveth me that I must speak concerning this thing. For if ye would hearken unto the Spirit which teacheth a man to pray ye would know that ye must pray; for the evil spirit teacheth not a man to pray, but teacheth him that he must not pray" (2 Nephi 32:8). Mormon emphasized sincerity, saying, "And likewise also it is counted evil unto a man, if he shall pray and not with real intent of heart; yea, and it profiteth him nothing, for God receiveth none such" (Moroni 7:9).

There is nothing magical about the formula for getting the Spirit while on your mission, and there isn't anything magical about keeping it when you return home. Service, scripture study, and prayer work every time. Consciously striving to live righteously will not be difficult if you decide that you will not allow a day to pass without using all three of these keys. If you do that, you will never lose your spirituality.
