Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

3

Readjusting to Your Family

One of the most frightening prospects for a missionary preparing to return home is facing the issue of fitting into the family again. To those who have never served a mission, that may seem like a trivial issue. But the issue is real.

First, you have changed a lot in the last year and a half or two years. The advantage is that no one at home knows what you are like now! You may find that there are still a few things that need correcting or adjusting in your personality. If minor changes can be made by simply making a conscious decision, make the changes before you go home. You can decide to keep your room cleaner, to help out more around the house, or to consciously make an effort to be more complimentary to those around you. But be realistic. If your mission has helped you identify some major character flaws or areas of difficulty in your interpersonal relationships, working on these challenges will probably require more time, effort, and practice than you have available before ending your mission. You don't need to worry; people will be surprised and pleased with the changes and progress you have made.

Second, don't try to put on a facade. Be yourself. No one appreciates insincerity. Once you've been released by the stake president, you will no longer be a full-time, ordained minister. Your role is not to call your family to repentance. As you learned on your mission, stewardship goes from the top down, not from the bottom up! When you return home, remind yourself, if necessary, that your parents lead the family, not you. Whether your father is a General Authority or a nonmember, you will probably find things you think ought to be changed. Resist the urge to repair all the wrongs in the family.

A friend told me about his call to be a General Authority. He felt out of place being around brethren who were spiritual and wise. He consulted with his sheepherder father about what to say and how to act. This wise father gave some very timely advice: "Oh, son," he said, "just graze around the edges for a while." In other words, watch how things operate. Be more visible than vocal. There will be plenty of time and opportunities to make helpful suggestions.

Third, be an example of what you believe rather than a voice in the wilderness. You will probably be told often to "give yourself a few weeks and you'll get your feet on the ground. You'll get back to normal soon enough." Unfortunately, many missionaries fulfill that prophecy. Your loved ones will watch you carefully for signs that indicate you are getting back to the old you. If you stay with your resolve to "never go back" to those habits and personality traits you have resolved to eliminate from your life, others may still expect you to fall off your ivory tower of righteousness sooner or later.

When days become weeks and weeks evolve into months and the expected change does not take place, you will begin to enjoy the fruits of your righteous example. As Nicodemus came to Christ at night and alone, so members of your family and others may come to you away from the spotlight. They will want to know why you continue to be happy. Why doesn't anything get you down? When they ask those questions, you can invite them to a higher level of understanding. One startling occurrence is that other returned missionaries may come to you for advice.

Often the person who wants your advice will be the person who seems to be totally happy in their life of sin. The one no one would expect is struggling to change. When friends or family members of this kind admit they're really miserable, you'll probably be very surprised.

After years of watching closely those who have chosen to disobey God's laws, I have an abiding testimony that Alma was right: "Wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10). Many people want to be happy, but, like the Nephites, they "have sought all the days of [their] lives for that which [they] could not obtain; and [they] have sought for happiness in doing iniquity, which thing is contrary to the nature of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head" (Helaman 13:38).

When others seek your counsel, do what you did in the mission field—teach them a better way. Don't preach, condemn, ridicule, or mock, but be kind, gentle, and understanding. If you do not set a proper example, you will not have the desired impact.

Fourth, avoid the desire to be everything to everybody. You may find that you have more time on your hands than you had on your mission (unless you get into school immediately). At first you may feel restless. You may feel that you are wasting valuable time or that nothing you do is as satisfying as missionary work. Those feelings are normal and expected. Because you have become accustomed to making every minute count, your initial reaction when you return home is to fill every free moment with activity. Soon you will be faced with a different frustration—you won't have enough time to do everything. It is best to slowly ease into a full schedule. Demands will change as time passes.

At first Mom and Dad may want to show you off to relatives and friends. You will no doubt be asked to speak in sacrament meeting, and in addition you may serve as a speaking companion to a high council member when he addresses a ward on his assigned Sunday. You may be asked to speak at your mom's club party, at firesides, or at youth conferences. You may be asked to give the lesson at enlarged family home evenings or even give a portion of Mom's Relief Society lesson. These activities generally subside after a few months.

The more definite your postmission plans, the easier it is to adopt a reasonable schedule. It will be long-range commitments that become burdensome as your normal schedule fills.

Fifth, act—don't react. In an attempt to help you "get real," your little brother or sister may say or do things to irritate you or to provoke a fight. If you have already thought through these potentially explosive situations, you will have some idea of how to defuse the confrontation. Humor is a great relaxer. So are cheerfulness and optimism. Decide beforehand to respond cheerfully and, if possible, humorously to family conflicts.

What will you do if your family decides on a family picnic that interferes with your church meetings? What if your mom asks you to make a purchase at the store on Sunday? You may never have to face these situations, but you can probably anticipate several potentially uncomfortable situations you may face with family members. Decide before you leave the mission area how to handle them so you don't appear self-righteous or make your family feel like vile sinners.

Sixth, watch for the teaching moments. There will be moments when it becomes apparent that "now is the right time." If you live each day with a prayer in your heart, asking Heavenly Father to keep you ready to be his voice, you will be surprised how often opportunities come. Examples from your mission teach powerful lessons. I would emphasize again, avoid the temptation to preach!

Seventh, if you fail to progress because your parents are trying to re-exert excessive control, be wise enough to leave home. As long as you live with them, expect to be governed by their rules.

As your light continues to shine within the walls of your own home, it will illuminate even the darkest corners. Other family members will grow because of your example. But don't expect too much too fast. Change happens slowly. One of the promised rewards for being an honorably returned missionary is that your family will be blessed.
