Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

4

Avoiding Spiritual Elitism

For the past eighteen months or two years you have focused on spiritual things. If you have served with honor, you are probably at your highest level spiritually ever. Spiritual maturity is just the beginning of the blessings and rewards that your Heavenly Father has promised you. When Heavenly Father blesses us with any quality of character, the adversary tries to get us to use it to our destruction. Spiritual growth is no exception.

Because the adversary has enjoyed nearly six thousand years of experience with the many billions of our brothers and sisters, he has become an expert in deception. Unfortunately, some people have not exercised sufficient staying power to resist his temptations. Satan may use individuals who have distanced themselves from the mainstream of the Church for his evil purposes. Many of these people honestly believe that they are spiritually superior. They steadfastly maintain their allegiance to the Church and its leaders, but they claim that because of their spiritual superiority, they are able to live laws higher than those presently being taught by the prophets. How convenient!

You may be approached by someone who seems to be very spiritual who says something like, "I perceive by the Spirit that you are a cut above others in your family or in your ward. I am therefore authorized to invite you to join a select group." Neither out of curiosity or vanity should you ever accept such an invitation. Whenever anyone tells me that my spirituality exempts me from living certain commandments and authorizes me to live a "higher" set of commandments, that is an immediate red flag. If the Savior did not excuse himself from even the least commandment, why should some people think they—or anyone else—should have special spiritual privileges? Avoid these people. When you say, "No, I must live by the same rules that everyone else lives by," they may very well respond by saying, "Perhaps I have misinterpreted what the Spirit is saying. I guess you are not really among the spiritually elite!" Bid them a good day, and get on with your life.

If you have been diligent in studying the gospel and applying it in the mission field, you will have made great spiritual strides, and you may receive many compliments. Recognize growth, but use it to bless others, not to pat yourself on the back. The only one from whom we really want to hear, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant" is the Lord. He does that by leaving his Spirit with us.

Satan may try to make you believe that you really are smarter because you know many scriptures. He may try to get you to think you are more spiritual than others because you seem to be doing more of what Heavenly Father has asked us to do. Remember the Lord's stern warning in Doctrine and Covenants 82:3: "For of him unto whom much is given much is required; and he who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation." It may even be true that you are more familiar with the scriptures and the teachings of latter-day prophets than anyone in the ward. They may not have enjoyed the uninterrupted months of gospel focus that you have. Stay humble by reminding yourself that unless you continue to study and seek the guidance of the Spirit, you may find that when you have been home from your mission as long as they have, your spiritual knowledge may diminish too.

One of the real problems faced by returning missionaries is avoiding the label "gospel know-it-all" that comes naturally when you respond to every question in the Sunday School class. How can you be true to your testimony and knowledge and avoid the label? It isn't easy! What generally happens is that you answer a question posed by the teacher that no one else seems to know how to answer. Your answer is scripturally based or documented by a quote from a latter-day prophet. Everyone in class is impressed with your wisdom. The teacher may even be a bit intimidated. The next question is asked directly to you because the teacher and class members love the spirit that comes when you answer the Lord's way. You answer. The pattern is set. The class is in danger of becoming a dialogue between you and the teacher.

How do you avoid or break that cycle? In class itself you might try buying a little time. A question is posed to you. You know the answer but are uncomfortable answering every question. You might say something like, "That is a really good question. I'd like to hear what some of the others in class have to say about that." You might also respond by saying, "I'll need a minute to think about that question. What do others have to say?" A sensitive teacher will understand what you are doing and willingly solicit input from other class members.

If that doesn't work, you can meet the teacher before or after class and explain that you feel uncomfortable answering more than your share of questions in class. You might even suggest that you'd be glad to discuss gospel principles with him or her any time, but Sunday School really needs to be a learning experience for everyone. Almost always the teacher will find ways to broaden classroom discussions and help others feel their contributions are worthwhile. In the rare instance when everything else fails, attend the Gospel Essentials class instead of Gospel Doctrine.

More frequently the problem will be one of false doctrine being taught by a teacher who isn't quite as well-versed as you would hope. As you discovered in the mission field, there are two distinct and separate gospels. One is the revealed gospel, and the second is the "hearsay gospel." The hearsay gospel is the easiest to master because you don't have to document anything. You merely have to say, "I heard that . . . !" When you hear doctrine taught that is questionable or clearly false, you are seldom in a position to stand up and, with the pointing finger of scorn, rebuke the person teaching the false doctrine. That would show extremely poor taste anyway. There are ways of helping teachers of "hearsay doctrine" realize that false doctrine will not be tolerated.

First, you might say, "That is really interesting doctrine. Could you give me a reference or a place where I might study more about it?" That will generally bring the "hearsay" response, "Well, I'm not sure where that is found, but I'm sure I heard it somewhere!" You can then calmly suggest that the class adopt the ground rule to accept only doctrine from the scriptures and the latter-day prophets. A second method might be to say, "I am having difficulty reconciling that teaching with these scriptures that seem to teach the opposite. Could you help me understand?" It doesn't take very long until the "hearsay gospel" scholar chooses to keep his opinions to himself because the embarrassment of being challenged by the scriptures or prophets is too great.

If the false doctrines continue, you might ask the bishop how to handle it. He may be aware of the problem and even be working behind the scenes to eliminate the source. A word of caution—don't try to right every wrong. There will be slips of the tongue or slightly misstated issues that are not technically correct but are not potentially fatal. If you choose to challenge every little error (as you may suppose), you will quickly be labeled as a troublemaker instead of being a strength to the class or quorum. Choose carefully your battlefields. Most people recognize when the teacher or person commenting in class is off-base.

Be extremely careful not to "magnify" the bishop's office. You may feel that you could organize the ward, call people to offices, counsel those in trouble, or move the ward spiritually forward better than the bishop. There's only one problem: that is his office and calling and not yours! If you want to feel the Spirit withdraw in a hurry, just get out ahead of the bishop. Whether he is right or wrong, good or bad, he is the Lord's anointed and the Lord will bless his decisions. Give help where you can, preferably when you are asked. Avoid criticizing the bishop or other ward leaders in your conversations. Remember in the mission field how frustrated it made you feel when ward members would criticize you behind your back? If you want to help a person perfect himself or herself and grow, go directly to that person.

Someday you may be called as the bishop or Relief Society president. Then you will discover that the calling isn't as easy as it looks! Right now, do everything in your power to help others succeed in their callings. Make them look good. Don't worry about whether you get credit for what you do. You will be blessed for it. Magnify your own calling and be of service to others when you can.

Remembering that the Lord knows the end from the beginning, you can rest assured that you need not waste your time "campaigning for position." Many truly great leaders in the Church will tell you the same thing: just grow wherever you are planted. If the Lord wants you in a position, he will maneuver you until you are there. Experience has proven that those who campaign the hardest for Church positions are often the least qualified to hold the office. At times it has been amusing and disappointing to see how many people openly campaign to become a mission president. Although serving as mission president was a great honor, it isn't something a person would campaign to become. Those who are called humbly accept and do the best they know how. At the end of three years, I doubt that anybody requests an extension. So it is with callings of bishops, Relief Society presidents, stake presidents, and other positions of high profile—but also of extreme pressure and demand.

The Lord knows where he wants you to serve. If you are willing and pliable, he will give you experiences that will help you grow. We should not tell the Lord where we want to serve and for how long. Instead, we need to be humble and recognize that the Lord is still directing his work.

You can do much more good if you are not worried about who gets the credit. Until the Second Coming, when everyone will be rewarded according to their works, there will be those who are willing to stand up and take credit for work that others do—and they then have their reward. Go quietly about doing good wherever you can. If you are not recognized or even found out—so much the better. Start the "mystery love basket" in your ward—just a little basket to let somebody know that someone else cares. Include a little note suggesting that they anonymously pass the basket on. In wards where that practice has been started, it has brought joy and excitement where boredom and complacency have been. No one needs know who decided to prove again that it really is more blessed to give than to receive. What joy you will bring to your ward as you go about doing good without hoping for or expecting a reward.
