Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

5

Sensible Scheduling

Not long after I started teaching seminary, I had a group of rowdy senior students. During the course of the year, they matured a lot. I learned more about teaching and they learned more about the gospel. At the end of the year, only one young man was still a trial. He would sit on the back row and pull the hair of the girl who sat in front of him or put his feet over her shoulders. It became a challenge to get anyone to sit near him. Toward the end of the school year we took a class period and had everyone tell their plans for the future. To everyone's surprise this young man said he was preparing for a mission. Everyone laughed, but he steadfastly maintained he was going. A few months later I received a phone call from him. He wanted me to speak at his farewell, and of course I accepted.

Two years passed before I knew it. One day after school I was sitting in my office when in walked a clean-cut, mature young man with a large binder under one arm and a set of scriptures under the other. I thought it was another of the many salesmen who frequently came to sell their products.

The young man asked, "Brother Bott, don't you recognize me?" I studied his vaguely familiar face and had to admit that I couldn't place him. He introduced himself as the rowdy boy from my seminary class, and then he told me about his very successful mission. Then I started to probe. "How do you plan to keep the spirituality you developed in the mission field?" To which he responded, "I thought you might ask, so I brought my plan." He laid out the large binder containing many sections. He showed me how he had organized the gospel into subjects. As he read the scriptures or talks from the modern prophets, he entered the passage into one or more of the categories. By the time he had worked his way through the scriptures and the conference talks, he would have enough material to write a book about any topic in the gospel. I was impressed but leery. "When are you going to do all this?" I asked. He explained how he planned to get up every morning at 6:00 a.m., study for two hours, get ready for the day, and either go to school or work. I asked whether he thought he could keep the schedule; he assured me that he could. We parted after a few more minutes of small talk.

About three months later I was walking down the main street of Logan, Utah, when I heard a whistle and a call from the far side of the street: "Brother Bott!" From across the street I saw a grubby-looking, bearded guy head toward me. I thought for a minute that my number had just been called. This man grabbed me by the shoulders and gave me a big hug. I must have looked bewildered, because he stood back and said, "You don't recognize me, do you?" I admitted that I didn't. When he told me that he was the "Mr. Clean" who had reported from his mission three months earlier, I almost fell over!

I asked what had happened to him, and he replied that he had left my office, reported his mission that next Sunday, started his study schedule on Monday, and continued it on Tuesday and Wednesday. Then he realized that he had bitten off more than he could chew. He put his scriptures away, stopped attending Church, and reverted back to his old ways. He said it wasn't until he saw me that he realized how far he'd slipped in such a short time. I asked him why he didn't just decrease his study time. He said he didn't know why, but he hadn't. We talked for some time. He promised to get back into shape spiritually and to come see me often. He did both. Eventually he was sealed to a lovely young woman in the temple, and the last I heard, he was doing well.

This kind of thing happens over and over again. You need to face the fact that you will likely not be able to maintain the study schedule you established on your mission. Before you leave the mission field, you should set some realistic study goals. If you get home and discover that the press of life makes it impossible to keep up the planned study pace, cut back. If you can't study for an hour every day, try studying for a half hour. If you can't do that, resolve to read a chapter of scripture a day. If you can't do that, then read at least a few verses every day. You cannot expect to maintain your spiritual muscles if you don't feed them, any more than you would expect to sustain your physical muscles if you went on a starvation diet.

Set a specific time every day to study, preferably in the morning. If you start the day by learning the things of God, whenever you have a spare minute during the day, your mind will revert back to what you learned earlier. Note the Lord's counsel to "arise early, that your bodies and your minds may be invigorated" (D&C 88:124; emphasis added).

Establish a specific place to study. Avoid studying on the bed. You will find soon enough that life after a mission is often lived in the fast lane. If you lie down on your bed, you will probably fall asleep. Get a desk, sit at the kitchen table, find an overstuffed chair in the living room, or choose some other convenient place to study. Have your scriptures handy so you don't have to waste valuable study time hunting for them.

Determine a course of study. It might be the Sunday School Gospel Doctrine course for the year. Explore those topics that interest you. Stay with the mainstream of the doctrine. The standard works will never lead you astray. Read the talks and writings of the latter-day prophets. Select very carefully beyond that. Many books provide valuable insight; but in some books, the author tries to reveal things that the Lord, in his wisdom, has chosen to keep secret. Avoid speculative doctrine. It is one of Satan's tools to lure you into forbidden paths.

Because the gospel is both spiritual and practical, there is the temptation to try to experience the entire gospel all at once. However, your spiritual progress cannot be forced. It must be allowed to mature and unfold naturally. Running faster than you have the spiritual strength or foundation to sustain will result in the adversary taking advantage of you.

Many people humbly study the gospel for the personal insight that Heavenly Father promises to give the faithful. Others seem impatient with how long it takes to build a spiritual foundation. In an attempt to accelerate their learning, they meet together in study groups. That sounds innocent enough, but sad experience has proven that unless you are cautious and have some strict guidelines, you could find yourself focusing on a narrow part of the gospel or on a "fringe doctrine"—an intriguing but nonessential area of gospel study. Note carefully the promise and caution the Lord gives:

For thus saith the Lord—I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto those who fear me, and delight to honor those who serve me in righteousness and in truth unto the end.

Great shall be their reward and eternal shall be their glory.

And to them will I reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom from days of old, and for ages to come, will I make known unto them the good pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom.

Yea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come will I show them, even the things of many generations.

And their wisdom shall be great, and their understanding reach to heaven; and before them the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall come to naught.

For by my Spirit will I enlighten them, and by my power will I make known unto them the secrets of my will—yea, even those things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor yet entered into the heart of man. (D&C 76:5-10)

Elsewhere the Lord, through the prophet Alma, issues the caution, "It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him" (Alma 12:9).

Elder Boyd K. Packer also gave the following timely counsel:

I have come to believe also that it is not wise to continually talk of unusual spiritual experiences. They are to be guarded with care and shared only when the Spirit itself prompts us to use them to the blessing of others. . . . A testimony is not thrust upon you; a testimony grows. . . . It is not wise to wrestle with the revelations with such insistence as to demand immediate answers or blessings to your liking. You cannot force spiritual things. . . . Do not be impatient to gain great spiritual knowledge. Let it grow, help it grow; but do not force it, or you will open the way to be misled. ("Candle of the Lord," address given to mission presidents June 25, 1982)

I have been invited many times to join study groups. I have declined because of the counsel of the Brethren and because my first priority is to teach and be an example to my family. By the time I finish that never-ending task, there isn't the time or the inclination to become involved beyond those organized study sessions the Lord has provided each of us during our Sunday meetings.

A wise man once said, "When we focus on a single doctrine of the gospel with the intent of learning all about it, we soon know more and more about less and less until we know everything about nothing!" The Lord needs you to be faithful and diligent in these last days. When you start to explore one single doctrine or a fringe doctrine, you may end up being unable to carry the burden of leadership to which you were foreordained.

Look at your mission president, stake president, or bishop. These men are not prone to delve constantly in the thick of thin things. They are mainstream people; follow their example. Pace yourself and make it your goal to gradually gain a deeper understanding of the gospel's essential, saving doctrines.
