Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

6

Gospel Scholarship without Apostasy

When missionaries learn to "feast upon the words of Christ" (2 Nephi 32:3), they discover how sweet the word really is. There is a temptation to let personal study encroach on proselyting time. This urge is generally suppressed, because you know that there will be plenty of time when you return home to satisfy that hunger. Now you are home and find yourself back in the fast lane. Schooling often becomes an emerging priority as you try to find balance between social activities, work, school, and church. It is not unusual for a returned missionary to long for the good old days in the mission field when everything was so simple.

Many men and women have served missions; fewer have continued to actively study the gospel and scriptures with the same intensity they applied to the task while serving a mission. Unless you make a special effort, you may find yourself in the same category a few years from now. Many young men and women attend school for years after their missions and become experts in their chosen professions and yet believe that a few minutes every once in a while will result in their becoming gospel scholars! If you want to become a scholar, you must plan to devote countless hours to serious, concentrated study. Gospel scholarship itself is neither good nor bad. Whether that scholarship moves you closer to your Heavenly Father or pulls you further from him is the crucial factor. Jacob, who could perhaps be considered the "intellectual" of the Book of Mormon, said, "But to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God" (2 Nephi 9:29; emphasis added). However, a quick reading of the preceding verse enlarges Jacob's concern: "O that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish" (2 Nephi 9:28; emphasis added).

How do you develop into a gospel scholar? Daily study over an extended period of time is a more effective method than studying for large blocks of time every once in a while. When you systematically investigate the gospel and take particular note of how each doctrine and topic interrelates with all the others, you begin to gain insight never attained through casual reading. Time to ponder, meditate, compare, and contrast is necessary to deepen your understanding. Reading for speed does not bring deep insight.

When you study the scriptures, consider the meaning of each word. Then zoom out and look at the positioning of the verse. How does it fit within the chapter, the book, or the entire volume of scripture? Try to understand the principle behind the scripture. Perhaps the actual setting of the particular verse may be irrelevant, but the principle may be vital. For example, after Lehi recounted his inspired dream to Laman and Lemuel, Nephi records that "he did exhort them then with all the feeling of a tender parent, that they would hearken to his words, that perhaps the Lord would be merciful to them, and not cast them off; yea, my father did preach unto them. And after he had preached unto them, and also prophesied unto them of many things, he bade them to keep the commandments of the Lord; and he did cease speaking unto them" (1 Nephi 8:37-38). As interesting as the story is, and as much as we may empathize with Lehi, part of the real value comes as we consider how he (a struggling father) dealt with his wayward sons: he realized that there is a time to quit and let natural consequences teach the next level of lessons. Unless we can extract principles from the scriptures and apply those principles in our lives, they are interesting stories but little else. Serious gospel scholars who pay the price to find the hidden treasures in the scriptures are promised that they will "enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory" (Moses 6:59).

Searching for lists, noting cause-and-effect passages, looking for divine definitions, understanding symbolism and veiled phrases, allowing the Lord to interpret his own scriptures, and using external sources for clarification provide rich and rewarding paybacks for your hours of intense scriptural study. Don't rush to know it all. Spiritual knowledge comes when you are prepared to receive it. Provide a fertile mind in which the thoughts can grow, then allow Heavenly Father to nurture them in "his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will" (D&C 88:68).

Satan may try to take advantage of your enthusiasm for things of the Spirit. His counterfeit knowledge leads to personal apostasy. At this point in your life, you may be concerned about the risks associated with becoming a Mormon "intellectual." During a conversation with me, one bright Latter-day Saint scholar noted, "Self-designated 'Mormon intellectuals' are neither. They disqualify themselves from being 'Mormons' because they no longer subscribe to the discipline and beliefs of the Mormons, and they certainly are not 'intellectuals' when they match their own weak mental processes against the infinite knowledge of God!"

One of the sure signs that the quest for intellectual understanding is leading a person astray is outlined by the Prophet Joseph Smith: "I will give you one of the Keys of the mysteries of the Kingdom. It is an eternal principle, that has existed with God from all eternity: That man who rises up to condemn others, finding fault with the Church, saying that they are out of the way, while he himself is righteous, then know assuredly, that that man is in the high road to apostasy; and if does not repent, will apostatize, as God lives" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1938], 156-57).

As you increase in scholarship, follow closely the teachings of the Brethren and the scriptures. I have found it helpful to use the standard works as a guide. If the standard works say very little or nothing about a doctrine, maybe I should follow suit. Too many self-designated intellectuals choose to endlessly discuss those matters about which God has chosen to say little or nothing. Follow the living prophets. If they are not speaking about certain topics, follow their example. The Lord's law of safety for the scholar is found in Doctrine and Covenants 52:9: "And let them journey from thence preaching the word by the way, saying none other things than that which the prophets and apostles have written, and that which is taught them by the Comforter through the prayer of faith" (emphasis added).

If you should start to question the inspired leadership of those the Lord has raised up to lead his people during these crucial days, you'd be wise to stand back and look at the fate of those who have chosen to let go of the iron rod. Satan plays on the vanity of self-styled intellectuals. After all, they should be "bright enough" to think for themselves. I may not presently have sufficient information to understand the whys behind all the counsel the leaders are giving, but I do have a testimony that the Lord will never allow his chosen leaders to lead the Saints astray. Safety lies in following the guidelines that come from our leaders in Salt Lake City.

As you grow in your understanding of the gospel, remain teachable. If the only people you will learn from are those with higher academic degrees, more publications, or a higher Church position than you have, you will miss out on learning many of the most profound lessons of life. Remember the promise of the Lord through the Prophet Joseph Smith: "And not only this, but those things which never have been revealed from the foundation of the world, but have been kept hid from the wise and prudent, shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times" (D&C 128:18). What a shame if we ever get too big in our own eyes to learn from little children.

The stronger your understanding becomes, the more powerful your voice will be in defending the kingdom of God. Many times you may wish that you had known a certain doctrine or scripture while you were on your mission. As your ability to defend your beliefs becomes more solid, you may have many opportunities to reason with others whose intellectual pursuits have weakened their faith. God is not anti-intellectual—provided we don't become puffed up to the point of "outgrowing" God. Frequently check your allegiance to God, the Church, and the Brethren and make whatever corrections are necessary.

What a thrill to listen to a person with a testimony who has really studied the gospel. I am fortunate to work with many men and women who are true "spiritual intellectuals" and whose testimonies are firm and unshakable. Does the Church discourage us from thinking for ourselves? Absolutely not. Just the opposite is true. The Lord has wisely provided guidelines to protect us from being led astray by Satan, "a liar from the beginning" (D&C 93:25). Even the highway department provides lines to keep us from straying off into dangerous and forbidden paths, where a costly crash is imminent and a fatal wreck is probable. Would the Almighty choose to do less?
