Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

7

No Mediocrity in Spirituality

You may look back on your mission and think that the trials and temptations you experienced during that time will never have an equal. If you believe that, you are in for a shock. Life is meant to be a test to prepare you to eventually become like your Heavenly Father. The Lord explained through Brigham Young, "My people must be tried in all things, that they may be prepared to receive the glory that I have for them, even the glory of Zion; and he that will not bear chastisement is not worthy of my kingdom" (D&C 136:31). The testing period has only begun.

It is fortunate that the tests will not come all at once. The Lord comforted us by saying, "For he will give unto the faithful line upon line, precept upon precept; and I will try you and prove you herewith" (D&C 98:12). Each time we prove our faithfulness and obedience, the Lord gives us additional light. He then showers us with more blessings, which bring additional revelations, which reveal even more commandments—and the cycle continues. The cycle is outlined in Doctrine and Covenants 59:4: "And they shall also be crowned with blessings from above, yea, and with commandments not a few, and with revelations in their time—they that are faithful and diligent before me."

You may not always see the wisdom behind the trial. In Doctrine and Covenants 58:3 the Lord cautions, "Ye cannot behold with your natural eyes, for the present time, the design of your God concerning those things which shall come hereafter, and the glory which shall follow after much tribulation." Our attitude in life is the crucial factor. To believe that God is punishing you or to accuse him of not making good on his promises of peace and prosperity in return for your missionary service would demonstrate a lack of understanding. Trials and tests come to everyone, even—or perhaps especially—to those who will be sanctified and prepared for the celestial kingdom (see D&C 101:4-5).

Many Latter-day Saints need your vision to help put their trials in proper perspective. If you whine and complain about trials, you not only postpone passage of the test but you destroy the confidence of those who are not well schooled spiritually and look to you for an example. Remember from your mission experience that the Spirit withdraws not only when you sin but also when you are ready to be tested or taught on a higher level.

When you notice a decrease in the intensity of the Spirit, ask whether you are breaking any additional commandments that you were not breaking earlier, when you strongly felt the guidance of the Spirit. If you are not, consider thanking your Heavenly Father for the confidence he is showing in allowing you to take a higher test on the trail toward perfection. Identify the test, and through faithful, humble diligence, pass it, thus qualifying yourself to take an even more difficult test. Is there an end? What is in it for you if you complete all the tests successfully? Joseph Smith gave an enlightening answer:

After a person has faith in Christ, repents of his sins, and is baptized for the remission of his sins and receives the Holy Ghost, (by the laying on of hands), which is the first Comforter, then let him continue to humble himself before God, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and living by every word of God, and the Lord will soon say unto him, Son, thou shalt be exalted. When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is determined to serve Him at all hazards, then the man will find his calling and his election made sure. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150; emphasis added)

Certain goals you can set will challenge you to the limit. You have probably climbed higher up the mountain of spirituality than you ever dreamed you would; however, you are not yet standing atop the mountain. For eighteen months or two years you have been giving. To sustain your spiritual progress, you must learn to give for the rest of your life. When returned missionaries fall into a spiritual slump, their spiritual superiority becomes mediocrity when they just do nothing!

The people in the Church are moving onward and upward. If your graph line is flat, then what is righteousness to you today becomes wickedness tomorrow unless you improve on it. There is no stagnation in the kingdom of God. That seems to be where some returned missionaries make their mistake. They want to coast for a while. But you can only coast downhill! If you have tried to push-start a stalled car, you know how much easier it is to keep the car rolling than it is to stop and start pushing again. The same principle holds true in spiritual things. Now that you have spiritual momentum, keep rolling. Keep learning, growing, progressing, and climbing, and you won't be in danger of apostasy.

The first six months after your release seem to be the most critical. If you can get your feet on the ground after you get home, establish an acceptable routine, keep active in the Church, and maintain your spirituality, there isn't a great likelihood that you will become inactive. Before I returned home from my mission in Samoa, I wrote myself a letter. I first congratulated myself on successfully completing the mission, then started asking myself questions. It was like a PPI (personal priesthood interview), with me interviewing myself. "How are you doing in your daily prayers? Are you reading from the scriptures every day? Are you keeping your mind clear of polluting thoughts? Is your relationship with young ladies clean and wholesome?" The questions went on and on. I signed my name, put the letter in an envelope, postdated it for six months later, and sealed it up.

After being home two or three months, I found the letter and, eager to see what I had written, opened it. It was a real attention getter. I wasn't doing anything terribly wrong, but I just wasn't being as diligent in a few areas as I had promised I would be. There wasn't anyone to get angry at; after all, it was me telling myself to shape up. The final statement of my letter really hit home: "Now, Elder Bott, if you have slipped in any of the above areas, shape up! Your eternal life depends on it!" I had signed it, "With your eternal interest in mind, your brother, Elder Bott." I remember sitting in my bedroom and making some serious recommitments. For the next two or three months, I reread the letter once a week. My course was set, and that has carried me through the trials of the next quarter of a century. I am so thankful for that letter.

Maybe you should, while you still enjoy the spirit of the mission, write yourself a letter. If you're just not the writing type, at least hold a personal priesthood interview with yourself every Sunday before taking the sacrament. If you will do that for three or four months, you will find yourself stabilized and less likely to stray onto forbidden paths. Then once a month for the rest of your life (possibly on fast Sunday), hold the same kind of worthiness interview.

It isn't until you check your trajectory and speed that you become aware (if you are straying) that you could miss the celestial target altogether! Frequent midcourse corrections are easy to make. It is when we ignore the warnings and insist on traveling along forbidden paths that the corrections we must make to restore ourselves are major and painful. Frequent, small corrections are much more effective in helping us keep the Spirit than infrequent, massive alterations.

You may know a better method of making it through the adjustment period. If so, use it—but remember, you need a game plan. Most returned missionaries comment that it is more difficult to readjust to normal living than it was to adjust to being on a mission. If you are fully aware that your reentry into civilian life will not be without challenges, you will not be as likely to be taken by surprise by the adversary.

Talking about your mission helps crystalize the lessons you learned. As you discuss your mission with those who are planning on serving a mission in the future, be honest. You don't have to dredge up every bad thing that happened to you on your mission. However, you are not doing a very good job of informing the prospective missionary about real missionary life if you sugarcoat your experience. Too many missionaries arrive in the mission field believing that just showing up is all that is necessary to be a successful missionary. You can help them by truthfully discussing your mission.

Although difficult, your mission was definitely worth the sacrifice many times over. I have heard it said that a well-served mission is equivalent to fifty years of normal Church service. With a fifty-year head start, you should be able to move confidently into the next important chapter of life. The lessons you have learned, the principles you have mastered, the spiritual skills you have developed, your thirst for righteousness, and your determination to earn exaltation will never leave you if you don't leave them. You have agreed to follow God in the course that leads to eternal life. Remember his timely counsel: "For God doth not walk in crooked paths, neither doth he turn to the right hand nor to the left, neither doth he vary from that which he hath said, therefore his paths are straight, and his course is one eternal round" (D&C 3:2). If you don't leave the "strait and narrow path," you never need worry about losing your spirituality.

Lean on the Lord for help, and trust his unfailing promise: "Be of good cheer, for I will lead you along. The kingdom is yours and the blessings thereof are yours, and the riches of eternity are yours. And he who receiveth all things with thankfulness shall be made glorious; and the things of this earth shall be added unto him, even an hundred fold, yea, more" (D&C 78:18-19).
