Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

8

Physical Appearance

Serving a mission may have required a change in your dress habits. If you were prone to push the acceptable limits with hair length or clothing style before your mission, you may be tempted to return to the old ways. Before doing so, consider a statement by President Spencer W. Kimball:

I want you to know it is hard for me to be disappointed, and I rejoice in the blessings of the Lord daily. But a few things disappoint me occasionally and one of them is the returned missionary who, after two years of taking great pride in how he looks and what he represents, returns to [a college] campus or some other place to see how quickly he can let his hair grow, how fully he can develop a moustache and long sideburns and push to the very margins of appropriate grooming, how clumpy his shoes [can] get, how tattered his clothes, . . . how close to being grubby he can get. . . . That, my young returned missionary brethren, is one of the great disappointments in my life. . . .

Please, you returned missionaries and all young men who can understand my concern in this matter, please do not abandon in appearance or principle or habit the great experiences of the mission field when you were like Alma and the sons of Mosiah, as the very angels of God to the people you met and taught and baptized. We do not expect you to wear a tie, white shirt, and a dark blue suit every day now that you are back in school. But surely it is not too much to ask that your good grooming be maintained, that your personal habits reflect cleanliness and dignity and pride in the principles of the gospel you taught. We ask you for the good of the kingdom and all those who have done and yet do take pride in you. (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], 593)

We enthusiastically sing, "We thank thee, O God, for a prophet"—why? "To guide us in these latter days"! It may seem a small matter to you, but you have joined a select group of chosen sons and daughters of God who were willing to sacrifice everything and respond to a call from a living prophet. You will always represent the effects, both positive and negative, that a mission has on people.

You might be tempted to respond, "Well, if others get offended at the way I dress, that is their problem!" Not so. Since you have promised in holy places to sacrifice and consecrate your all to the Lord for the furtherance of his kingdom, you must seriously consider the impact your dress and behavior has on everyone you meet. If you draw attention to yourself and away from the cause you represent, you are inappropriately dressed.

It is difficult to believe that young men and young women would be willing to give up virtually everything in their lives to proclaim the gospel only to return home and undermine all they have worked for by their sloppy appearance. Look at it this way: some day you'll be a parent of teenagers, and, believe me, you'll be struggling to encourage them to follow reasonable dress standards. Your parents—their grandparents—will get out the old photo albums, and there you'll be. How do you want to look in those photos? Like a young rebel, or like a person who knows where he or she is going in life?

Wearing shorts of the proper length seems to be a real challenge for returning missionaries. It may be true that your garments ride up on your legs to the point that some shorts could be worn. That old teenage attitude of "what can I get away with" should have been conquered in the mission field. The truly Christlike attitude is "What is the intent of the law?" The intent is that the garments should cover the knee. As you return to the temple often and participate in the ordinances, you will be reminded of the real purpose of the garment. Those who have matured spiritually see how subtle the adversary is and how he can lead you into forbidden paths. It is vital to take advantage of every help that Heavenly Father has given us to overcome Satan. One of those steps is wearing the temple garment properly.

Other than the instructions God gave to Adam and Eve before expelling them from the Garden of Eden, the only other thing he did was clothe them. The fad and fashion of the day is to suntan as much of the body as possible, almost without regard to modesty. To subject yourself to Satan by removing your temple garments for practically every common outdoor activity would not be demonstrating much understanding of how Satan operates and how much destructive power he has. Nor would that kind of behavior show how committed you are to continuing to keep your temple covenants.

The way we dress reflects our state of spiritual health. President Harold B. Lee noted:

When we see one devoid of respect for himself, as indicated by his conduct, his outward appearance, his speech, and his utter disregard of the basic measures of decency, then certainly we are witnessing the frightening aspect of one over whom Satan has achieved a victory, as the Lord declared he would try to do "to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, . . . to destroy the agency of man." (Moses 4:14.) This is the fate of "even as many as would not hearken unto my voice" (Moses 4:4), so declared the Lord to Moses. (Harold B. Lee, Stand Ye in Holy Places [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1974], 12)

President Spencer W. Kimball spoke very practically to a generation who had much potential but sent the wrong message by the way they dressed:

Shakespeare had Polonius truly say, "The apparel oft proclaims the man." (Hamlet, act 1, sc. 3.) We are affected by our own outward appearances; we tend to fill roles. If we are in our Sunday best, we have little inclination for roughhousing; if we dress for work, we are drawn to work; if we dress immodestly, we are tempted to act immodestly; if we dress like the opposite sex, we tend to lose our sexual identity or some of the graces that distinguish the eternal mission of our sex.

Now, I hope not to be misunderstood: I am not saying that you should judge one another by appearance, for that would be folly and worse; I am saying that there is a relationship between how we dress and groom ourselves and how we are inclined to feel and act. . . . We hope that the disregard we sometimes see is mere thoughtlessness and is not deliberate.

Dress suggests our values. How far, we wonder, will men and women go to pay ovations to the god of style? Will men wear rings in their noses when style dictates? Will young people still fall prey to their god of style, which they worship? "Everybody does it."

Tell me: Is it not true that the dress, the grooming, paints an immediate picture and classifies a person? The famous Jerry Rubin says: "Young kids identify short hair with authority, discipline, unhappiness, boredom, hatred of life and long hair with just 'letting go.' Wherever we go, our hair tells people where we stand on Vietnam, lawless campus destructions, and drugs. We're living TV commercials for the revolution. Long hair is the beginning of our liberation from sexual [morality]." What group do you wish to follow and with which group do you wish to identify?

Some young people have prided themselves in wearing the most tattered, soiled, and grubby attire. If we dress in a shabby or sloppy manner, we tend to think and act the same way. I am positive that personal grooming and cleanliness, as well as the clothes we wear, can be tremendous factors in the standards we set and follow on the pathway to immortality and eternal life. (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 379-80)

If you are going to have your foreordained impact on the next generation, you must take into account the way you dress. The world always scorns the cautions and warnings of the living prophets. If we would be wise enough to avoid deception, we should listen and give heed to what they are saying.

Look at your wardrobe. If it needs updating to reflect your newly acquired dedication to righteous living, then start now. You have probably discovered that some of your old CDs and tapes no longer fit in your library, so you may find necessary the cleaning out of your closet. I watch with great interest the appearance of returned missionaries. Within the first six months they label their effectiveness as missionaries and their attitude toward the missions they have just served. One righteous young man or woman can greatly influence an entire ward. Why not be the one? It does matter how you look. The prophets ahve spoken; now it is up to you whether to follow their counsel and prosper or choose your own way and find out by sad experience that the prophets speak the truth.
