Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

9

Letting Things Unfold Naturally

Honorably released missionaries often feel the urge to "be perfect right now." But achieving perfection will take much longer than our mortal lifetimes. The Prophet Joseph Smith gave this insightful counsel:

When you climb up a ladder, you must begin at the bottom, and ascend step by step, until you arrive at the top; and so it is with the principles of the Gospel—you must begin with the first, and go on until you learn all the principles of exaltation. But it will be a great while after you have passed through the veil before you will have learned them. It is not all to be comprehended in this world; it will be a great work to learn our salvation and exaltation even beyond the grave. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 348; italics in original)

To continue to grow without stagnating, create an environment where spiritual growth can continue to occur. Keep out the weeds of a telestial world. Be where you are supposed to be, doing what you are supposed to be doing. The Lord will give you as much as you are capable of receiving as quickly as you are willing. It is you, not the Lord, who is impeding your spiritual progress. It is his work and his glory to prepare you for the highest degree of the celestial kingdom; therefore, your slow progress doesn't reflect a lack of desire or capability on his part. We are the ones who impose ceilings and limitations on what we will receive from our Heavenly Father.

We want to pick and choose which commandments to keep and how diligent to be in fulfilling our callings, yet we expect unlimited blessings. Just before his betrayal, the Savior looked longingly back at Jerusalem and lamented, "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!" (Matthew 23:37; emphasis added). How sad that some individuals try to blame him for their failure to receive promised blessings, when he so willingly offers those blessings.

"Who am I that made man, saith the Lord, that will hold him guiltless that obeys not my commandments? Who am I, saith the Lord, that have promised and have not fulfilled? I command and men obey not; I revoke and they receive not the blessing. Then they say in their hearts: This is not the work of the Lord, for his promises are not fulfilled. But wo unto such, for their reward lurketh beneath, and not from above" (D&C 58:30-33).

Although we hold the key to our spiritual progress and development, we must not "run faster or labor more than [we] have strength" (D&C 10:4; see also Mosiah 4:27). Be patient. The factor determining whether we progress as quickly as we should is the presence or absence of the Spirit. I wish I had understood that better when I was a recently returned missionary. When the Spirit is with us, we are doing all that the Lord expects us to do based on the amount of light and knowledge he has given us. When the Spirit withdraws, we must either repent of whatever has caused the Spirit to leave or take the next step up the ladder of spiritual progress.

It is not important whether others commend our progress. The "spirit of justification" makes all the difference in the world. Trying to force spiritual growth is like trying to force an egg to hatch early or fruit to ripen before its time: "To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven" (Ecclesiastes 3:1).

Although spiritual lethargy is usually more of a problem than being overzealous, beware of expecting too much too soon. Someday we will have our "calling and election made sure" by receiving the Holy Spirit of Promise. That is certainly a worthy goal, but we must realize it may take years—or more than a lifetime—to accomplish. Enjoy life. Many overenthusiastic returned missionaries become discouraged because those sacred promises have not yet been fulfilled after they have been home six months!

God explained to Abraham that this earth life is a time to be tested and tried in all things (see Abraham 3:25). If you consider the implications of that statement, you'll realize that it will take time to experience all the situations in which we can be tried. Marriage and child rearing certainly pose major challenges that you can't possibly experience until you're married and have children! Coping with the normal setbacks of life, solving interpersonal conflicts, and handling unexpected reverses in business, social life, or family affairs all require time to experience. Perhaps that is why the Lord admonishes us to "be still and know that I am God" (D&C 101:16).

Life is somewhat like your mission experience. People will ask you how your mission went. Some will be asking out of courtesy and really won't care to know too many details. Others plan to serve missions themselves and are very interested in your answer. Be honest. Missions are tough. They push you to the limit and then some. It is not a continuous string of blissful, baptizing days. There are problems, health concerns, and difficult companions as well as spiritual experiences and unparalleled highs. If you report that a mission was the easiest time in your life, you are not being completely honest. Although difficult, it was also the most productive time of your life. It was more than worth it! So it is with life. If someone older and more experienced tells you that life is easy, he or she is not being completely honest. You will have challenges. During some periods of extreme difficulty you may wonder how you will ever get through a particular challenge. But somehow you will make it. And like anyone who uses the gospel as the road map through the trials of life, you will agree that life is richly rewarding.

If you expect postmission life to be an unbroken chain of blissful, Spirit-filled days when everything goes your way, you will be very disappointed. Your spiritual muscles were not developed in the mission field by ease. Adversity brought growth. The same is true of life after a mission. Growth comes through continually meeting the challenges of life over a long period of time. When you regularly evaluate your progress, you'll be less likely to be discouraged or to accuse yourself of not making progress.

The temple experience helps you keep life in eternal perspective. Go to the temple when you can enjoy the session without being hurried. Study the symbolic nature of the endowment and let your understanding unfold naturally as the Lord sees fit.

Growth in the mission field occurred subtly, and so will your continued spiritual progress. If you were wise while you were on your mission, you kept a detailed record of your feelings and the events that influenced you. If you are wise now, you will continue to keep a journal. It is beneficial to look back in your journal and reread entries made a year ago, five years ago, or, as you grow older, twenty years ago. You may be surprised at the progress you are making.

Spirituality is a process, not an event. Sanctification is a process, not an event. Earning your exaltation is a process, not an event. Being closer to your goal today than you were last week, understanding the temple endowment better this time, gaining insights into the scriptures that escaped you before, controlling your temper better—all these constitute the progress that makes the process an enjoyable experience. Enjoy the process—and don't rush it!
