Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

10

College Athletics

Many returning missionaries consider the issue of whether to play a college sport. If you didn't participate in college athletics before your mission, you are probably not inclined to start participating now. For many who did play college sports, the issue is a much more serious one. During their missions or after returning home, many missionaries have sought counsel on whether to play ball or just focus on finishing school. There isn't a right or wrong answer.

Count the cost. As a missionary you were taught to be goal oriented. Hours of proselyting, numbers of projected baptisms, and deadlines for memorizing discussions and the scriptures were all part of your regular schedule. In order to accomplish any goal, you needed to assess your resources and establish a time frame for accomplishing your goal. The same is true with sports. A certain amount of time is required for physical conditioning, practice, and participation in a sport. Since the Lord doesn't expand the day to meet your desires, you are constrained to play within the "24-hours-a-day" limit that God imposed. Like it or not, when you give twenty hours a week to a sport, there are twenty fewer hours to use in some other activity. That doesn't make sports good or bad; it just makes them time-consuming. If you decide that you want to play no matter what, then the time requirement won't make much difference.

In addition to the time required to practice and play, there will be the scheduling difficulties and road trips. If you marry before you complete college, will your travel schedule pose a hardship on your spouse and children?

Another important consideration is the possibility of Sunday play. If you plan to play professional ball, you can be assured that Sunday play will be required. Before you make a final decision, seek the counsel of your local priesthood leaders and, if possible, talk to a professional athlete who is a member of the Church. By far the most important consideration is "Will I be able to maintain my spirituality in a professional sports environment?" If you cannot answer yes, you may have made your decision already.

If you choose to participate in intramural sports, remember that during your mission you have not been accustomed to training and playing. It is easy to expect the same from yourself as before, even though you are not as fit physically. Ease into competitive sports. Injuries may result when you play too hard before you're physically ready. In fact, you should consider the likelihood of injury as you evaluate any possible career in sports.

Another consideration is more crucial than conditioning—temper control. If you can't control your temper, don't play! Many testimonies have been weakened, feelings hurt, and friendships ended because of uncontrolled tempers. Is it worth it? As members of the Church we are to "stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that ye may be in, even until death" (Mosiah 18:9). The witness you bear will be for one team or the other—you can't escape that. You may think that no one is watching. Wrong! On more than a few occasions, my sons have come home from Church activities and reported on the conduct of Brother So-and-so.

In time, your role will shift from participant to spectator. Learning how to be a good spectator can be equally challenging. You don't have to argue or fight with the Cub Scout leader if your son's pinewood derby car doesn't win first place! You don't have to fight with or bully the Pony League coach if your son doesn't get to play all the time. Learning how to control yourself during times of intense competition is a "must" if you desire to progress until you become like your Heavenly Father. You are never justified in losing your temper at a ball game. If you can't control yourself, avoid the situation. The rewards for controlling yourself include greater peace of mind and conscience and more joy in life.

Physical fitness is important. There may come a time, however, when due to accident or illness you are physically challenged. In fact, that may already be the case. Some of the most influential people in my life are people who have not had the use of either their arms or their legs. Learning to live with physical disabilities can cause you to shine. Learning to make the best of your circumstances, whatever they are, certainly puts you in a favorable position for future judgment.
