Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

11

Visiting Your Mission Area

Missionaries who learn to serve with all their "heart, might, mind, and strength" will learn to love the people more than they ever dreamed possible. Some missionaries report that they love their investigators more than they love members of their own families. You may even have met someone in your mission area who seemed absolutely wonderful, someone with whom you could easily fall in love. While you were serving your mission, you recognized the absolute necessity of suppressing all romantic interest in that person. But now perhaps you have the idea that you would like to return to the area and date her or him.

Whether or not you are romantically interested in someone in your mission area, it is natural to want to come back and visit after your formal mission is complete. If you served in a foreign country, returning after your mission is more difficult. If you served closer to home, it is easier to return to your field of labor.

One of the discoveries missionaries make when they return home is that the mantle of a missionary is taken from them when their stake president officially releases them. This mantle is an indefinable but very real feeling of stewardship, responsibility, and heightened spiritual awareness regarding matters pertaining to missionary work. Try as you will, the feelings you experience when you revisit your mission will not be the same as when you served there. The members may still warmly greet you, those you helped convert will still love you, and other missionaries may still remember you, but it will be different.

Particularly if you served in a foreign country or among a people who were not well versed in the gospel, you may find that the people still consider you a missionary when you return to visit your former area. Therein lies the danger. If you should decide to socialize with or date someone from that area, the people may become confused. They may wonder why a "missionary" is dating their daughter or son. Unless your experience is entirely different from that of missions I have observed, your dating someone in your former mission area will have a negative impact on missionary work there. In three separate cities and within three different cultures, the work came to a screeching halt when elders returned and started dating girls from those cultures.

It is difficult to understand why dedicated missionaries would date people who were in their missions when they know the negative impact their behavior will have on the work. Why would you want to undo in one day what you have worked two years or eighteen months to build? Such actions negatively affect the work of those who have gone before and those who are still serving.

In one particular city the average weekly church attendance dropped from seventy to two after a returned missionary came back to the area, dated a native girl, and then dropped her when he realized they were not right for each other. In our culture it is acceptable to date different people and to discontinue dating when things are not going right. But in many other cultures, dating is a serious prelude to marriage and is not discontinued without disgrace to the girl and her family in the eyes of the entire culture.

Of course there isn't a law that states you can't date those you worked with, but I would strongly discourage it. For your entire mission you were there not to do your will but the will of him who sent you. Why would you want to change after completing a successful mission?

If you are working among the English-speaking population in the United States, then returning to date may not have such a negative impact. However, as you take your date to church, if you are sensitive, you may still notice the raising of eyebrows and the furrowing of brows as indications of disapproval or questioning. It just never felt right when former missionaries came back to date and associate with the members and missionaries in a capacity that cast a questioning shadow over the work in which other missionaries were still engaged.

When you first go home, there is going to be a period of adjustment. Many times you may experience homesickness for your mission. If you return to the area within the first three or four months after your release, you may be reacting to that homesickness. Instead, consider staying home for six or eight months before deciding to return. Chances are you will have found your niche at home by then, and your desire to return may have lessened even though you will always love the people you served. Use these months to get things into perspective, and then if you still choose to return, you will not be viewed as a recently released missionary. The companion you were serving with in your last area will probably have been transferred. The memory of you as a missionary will have faded. The negative impact will not be as great as it would have been just a few months after your release. However, be aware that the cultural barriers, if any, will still be just as strong as ever.

As you reflect on your mission, you may experience the "grass is always greener on the other side of the fence" syndrome. When you return to your area, it won't be quite as beautiful as you remember it. The people will not be quite as celestial as you remember them being. You could easily be very disappointed if you return. Many missionaries have chosen to remember the mission the way they left it rather than return and destroy their image of it.

There is another consideration in dating someone you met on your mission. He or she knew you when you were a missionary. Although you want to maintain the same dynamic personality, the intensity with which you live life after your mission will be different. If you were the missionary you were called to be, your entire focus was on spiritual things. As you return home, it isn't even desirable that you stay totally focused on spiritual things. You must find a job, get back into school, accept a position in the Church, start a social life, and start working toward your life's career. That balance of your social, physical, intellectual, and spiritual sides (see Luke 2:52) is a must if you are going to be like the Savior.

Too often girls and guys fall in love with full-time missionaries, who are focused entirely on spiritual things, only to find they are not what they expected or wanted when the physical, social, and intellectual factors are considered. If you return within a month or two of your release, you are still in the adjustment stage. The person you are dating in the mission area may still not be able to get a true picture of what you will be like. Think of the heartache for both of you if you marry and later find you are not compatible.

If you are totally honest with yourself, you will know whether you are violating good judgment by returning to the mission area. Make it a matter of prayer, and listen for the guidance of the Spirit before you take off for the area where you served your mission. Talk to your parents and even to your bishop if you still feel confused. They see things with a broad perspective that may not be available to you right now.

If after doing these things you still feel you should return to your mission area, be honest with yourself, once you arrive, in evaluating whether or not you should have come. How can you tell? If you find yourself sneaking around, avoiding the mission president or mission leaders, or asking members and nonmembers not to mention to the full-time missionaries that you are in the area, then common sense tells you that you shouldn't be there. Do you have to visit the mission president while you are there? No, not at all. But if you fear that he'll find out you are in the area, be honest enough to realize you shouldn't be there. Then go home and get on with your life.

If you decide, after a reasonable length of time, to go back to visit or date in your former mission area, avoid dressing like the full-time missionaries. If the only thing that distinguishes you from the missionaries is your lack of a name tag, people start to wonder. Have the full-time missionaries just taken off their name tags? Should they report you to the mission president? How can they distinguish you from the real elders or sisters? These are just a few of the questions I fielded as a mission president. It was difficult to explain that the individuals who came back were no longer missionaries and I no longer had a stewardship over them.

Once you arrive in your former area of labor, be careful about spending too much time with the missionaries who are still serving. They have work to do, and you won't want to hold them back in any way. If you want to visit, team up with, or participate in companion exchanges (commonly called splits) with the full-time missionaries, get permission from the mission president. He may not mind your spending some time with them. On the other hand, he may have very strong feelings about it, because your mere presence will cause the missionaries to think about the end of their missions. If you could see the negative impact of visits from recently returned missionaries, you would think twice about visiting the missionaries who are still serving. If there had been many positive experiences of missionaries coming back to visit, I would give you different advice. But in my view, the risk you take of becoming a deterrent to the work is not worth fleeting happiness that comes from being there when you really shouldn't.

If you do return to visit, make the visit short and leave while the people still want you to stay. You will remember the poverty of so many families who gave their all to feed the missionaries. Moving in with or imposing on a family you helped convert may be met with smiles and gratitude, but it may also cause the collapse of their monthly budget. Be sensitive to the economic impact on the people you visit.

Very few people just sit around waiting for your visit. Call in advance and let them know you will be in the area and ask if they would be available for a short visit. Be very sensitive to the demands on the mission president's time. He and his wife will probably be glad to see you, but remember, they still have a calling that requires almost twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week to fulfill. A short, planned thirty-minute visit is much more appreciated than an unannounced two-hour visit.

By using the same sensitivity you developed while on your mission, you will be able to make your visit more pleasant and worthwhile, and your presence will not be as troublesome as it has been when missionaries have thought only of themselves rather than the continuing progress of the work. The Lord will bless you to know the right thing to do.
