Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

12

Being Friends without Compromising

When you return home after your mission, rejoining your old social group may pose some unique challenges—depending on your focus before your mission. Many elders and sisters approach their former friends with a justifiable sense of fear. If your friends supported you in keeping the commandments, then returning to their social circle will not be difficult. If your friends chose not to go on missions, they may still be focused on things that seem unimportant or almost disgusting to you now. They may still be worried about who is dating their old boyfriend or girlfriend, where the big party is for this weekend, who has the fastest car, or who has had the latest brush with the law.

One elder came to an interview a couple of months before the end of his mission carrying a letter he had received from a friend. His friend described the parties they were planning for him, the girl they were priming for his "welcome home," and the assortment of booze they were arranging to have at the party. The elder was concerned about how he could keep their friendship without compromising his standards. We talked frankly for a long time.

We talked about how his friends would be excited to have him back. The party would go really well until it came his turn to demonstrate his allegiance to them by drinking or getting involved with the girl. When he refused, the tension would rise. His continued refusal to lower his standards would perhaps at first be seen by his friends as an obstacle they could overcome in time. They might strengthen their pleas to him to be "one of the crowd." When they failed to lure him back into his old ways, his friends would begin to draw away from him. He would eventually have to decide whether to go with the guys or stay true to his testimony. I asked him to write and let me know how things went. A couple of months after his release came his letter. He outlined the struggles in trying to convert his less-active member friends to his newly discovered lifestyle. He recounted the verbal abuse and teasing he had taken. He outlined the very situations we had talked about and ended the letter by telling about the new set of friends he was developing. He wrote how sorry he felt to have to decide between his friends and the Church. His testimony at the end of the letter confirming how good it felt to make right choices reinforced my faith in the ability of youth to make righteous decisions.

Before you leave the mission field, decide how to handle sticky social situations. What are you going to do if your friends throw a party for you and everyone wants to watch an R-rated video? Can you use humor to soften your refusal to watch? You might say, "I don't think my mom would let me watch this!" Laughter may result, but others may suggest that you play a game rather than watch the video. If you are not firm in your refusal, they will push you to the limit. If they insist on watching the video, you might say something like, "I don't want to make you guys uncomfortable, but I promised myself I wouldn't watch R-rated movies. Tell me how long it will last and I'll be back when it's over."

Today's culture seems oriented towards watching videos. Decide before you lose the missionary mantle what you will watch and what you will not. Make that decision only once. You surely have become realistic enough to realize that you cannot feed your mind on telestial food and expect celestial thoughts. Very few videos and movies today promote virtue, goodness, service, true Christlike love, and devotion to a higher cause. You are only deceiving yourself if you rationalize that movies, songs, and lyrics have no effect on your thoughts and spirituality. Feed your mind and spirit on celestial materials and you will see how much easier it is to avoid telestial temptations.

If you associated with a rowdy group before your mission and if there is the slightest possibility that they will try to lace your drink with alcohol, make sure that when you are with them you drink from a can of pop that you open yourself. Be on guard until you have established a social group where alcohol and drugs are not even used.

It is easy to stay straight if you never take the first step off the track. Well-defined guidelines will make your social re-entry much easier. Make yourself a list of "these things I will do" and another list of "these things I will not do." You have paid a tremendous price to get where you are now; to return to the old ways would be like going to four years of college only to work in a fast-food restaurant. Trying to "return" is a mark of a lack of mature understanding. The world is not the same place as when you left. If you are unconvinced, watch an evening of television! You will likely be shocked. Having been away from television for eighteen months or two years, you will not have been desensitized into accepting filth as normal. You may even rent a movie you liked before your mission only to turn it off unwatched, finding that it contains much more offensive material than you had realized. You cannot possibly return to the environment you left two years ago, because it no longer exists. Your less-active friends may be doing the same things they did before your mission, but there is no stagnation in life. They will actually be further away from their eternal goals than they were when you left.

Can you be a factor for change among your friends? Certainly. But be careful not to try to influence the whole rowdy group at once; if you tackle several friends who are off the track, their combined influence may overpower your desire to do good and you may join them. Pick the friend who is most likely to change, and do things with him or her. If you notice yourself being strongly tempted to slip into old ways you have put behind you, pull away from your less-active friends until you are strong enough to influence them instead of the other way around.

Once you have "converted" one friend to live a more righteous life, then the two of you can tackle another friend. Certainly their souls are as important to save as the souls of the investigators you worked with your whole mission. Just be aware that it is sometimes more difficult to rekindle the fire of testimony after it has been doused with the ice water of sin than it is to start a testimony fire from dry wood. Don't be discouraged. If you are successful, your friends will one day thank you for saving their spiritual lives.

You will probably notice that your whole approach to social life has changed since returning from your mission. Life has a more serious meaning. There is more to life than just play and fun. Your desire for conversation with some substance rather than just gossip may surprise your former friends. Going on dates will still be fun, but you will probably be oriented toward finding someone you could marry rather than just having a good time. You may discover that hanging out gets old in a hurry. You will probably want something more fulfilling and challenging. All of these feelings are natural and desirable.

Your mission has cast you forever into a leadership role. Take the challenge to throw the best parties, plan the most fun dates, be the most original person around. Being creative requires a lot more energy, but once you have developed the reputation, others will want to join you. When you plan the parties, you can set the standards for the activities. People will gladly meet the qualifications if the parties are fun.

That will be your challenge. Take charge in a positive way. Let people see the true and lasting fun that comes when you can remember not only the party but after the party as well. Make it your job to bring out the best in others. If you need some ideas for fun, creative dates, see the list in the back of the book for inexpensive but memory-creating activities.
