Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

14

Social Sensitivity

Many lessons you learned on your mission will enrich your postmission life as you continue to apply them. A few of those lessons will be emphasized in this chapter to remind you of proper social etiquette.

Know when to leave. Do you remember the mission counsel to make your visits brief, always leaving with the people wanting you to stay longer? That is good advice at home, too. You will probably want to visit people who have positively influenced you. They will want you to visit. But remember to plan ahead by telephoning and asking when it would be convenient for them to chat for a few minutes. If you just drop in, then consider using the rule of thumb you applied when visiting members to get a drink of water or a referral—stay fifteen to twenty minutes maximum.

How can you tell if people want you to stay longer? After fifteen minutes you might say something like, "Well, I need to be going. It's been great to visit with you." If the people you are visiting really want you to stay longer, they will protest your leaving and invite you to stay for dinner or just to visit longer. Then feel free to stay. If they thank you for coming and encourage you to come again, you can know for sure that it's time to go.

If you want to spend more time with someone, call and set an appointment. If your mission president has returned from his mission and lives nearby, he will no doubt enjoy visiting with you. We are busy people, but we love to have returned missionaries from our mission come by and visit. If they call, we will generally invite them over for dinner! Everybody wins then. We get to visit with people we love, and they get to enjoy good home cooking.

If you're invited to dinner, remember the mission rule to limit dinner appointments to one hour or so unless there is a special purpose. Staying all evening would probably make your host a little uncomfortable.

On your mission you learned to be sensitive to local customs. Manners may vary from country to country, but you tried to adjust to the expectations of your host. The same thing applies when visiting others after you return home. Put on your best manners. Manners indicate a spiritually mature individual. "Please," "thank you," and "excuse me" are not difficult words, but they certainly set you apart from thoughtless crowds who consider only their own needs.

President David O. McKay used to stand every time Sister McKay entered the room. We can follow his example by similarly honoring others, by performing small, courteous acts, and by generously expressing our appreciation for our host and hostess.

It is important to show proper respect for others as we converse with them. Learning to listen and not interrupt is difficult, especially if you have something important to say, but it pays great dividends. It automatically labels you as a courteous person. Listening also happens to be the only way you can learn that other people really do have important things to say.

In your mission area, you tried to build relationships based on beliefs you and your investigator had in common. When dealing with people at home, it is easy to focus on differences and on their weaknesses. However, it is more Christlike to accentuate the positive traits you see in them. You are no longer in the same ministerial position to call people to repentance. People often accuse returned missionaries of being critical of everything that is different from what they're used to. The food you like is not scripturally superior to the food others may prefer. The entertainment you enjoy and the kind of music you prefer do not necessarily have the divine stamp of approval. You are not the measuring stick against which all activities are judged. Allow people to have their own likes and dislikes. You are not obliged to comment on every subject. Pizza happens to be a food I don't like, but that doesn't mean I should insist that everyone avoid eating pizza. Do you tend to treat your own personal likes and dislikes as a standard for everyone else? If you do, practice being more accepting and less vocal.

It may not be right, but you cannot avoid being socially labeled if you associate with the wrong crowd. It is noble to try to fellowship the wayward, but you always run the risk of giving people the impression that you are one of them. Whether you care to admit it or not, the clothes you wear also send a powerful message about how you view yourself.

As a teacher for many years and also as the president of a company, I had multiple occasions to interact with students and other people who were seeking promotions or employment. A neatly dressed person projects a positive message. I tried to avoid labeling people because of their appearance, but I was more likely to hire a person who looked trustworthy than one who took no thought for their appearance. I have asked numerous business leaders how they view a job applicant's appearance. They all confirmed the truth of this principle. If you want a job, look like you want it.

You made sacred covenants before entering the mission field. If your wardrobe at home makes it impossible for you to properly wear temple garments, you need to change your wardrobe. Your commitment to continued spirituality is called into question by priesthood leaders and members when you disregard the covenants you made in the temple. There will certainly be times when you will remove the garment. Very active sports such as basketball, swimming parties, and possibly a few other activities would suggest the appropriateness of going without garments. When you seek for opportunities to wear them rather than remove them, your spiritual understanding begins to shine through. Sunbathing, mowing the lawn without a shirt on, and going around all day in athletic shorts when not required send a message. Live your testimony.

On your mission, people served you. They invited you to dinner and included you in family outings. It is easy to fall into the trap of expecting these things after your mission. If you expect to be served, you may become bitter when it doesn't happen. It is much easier to expect nothing! If no one invites you over to eat, that is all right. If no one thanks you for serving a mission, that won't rattle your testimony. If people totally ignore you (which they won't!), that isn't a reason for becoming less active in the Church.

Look at the positive side of not expecting anything. Whenever anyone gives you a gift, invites you to dinner, or includes you in a family outing, you are overflowing with gratitude. That is the way it should be. Be grateful for everything people do for you. How much more at rest you will feel when you expect to make your own way rather than expecting someone else to pave the way for you.

None of us has arrived at perfection yet. Overcoming socially unacceptable behavior is a positive goal. Be aware of how your speech and actions affect those around you. If others send nonverbal (or verbal!) cues that suggest their disapproval, consider what you are doing or saying and see if they are alerting you to something that will have to be overcome before you will be welcome in the celestial kingdom. Just as you did on your mission, be humble and teachable enough to take corrective advice from anyone who cares enough to give it. There will be those who desire to see you fail. Some may even sense a divinely given mission to help you experience reality. Consider comments and act on them according to their merit, not the advice-giver's motive, and continue the perfecting process.

You will probably find that postmission social experiences take on an entirely different meaning. Everything before the mission may have been fun and games. After the mission you may find you are more interested in getting on with life. You will still have fun and still play games, but behind all of the frivolity will be more seriousness and looking to the future.

It is much easier to be straight when everyone in your social circle is straight. While you were serving your mission you were probably acutely aware of how people considered you a role model for their children and for themselves. Things have not changed. You will forever be labeled as a "returned missionary." It is your responsibility to set an example throughout your life. A clear understanding of this responsibility will be yet another incentive to live the way you know you should live. What a joy you will be to your parents and what a credit you will be to yourself when you no longer depend on someone else to control your behavior. Even when you are not being supervised, do you act in an acceptable way? Have you completely shed the childish attitude of trying to "get away with" things? Could you with confidence invite the Savior to participate in your social activities? These and many similar questions will help you govern yourself socially when you return.

There will probably be awkward situations. Everything may not run smoothly. There may be experiences that require you to stretch beyond the principles you learned on your mission. But your mission will give you the headstart you need to ensure that, socially speaking, you don't just wander aimlessly.
