Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

15

Balancing Brain and Brawn

What will you do with the rest of your life? That sounds like such a large, all-encompassing question. It is, and for that reason you owe it to yourself to make the decision deliberately, taking whatever time it requires to decide wisely. There isn't necessarily a right or wrong answer concerning your future. In order to determine the direction your life will take, however, you will want to find honest answers to some practical questions. For many the decision to return to school was made before they served a mission. Others worked for the year or so following high school to earn enough money to partially pay for the mission. Still others have no real desire to pursue academic careers. The first question you may want to ask yourself is "Do I know what I want to be in life?" You may feel a great sense of alarm when you realize that you are less sure now of what you ultimately want to become than you were before you started your mission. That isn't unusual, nor is it undesirable. When missionaries met together as part of the exit process from our mission each month, we would ask them to show by the raise of their hands if they knew exactly what they wanted to be or if their plans were more definite now than before their mission. It was not unusual for only one or two or even no hands to be raised.

After a good laugh, we would discuss how to decide, and we'd mention that they may change their minds several times before finally settling on a chosen career. As you dream about the future, do you have at least an area where you visualize yourself? Does that profession or career require a college degree or perhaps even graduate schooling? If an advanced degree is required in your chosen field, don't try to rewrite the requirements because you don't want to go to school or because you are sick of studying and taking classes. If you are going back to run the farm, advanced schooling may not seem necessary until you look at the high-tech world in which you live. It may require more specialized training to compete in agriculture than you think it will. Talk to people who are on the cutting edge of your chosen profession. Be careful in taking too much advice from people who freely counsel without much personal experience.

Elder John H. Groberg of the First Quorum of the Seventy gave some timely advice on how to make decisions about your future:

In the past I have tried to figure out whether I should go into business or into teaching or into the arts or whatever. As I have begun to proceed along one path, having more or less gathered what facts I could, I have found that if that decision was wrong or was taking me down the wrong path—not necessarily an evil one, but one that was not right for me—without fail, the Lord has always let me know just this emphatically: "That is wrong; do not go that way. That is not for you!"

On the other hand, there may have been two or three ways that I could have gone, any one of which would have been right and would have been in the general area providing the experience and means whereby I could fulfill the mission that the Lord had in mind for me. Because he knows we need the growth, he generally does not point and say, "Open that door and go twelve yards in that direction; then turn right and go two miles . . . " But if it is wrong, he will let us know—we will feel it for sure. I am positive of that. So rather than saying, "I will not move until I have this burning in my heart," let us turn it around and say, "I will move, unless I feel it is wrong; and if it is wrong, then I will not do it." By eliminating all of these wrong courses, very quickly you will find yourself going in the direction that you ought to be going, and then you can receive the assurance: "Yes, I am going in the right direction. I am doing what my Father in Heaven wants me to do because I am not doing the things he does not want me to do." And you can know that for sure. That is part of the growth process and part of accomplishing what our Father in Heaven has in mind for us. ("What Is Your Mission?" Speeches of the Year, 1979 [Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1980], 97-98)

If you do not know what you want to do with the rest of your life, how can you find out? At universities, colleges, and employment centers in most cities, you can take free aptitude tests that indicate your interests and abilities. These tests won't tell you to be a telemarketing specialist. They might say that people who have likes and dislikes similar to yours excel in careers that include sales—then they may list a dozen careers. It is likely that you will want to learn more about several of the careers listed. Of course, you might look through the suggestions and decide that none of them holds much appeal for you. It will at least be a beginning place.

You may want to shop around and talk to people in various professions. Most professional people will gladly talk to you about their careers. Being a doctor holds a lot of appeal to the unrealistic because of the high wages and the social status. If you want to become a doctor, talk to some doctors about the number of years of schooling required as well as the demands on their time when they are established. If you want to be a doctor, that's wonderful, but go into it with your eyes open.

A friend of mind has great advice for people who want to know what they should do with their lives. He asks them to write down three things they would like to do with their lives if money were not a consideration. After the three things are listed, he has them circle their first choice. "Now," he says, "go out and find a way to have people pay you for doing what you love most!" Sounds so simple. He is a great example of what he preaches. He explains that you want to spend your life doing something you really love doing. Imagine looking forward to each day of work. Contrast that with the dread most people feel as they go to work and count the months until vacation or the days until the weekend or the next holiday. What a way to spend life—wishing the next day would never come. Yet millions of people do that every day. My friend's philosophy is "Yes, but not for money! Yes, I will go to work because I love what I am doing and want to make an impact, not merely because it pays good money." Think strongly about that. If you find yourself in a job you hate, why not change? Your life will not fall apart if you change. Recently I heard a follow-up report on college graduates. Within two years of graduation, eighty percent of these highly trained college graduates are working in careers outside their majors.

You may think that you can't afford to change majors if you are partway through your educational career. Perhaps you can't afford not to! With just one life to live, don't you think it is worth doing something that you really want to do? My friend loves traveling, meeting people, and tackling difficult problems. He is president and CEO of his own public relations firm. He loves his job and is paid well for doing it. I love teaching. I have strong convictions and do not like to apologize for my beliefs. I really like young people and enjoy being challenged to show how the gospel principles apply to life. So I teach religion! I can hardly wait to get to class every day to see what new challenges await me. I am actually paid for doing what I love most! The same could be said of construction workers, bankers, doctors, lawyers, or people in any other profession. In each of these professions there are individuals who love their work. There are also those who hate their work. Jobs, careers, and professions are neither inherently exciting or boring; they are what your attitude makes them.

You may profit by reading your patriarchal blessing for hints or clues on what you should do. One young man came up to me after a class in which we had discussed patriarchal blessings. Smiling, he told me that his blessing said he would use his body to earn a living. He had always thought that meant he was going to be a ditch digger. Now he is being recruited as a professional football player. He liked that interpretation much better. Your blessing may not explicitly say you should be a dentist or a teacher. It may suggest that you will work with people or that your contribution will be mainly in bringing forth new ideas and technology. I wanted to be a forest ranger. But the wording in my patriarchal blessing directed me toward teaching the gospel. After more than twenty-five years of professional teaching, I can't imagine being anything other than a teacher.

Whatever career you choose, make sure that your chosen work will satisfy your needs now and in the future and that it is honorable. What sounds like big money to you now may not be enough to support your family later if you do not plan for a career that includes growth opportunities. Many people have decided to take high-paying jobs rather than continue their education and are now struggling to keep up with the financial demands of their families. On the other hand, many of those who have chosen to continue with their education have struggled during the college years but are reaping financial benefits now. Money is not everything, but it is certainly easier to cope with life's other problems when financial woes are not a constant threat.

Do you have to go to college to be successful? No, unless your chosen career requires a diploma. It is really difficult to be satisfied when you deserve a promotion or a raise and someone else gets it because they have a degree and you don't. You may believe that the most qualified applicant always gets the job. I wish that were true. More often than not, it is the person with the college degree or other credentials who gets his or her name on the office door. Ask any number of very skilled workers who lack the degree and you may be overwhelmed at their response. Don't expect equity and fairness in the workplace until the millennial day.

We have considered the negative effects of not having the necessary credentials. You must also realize that too much education may also close some doors. You might be overprepared for a job. A custodian with a doctor's degree might sound funny to you. You might say, "Well, if I want to be a custodian, can't I have a degree?" Yes, but there may be other problems. You may be viewed with suspicion by a supervisor who has only a high school education. When you open certain doors, you automatically close others.
