Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

16

Getting Employment or Just a Job

When you first arrive home you may worry that you won't be able to find a job. Some people will be fortunate enough to have family members who can employ them. Others will be able to return to the jobs they had before their missions. If you plan to return to school immediately, you will have to go to where the school is located and compete with many others for a job.

You may consider your skills and think that you're seriously lacking. Wait a minute! You have a lot to offer. You have spent the last eighteen months or two years in one of the most highly specialized public relations ventures in the world. You have trained and supervised people, organized programs, and solved complex problems. You have successfully completed a difficult task. You don't have alcohol problems, drug addictions, or problems such as dishonesty or disloyalty. Your appearance is a primary selling tool. Most employers would like to have their entire workforce look like you! You may be fairly fluent in a foreign language. You may know a different culture and customs and have a rap-port with the people. This list could go on and on. You need to know that you have a wealth of resources to offer any enterprising employer. Returned missionaries are highly sought after in the business world.

In interviewing a number of potential employers, we compiled the following list of pointers to help you succeed:

It is always a temptation when the dollars start to roll in to spend every waking moment working. It may seem prudent to work as much as you possibly can while going to school. You will find that excellence in schooling demands a lot more than the number of hours you spend in class. Too many returned missionaries have failed in school because they spent too much time working at their jobs. If you find that your work schedule is affecting your academics, you have a serious decision to make. It is going to require real dedication to postpone having the extra spending money in order to devote more time to schooling now. Most employers of university students will be sympathetic toward your school schedule. If they are not, be wise enough to seek other employment.

Be careful what kind of job you take during school. More often than you would believe, that job will become your life's career. If you have identified what career you are going into, try to get a job that will give you valuable experience in a related area. For example, if you are going into civil engineering, try getting a part-time job with a land surveying company or on the crew for the city engineer's department. Very often part-time employment becomes a full-time position once you have earned the degree.

Though a career-related part-time job is the ideal, you may have to work at whatever honest employment you can find in order to support yourself as you continue your education. If this is the case, look for a job where you can associate with other college students at work; look for work that fits around your class schedule; and if possible, try to find a job that allows you to keep the Sabbath day holy.

Whatever you decide to do for a temporary job, make certain that as you prepare for a career, you plan to be the very best you can be. You may be somewhat apprehensive about the stability of the economy or the availability of jobs in your chosen profession. Remember, there is always room at the top. If you are the best there is, there will be a position for you. Whether you are a plumber or a professor, if you are good at what you do, there will always be a demand for your skills. If you know how to work, you can always find work. With the drive and initiative you developed on your mission, you may very well find that going into business for yourself is the direction you want to go.

If the world seems like a scary place to you right now and you are considering just waiting around until after the Second Coming, I would suggest you do just the opposite. In Matthew 24:46, the Savior lets us know what we ought to be doing: "Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing." This is not the day for the faint-hearted or the weak-kneed. We should use good common sense and be willing to take counsel from those who have gone before, but move ahead we must. Those who will be honored with millennial responsibility will be the doers, not the talkers.

If after following all the above counsel you still are struggling to find meaningful employment, try going through the ward employment specialist or LDS Employment Services. Sign up at a temporary service agency. Be aware, however, that the majority of the good jobs are not advertised. Let influential members of your ward and stake know that you are available. The more people who know you are looking for a job, the more likely you are to find a good job. Sometimes it really is who you know, rather than what you know, that makes the difference. Ask for Heavenly Father's help in finding a job, but then don't just sit there hoping something comes your way. We need to be "anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of [our] own free will" (D&C 58:27) before we can expect the Lord to intervene for us.

Above all, do not be discouraged. The greatest blessings were all hidden in the second mile in the mission field; so it is with employment. The best jobs are always found on the last extra contact that is made when the other people have long since quit looking.
