Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

17

Intellectual Balancing Act

There are many reports in the media about how "Mormon intellectuals" are being singled out for persecution. The longer you are around them and the more you hear their arguments, the more you are convinced that they are neither "Mormon" nor "intellectual." That may sound rather harsh, so let me explain. When you hear the word Catholic, you probably imagine a person who holds to a certain set of beliefs. If that person deviates far from his belief system, you would call him a so-called Catholic, thus warning others that he calls himself Catholic but does not fall within the mainstream of Catholic belief. So it is with so-called Mormons who would seek refuge under the umbrella of Mormon theology but who differ significantly so as to be called into question because of their beliefs.

The dictionary would define "intellectuals" as those who "show high intelligence" in their ability to reason and understand truth (see Webster's New World Dictionary). When humans attempt to dictate how God is to officiate in his affairs with his children, they are hardly demonstrating "high intelligence."

As early as March 1914, President Joseph F. Smith warned of three dangers we would face in the latter days: "There are at least three dangers that threaten the Church within, and the authorities need to awaken to the fact that the people should be warned unceasingly against them. As I see these, they are flattery of prominent men in the world, false educational ideas, and sexual impurity" (Gospel Doctrine [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1975], 312-13). It is impossible to live in the closing years of the twentieth century and not realize how prophetic President Smith's warnings were.

Having been involved in higher education during the decades of the sixties, seventies, eighties, and nineties, both as a student and as a teacher, I find it easy to see how a person can get caught up in how much mankind knows until we see how truly little we understand. A prominent child psychologist who during the sixties taught parents one method of child discipline later reversed himself and admitted that he had been mistaken. What about the generation of parents who relied upon his "expert advice" in rearing their children? No second chances for them. No "Oops, I guess I was wrong!" would undo the damage of the well-intended but misdirected advice of one "expert."

Your quest for facts and information today is no different. In the nineties we are hearing loud, blatant voices demanding changes in traditional gender roles, protection for those of an alternate sexual orientation, and the right to choose whether unborn children live or die. All of the intellectual dueling in the world will not replace the clear words from the Lord through his living prophets. Those who have ears tuned to the words of the prophets will avoid mistakes that bring devastating consequences.

Does the Church really repress free thought as the dissidents say it does? In all my academic studies, I have never been inhibited in my freedom of thought and expression. What of all the media coverage suggesting Church persecution of "intellectuals"? Look at what is being said: "Give women the priesthood," for instance. In other words, "Dear God, you just don't understand what is best for your children. We here on earth with our unlimited understanding of the past and our clear vision of the future have determined that you are wrong and need to get into line!" It seems strange to call someone with that mentality "intellectual." Or perhaps another thought: "The Church needs to join the modern world and lift the stigma of sin from those who have chosen an 'alternate sexual orientation.'" That could be interpreted as saying, "Dear God, again you fail to understand. Although you created us, and although your sole objective is to get us back into the celestial kingdom, you need to loosen up on this issue. We know that anciently death was the prescribed punishment for homosexuality, but we're more enlightened now. We don't just want tolerance—we want full acceptance of homosexual couples. Perhaps you need to rethink the issues of marriage and family too."

My intent is not to mock those who so believe but to show how out of focus their arguments are when addressed to the Lawgiver. To dictate to God how he should act and what he should decide does not suggest a great deal of intellectualism to me.

Is it possible to get an education while being constantly bombarded with philosophies like these and still come away with your testimony intact? Yes, definitely. It is not until we as human beings come to think that we can replace God as the mastermind of the universe that our thinking commands center stage. We should have enough sense and humility to admit, as did the Prophet Joseph Smith, that "whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although we may not see the reason thereof till long after the events transpire." The Prophet continued, "He never will institute an ordinance or give a commandment to His people that is not calculated in its nature to promote that happiness which He has designed, and which will not end in the greatest amount of good and glory to those who become the recipients of his law and ordinances. Blessings offered, but rejected, are no longer blessings, but become like the talent hid in the earth by the wicked and slothful servant" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 256-57).

As you continue your schooling, keep your eye on the prophets. A daily reading from the pages of the book designated as "the most correct of any book on earth"—the Book of Mormon (see introduction, Book of Mormon)—will keep you from straying too far afield.

One spiritually fatal flaw of intellectuals is the compulsion to try to make the gospel fit or conform to the philosophies of men. If the gospel seems to be at variance with the most recent teachings of the scholars, intellectuals want to adjust the gospel. A more valid response would be to question the modern philosophy. Most of what I was taught as "truth" in the sixties has been reversed or discarded as "folklore" in the nineties. I would venture that such will be the case in the future. Any philosophy that contradicts the gospel will eventually be found to be in error.

There are many things we do not yet understand. In fact, the Lord explains that some things we just won't understand until he comes to usher in the Millennium. "In that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal all things—things which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof—things most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven" (D&C 101:32-34). It has become much easier in my older years to admit that I don't know the answers to all the questions. In fact, I am consoled to know that I don't even know all the questions. But as you learned on your mission, just because a nineteen-year-old or twenty-one-year-old missionary doesn't know the answer certainly does not mean there isn't an answer. So it is apparent that just because limited mankind does not know the answer to any given question, that certainly does not suggest that there isn't a God in heaven who knows the answers to all of the questions. Is there divine reason why the priesthood has not been given to women? Yes, and God knows the reason and it is correct.

There are so many areas of knowledge and understanding that will require our best effort that it seems ridiculous to spend our time and energy arguing with God about things that are not negotiable. Learning how to ask the right questions is a key to increased understanding. Learning to work within our God-imposed limits is learning not to be stifled but to be freed to spend all our energy in areas that will produce vital understanding. What a terrible loss to the Church and to mankind in general when those of high intellect choose to become adversaries to God. What wonderful revelations and understanding does God have in store for us when we redirect our efforts to discovering his will for us rather than dictating what his will toward us should be.

The Prophet Joseph Smith gave this solemn warning to the Church:

O ye Twelve! and all Saints! profit by this important Key—that in all your trials, troubles, temptations, afflictions, bonds, imprisonments and death, see to it, that you do not betray heaven; that you do not betray Jesus Christ; that you do not betray the brethren; that you do not betray the revelations of God, whether in [the] Bible, Book of Mormon, or Doctrine and Covenants, or any other that ever was or ever will be given and revealed unto man in this world or that which is to come. Yea, in all your kicking and flounderings, see to it that you do not this thing, lest innocent blood be found upon your skirts, and you go down to hell. All other sins are not to be compared to sinning against the Holy Ghost, and proving a traitor to the brethren. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 156)

This is not a day for weak intellect or for people who do not know how to think for themselves; it is a day to hold tightly to the living prophets and to soar to unprecedented heights both intellectually and spiritually.
