Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

18

Finding the Right One

Near the top of the list of concerns for every missionary about to return home is the concern over finding the "right one." Let's start by asking a vital question: "Is there a one and only one for me?" President Kimball said, "'Soulmates' are fiction and an illusion; and while every young man and young woman will seek with all diligence and prayerfulness to find a mate with whom life can be most compatible and beautiful, yet it is certain that almost any good man and any good woman can have happiness and a successful marriage if both are willing to pay the price" (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], 306).

Indeed, God, who knows the end from the beginning, knows exactly who we will marry. But since the Lord will probably not send an angel to tell us directly, we will be safest in taking President Kimball's approach. If we view every person of the opposite sex as a possible candidate for marriage, we will keep our eyes open and we won't miss the opportunity for a successful marriage when the right one does come along.

By far the better quest than trying to find the right one would be our never-ending quest to be the right one! There is a principle of the gospel that will help us in our search for a spouse. It is that "likes attract"! Note what the Lord said in Doctrine and Covenants 88:40: "For intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence; wisdom receiveth wisdom; truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light; mercy hath compassion on mercy and claimeth her own; justice continueth its course and claimeth its own; judgment goeth before the face of him who sitteth upon the throne and governeth and executeth all things."

If you want to attract a spiritual spouse, be a spiritual person yourself! If you want someone who is interested in scholarly pursuits, be interested in scholarly things yourself. The rest is easy.

Is it possible that someone with lesser spirituality or intellect or whatever will be attracted to you? Yes, but you probably won't be that interested in them, especially after you have gotten well acquainted with them! Is it also possible that you will be attracted to someone of greater spirituality or intellect than yourself? Yes, but again, don't be surprised if they do not show a sustained interest in you! When you find a person you are really attracted to, and they are attracted to you, when you see that you bring out the best in each other, when you want to excel and they do too, then you have a person whose name you should consider taking to the temple in humble prayer.

Too often the attitude among returned missionaries is "Oh, the Lord will provide!" That is a noble thought, but it demonstrates the same lack of understanding that Oliver Cowdery showed in the early days of the Church. The Lord reprimanded him by saying, "Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you [in your case today, tell you who your mate should be!], when you took no thought save it was to ask me. But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind [make your own preliminary decision!]; then you must ask me if it be right [you can't ask if you haven't decided!], and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right. But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong" (D&C 9:7-9; bracketed notes added).

Finding an eternal companion is one of the most challenging and rewarding searches you will ever make. Don't be eager to shift the responsibility onto someone else. You—not Mom or Dad or even God—must live with that person for the rest of mortality and throughout eternity. It seems only right that you should make the choice of the person you will live with forever.

The soaring divorce rate worldwide has not altogether missed the Church. Keep this idea in mind: You marry who you date! If you don't think you'd like to marry a person, don't date him or her. You may say, "Oh, this is just a fun date." When you return from your mission, your focus needs to be different. Dates are still fun, but there is also a serious side to them. Before, you may have felt you could date anyone you wanted to because there was always that buffer, "I can't get serious because I'm going on a mission." We caution returning missionaries to date only those who are worthy to go to the temple. You can never guarantee where a relationship will lead. It may just be a casual date, but continued, close associations encourage feelings that are painful to extinguish once they are kindled. Dating someone with the idea of reactivating him or her sounds noble but is very dangerous. The apostle Paul gave this timely advice: "Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for what fellow ship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness?" (2 Corinthians 6:14).

Take your relationship slowly. Eternity is a long time to build on a foundation of a couple of weeks. It is alarming to see how many returned missionaries meet, date, become engaged, and marry before the missionary has had a chance to assimilate. Relationships go more smoothly when there are not too many big surprises. Take your time and get acquainted before you get married! Just as you're wary of the high-pressure salesman who has to know "right now" or the deal is off, so, too, you should proceed slowly with the potential mate who has to know "right now" whether you will marry him or her. Love can and does wait. If a deal is a good deal today, it will be a good deal tomorrow. Avoid making hasty decisions.

Part of the fun of the courting process is to do enough things together that you see your potential mate in a wide variety of social situations. How do they act in Church or in spiritual situations? How do they handle various social situations that normally face couples? How do they interact with your family and friends? How do they react to stress? What are they like early in the morning? How do they act when they are exhausted? What is their reaction in a crisis or an emergency? How do they act on the basketball court or during a sporting event? These are all considerations that require time and experiences together to find the answers. To ask potential mates how they would act in a given situation is a poor substitute for observing the real experience.

Once you have found someone you are seriously considering as a mate, it would be wise to do a "celestial courtship" activity or two. By that I mean a date that goes from early morning to late night. Pick up your date at four or five o'clock in the morning. Go to the temple to participate in doing baptisms for the dead (remember that both of you need recommends in order to do this; if your date has not yet been through the temple, he or she will need to meet with the bishop and stake president in advance to obtain the necessary recommend). If both of you have been through the temple, go through an early-morning temple session together. Or drive somewhere scenic (perhaps a busy public campground or beach) where you can watch a sunrise together, cook breakfast over an open fire, and then hike, play tag, or sightsee until noon. Cook lunch over a fire or prepare lunch from ingredients you purchase together at a grocery store. At about 2:00 p.m. go home for one hour to get ready for the rest of the date. Meet again at 3:00 p.m. and tour a museum or art gallery. Eat at a nice restaurant. Go dancing or to a performance. At about midnight, return home. By that time the small talk is over, the facades are gone, and the real you is showing through. Because of the obvious dangers of being together too long, reserve this date for a time just before the final decision is made, and spend your day together in public places, not in solitude.

Now go back to your separate homes and evaluate the experience. Be honest. If you see no faults in your date, you aren't looking far enough. That doesn't mean you have to pick the other person apart; it just means that being aware of areas of potential conflict helps you make a more informed decision.

There is a game my future wife and I discovered by chance when we were dating that took some of the surprise out of marriage. We called it the "open-ended statement game." Because knowledge is power, we strongly suggest that you not play this game until you're sure you are getting mar ried. It is simple to play. Taking turns, one person starts a statement, and the other must complete it honestly. During our courtship, we would drive from Logan to Salt Lake City (about a ninety-minute drive) and play the game all the way down and all the way back.

Some examples of these statements are the following: "My favorite color is . . ."; "The time of day I dislike most is . . ."; "My favorite food is . . ."; "The one food I dislike most is . . ."; "The ideal number of children in a family is . . ."; and "I think it's important to teach children to . . ." You get the idea. You will no doubt discover hundreds of statements for you and your partner to complete.

My wife and I had a great time playing that game before we were married. There was only one major surprise for her. She never found out what time I got up every morning. Because of work, school, and other responsibilities, I would get up about 4:00 a.m. She planned to be the ideal bride and get up before I did, cook breakfast, then wake me. On that first morning I got up at four. So much for her plan! We've laughed about that oversight for years. Playing this game, however, did minimize the number of surprises in our relationship. I hope you can see why you wouldn't use this technique with everyone you date. It would be tough to know more about someone else's spouse than he or she knows!
