Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

21

A Time to Be Tested in All Things

Marriage is a wonderful thing. Unfortunately, too many people enter into it with unrealistic expectations. As with your mission, if you know what to expect, you will not be overwhelmed or surprised. If you have not been realistic, you are in for the shock of your life. Marriage poses the ultimate challenge. The following rather humorous account from Elder A. Theodore Tuttle of the Seventy has helped many couples put their problems into a more eternal perspective:

After marriage in the temple, then what? I do not want to be misunderstood about this statement, but I want to say this: Temple marriage does not guarantee either success or happiness. It does not guarantee either success or happiness because these you must earn. The incident is told of a young couple married by President Stephen L Richards. After the ceremony, he said, "Well, now, young folks, you are at the end of your troubles!" So they went out happily into the world. After a few months of meeting some of the vicissitudes of life and having some problems they came back to see him and reported, "President Richards, we are having some troubles. I thought you told us that we were at the end of our troubles."

He said, "I did, my dears. I just didn't tell you which end." (Becoming Goodly Parents, Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year [Provo, December 12, 1967], 7)

Nobody gets married with the idea of living in misery. Are we missing some gem of understanding that could put marital trials into a more eternal perspective?

Life seems to be like balancing on a tightrope. It is easy to fall off either side. In marriage, one of those tightropes is recognizing and solving problems. We can deny that problems exist until they become so overwhelming that the cumulative package is too big to handle and our marriage falls apart. On the other side of the rope are the couples who criticize every fault, every difference, and every mistake. Tender feelings are hurt, confidences are shattered, and love is replaced by resentment, hatred, and finally divorce. Is anyone living happily ever after? Sure they are, but not by living in a make-believe world. The world has such a poor track record that turning to worldly sources for advice on living happily ever after is not helpful. Where do we look for solutions that really work?

Watching couples solve normal day-to-day problems, some successfully and some not, has caused me to look at the gospel to see if answers exist. They do! They may not be simple but they do work. The following will not represent an exhaustive list, but it is a starting place to solving problems.

Every young couple approaching marriage will come from two different backgrounds. How each of their parents did things will have a powerful impact on how they decide to handle problems. Some children will want to do things just like their parents because the parents were so successful. Some children will insist that they will never do things the way their parents did. The irony is that unless they establish their own way of dealing with problems, they will automatically default to the only way they know (their parents' way) when they experience similar situations. If you want to change your approach to disciplining children, spending money, solving personal differences, or a thousand other situations, establish the ground rules.

The Lord knows how important it is to establish a house. In the section of the Doctrine and Covenants entitled by the Prophet Joseph Smith "'the olive leaf. . . plucked from the Tree of Paradise, the Lord's message of peace to us'" (D&C 88, preface), the Lord instructs, "Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing; and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God" (v. 119). Isn't it interesting that the Prophet called this great revelation "the Lord's message of peace to us." If we haven't taken time to establish our house, then it shouldn't be surprising to us that we forfeit the promised blessing of peace.

How does one go about establishing the ground rules? In that same revelation the Lord gave some guidelines that could prove helpful. The first is timing. The Lord warns in verse 124 to "retire to thy bed early, that ye may not be weary." Usually, the times when we argue with our spouse or our brothers and sisters are when we are weary and not in control. Often feelings are hurt and relationships are strained because we insist on disobeying the Lord's counsel in this matter.

Verse 124 continues with a second guideline: "Arise early, that your . . . minds may be invigorated." We are much less likely to lose control after a good night's sleep. Many parents go to bed after painful, late-night confrontations with their teenagers, wishing that they had kept quiet until morning. Instead of helping the situation, the "let's get to the bottom of this" session turns into a fiasco. Likewise, many marriages are weakened because checkbooks must be balanced, perceived offenses must be talked through, and decisions must be made after reason and resistance have gone to bed.

A third suggestion is inferred from the confrontation between Nephi and his older brothers after Laman's abortive attempt to obtain the brass plates. Laman and Lemuel were always focusing on the problem—even after being reprimanded by an angel. In stark contrast, Nephi faced the same seemingly impossible objective, but after analyzing the situation, he immediately turned his attention to possible solutions. It is important to focus on the problem long enough to define it. Then leave it alone and start working on solutions. Before long the air of depression (see 1 Nephi 3:14) turns into the spirit of optimism (see 1 Nephi 4:1-3).

A fourth suggestion comes also from the above story. Attack the problem and not the person. Immediately upon failing to obtain the plates by purchasing them (Nephi's proposed solution), Laman and Lemuel turned on their younger brothers to vent their frustration. It must have been a rather severe beating they were giving Sam and Nephi, because divine intervention was required to save their lives (see 1 Nephi 3:28-30). Very often in solving marital difficulties, we attack our partner rather than the problem. Since marriage encourages us to become no longer "twain" but to be "one flesh" (Matt. 19:5), to hurt our mate is equivalent to hurting ourselves—something only the seriously troubled do.

Instead of name calling and personal attacks, talk about how you feel when your partner does certain things or speaks in a certain way. When you focus on the way something makes you feel, a discussion can turn positive as you discover possible solutions: (1) your partner can change the behavior that makes you feel bad, or (2) you can alter your reaction to the behavior or situation. Maybe there isn't a right or wrong but rather a difference in personal preference. A little understanding can defuse an explosive situation and cause reason to return.

A fifth suggestion is modeled for us by the Lord in his rebuke of Joseph Smith and the early Brethren for not building the Kirtland Temple (see D&C 95). This entire section of the Doctrine and Covenants is worthy of careful investigation, especially when it is applied to correcting children. The point is that the Lord doesn't leave the Brethren wondering what they have done to offend. He spells it out plainly so they cannot misunderstand. In verse 3 the Lord explains, "For ye have sinned against me a very grievous sin, in that . . ." Too often couples make the marriage-threatening mistake of saying, "I know what you are thinking." Since the Lord clearly stated that "there is none else save God that knowest thy thoughts and the intents of thy heart" (D&C 6:16), perhaps we would be wise to default to a very simple solution to the problem. If you want to know, ask! It seems so simple to just find out firsthand what a person is thinking or what he or she intended by a particular comment. This requires honesty, but if there isn't trust and honesty between marriage partners, immediate and more serious help is needed than can be given in a book. A simple "What are you thinking?" or "This is what I think I heard you say; is that what you intended?" will eliminate most misunderstandings.

As a young boy I lived with some dear friends at Mapusaga, American Samoa. The only road that led to Pago Pago (the main city) was really a series of connected potholes. The buses that traveled the road were constantly broken down. Riding to town was a grueling experience, physically torturous. One day my friend and I climbed the Mapusaga Rainmaker, which towers fifteen hundred feet above the road. From atop the mountain, the road seemed to have direction and purpose. The potholes were unnoticeable. The jostling and lurching of the buses were not evident from our vantage point. I gained a new appreciation for the trials of life from that road. When viewed from a distance, things that seem difficult take on a whole new meaning. The same is true in marriage.

The graphics programs I use on the computer have a "zoom out" feature that enables the user to get a broader picture of the page on which he or she is working. We can apply the same principle to enhance our marriages. It's a good idea to set a time each week when, as a couple, we can "zoom out" and see our trials in a broader perspective. The Lord used that technique with the Prophet Joseph Smith, who had been inhumanely imprisoned for many months. A discouraged Joseph asked the Lord for a little insight. Two glorious revelations given as "answers to prayers" (D&C 121, 122) put all the persecutions, deprivations, imprisonments, and sufferings into eternal perspective: "Know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good" (D&C 122:7).

The pain and suffering of pregnancy and childbirth for both the prospective mother and prospective father would be unjustifiable unless considered in the larger perspective of the joy of holding a precious, new baby. Why would anyone go through that a second, third, or seventh time? We wouldn't unless we could "zoom out" and see that the joys greatly outweigh the pain. Marital challenges can be viewed the same way. Why do people go through all the trouble? When viewed through an eternal perspective, the pain and inconvenience seem insignificant. Paul tried to teach the ultimate worth of enduring problems by stating, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him" (1 Corinthians 2:9).

Perhaps another example will clarify the principle. Have you ever been in a cave and had your flashlight go out? I have, and it is dark. In fact, it is so dark that no matter how close you hold your hand to your face, you can't even see the outline of your hand. I remember fiddling with the flashlight to no avail. In frustration I focused the unseen, darkened flashlight into my face and struck it with my hand. The connection was made and on came the light. There was just one small problem. Now the light that was intended to lead me and others to the safety of the cave's mouth by illuminating the rocks, obstacles, and pitfalls was shining directly in my eyes. Gone was my night vision. In the brief second I looked directly into the light, I had complicated my assigned task (leading others to safety) by an action that I thought would help—but it didn't. It took some time before my vision was restored so that I could see clearly again.

Isn't that what happens when we dwell on our own problems? We become so bogged down that we lose hope of ever solving the problem. Often, when faced with a challenging mathematical problem, I would walk away from my desk for awhile. When I returned, the solution became obvious. My previous mind set had kept me from seeing all the options.

As the Lord tutored the prophet Joseph and others in the proper use of the priesthood, he warned them of two potential pitfalls. Studying this scripture, we learn that we have already qualified to be "called" to receive unlimited blessings. If we fail to be "chosen," it will be because (1) our "hearts are set so much upon the things of this world," or (2) we "aspire to the honors of men." Because our focus is wrong, we fail to learn this one vital lesson, "that the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness" (D&C 121:34-36).

If we are going to maintain power in our priesthood, it can only be done as Christ did it. Unless we lead as he led, love as he loved, and serve as he served, we cannot enjoy the success that he enjoyed. Too often a husband wants to get his own way by insisting that he holds the priesthood—so the wife must obey! A careful reading of Doctrine and Covenants 121:37-43 reveals that we are making a near-fatal spiritual mistake by trying to use the priesthood to force anyone to do anything. Words like persuasion, long-suffering, gentleness, meekness, love unfeigned, kindness, pure knowledge, and without guile typify those Christlike qualities that make marriage a bit of heaven on earth.

If marriage were nothing more than a "battle of the sexes," I suppose couples could turn to worldly counselors for a handbook on how to win the war. If marriage is to be the final preparatory test for eternal life, then turn to the scriptures, the latter-day leaders, and prayer for guidance. I am comforted to know that "the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them" (1 Nephi 3:7). He also commanded us to "live together in love" (D&C 42:45) and to "love one another . . . [and] learn to impart one to another as the gospel requires" (D&C 88:123). What an opportunity and a challenge, as husband and wife, to succeed in the greatest test of all time—the test to become "even as I am" (3 Nephi 27:27).
