Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

22

Intimacy in Marriage

If you are expecting a detailed how-to account of intimacy in marriage, you won't find it in this book. Your doctor can suggest books that explain the mechanics of sex. You may also want to ask your doctor for a marital guide book. They are available at a local pharmacy. In preparing for this book, I surveyed the available books on intimacy at a local bookstore. Few of the books I saw presented human intimacy in a way that was edifying or unifying. Most presented intimacy as an animalistic act between two people of the opposite sex, not as a unique, solidifying act between two eternal companions. (One exceptional discussion of sexual intimacy is Tim and Beverly LaHaye's book The Act of Marriage: The Beauty of Sexual Love [Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan, 1976]. In this manual, the authors, who write from a Christian viewpoint, present detailed information while emphasizing the spiritual aspects of the marital relationship.)

If you turn to the telestial world for answers, you will find only telestial answers. If you want a celestial kind of intimacy, you must look to God and his mortal representatives.

Your understanding of the purpose of life has probably greatly changed in the past year and a half or two years as you have served a mission. Everything has much more significance. A mission should have given you experience in learning to recognize the Spirit and to use it in building, lifting, and blessing the lives of others.

In order to be consistent with the principles of eternal marriage, sexual relations in marriage should be built on spiritual principles. As you taught the gospel to others, you grew together, and you felt an intimate bonding of spirits as you saw people embrace the gospel.

Few people seem to realize it, but sharing spiritual experiences is the most intimate part of marriage. It will bond you to your mate eternally. Yes, the physical part of marriage is important and beautiful, but it is made infinitely more beautiful and more satisfying by the spiritual elements of your love for each other. Those spiritual feelings are based on principles you learned and practiced on your mission.

When you lose yourself in meeting and satisfying the needs of your spouse, you will find a beauty and passion in marriage that far exceeds anything the world can offer. Sexual experiences within the bonds of marriage can lift and strengthen you as a couple. In contrast, the worldly would teach you that your mate is a plaything to satisfy your lusts. This attitude is degrading rather than exalting.

Instead of accepting worldly teachings regarding sex, build your relationship on trust and mutual caring. Christ taught that when we reach out to serve and love others, it is the same as serving him. This is especially true in marriage. As you serve each other with all your heart, might, mind, and strength, you will feel a closeness and beauty in your marriage that will endure through the eternities. The world teaches you to find yourself by satisfying your own needs first. The Lord teaches you to lose yourself in the service of others, for only then will you find yourself. As you lose yourself in loving and caring for your eternal companion and seeing to his or her spiritual, emotional, and physical needs, you will find an intimate beauty that will grow deeper each day of your life. The Spirit will enhance every facet of your life, including the physical as well as the emotional part of your marriage.

When you have the guidance of the Spirit, you are more sensitive to your spouse's wants, needs, and desires. Your ability to communicate those needs to each other is enlarged when you live worthy of the Spirit. When you are able to control your passions before marriage, you build a relationship based on discipline rather than indulgence. Your Father in Heaven blessed you with passions and desires that draw you even closer to the person you love. These are good, godly gifts. When they are used within the bounds God has given, they will build, edify, and enhance self-esteem. When they are abused, they bring guilt, shame, and a lowering of self-esteem.

When my wife and I were married, President Glen Rex told us to always include our Heavenly Father in our marriage. Usually "two is company and three is a crowd," but this is different. "Counsel with the Lord in all thy doings, and he will direct thee for good" (Alma 37:37; emphasis added). This includes seeking a spirit of appropriate tenderness and mutual respect in matters of intimacy. You will have many questions about bringing children into your family, birth control, and what is "normal" and appropriate sex. Counsel with your bishop and with the Lord. I strongly urge you to spend a few dollars on an inexpensive booklet entitled Sensible Sex by Dr. Lindsay R. Curtis (n.p.: Lindsay R. Curtis, M.D., 1992). Doctor Curtis is a faithful LDS doctor with some good, sound, practical advice. In addition, as mentioned earlier, Tim and Beverly LaHaye's book The Act of Marriage can be most helpful for newlyweds.

While you were serving your mission, you probably felt awkward as you first approached people about the gospel. You may have been unsure of yourself because you were communicating with others in ways that were totally new. It's the same in marriage. Even though you love each other dearly, there will be many awkward times as you draw closer to your spouse spiritually, socially, emotionally, and physically. Marriage is a learning process.

You developed certain ways of handling those awkward moments on your mission. Some were productive, and some were not. Sometimes you may have become discouraged or angry with yourself or with companions. Sometimes you laughed at yourself and your weaknesses and dug in with new determination. Was it scary? Yes. Was it hard? Yes. Was it worth it. Yes!

There are a lot of firsts in the first year of marriage. There's a lot of awkwardness in attempting new things. There will be some frustrating times as you try to forge an eternal and lasting partnership.

The scriptures and the guidelines given by modern-day prophets should be the standard by which you judge all truth. Correct information helps you make choices in every aspect of your life. Make sure the information you receive from the world isn't in conflict with what the Spirit, the scriptures, and the Brethren tell you is right. The Lord has said he will tell you in your mind and your heart what is correct, so that you will not be deceived (see D&C 8:2-3).

The intimate part of marriage is sacred. Sexual powers come with a sacred trust from our Heavenly Father. These powers are used to create life and to draw man and woman into a oneness of body and spirit. These powers should be guarded carefully and only used within the guidelines the Lord has set. As you look around the world, think how many problems would not exist if the world would just listen to the directives our Heavenly Father has given on being morally clean. His commandments are given to bless us, not to inhibit our happiness. When we control our passions, we feel a sense of peace and well-being.

When we use our passions to bless our marriage rather than just to satisfy our physical wants, we build a unity and love and passion that the world can't duplicate because that feeling is enhanced by the Spirit and blessed by our Father in Heaven.

When you come together as husband and wife, having controlled your passions before marriage, you come with a greater trust for each another. You build confidence and self-esteem by controlling those sacred powers entrusted to you. The opposite is also true. When you misuse or abuse those powers before marriage, you lose trust and confidence in each other.

The Lord never would have commanded us to control our passions before marriage if he didn't believe we could. He has more faith in us than the world does and many times more than we have in ourselves. Parents and priesthood leaders can be a big help as we struggle to control our passions or to repent of past moral transgressions. Listen to the timely advice of trusted leaders.

There are many things in marriage that will require patience, humor, and understanding as you "become one flesh." Laugh together as you learn together. Probably in no other area of marriage is communication more useful than in learning about physical intimacy together. Be willing to openly and honestly express how you feel, what you like and don't like, what brings the Spirit, and what seems cheap and dirty.

Expect an adjustment period. It is not reasonable to believe that a lifetime of being warned against expressing your sexual feelings can be dismissed with a single ceremony in the temple. Be patient with each other. Time and experience will likely solve your problems.

Before marriage, it would be wise for both of you to have a complete physical examination. If there are physical problems, knowing about them can reduce tension after marriage as you both understand the limitations involved. The examination will also put your mind at ease concerning possible health-related problems. Sometimes a minor medical procedure is required to correct physiological difficulties that may otherwise impair sexual functioning. Usually that is not necessary. Like all other areas of marriage, the area of sexual intimacy is better if there are not so many surprises. I don't mean, however, that premarital sexual experience is in any way desirable. On the contrary, total innocence on your marriage night is probably the greatest compliment you can pay to your spouse.

Although physical intimacy is a very important part of married life, it (by itself) is not sufficient to hold your marriage together. Sharing intimate experiences spiritually, socially, and intellectually as well as physically makes you a well-rounded couple.

Be cautious about discussing your intimate experiences with others. Too often people compare notes. What a total betrayal of the confidence and purity of your spouse! Safeguard your intimate experiences with your eternal companion. Read the scriptures or listen to the modern prophets. Since we are to use them as a pattern for our behavior, we should talk outside of marriage about as often as they do concerning intimate affairs. In case you haven't noticed—that is almost never. If you need counsel, talk to your bishop or family physician; but don't chat with friends and acquaintances about these intimate matters.

Like every other part of married life, the sexual aspect of marriage needs to be brought into proper focus. Sex isn't everything, but it is important, and it is divinely approved. This very power rightfully causes us to refer to God as our Father in Heaven. Even—or perhaps especially—in the area of physical intimacy, you will want to conduct yourselves in ways that allow you to have the Spirit as a constant companion.
