Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

23

Conflict Resolution

In a preceding chapter we mentioned that tests and trials were an expected and normal part of marriage. Your attitude toward problems and your willingness to solve problems are of far greater importance than the problems you face. In the mission field you regularly held a problem-solving session with your companion. These "companionship inventories" were held to evaluate both the positive areas of your work together and the areas that needed attention. In marriage, since transfers are not desirable or anticipated, inventories become even more crucial. Many couples live together in an environment of increasing tension and distrust. Problems arise, but rather than addressing them, they choose to ignore them. However, because trials are actually necessary for our eventual exaltation, they will not disappear.

Before you are married, sit down and decide on a regular time to meet to resolve problems. As mentioned before, don't try to solve problems late at night or when one or both of you are mentally fatigued or angry. Set a time when you are fresh and the world looks manageable. In an interview with President David O. McKay and his wife of many years, Emma Rae, I learned one of the greatest lessons of my life. The person who was interviewing the McKays had apparently had a disagreement with his wife, and he was obviously irritated. The interview went something like this: Interviewer: "President McKay, you have what some would call a picture-perfect marriage. How often do you and Sister McKay fight?" President McKay: "Young man, we never fight!" In a voice that reflected disbelief, the interviewer asked: "Would you mind telling our audience how you keep from fighting?" President McKay turned to Sister McKay and said, "Emma, why don't you tell him?" She responded, "I will, David," then said, "We just decided that we won't get angry at the same time." By this time the interviewer had recovered somewhat, and he asked, "Well, what if you do get angry at the same time?" Sister McKay patted President McKay on the hand and said, "David, why don't you tell him?" President McKay said, "I will, Emma," and he then said: "If we ever get angry at the same time, we have agreed that I would go for a walk! And young man, I have spent a lot of nights out walking!"

Here was a key. A prophet of God telling me, a prospective husband, how to keep peace in the home. At that time I was majoring in psychology, and the theory of the day was that to walk away from an argument in marriage demonstrated a lack of true love. I had a choice to make: follow a living prophet or heed the philosophies of the day. The choice for me was easy—follow the prophet.

On several occasions I have found myself heading out the front door to get things into proper perspective. I don't know why, but when this happens it is always late at night, forty degrees below zero, and I have no coat. It only takes me a second to say to myself, "This is stupid. If I am mature enough to be married, surely I can be adult enough to reason this difference through." I return to find my beautiful wife also willing to talk through our differences.

If you are willing to make the commitment and the subsequent investment of willpower, you can go throughout your married life without arguing. Does that mean you will never disagree? Certainly not. You will likely disagree many times, but you will not attack each other—you will attack the problem.

Over a lifetime of observation and counseling, I've noticed that usually one partner is willing to ignore problems in an effort to keep peace and harmony and avoid confrontation. While it is true that couples should be willing to overlook minor differences, if the problems begin to fester and grow, they need to be resolved. Living together in the spirit of love requires a willingness to put aside pride and condemnation and a commitment to work together as a team to solve the problem.

Some of the factors that make for successful "companionship inventories" are seemingly insignificant but are very helpful to a smooth relationship. When you have your session, sit together on a sofa or at ninety-degree angles from each other at the table. Figuratively set the problem or the issue on the table in front of you. If you sit opposite each other and shoot at the issue, but miss, you hit your spouse! That is not good. We have found something therapeutic about going for a walk during the problem-solving session. The fact that we are moving in the same direction seems to get us on the same team. Whatever works best for you is fine, but if you find yourselves accusing each other or beginning to argue rather than discuss, check your positioning. And resolve to close your mouths just for a minute, until you regain control of what you are saying.

Have a set time for your sessions. Right after church on Sunday seems to be a good time for us. You are coming from a spiritual experience and are generally thinking in terms of the gospel. If another time encourages the spirit of cooperation, use it. Even if you don't have anything major to solve, hold the inventory anyway. That way, these problem-solving sessions don't become something to dread but something to look forward to.

Start with the positive. If you can't find anything that is going right in your relationship, you are not being honest. It might just be something minor, like "I really appreciate your willingness to put your dirty clothes in the hamper," or "It makes life much easier for me now that you make the bed every morning." Your inventories will probably consist of mostly positive things. It is not only okay but essential that you emphasize the positive and express your gratitude and appreciation.

During your inventory, select just two or three things to work on. If you identify a long list of needed corrections, your spouse may get the idea that things are actually worse than he or she thought. You have an eternity to work on your relationship. You come from different backgrounds; don't be surprised if the little things are the ones that become the real irritants. Almost always, the things that cause the tension are not the big issues but the little habits we have. Squeezing the toothpaste in the middle rather than at the end, deciding whether the toilet paper rolls over the top of the holder or out from the bottom, making the bed with the pillows under the bedspread or on the top, and closing the closet doors rather than leaving them open—all these are items mentioned by couples as areas of conflict. They sound pretty petty, but to the people involved these things were important.

After you have decided on the two or three items that you want to address, immediately go on to the "solution" part of the session. Once both of you understand fully what the problem is, start making a list of possible solutions. If you can only come up with one, you are not being very creative. For those who have just realized that the honeymoon is over, the first solution is usually that the other spouse change.

All of the skills you developed in the mission field—including negotiation, compromise, arbitration, and mediation—come into play at this time. Be willing to resolve concerns, view the problem from your spouse's perspective, and make concessions. When you come to a decision, make sure it is a mutual agreement and not just your spouse giving in to preserve peace. We resisted the concept of force in the pre-earth life, and we still resent and resist being forced down here on earth. If you're the husband, using your priesthood to "get your way" is one of the quickest and surest ways of losing power in your priesthood. Reread Doctrine and Covenants 121:34-42 and you will be impressed that force does not describe how the priesthood is to be used.

If you constantly remind yourselves that you are on the same team, these sessions will not degenerate into a power struggle or an argument. If necessary, stop during your companionship inventory and reaffirm that you are both on the same team. If one person gets defensive or argumentative, then consider postponing the session. Remember the admonition of the Savior to the Nephites:

And there shall be no disputations among you, as there have hitherto been; neither shall there be disputations among you concerning the points of my doctrine, as there have hitherto been.

For verily, verily I say unto you, he that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another.

Behold, this is not my doctrine, to stir up the hearts of men with anger, one against another; but this is my doctrine, that such things should be done away. (3 Nephi 11:28-30)

As you mutually decide how to solve the problem, agree upon a time to check your progress, maybe during the next session. You may decide to periodically check up on the progress you make, but if you don't follow up, it is too easy to make empty promises without resolving the problem.

If all you do is accuse your spouse of things he or she is doing wrong, you are approaching the inventory in the wrong way. If you want to describe problems, try expressing them in terms of how they make you feel: for example, "When you leave the lid off the toothpaste it frustrates me because the glob comes out and toothpaste sprays all over the bathroom." As you describe your reaction, it alerts your spouse to something he or she may not have been aware of. A loving spouse will at least consider how his or her behavior affects you.

If you are not constantly working on being on the same team, it is easy to become adversaries. As you joke with each other, you may find that you are not entirely sure your spouse is joking. Unfortunately, this creates a vicious circle: Just in case she may be insulting you a little, you decide to throw in a barb. Then she isn't sure you are just kidding, so she sharpens her barb a little. Before long, feelings are hurt, the spirit of love is replaced by feelings of resentment, and what started out as fun has turned into a fiasco. Let your spouse know when your feelings are being hurt. You might say, "What you just said really hurt my feelings. Can you help me understand what you meant?" That puts the issue on the table and allows you both to stop and consider the direction of your verbal exchange. If you discover that you don't want that kind of relationship, it is easy to correct at that point. If you continue on to the end of a verbal duel, soon neither of you will be talking rationally enough to recover the ground you have lost.

In sports when you need a break to regroup and fine-tune your strategy, you call for a time-out. That is also a good practice in marriage. When you need a little room to calm down, put things into perspective, and get control of your attitude, call for a time-out. If you have agreed before you are married to honor that time-out sign, it will be a small issue to back off and consider what has caused the feelings. If you give the time-out sign, don't just forget what you called time-out for. If you need an hour or so to cool down, then that hour should be used to pray, meditate, study scriptures, list your feelings, and figure out how to solve the problem. If your spouse is doing the same thing, you will find that after the time-out period, the solution to the problem is obvious and fairly easy to implement.

It is doubtful that any serious-minded person believes that arguing, bickering, and fighting exist in the celestial kingdom. Sometime before we are welcome there, we must learn how to resolve our differences in a godly way. Isn't now as good a time as any?
