Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

25

Plan for the Future or Default to the Past

Do you want to discipline your children the way you were disciplined? Are your memories of holidays what you hope they will be for your children? Did your parents solve problems in a way that you want to duplicate in your marriage? These are questions without right or wrong answers, but they still need to be answered.

One young mother who sought my counsel was in tears and was very frustrated. She said something like, "I hated the way my mom disciplined us. I vowed that if I ever had children, I would never treat them like that! Now here I am with my four little children and I catch myself disciplining them the same way my mother did. What is wrong with me?" There wasn't anything wrong with her. She had just completed half of the formula for breaking an undesirable cycle. She had resolved what not to do.

The other half of the formula is not any more difficult, but unless you understand the process, you will likely not be successful in changing. The second part involves deter-mining what you will do. This young mother and I had a lengthy discussion, and she left with some definite plans on how to handle frustrating situations. By deciding how to act in given situations, you too can enjoy the success that comes when you take control of your life.

You may be fortunate enough to have been raised in a home where generations of gospel living demonstrated correct principles which, when lived, have paid high dividends. Traditions are well established, procedures for coping with problems are firmly in place and are based on gospel principles, and success in marriage seems as easy as mimicking your parents. However, your parents grew up in a generation considerably different from yours. Although principles never change, your reaction to current problems will require ingenuity.

More typical are the young couples who have decided that now is a wonderful time to make a break with the old, unproductive ways and start establishing a life for themselves on a higher plane. How is it done? The same way you made changes on your mission. First, identify the things you want to change. Identify what in particular you do not like about what your parents have done. One easy example might be "We don't like the way our parents yelled at us." Now think of as many alternate methods as you can to eliminate the problem.

One enterprising couple confided that they would speak quietly to their children rather than yell. The more frustrated they were, the quieter they would speak. The children learned early that if Mom and Dad went quiet, they had better reevaluate their behavior. They used a swat on the hind pocket only to get the attention of the child. They had established a system of punishments that matched the violations. They had done a lot of homework, and although their system needed constant modification and refinement, it was working very well for them.

Different methods are required for different children. Not all children respond to the same kind of discipline.

You have probably heard of counting to ten before saying anything. That is just another tactic to help you be in control before you speak or act.

As in everything else, the Lord set the best example in how to discipline. As I have studied Doctrine and Covenants section 95, where the Lord disciplines Joseph Smith and the early brethren for not building the Kirtland Temple quickly enough, I have discovered six principles of godly discipline that have helped me in dealing with my own family.

The Lord begins by addressing "you whom I love," then adds, "and whom I love I also chasten." The first principle and controlling factor in discipline is the spirit in which it is given. If you can't discipline in love, don't discipline! This principle is so important that parents would do well to remind themselves of it every time they consider disciplining a child.

Several years ago, when two of our little boys were upstairs in the family room fighting, my wife came into the living room, where I was reading the newspaper, and asked if I would attend to the fight between the boys. I assured her that I would. I had already tried several times to go upstairs, but each time I felt anger; I knew I was not going in the spirit of love. I returned to my newspaper, not to read or even look at the words, but to pray and get the proper spirit so I could help the boys.

The second principle is also found in the first verse: "I also chasten that their sins may be forgiven." What is the purpose behind the discipline? Has someone dared to defy your authority? Are you disciplining because someone has dared to talk back to you? Or are you disciplining because you can see that unless corrected, your children's behavior will lead to serious problems later in life? Since every action has a consequence, part of our problem comes in our being able to know the consequences of our own and others' actions. Part of the discipline is to truly want to save your child from the negative consequences that inescapably follow violation of the Lord's directives.

The third principle can be inferred from the conclusion of that same first verse, which states that "with the chastisement I prepare a way for their deliverance in all things out of temptation." A deer that normally would flee from you will attack if cornered. Likewise, a child who normally will accept discipline may defiantly oppose you if cornered. Just as the Lord wisely prepared a way for the brethren he chastised to be delivered in all things out of temptations, wise parents will find a way for a child to be "delivered" out of his or her present inappropriate behavior without undue humiliation or disgrace. The problem is that a disgraced child feels completely cornered. There is no way out, no way to save face, no way to let off steam, and the child therefore reacts angrily.

In the example cited above about our two boys fighting, we eventually separated the boys and sent each to his room. Afterward, however, we recognized that all we had really accomplished was to stop the fighting. We both realized that the boys had not learned how to get along, that they did not, at that time, like each other, and that they did not have a greater respect for their parents based on our handling of the situation. We decided that next time, to avoid the frustration we had just experienced, I would handle the problem in a way we both agreed upon. She was to alert me and then retreat to the bedroom, lock the door, and turn up the stereo so she couldn't hear them fight.

The Lord seems to have a way of helping us learn lessons. It wasn't more than a day or two later that the same situation came up. According to our agreement, my wife told me the boys were fighting again, and then she retreated to the bedroom. Three or four times I started up the stairs trying to figure a way to stop the fighting, teach a lesson, and strengthen our relationship.

Finally, after a few tense minutes and a lot of prayer, I thought I had a solution. I went to the entry of the family room. Immediately there was silence. The boys already knew they were doing something wrong. They expected me to light into them. Instead I joined them on the floor.

We had assumed that they knew what the problem was—a bad assumption. Principle number four now came into play. In Doctrine and Covenants 95:3, the Lord was clear and specific in describing the errors the brethren had made: "For ye have sinned against me a very grievous sin, in that ye have . . ." The Lord took the time to describe the sin. I realized that it was important for a parent to do the same, so I sat there on the floor and explained that when the spirit of contention existed in a home, the Spirit of the Lord could not. I further explained that although they had the right to fight if they wanted to, they did not have the right to deprive everyone in the house of the Spirit.

With divine aid, I recognized a fifth principle and implemented it with the boys: I explained to them the desired behavior. The Lord did this when he taught the brethren of the Church: "Yea, verily I say unto you, I gave unto you a commandment that you should build a house, in the which house I design to endow those whom I have chosen with power from on high" (D&C 95:8). In a similar way, I tried to specifically teach the boys what we expected of them. Not leaving to chance that they understood how to act and why they are to get along, I taught them the principle of harmony in the home and the attendant rewards of such behavior. Things were going pretty well. As I spoke to them, I kept praying for continued assistance. After I had completed my teaching, I realized that there was one more step the Lord took. He helped them!

From verse 14 I identified principle number six: show them how it's done. The Lord taught the brethren by saying, "Therefore, let it be built after the manner which I shall show unto three of you." Now the boys and I did some fun role playing for a few minutes. I would pose a situation and have them role play the wrong way and the right way to act. We rehearsed about half a dozen situations, and their enthusiasm grew with each case. At the end I asked if they loved each other. They affirmed that they did. I suggested that a hug might cement the relationship. They readily complied. I asked if they still loved me. They both gave me a big hug as a demonstration of their love. I roughed up their hair and got up to leave. I got just to the entryway when my oldest son called after me, "Dad." He continued, "Thanks. That was really fun!" I knew then, in a way I had never realized before, the power that comes from doing things the Lord's way.

Wouldn't it be nice if I could report that the boys have never fought since? I can't. Wouldn't it be great if I could say that I have learned how to discipline the Lord's way in every situation? I can't. But every time I have successfully applied these six principles, I can testify of how wonderful everyone feels when discipline is administered the Lord's way.

Learning how to do things the Lord's way is a lifetime pursuit. You will not be perfect parents from the very start. There will be mistakes made, and you will alter and adjust your method of doing things. But when you continue to discover and apply the Lord's way, you will eventually find yourself making fewer mistakes in the most common areas of parenting. However, your understanding of other areas where you need divine assistance will increase. Will you ever perfect yourself in this life? Perhaps not, but the process leading to perfection is rewarding and fun.
