Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

26

Money Matters

Finances in marriage may not be the most important issue, but they seem to surface in most major disagreements. The amount of money a family has access to is not as relevant as how it is spent. As long as there is mutual agreement regarding most expenses and as long as there is enough money to go around, things go pretty smoothly. But when there is too much month left at the end of the money, tempers can flare and disrupt the Spirit in the home. How can these conflicts be avoided? Here are some simple, practical suggestions.

Using your mission experience as a model, make a budget. List every fixed expense. The first thing on the list should be tithes and offerings. Unless you are independently wealthy, you are going to need the help of the Lord in making ends meet. Don't offend him by robbing him (see Malachi 3:8-11). Rent and utilities must be paid monthly. See if you can get a record of the past year's gas and electricity bills. Telephone expenses can be controlled if you will agree to stay within a limit in your long-distance calling. Are you still paying for your car? Even if it is paid for, the law requires that you have basic insurance coverage. You must also calculate the taxes, licensing, gas, maintenance, and a fund for emergency repairs of a car. Eventually the car will have to be replaced. If you have saved for its replacement, the shock is not nearly so great as it would be with you coming home on foot because the car died without the possibility of resurrection.

For the first couple of years, you may be able to wear the clothes you brought into marriage. Eventually clothing costs must be figured into the budget. With marriage comes the responsibility of caring for your own health. Medical insurance can be very expensive but should not be ignored. Babies do come along and emergencies happen, and without some insurance you could be in real trouble.

Food budgets can fluctuate. However, it does require money to eat. You could set aside a certain amount monthly for food and then keep track of how much you actually spend; then cut back on luxury foods as needed, or adjust your food budget to match reality. Tuition, books, and other school expenses are other considerations. Because emergencies come, you are making a serious mistake if you don't set aside some money for emergencies. A savings account, no matter how small, should be set aside for Christmas, birthdays, vacations, and parties. Life can be pretty dull if you never have any diversions.

All this may sound overwhelming, but it doesn't have to be. There is a simple formula for adjusting a budget that has gotten out of control. Either increase your income or decrease your spending—or both! If we would learn to live within our means, finances would not cause so much marital friction.

As you plan your budget, if you decide that necessities will come before luxuries, you may find fewer reasons for disagreement. If you simply don't have enough money to meet your basic obligations, one or both of you must increase your hours of employment or get higher-paying jobs. Other alternatives include moving to a less expensive apartment, buying a less expensive car, or making do for now with what you have rather than making desirable but nonessential purchases.

You will probably find, like most of us who have gone before, that those lean years are some of the happiest of your lives. Struggling to establish yourselves financially can be a unifying experience. Sometimes your education must be postponed to replenish your financial reserves. You won't be the first one to take six years to earn a four-year degree! Being realistic and honest with your money can lay a firm financial foundation for the rest of your married life.

In light of all of this counsel, there is something I learned many years ago. This is directed specifically to the husbands. No matter how meager your budget, set aside a little money (twenty-five cents at a time if necessary!) so that your wife can have some "mad money"—money that she does not have to account for or that is not expected to be used to meet the necessities of the family. Very often the young wife is supporting the family while the husband completes schooling. Unless the husband is very sensitive, his bride can begin to slide into a hopeless depression because there doesn't seem to be a light at the end of the tunnel. It doesn't take much to cheer her up—maybe ten or twenty dollars. You take the kids for an evening and let her go shopping. Many of you men will be saying to yourself, "Just the thought of going shopping would make me depressed!" That may be true for you but not necessarily for your wife. If she isn't a "shop till you drop" kind of woman, she may want to visit a museum or an art show or just take a friend out for an evening. Your investment will pay higher dividends than you can imagine. She will come home a new woman. She may very well return home without having spent a dime, but just knowing that it is there for her if she wants to use it will be therapy enough.

A second suggestion that can enrich your life without destroying the budget is to make sure both spouses are growing together. If only one spouse is in school, the other spouse may get the feeling that life is passing her or him by while the other is learning at an accelerated rate. Community education classes are fun, educational, and very inexpensive. When we lived in North Carolina I was gone almost constantly with institute classes, institute activities, and speaking assignments. My wife was left at home with three little girls. When the mental fatigue of dealing with small children became apparent to me (which took much longer than it should have taken for me to notice!), we enrolled her in a community art class. By creatively swapping baby-sitting, she could attend class even when I was out of town. She blossomed in her self-esteem, felt rejuvenated, and enriched our home with her paintings. It was the best fifteen dollars a quarter we have ever spent.

Since that time we have always tried to find areas that she was interested in so that she could also continue to learn as I continued my education. Whatever investment you make in your spouse's education will bless you and your family forever.

Often the spouses' educational goals are very different from each other. With effort, you can use that diversity to increase your unity. My interest in art, music, productions, and cultural events has greatly increased because of my wife's understanding of these things. And her appreciation for athletics, science, outdoor activities, and academic pursuits has increased as she has participated with me. There isn't a right or wrong on what to like or dislike. The Lord has cautioned, however, that "if ye are not one ye are not mine" (D&C 38:27).

One often hears of wives who have supported their husbands through their professional training only to be served with divorce papers when the degree is attained. I can't help but believe that those painful divorces could have been avoided if both partners had worked harder at being on the same team. It is tragic when a Latter-day Saint man is so lacking in generosity that he allows his wife's interests to narrow at the same time his own interests and education are expanding. Sharing what your mate is learning and doing and sharing what you are learning keeps you on the same level. That doesn't mean your spouse has to learn everything you are learning to become a doctor. It does mean that he or she shares with you in those moments of pure joy when some difficult concept finally becomes clear. Your spouse can prompt you during your studying for exams. You can attend your spouse's recitals or displays. He or she can attend your annual Christmas parties. You can attend his or her favorite play. Making marriages work is hard work, but it's very enjoyable hard work.

In the rush of trying to make ends meet and schedules fit, don't forget to express your love for each other often. Be sincere when you say, "I love you." Love really is the lubricant that keeps the marriage running smoothly in spite of the disappointments, the debt, and the occasional friction that threatens the stability of your relationship. Common goals, agreed-upon sacrifices, mutual celebrations, shared disappointments, and togetherness keep the marriage solid amidst the crazy pace of those first crucial years of marriage. Enjoy the stress—you will only pass this way once!
