Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

27

Priesthood Blessings

On your mission you saw the priesthood at work all the time. Illnesses responded to priesthood commands, investigators' questions were answered, bad habits were broken, discouragement was overcome, and direction was given to those who asked for priesthood blessings. Why should it be any different in marriage?

If the priesthood is powerful enough to create worlds, move mountains, and calm stormy seas, that power can surely aid you in solving some of the problems you face in marriage. I am blessed to have a wife who has great faith in the priesthood. If she has a Relief Society lesson to give, has a problem related to one of the children, or is ill, she asks for a blessing. She has instilled that same faith in our children.

During the early months and years of marriage, there are so many firsts. It might seem a little awkward at first when you give your wife a blessing. After a few times it will seem like a natural thing to do. The priesthood is meant to bless people's lives. There isn't a possibility of depleting the power in the priesthood, so why be afraid of using it?

For you wives, asking for a priesthood blessing can be a way of waking your spiritually sleeping husband. Many years ago I was a young seminary instructor. We had been discussing the priesthood in class. A young girl came up afterward and asked me for a blessing. She explained that her dad, although he had been through the temple, was now a less-active member. She had a real problem and needed some divine help. I hoped it would work out when I suggested that she ask her dad for the blessing, and I reassured her that if he refused, I would be glad to give her the blessing. She left rather disappointed. That was on a Thursday. Friday she missed class—unheard of for her. Monday she missed class again. I was really concerned.

Tuesday she came running into class, threw her arms around my neck, and gave me a big hug. I am sure the class was wondering what was going on, so I asked her to explain what had happened. Through tears she told me that she had left class really disillusioned. I had taught a lesson on using the priesthood and then had refused to give her a blessing. She explained that she had skipped class Friday because she wasn't about to be taught by a hypocrite. Saturday she stewed over the situation but realized that I wouldn't give her the blessing until she had first asked her father.

She then told about trying to approach her dad several times but just couldn't muster up the courage. On Sunday she and her mom had gone to church, and when she returned home she decided to make the attempt. She described her dad as sitting in front of the television, unshaven, watching football with a beer can in his hand. She said she approached him and asked if she could talk to him for a minute. He told her to come back at halftime! She about chickened out, but she really needed a blessing so she waited. At halftime she confronted him: "Dad, I have a major test coming up on Tuesday that will determine whether I get a scholarship or not. Would you give me a priesthood blessing?" She said that he just looked at her, set down the beer can, and walked out of the room without saying a word! She was sure she had destroyed the fragile relationship that had existed between them for years. She didn't see him again the rest of the day nor the next day. She said she was so mad at me for putting her up to asking him that she sluffed class again Monday. Monday evening at dinner her dad was conspicuously absent. Partway through dinner, her dad came into the dining room. To her total surprise, he was clean-shaven and dressed in a suit and tie. He told his shocked wife and daughter that he had been fasting ever since the request for a blessing, and that if she still wanted it, he would be willing to try. Dinner was quickly forgotten. The blessing was given. Tearful embraces were exchanged, and a relationship was strengthened. She told the class that the blessing was not wordy or eloquent but very sincere. She thanked me for not giving her the blessing. Her father had promised to get his act together, and her testimony of the power of the priesthood was growing.

A few months later I met the father in a store. He came up and jokingly hit me on the shoulder. He told me what a shock it had been to him to have his daughter ask him for a blessing and how he had evaluated his actions. He explained that he had just received his renewed temple recommend and was planning to go back with his wife to the temple after a twenty-year absence. Then he gave me a hug and thanked me again for not giving his daughter the blessing.

Sometimes we men have a problem with ego. When we do the least little thing that isn't right, rather than face the music and repent, we just distance ourselves from those situations that act as painful reminders of what we ought to be. A good, goal-oriented wife and righteous children can make it difficult for us to stay off track very long.

There is no limit to the number of blessings that can be given. Before going to the hospital for the birth of each of our own children, we have shared a special closeness as I have given my wife a priesthood blessing. At the beginning of each school year, we set aside scripture reading for a day, and I give everyone in the family (including my wife) a special blessing. First dates, missions, college, trips, illnesses, tests, and times of extra frustration provide golden opportunities to draw near to the Lord with your family.

Establish early in your marriage a tradition of frequent priesthood use. For the husband, it is easy to bless others without ever considering receiving a blessing for yourself. Ask your home teachers to give you a blessing, or seek a blessing from your father or from your wife's father. It may scare them to begin with, but it will strengthen the bonds of love and family closeness among you. Appreciate also the priesthood counsel that is given to you and to other family members when you are set apart after being called to Church positions. The priesthood works for husbands and fathers just as it works for wives and children. Let the Lord bless you as you bless others and as you receive blessings from others.
