Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

28

When the Honeymoon Is Over

Do you remember times during your mission when you woke up and said to yourself, "I'm just not cut out to be a missionary"? That was the signal that homesickness had set in. But effort, perseverance, and hard work made you feel better. It is sort of that way in marriage. After a few months you may wake up and stare at the ceiling and ask yourself if you have made a mistake in marrying the person you did. That doesn't mean your marriage is on the rocks. It just means that the honeymoon is over. Those who believe that they can sustain the honeymoon forever are not being very realistic.

Let me explain: You can and should build your romance. Your love for each other will grow stronger every day. You will nurture that "honeymoon" feeling by continuing to court each other. But the fact is that school, work, financial concerns, and eventually rearing children will occupy much of your time from day to day, and you probably will not have the leisure to just bask in each other's constant presence for long. Practical matters will need your attention, and you will get on with the business of life.

When the honeymoon is over, you need to expand your relationship to include more than physical attraction. If your relationship is strong, your marriage will start to develop into a beautiful, full relationship. If it is based only on physical attraction, you may start to slide toward disappointment and eventual misery or divorce.

What do you do to strengthen your relationship? Do what you learned to do on your mission—keep communicating. You have probably noticed that spending a lot of time with each other over a number of months has given you a false sense of knowing what your spouse is thinking. Both fortunately and unfortunately, you are correct a lot of the time. It is fortunate because you can begin to anticipate what your spouse wants or needs before even being asked. You may begin to establish routines and schedules that help you know how to meet the needs of your mate before they even ask for help. That is good.

Unfortunately, unless we are careful we extend that "I know what you are thinking" idea too far. We start to assume that certain behaviors mean certain thought patterns. For example, when my wife and I were newlyweds, she came into the room where I was studying one evening and asked, "Why are you mad at me? Have I hurt your feelings?" I was totally dumbfounded. I wasn't mad at all but just quietly studying. I asked her why she thought I was mad and she explained, after some thought, that whenever her father was silent it was because he was mad. We quickly established a system that prevented either of us from assuming that we knew what the other one was thinking. The easiest solution is to ask! One timely "What are you thinking?" followed by an honest answer can eliminate a lot of hurt feelings.

As the demands of life increase, children come, and school or work becomes all-consuming, it is easy to grow apart. Perhaps the wife is at home bearing and rearing children while she serves in Church callings, and the husband is earning a living and also serving in the Church. Unless care is taken, you can become two strangers living under the same roof. Weekly date nights (even when you can't afford them!) help prevent a gap from forming.

As a young teacher I would come home exhausted from talking and interacting with students. My wife, on the other hand, had been home trying to carry on an intelligent conversation with a two-year-old and a four-year-old. She wanted to talk, and I wanted some quiet. When we realized the problem, it didn't take much ingenuity to solve it. We arranged with another young family in our ward to swap baby-sitting. We would watch their children for a few hours while they spent some time alone, and they would do the same for us. I found that talking to my sweetheart was a delightful interlude after a day of dealing with students. She seemed content to just be together alone sometimes. It was not so much the talk as it was the togetherness that really mattered.

Does the spark have to go out in marriage? No, you can stay in love and keep it growing as the years go by. Instead of trying to replace the physical attraction that you initially felt, continue to build on it. Add a cultural dimension by going to museums, plays, and productions. Broaden your circle of friends. During the courting period, you probably found yourself spending less and less time with your friends. During the early months of marriage, it was more exciting to picnic alone. Now you may want to expand your social circle to include friends, extended family, and those you have responsibility for (like your Sunday School class or Young Women class). Add an intellectual dimension. Keep learning and sharing. Read good books and talk about them. Visit the science museum or a historical site. Go to the planetarium or a dinosaur display. Engage in thought-provoking discussions with others who are still in school or who are specialists in a given area. Continue to increase your spiritual oneness. Regularly attend the temple, go to firesides, do family history research, go to family reunions and parties, plan trips to Church historical sites, visit Temple Square. Get into the habit of reading the scriptures every day as a couple and then as a family. Read conference addresses, Church magazines, and books by inspired authors. Give selfless service together.

Instead of feeling your marriage is collapsing around you, you will see that your love and respect for each other has grown immensely. I love to listen to older people talk about how much deeper their love is for each other now than it was when they were first married. That is definitely true. If you were to ask my wife and me whether we would go back to the honeymoon stage of our marriage if given the chance, the answer would be a quick and definite no. That was a fun time, but we do not want to lose what we have gained and learned together.

In addition to a weekly date, consider going on a yearly honeymoon without the kids. Grandparents, close friends, and others will usually be eager to help care for the kids. If you start from the very beginning of your marriage to plan these getaways, it will be easy to keep them going. If you wait until you've got enough money, or the kids are a little older, or there is a more convenient time, it may be years and years before you go anywhere together.

These outings need not be expensive or extended. A few days camping by a favorite lake, a couple of days in a friend's cabin, a quick trip to the beach, or a visit to a national park can do wonders for your marriage and for your enjoyment of your children when you return. Even one night away from the children will provide a pleasant break.

As your family gets a little older, go on some family retreats. Some of our most memorable moments have been when we have allowed the kids to plan for a few days at a cabin in the mountains. Each child is given a certain amount of money to plan for the meals and treats during the day. In addition to the informal time together, we also prepare an agenda for meetings during which we check our progress as a family in four vital areas: spiritual, social, intellectual, and physical growth. We spend time with each child doing what they would like to do. Wouldn't it be nice if the retreats were always perfect? Well, they are not. But the family loves these retreats, and when we come home, the children immediately start talking about when we can go again.

Right from the very beginning of your marriage, start some traditions. Some of them are silly and short-lived, but others will go on for generations. From the time I was very young, all of us kids in the family would gather at the foot of the stairs and sing Christmas carols until mom would wake up, light the tree, and give the signal so we could see what Santa Claus brought us. We have continued that tradition in our family. My children love it and will probably do the same thing when they get married. Another family tradition we have continued is having everyone tell something they are thankful for before beginning the Thanksgiving Day feast. At Christmas we all share one of our favorite memories from past Christmases. Hunting for Easter baskets, visiting cemeteries on Memorial Day, setting off family fireworks—these and other traditions provide a welding link between generations. You may adopt the traditions of your families, modify them to meet your needs, or start new ones.

Years ago my grandfather started the "Bott Board," which was just an old scrap of one-by-four-inch board about six and a half feet long. Every New Year's Day when we would visit my grandparents, he would measure each child's growth over the past year. The child's name and date were entered just above the line that marked his or her height. We have done the same thing in our family. When our boys reached that age when they didn't think they were growing fast enough, we dragged out the Bott Board to reassure them by noting their added height since the last measuring.

You will probably recall many traditions from both sides of the family. If you wait until later to start some traditions, you may look back with regret, because time passes all too quickly. If you are wise, you will plan ahead by making a long list of possible traditions, then working together to select a few that you want to start right now—or when the next holiday comes along.

When you first started reading this book, you may have thought you were just going to read about missions and the beginnings of marriage. Isn't life wonderful? It is full of surprises. Life taken as a continuous series of challenging events can be great. As you experienced and observed with your mission, you can have as rich or lean a married life as you want. If you wait for these things to just happen, you will likely look back with regret. Knowing how good marriage can be with just a little extra effort changes the focus from surviving to thriving. The Lord has given you the rare opportunity to "create your own world" by starting your family. If you want a rich, colorful world, create one for yourself. The choice is yours.

Spend some time with older people and ask them what they did to create memories, what they wish they had done, what they are glad they did, and what they would do if they had it all to do over again. You will hear a lot of advice, some good, some bad. But at least you'll have something to choose from. Sometimes when I hear a really good idea, I think, Wow! I wish we had known that years ago when our kids were young.

Life can be full and rich. There will always be a new twist to make life more exciting. When you are dedicated to living life to its fullest, you can find ways to make even the challenges more fun. Follow the prophets and Church leaders and you will have ample time to enjoy the good life.

Life is not a destination; it is a journey. Learn to enjoy the journey. If you are not really enjoying life, what are you doing wrong? Everything will not always go perfectly. But making lemonade out of lemons is much more fun than treating citric acid burns. Is married life heaven on earth? It can be! A wise man once gave the following reply to a question about how difficult it is to make it to the celestial kingdom: "It is easy if you work at it hard and hard if you work at it easy." The same applies to a blissful married life.
