Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

29

Priorities

Wouldn't it be great if an angel came down and gave us a list of what is really important in God's eyes? Well, as a matter of fact, there is such a list. If you are interested in knowing the order in which your earthly stewardship is to be accounted to the Savior, the following statement given by President David O. McKay in June 1965 to the employees of the Physical Facilities Department of the Church will be priceless. While explaining to them the importance of the work they were engaged in, he paused and told them the following:

Let me assure you, brethren, that someday you will have a personal priesthood interview with the Savior Himself. If you are interested, I will tell you the order in which He will ask you to account for your earthly responsibilities.

First, He will request an accountability report about your relationship with your wife. Have you actively been engaged in making her happy and ensuring that her needs have been met as an individual?

Second, He will want an accountability report about each of your children individually. He will not attempt to have this for simply a family stewardship but will request information about your relationship to each and every child. Third, He will want to know what you personally have done with the talents you were given in the preexistence.

Fourth, He will want a summary of your activity in your Church assignments. He will not be necessarily interested in what assignments you have had, for in His eyes the home teacher and a mission president are probably equals, but He will request a summary of how you have been of service to your fellowmen in your Church assignments.

Fifth, He will have no interest in how you earned your living, but [instead in whether] you were honest in all your dealings.

Sixth, He will ask for an accountability on what you have done to contribute in a positive manner to your community, state, country and the world. (From notes of Fred A. Baker, Managing Director, Department of Physical Facilities)

If you use that prophetic outline as a guide, it should be fairly easy to keep your priorities straight. When we put things of secondary importance in primary positions, our whole life seems to be in a state of turmoil. It is a real temptation during the early days of marriage to become a workaholic in an attempt to acquire all that your parents have accumulated over a lifetime. It is an even greater temptation to rationalize that school has to come first for the next few years! President McKay was famous for his observation, "No other success can compensate for failure in the home" (J. E. McCulloch, as quoted by David O. McKay, in Conference Report, April 1935, p. 116; April 1964, p. 5). The Savior asked a very sobering question: "For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?" (Matthew 16:26).

Almost all of us who are advancing in years look back with some regret at how we misplaced priorities in the early days of our marriage. The scriptures were there and the prophets were speaking, but we may not have been listening as intently as we should.

Review often President McKay's advice. Before work, school, recreation, or children come the needs of your mate. Doctrine and Covenants 42:22 clarifies the importance of the marriage relationship: "Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else." President Spencer W. Kimball commented on that passage of scripture as follows: "The words none else eliminate everyone and everything. The spouse then becomes preeminent in the life of the husband or wife and neither social life nor occupational life nor political life nor any other interest nor person nor thing shall ever take precedence over the companion spouse. We sometimes find women who absorb and hover over the children at the expense of the husband, sometimes even estranging them from him. This is in direct violation of the command: None else" (The Miracle of Forgiveness, [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969], 250-51).

Take time to be with and strengthen your children. Rearing children can be frustrating. They will not always be totally obedient. In spite of your best efforts, some may develop bad attitudes or may even be rebellious. Their challenging behavior may have nothing to do with your failure. Children have agency. It is intriguing to note that in the parable of the prodigal son (see Luke 15:11-32), the father does not condemn himself or hold himself responsible for the behavior of the younger son—even though he provided the means for his son to enjoy the party life. If we follow the inspired counsel of our leaders, very few of our children will permanently leave the fold although some may stray for a while.

The third area of accountability mentioned by President McKay is your accountability for developing those talents and gifts given to you. Identifying those talents and using them to bless others is part of the challenge of life. If your world is not what you want it to be, don't wait for someone to change it; change it yourself. Elder Richard L. Evans of the Quorum of the Twelve gave some solid advice in the April 1961 general conference: "Now, as to a willingness to work: Nothing ever does itself. Nothing ever memorizes itself. Nothing ever accomplishes itself—without the requisite effort. Carlyle said, 'Men do less than they ought, unless they do all that they can.' It is not enough just to try; we have to succeed. The Lord expects us to see things through" (in Conference Report, April 1961, 75-76).

President McKay's fourth point is vital to happiness in the Church. Many people aspire to be bishops, Relief Society presidents, stake presidents, or General Authorities because of the visibility of men and women in those positions. It is how we serve, not where, that makes the difference. Countless unnamed Latter-day Saints labor without recognition to make the kingdom of God on earth roll forward in preparation for the arrival of the kingdom of heaven. Worry more about service and less about who gets the credit, and you will have a full, rich life.

The fifth point is integrity in the workplace. Giving a day's work for a day's pay is a disappearing philosophy. Happy indeed is the returned missionary who finds joy in his or her work. Work is honorable and divinely approved. Our first mortal father, Adam, was informed that the earth had been "cursed . . . for thy sake" (Genesis 3:17). Trying to get into a financial position where you don't have to work is in direct opposition to the divine plan. Being financially successful is not bad or undesirable if your desire is to promote the cause of Zion in these last days. Money does not canker a person's soul. It is the love of money that is the root of all evil (see 1 Timothy 6:10). Making the most of your time in mortality is not only desirable but commanded: "Thou shalt not idle away thy time, neither shalt thou bury thy talent that it may not be known" (D&C 60:13). It seems apparent that if we worked at or near our capacity, using all of our God-given talents, we would have just enough time to complete that which we were assigned to do in mortality. The Lord taught us that truth by saying, "For there is a time appointed for every man, according as his works shall be" (D&C 121:25). Part of the regret that we may yet suffer may come when we are shown what we could have accomplished if we had wisely used our time.

The final area of accountability will be the contribution we have made outside our home. It is easy to look with disgust at the world, to shake our heads in disbelief, and to go on about our own family's business. Recent tragedies and disasters reported in the news should help us realize that we cannot afford to ignore the plight of the world.

We as Latter-day Saints, more than any other people, have the solutions to the world's problems. They have been revealed by the Lord. As we use our knowledge of the gospel and the warnings from Latter-day prophets, we can give light to a darkening world. The Savior commanded us, "Therefore, hold up your light that it may shine unto the world. Behold I am the light which ye shall hold up—that which ye have seen me do" (3 Nephi 18:24). Changing the world may seem like an overwhelming task. The Savior knew what we would be facing. He consoled us by saying, "Wherefore, be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation of a great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is great" (D&C 64:33). Do your part and you will be able to report your stewardship without fear or regret.
