Randy L. Bott, Home with Honor: Helps for Returning Missionaries ( 1995)

30

Forever More

Thousands of books have been written about how to have a successful marriage. Attitude seems to be the most important factor. Whether you think you can or you can't be successful, you are right! As you marry in the temple you will complete, as far as ordinances are concerned, all that is necessary for you to gain exaltation.

Does that mean you have arrived? Certainly not! You have only entered through the gate that leads to the path to the celestial kingdom. Doctrine and Covenants 132:7 outlines in three short phrases what will take you and your spouse a lifetime to accomplish: "All covenants . . . that are not made and entered into and sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise . . . are of no efficacy, virtue, or force . . . after the resurrection from the dead." How do you "make" the covenant of marriage? That is what you do when you kneel across the altar from each other in the temple! How do you "enter into" the covenant of marriage? That requires a lifetime. It means to live by every promise that you have made to each other. It means to treat each other like the king and queen you are destined to become. It means meeting and overcoming together all the problems that Heavenly Father has seen fit to allow you to tackle in the test called mortality. It means becoming one. It means identifying and overcoming weaknesses. It means being humble enough to accept whatever the Lord deems necessary for us to experience. It means learning how to honor the priesthood by serving our family and serving in the Church. It means following the living prophets' counsel and the counsel in the scriptures. It means taking advantage of every opportunity to further the kingdom of God. It means magnifying our own callings and letting others magnify theirs. It means teaching and leading and loving children so that we may learn how to become eternal parents. It means returning frequently to the temple to renew and review the covenants we have made. It means living with one eye constantly trained on eternity while making the most of mortality. It means overcoming the temptations Satan constantly throws our way. It means subduing and gaining dominion over our world in preparation for creating our own world. It means not resting until we have passed every test of life and have together made our calling and election sure.

Does that sound like something you will accomplish during the first year of marriage? During the first decade? Perhaps not even during the first half century, or maybe not until long after you have passed through the veil into the life after death.

It is a little scary to look at the number of people who are temporarily failing the exam. We see many who have lost the vision of what life is all about and have forgotten what is in store for those who succeed. Some only see how rapidly the world is deteriorating and worry about how their children will ever be able to cope. If the Lord did not think it was possible for us to succeed under such trying circumstances, he would not have put us here now.

When we stand on the other side of the veil and have perfect memory of our premortal life, we will see that we anxiously looked forward to mortality. The Lord in his infinite wisdom chose us to be here at this time.

Although the challenge is almost overwhelming, President Ezra Taft Benson put that challenge into proper perspective:

For nearly six thousand years, God has held you in reserve to make your appearance in the final days before the Second Coming of the Lord. . . . While our generation will be comparable in wickedness to the days of Noah, when the Lord cleansed the earth by flood, there is a major difference this time. It is that God has saved for the final inning some of his strongest children, who will help bear off the Kingdom triumphantly. And that is where you come in, for you are the generation that must be prepared to meet your God.

All through the ages the prophets have looked down through the corridors of time to our day. Billions of the deceased and those yet to be born have their eyes on us. Make no mistake about it—you are a marked generation. There has never been more expected of the faithful in such a short period of time as there is of us. Never before on the face of this earth have the forces of evil and the forces of good been as well organized. Now is the great day of the devil's power, with the greatest mass murderers of all time living among us. But now is also the great day of the Lord's power, with the greatest number ever of priesthood holders on the earth. And the showdown is fast approaching. ("In His Steps," Speeches of the Year, 1979 [Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1980], p. 59)

Your full-time proselyting mission is complete. You have successfully completed the most difficult assignment that God has laid upon your shoulders—up to this point in time. You might say you've honorably completed the pre-game warmup. Now is the time to join the spiritually mature members of the Church upon whose shoulders the Lord has placed the responsibility of preparing the Church and the world for his second coming.

This is not the day for the weak and fainthearted. It is not a day for spiritual sabbaticals or lukewarm effort. Between now and the Second Coming, we will face problems that we have never encountered before and opposition that is greater than ever before. There are meetings to attend—regular ward, stake, and general Church meetings and special meetings at Adam-ondi-Ahman. There are seats of leadership to fill, additional missions to serve, sacrifices to be made.

In one hundred years the world will scarcely resemble what we now see. Whether we have kept pace with the Church or not is up to us. Whether you choose to keep pace or not, the test will be over for you and me before another hundred years pass. The rest of eternity will be spent enjoying or regretting the choices we have made.

Thousands of years ago we joined the choirs "when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy" (Job 38:7). Assignments were given and responsibilities accepted. Surely we must have been impatiently waiting for our turn to serve. You prepared with honor during those long ages of pre-earth life and for the first few years of your mortal life. You served with honor for eighteen months or two years in your mission area. Now you are returning with honor from your full-time mission in order to continue an even greater mission in life—including marrying and rearing children. Someday, will you return with honor to the anxious, waiting arms of your Heavenly Father?

Live one day at a time. Live each day so that you can look back without regret. What a thrill to know that God has enough confidence in you to allow you to be who you are, to be on the first string during the final minutes of the fourth quarter of the greatest game ever played. Don't shortchange yourself by giving less than your best. Don't disappoint the Lord by losing sight of who you are and what you are sent to do.

There is a God in heaven. He is at the helm. Nothing that is happening or will happen is a surprise to him or beyond his power to control. He is willing to continue to communicate directly with you as you humbly and willingly serve him. May we join with countless others on both sides of the veil in saying to you, "Welcome home, elder. Welcome home, sister." Eventually the Lord will personally greet you. His words of welcome are recorded for you to read: "Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord" (Matthew 25:21). The Lord wants you to return with honor.
