up its dead; which spiritual death is hell; wherefore, death and hell must deliver up

their dead, and hell must deliver up its captive spirits, and the grave must deliver up

its captive bodies, and the bodies and the spirits of men will be restored one to the

other; and it is by the power of the resurrection of the Holy One of Israel. 13 O how great the plan of our God! For on the other hand, the paradise of God

must deliver up the spirits of the righteous, and the grave deliver up the body of the

righteous; and the spirit and the body is restored to itself again, and all men become

incorruptible, and immortal, and they are living souls, having a perfect knowledge

like unto us in the flesh, save it be that our knowledge shall be perfect. 14 Wherefore, we shall have a perfect knowledge of all our guilt, and our

uncleanness, and our nakedness; and the righteous shall have a perfect knowledge of

their enjoyment, and their righteousness, being clothed with purity, yea, even with

the robe of righteousness.

15 And it shall come to pass that when all men shall have passed from this first

death unto life, insomuch as they have become immortal, they must appear before

the judgment-seat of the Holy One of Israel; and then cometh the judgment, and

then must they be judged according to the holy judgment of God.

2 nephi 9

59

16 And assuredly, as the Lord liveth, for the Lord God hath spoken it, and it is his

eternal word, which cannot pass away, that they who are righteous shall be righteous

still, and they who are filthy shall be filthy still; wherefore, they who are filthy are the

devil and his angels; and they shall go away into everlasting fire, prepared for them;

and their torment is as a lake of fire and brimstone, whose flame ascendeth up

forever and ever and has no end.

17 O the greatness and the justice of our God! For he executeth all his words, and

they have gone forth out of his mouth, and his law must be fulfilled. 18 But, behold, the righteous, the saints of the Holy One of Israel, they who have

believed in the Holy One of Israel, they who have endured the crosses of the world,

and despised the shame of it, they shall inherit the kingdom of God, which was

prepared for them from the foundation of the world, and their joy shall be full

forever.

19 O the greatness of the mercy of our God, the Holy One of Israel! For he

delivereth his saints from that awful monster the devil, and death, and hell, and that

lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment.

20 O how great the holiness of our God! For he knoweth all things, and there is not

anything save he knows it.

21 And he cometh into the world that he may save all men if they will hearken unto

his voice; for behold, he suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living

creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam. 22 And he suffereth this that the resurrection might pass upon all men, that all

might stand before him at the great and judgment day.

23 And he commandeth all men that they must repent, and be baptized in his name,

having perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel, or they cannot be saved in the

kingdom of God.

24 And if they will not repent and believe in his name, and be baptized in his name,

and endure to the end, they must be damned; for the Lord God, the Holy One of

Israel, has spoken it.

25 Wherefore, he has given a law; and where there is no law given there is no

punishment; and where there is no punishment there is no condemnation; and

where there is no condemnation the mercies of the Holy One of Israel have claim

upon them, because of the atonement; for they are delivered by the power of him. 26 For the atonement satisfieth the demands of his justice upon all those who have

not the law given to them, that they are delivered from that awful monster, death

and hell, and the devil, and the lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment;

and they are restored to that God who gave them breath, which is the Holy One of

Israel.

27 But wo unto him that has the law given, yea, that has all the commandments of

God, like unto us, and that transgresseth them, and that wasteth the days of his

probation, for awful is his state!

28 O that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the frailties, and the

foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they

hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of

themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And

they shall perish.

29 But to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God.

60

2 nephi 9

30 But wo unto the rich, who are rich as to the things of the world. For because they

are rich they despise the poor, and they persecute the meek, and their hearts are

upon their treasures; wherefore, their treasure is their god. And behold, their

treasure shall perish with them also.

31 And wo unto the deaf that will not hear; for they shall perish.

32 Wo unto the blind that will not see; for they shall perish also.

33 Wo unto the uncircumcised of heart, for a knowledge of their iniquities shall

smite them at the last day.

34 Wo unto the liar, for he shall be thrust down to hell.

35 Wo unto the murderer who deliberately killeth, for he shall die.

36 Wo unto them who commit whoredoms, for they shall be thrust down to hell. 37 Yea, wo unto those that worship idols, for the devil of all devils delighteth in

them.

38 And, in fine, wo unto all those who die in their sins; for they shall return to God,

and behold his face, and remain in their sins.

39 O, my beloved brethren, remember the awfulness in transgressing against that

Holy God, and also the awfulness of yielding to the enticings of that cunning one.

Remember, to be carnally-minded is death, and to be spiritually-minded is life

eternal.

40 O, my beloved brethren, give ear to my words. Remember the greatness of the

Holy One of Israel. Do not say that I have spoken hard things against you; for if ye

do, ye will revile against the truth; for I have spoken the words of your Maker. I

know that the words of truth are hard against all uncleanness; but the righteous fear

them not, for they love the truth and are not shaken.

41 O then, my beloved brethren, come unto the Lord, the Holy One. Remember

that his paths are righteous. Behold, the way for man is narrow, but it lieth in a

straight course before him, and the keeper of the gate is the Holy One of Israel; and

he employeth no servant there; and there is none other way save it be by the gate;

for he cannot be deceived, for the Lord God is his name.

42 And whoso knocketh, to him will he open; and the wise, and the learned, and

they that are rich, who are puffed up because of their learning, and their wisdom,

and their riches—yea, they are they whom he despiseth; and save they shall cast

these things away, and consider themselves fools before God, and come down in the

depths of humility, he will not open unto them.

43 But the things of the wise and the prudent shall be hid from them forever—yea,

that happiness which is prepared for the saints.

44 O, my beloved brethren, remember my words. Behold, I take off my garments,

and I shake them before you; I pray the God of my salvation that he view me with

his all-searching eye; wherefore, ye shall know at the last day, when all men shall be

judged of their works, that the God of Israel did witness that I shook your iniquities

from my soul, and that I stand with brightness before him, and am rid of your blood. 45 O, my beloved brethren, turn away from your sins; shake off the chains of him

that would bind you fast; come unto that God who is the rock of your salvation. 46 Prepare your souls for that glorious day when justice shall be administered unto

the righteous, even the day of judgment, that ye may not shrink with awful fear; that

ye may not remember your awful guilt in perfectness, and be constrained to

exclaim: Holy, holy are thy judgments, O Lord God Almighty—but I know my

2 nephi 9

61

guilt; I transgressed thy law, and my transgressions are mine; and the devil hath

obtained me, that I am a prey to his awful misery.

47 But behold, my brethren, is it expedient that I should awake you to an awful

reality of these things? Would I harrow up your souls if your minds were pure?

Would I be plain unto you according to the plainness of the truth if ye were freed

from sin?

48 Behold, if ye were holy I would speak unto you of holiness; but as ye are not holy,

and ye look upon me as a teacher, it must needs be expedient that I teach you the

consequences of sin.

49 Behold, my soul abhorreth sin, and my heart delighteth in righteousness; and I

will praise the holy name of my God.

50 Come, my brethren, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters; and he that

hath no money, come buy and eat; yea, come buy wine and milk without money and

without price.

51 Wherefore, do not spend money for that which is of no worth, nor your labor for

that which cannot satisfy. Hearken diligently unto me, and remember the words

which I have spoken; and come unto the Holy One of Israel, and feast upon that

which perisheth not, neither can be corrupted, and let your soul delight in fatness. 52 Behold, my beloved brethren, remember the words of your God; pray unto him

continually by day, and give thanks unto his holy name by night. Let your hearts

rejoice.

53 And behold how great the covenants of the Lord, and how great his

condescensions unto the children of men; and because of his greatness, and his grace

and mercy, he has promised unto us that our seed shall not utterly be destroyed,

according to the flesh, but that he would preserve them; and in future generations

they shall become a righteous branch unto the house of Israel.

54 And now, my brethren, I would speak unto you more; but on the morrow I will

declare unto you the remainder of my words. Amen.

2 Nephi 10

1 And now I, Jacob, speak unto you again, my beloved brethren, concerning this

righteous branch of which I have spoken.

2 For behold, the promises which we have obtained are promises unto us according

to the flesh; wherefore, as it has been shown unto me that many of our children shall

perish in the flesh because of unbelief, nevertheless, God will be merciful unto

many; and our children shall be restored, that they may come to that which will give

them the true knowledge of their Redeemer.

3 Wherefore, as I said unto you, it must needs be expedient that Christ—for in

the last night the angel spake unto me that this should be his name—should come

among the Jews, among those who are the more wicked part of the world; and they

shall crucify him—for thus it behooveth our God, and there is none other nation

on earth that would crucify their God.

4 For should the mighty miracles be wrought among other nations they would

repent, and know that he be their God.

5 But because of priestcrafts and iniquities, they at Jerusalem will stiffen their

necks against him, that he be crucified.

62

2 nephi 10

6 Wherefore, because of their iniquities, destructions, famines, pestilences, and

bloodshed shall come upon them; and they who shall not be destroyed shall be

scattered among all nations.

7 But behold, thus saith the Lord God: When the day cometh that they shall

believe in me, that I am Christ, then have I covenanted with their fathers that they

shall be restored in the flesh, upon the earth, unto the lands of their inheritance. 8 And it shall come to pass that they shall be gathered in from their long

dispersion, from the isles of the sea, and from the four parts of the earth; and the

nations of the Gentiles shall be great in the eyes of me, saith God, in carrying them

forth to the lands of their inheritance.

9 Yea, the kings of the Gentiles shall be nursing fathers unto them, and their

queens shall become nursing mothers; wherefore, the promises of the Lord are great

unto the Gentiles, for he hath spoken it, and who can dispute?

10 But behold, this land, said God, shall be a land of thine inheritance, and the

Gentiles shall be blessed upon the land.

11 And this land shall be a land of liberty unto the Gentiles, and there shall be no

kings upon the land, who shall raise up unto the Gentiles.

12 And I will fortify this land against all other nations.

13 And he that fighteth against Zion shall perish, saith God.

14 For he that raiseth up a king against me shall perish, for I, the Lord, the king of

heaven, will be their king, and I will be a light unto them forever, that hear my

words.

15 Wherefore, for this cause, that my covenants may be fulfilled which I have made

unto the children of men, that I will do unto them while they are in the flesh, I must

needs destroy the secret works of darkness, and of murders, and of abominations. 16 Wherefore, he that fighteth against Zion, both Jew and Gentile, both bond and

free, both male and female, shall perish; for they are they who are the whore of all

the earth; for they who are not for me are against me, saith our God. 17 For I will fulfil my promises which I have made unto the children of men, that I

will do unto them while they are in the flesh—

18 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, thus saith our God: I will afflict thy seed by the

hand of the Gentiles; nevertheless, I will soften the hearts of the Gentiles, that they

shall be like unto a father to them; wherefore, the Gentiles shall be blessed and

numbered among the house of Israel.

19 Wherefore, I will consecrate this land unto thy seed, and them who shall be

numbered among thy seed, forever, for the land of their inheritance; for it is a

choice land, saith God unto me, above all other lands, wherefore I will have all men

that dwell thereon that they shall worship me, saith God.

20 And now, my beloved brethren, seeing that our merciful God has given us so

great knowledge concerning these things, let us remember him, and lay aside our

sins, and not hang down our heads, for we are not cast off; nevertheless, we have

been driven out of the land of our inheritance; but we have been led to a better land,

for the Lord has made the sea our path, and we are upon an isle of the sea. 21 But great are the promises of the Lord unto them who are upon the isles of the

sea; wherefore as it says isles, there must needs be more than this, and they are

inhabited also by our brethren.

22 For behold, the Lord God has led away from time to time from the house of

2 nephi 10

63

Israel, according to his will and pleasure. And now behold, the Lord remembereth

all them who have been broken off, wherefore he remembereth us also. 23 Therefore, cheer up your hearts, and remember that ye are free to act for

yourselves—to choose the way of everlasting death or the way of eternal life. 24 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, reconcile yourselves to the will of God, and

not to the will of the devil and the flesh; and remember, after ye are reconciled unto

God, that it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved. 25 Wherefore, may God raise you from death by the power of the resurrection, and

also from everlasting death by the power of the atonement, that ye may be received

into the eternal kingdom of God, that ye may praise him through grace divine.

Amen.

2 Nephi 11

1 And now, Jacob spake many more things to my people at that time; nevertheless

only these things have I caused to be written, for the things which I have written

sufficeth me.

2 And now I, Nephi, write more of the words of Isaiah, for my soul delighteth in

his words. For I will liken his words unto my people, and I will send them forth

unto all my children, for he verily saw my Redeemer, even as I have seen him. 3 And my brother, Jacob, also has seen him as I have seen him; wherefore, I will

send their words forth unto my children to prove unto them that my words are true.

Wherefore, by the words of three, God hath said, I will establish my word.

Nevertheless, God sendeth more witnesses, and he proveth all his words. 4 Behold, my soul delighteth in proving unto my people the truth of the coming of

Christ; for, for this end hath the law of Moses been given; and all things which have

been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of

him.

5 And also my soul delighteth in the covenants of the Lord which he hath made to

our fathers; yea, my soul delighteth in his grace, and in his justice, and power, and

mercy in the great and eternal plan of deliverance from death.

6 And my soul delighteth in proving unto my people that save Christ should come

all men must perish.

7 For if there be no Christ there be no God; and if there be no God we are not, for

there could have been no creation. But there is a God, and he is Christ, and he

cometh in the fulness of his own time.

8 And now I write some of the words of Isaiah, that whoso of my people shall see

these words may lift up their hearts and rejoice for all men. Now these are the

words, and ye may liken them unto you and unto all men.

2 Nephi 12

1 The word that Isaiah, the son of Amoz, saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem: 2 And it shall come to pass in the last days, when the mountain of the Lord’s house

shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills,

and all nations shall flow unto it.

64

2 nephi 12

3 And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of

the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we

will walk in his paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the

Lord from Jerusalem.

4 And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they

shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into

pruning-hooks—nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they

learn war any more.

5 O house of Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord; yea, come, for

ye have all gone astray, every one to his wicked ways.

6 Therefore, O Lord, thou hast forsaken thy people, the house of Jacob, because

they be replenished from the east, and hearken unto soothsayers like the Philistines,

and they please themselves in the children of strangers.

7 Their land also is full of silver and gold, neither is there any end of their treasures;

their land is also full of horses, neither is there any end of their chariots. 8 Their land is also full of idols; they worship the work of their own hands, that

which their own fingers have made.

9 And the mean man boweth not down, and the great man humbleth himself not,

therefore, forgive him not.

10 O ye wicked ones, enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, for the fear of

the Lord and the glory of his majesty shall smite thee.

11 And it shall come to pass that the lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the

haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that

day.

12 For the day of the Lord of Hosts soon cometh upon all nations, yea, upon every

one; yea, upon the proud and lofty, and upon every one who is lifted up, and he shall

be brought low.

13 Yea, and the day of the Lord shall come upon all the cedars of Lebanon, for they

are high and lifted up; and upon all the oaks of Bashan;

14 And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills, and upon all the

nations which are lifted up, and upon every people;

15 And upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall;

16 And upon all the ships of the sea, and upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all

pleasant pictures.

17 And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall

be made low; and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.

18 And the idols he shall utterly abolish.

19 And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for

the fear of the Lord shall come upon them and the glory of his majesty shall smite

them, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.

20 In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which he hath

made for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats;

21 To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for the

fear of the Lord shall come upon them and the majesty of his glory shall smite them,

when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.

22 Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils; for wherein is he to be

accounted of ?

2 nephi 12

65

2 Nephi 13

1 For behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem, and from

Judah, the stay and the staff, the whole staff of bread, and the whole stay of water— 2 The mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet, and the

prudent, and the ancient;

3 The captain of fifty, and the honorable man, and the counselor, and the cunning

artificer, and the eloquent orator.

4 And I will give children unto them to be their princes, and babes shall rule over

them.

5 And the people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his

neighbor; the child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base

against the honorable.

6 When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his father, and shall

say: Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let not this ruin come under thy

hand—

7 In that day shall he swear, saying: I will not be a healer; for in my house there is

neither bread nor clothing; make me not a ruler of the people.

8 For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen, because their tongues and their

doings have been against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory.

9 The show of their countenance doth witness against them, and doth declare their

sin to be even as Sodom, and they cannot hide it. Wo unto their souls, for they have

rewarded evil unto themselves!

10 Say unto the righteous that it is well with them; for they shall eat the fruit of

their doings.

11 Wo unto the wicked, for they shall perish; for the reward of their hands shall be

upon them!

12 And my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule over them. O my

people, they who lead thee cause thee to err and destroy the way of thy paths. 13 The Lord standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the people.

14 The Lord will enter into judgment with the ancients of his people and the princes

thereof; for ye have eaten up the vineyard and the spoil of the poor in your houses. 15 What mean ye? Ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor,

saith the Lord God of Hosts.

16 Moreover, the Lord saith: Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk

with stretched-forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and

making a tinkling with their feet—

17 Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters

of Zion, and the Lord will discover their secret parts.

18 In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments, and

cauls, and round tires like the moon;

19 The chains and the bracelets, and the mufflers;

20 The bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets,

and the ear-rings;

21 The rings, and nose jewels;

22 The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the

crisping-pins;

66

2 nephi 13

23 The glasses, and the fine linen, and hoods, and the veils.

24 And it shall come to pass, instead of sweet smell there shall be stink; and instead

of a girdle, a rent; and instead of well set hair, baldness; and instead of a stomacher, a

girding of sackcloth; burning instead of beauty.

25 Thy men shall fall by the sword and thy mighty in the war.

26 And her gates shall lament and mourn; and she shall be desolate, and shall sit

upon the ground.

2 Nephi 14

1 And in that day, seven women shall take hold of one man, saying: We will eat our

own bread, and wear our own apparel; only let us be called by thy name to take away

our reproach.

2 In that day shall the branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious; the fruit of the

earth excellent and comely to them that are escaped of Israel.

3 And it shall come to pass, they that are left in Zion and remain in Jerusalem shall

be called holy, every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem— 4 When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and

shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of

judgment and by the spirit of burning.

5 And the Lord will create upon every dwelling-place of mount Zion, and upon

her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day and the shining of a flaming fire by night;

for upon all the glory of Zion shall be a defence.

6 And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the heat, and

for a place of refuge, and a covert from storm and from rain.

2 Nephi 15

1 And then will I sing to my well-beloved a song of my beloved, touching his vineyard.

My well-beloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill.

2 And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the

choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also made a wine-press

therein; and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild

grapes.

3 And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you,

betwixt me and my vineyard.

4 What could have been done more to my vineyard that I have not done in it?

Wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes it brought forth wild

grapes.

5 And now go to; I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard—I will take away

the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and I will break down the wall thereof,

and it shall be trodden down;

6 And I will lay it waste; it shall not be pruned nor digged; but there shall come up

briers and thorns; I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. 7 For the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah

his pleasant plant; and he looked for judgment, and behold, oppression; for

righteousness, but behold, a cry.

2 nephi 14

67

8 Wo unto them that join house to house, till there can be no place, that they may

be placed alone in the midst of the earth!

9 In mine ears, said the Lord of Hosts, of a truth many houses shall be desolate, and

great and fair cities without inhabitant.

10 Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of a homer shall yield

an ephah.

11 Wo unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong

drink, that continue until night, and wine inflame them!

12 And the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and wine are in their feasts; but

they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands. 13 Therefore, my people are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge;

and their honorable men are famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst. 14 Therefore, hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth without measure;

and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoiceth, shall

descend into it.

15 And the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall be

humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled.

16 But the Lord of Hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and God that is holy shall be

sanctified in righteousness.

17 Then shall the lambs feed after their manner, and the waste places of the fat ones

shall strangers eat.

18 Wo unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a

cart rope;

19 That say: Let him make speed, hasten his work, that we may see it; and let the

counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it. 20 Wo unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for light, and

light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!

21 Wo unto the wise in their own eyes and prudent in their own sight! 22 Wo unto the mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink; 23 Who justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the

righteous from him!

24 Therefore, as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumeth the chaff,

their root shall be rottenness, and their blossoms shall go up as dust; because they

have cast away the law of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One

of Israel.

25 Therefore, is the anger of the Lord kindled against his people, and he hath

stretched forth his hand against them, and hath smitten them; and the hills did

tremble, and their carcasses were torn in the midst of the streets. For all this his

anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

26 And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and will hiss unto them

from the end of the earth; and behold, they shall come with speed swiftly; none

shall be weary nor stumble among them.

27 None shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor

the latchet of their shoes be broken;

28 Whose arrows shall be sharp, and all their bows bent, and their horses’ hoofs

shall be counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind, their roaring like a lion. 29 They shall roar like young lions; yea, they shall roar, and lay hold of the prey, and

68

2 nephi 15

shall carry away safe, and none shall deliver.

30 And in that day they shall roar against them like the roaring of the sea; and if

they look unto the land, behold, darkness and sorrow, and the light is darkened in

the heavens thereof.

2 Nephi 16

1 In the year that king Uzziah died, I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high

and lifted up, and his train filled the temple.

2 Above it stood the seraphim; each one had six wings; with twain he covered his

face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly.

3 And one cried unto another, and said: Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts; the

whole earth is full of his glory.

4 And the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried, and the house

was filled with smoke.

5 Then said I: Wo is unto me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean

lips; and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the

King, the Lord of Hosts.

6 Then flew one of the seraphim unto me, having a live coal in his hand, which he

had taken with the tongs from off the altar;

7 And he laid it upon my mouth, and said: Lo, this has touched thy lips; and thine

iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged.

8 Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying: Whom shall I send, and who will go

for us? Then I said: Here am I; send me.

9 And he said: Go and tell this people—Hear ye indeed, but they understood not;

and see ye indeed, but they perceived not.

10 Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their

eyes—lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with

their heart, and be converted and be healed.

11 Then said I: Lord, how long? And he said: Until the cities be wasted without

inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate; 12 And the Lord have removed men far away, for there shall be a great forsaking in

the midst of the land.

13 But yet there shall be a tenth, and they shall return, and shall be eaten, as a teil

tree, and as an oak whose substance is in them when they cast their leaves; so the

holy seed shall be the substance thereof.

2 Nephi 17

1 And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king

of Judah, that Rezin, king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel,

went up toward Jerusalem to war against it, but could not prevail against it. 2 And it was told the house of David, saying: Syria is confederate with Ephraim.

And his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of the wood are

moved with the wind.

3 Then said the Lord unto Isaiah: Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou and

Shearjashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of

2 nephi 16

69

the fuller’s field;

4 And say unto him: Take heed, and be quiet; fear not, neither be faint-hearted for

the two tails of these smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria,

and of the son of Remaliah.

5 Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have taken evil counsel against

thee, saying:

6 Let us go up against Judah and vex it, and let us make a breach therein for us, and

set a king in the midst of it, yea, the son of Tabeal.

7 Thus saith the Lord God: It shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass. 8 For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus, Rezin; and within

threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken that it be not a people. 9 And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliah’s son.

If ye will not believe surely ye shall not be established.

10 Moreover, the Lord spake again unto Ahaz, saying:

11 Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God; ask it either in the depths, or in the heights

above.

12 But Ahaz said: I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord.

13 And he said: Hear ye now, O house of David; is it a small thing for you to weary

men, but will ye weary my God also?

14 Therefore, the Lord himself shall give you a sign—Behold, a virgin shall

conceive, and shall bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.

15 Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil and to choose

the good.

16 For before the child shall know to refuse the evil and choose the good, the land

that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings.

17 The Lord shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy father’s

house, days that have not come from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah, the

king of Assyria.

18 And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall hiss for the fly that is in

the uttermost part of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria. 19 And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate valleys, and in the

holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon all bushes.

20 In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is hired, by them beyond

the river, by the king of Assyria, the head, and the hair of the feet; and it shall also

consume the beard.

21 And it shall come to pass in that day, a man shall nourish a young cow and two

sheep;

22 And it shall come to pass, for the abundance of milk they shall give he shall eat

butter; for butter and honey shall every one eat that is left in the land. 23 And it shall come to pass in that day, every place shall be, where there were a

thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, which shall be for briers and thorns. 24 With arrows and with bows shall men come thither, because all the land shall

become briers and thorns.

25 And all hills that shall be digged with the mattock, there shall not come thither

the fear of briers and thorns; but it shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and the

treading of lesser cattle.

70

2 nephi 17

2 Nephi 18

1 Moreover, the word of the Lord said unto me: Take thee a great roll, and write in it

with a man’s pen, concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz.

2 And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah

the son of Jeberechiah.

3 And I went unto the prophetess; and she conceived and bare a son. Then said the

Lord to me: Call his name, Maher-shalal-hash-baz.

4 For behold, the child shall not have knowledge to cry, My father, and my mother,

before the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away before

the king of Assyria.

5 The Lord spake also unto me again, saying:

6 Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice

in Rezin and Remaliah’s son;

7 Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth up upon them the waters of the river,

strong and many, even the king of Assyria and all his glory; and he shall come up

over all his channels, and go over all his banks.

8 And he shall pass through Judah; he shall overflow and go over, he shall reach

even to the neck; and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy

land, O Immanuel.

9 Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear

all ye of far countries; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird

yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces.

10 Take counsel together, and it shall come to naught; speak the word, and it shall

not stand; for God is with us.

11 For the Lord spake thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed me that I

should not walk in the way of this people, saying:

12 Say ye not, A confederacy, to all to whom this people shall say, A confederacy;

neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid.

13 Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your

dread.

14 And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock of

offense to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and a snare to the inhabitants of

Jerusalem.

15 And many among them shall stumble and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and

be taken.

16 Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples.

17 And I will wait upon the Lord, that hideth his face from the house of Jacob, and

I will look for him.

18 Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath given me are for signs and for

wonders in Israel from the Lord of Hosts, which dwelleth in Mount Zion. 19 And when they shall say unto you: Seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and

unto wizards that peep and mutter—should not a people seek unto their God for

the living to hear from the dead?

20 To the law and to the testimony; and if they speak not according to this word, it

is because there is no light in them.

21 And they shall pass through it hardly bestead and hungry; and it shall come to

2 nephi 18

71

pass that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse their king

and their God, and look upward.

22 And they shall look unto the earth and behold trouble, and darkness, dimness of

anguish, and shall be driven to darkness.

2 Nephi 19

1 Nevertheless, the dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation, when at first he

lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun, and the land of Naphtali, and afterwards did

more grievously afflict by the way of the Red Sea beyond Jordan in Galilee of the

nations.

2 The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light; they that dwell in the

land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined.

3 Thou hast multiplied the nation, and increased the joy—they joy before thee

according to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil. 4 For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod

of his oppressor.

5 For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in

blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire.

6 For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the government shall be

upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called, Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty

God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace.

7 Of the increase of government and peace there is no end, upon the throne of

David, and upon his kingdom to order it, and to establish it with judgment and

with justice from henceforth, even forever. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will

perform this.

8 The Lord sent his word unto Jacob and it hath lighted upon Israel.

9 And all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the inhabitants of Samaria, that

say in the pride and stoutness of heart:

10 The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones; the sycamores are

cut down, but we will change them into cedars.

11 Therefore the Lord shall set up the adversaries of Rezin against him, and join his

enemies together;

12 The Syrians before and the Philistines behind; and they shall devour Israel with

open mouth. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out

still.

13 For the people turneth not unto him that smiteth them, neither do they seek the

Lord of Hosts.

14 Therefore will the Lord cut off from Israel head and tail, branch and rush in one

day.

15 The ancient, he is the head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail. 16 For the leaders of this people cause them to err; and they that are led of them are

destroyed.

17 Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young men, neither shall have mercy

on their fatherless and widows; for every one of them is a hypocrite and an evildoer,

and every mouth speaketh folly. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his

hand is stretched out still.

72

2 nephi 19

18 For wickedness burneth as the fire; it shall devour the briers and thorns, and shall

kindle in the thickets of the forests, and they shall mount up like the lifting up of

smoke.

19 Through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts is the land darkened, and the people

shall be as the fuel of the fire; no man shall spare his brother.

20 And he shall snatch on the right hand and be hungry; and he shall eat on the left

hand and they shall not be satisfied; they shall eat every man the flesh of his own

arm—

21 Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh; they together shall be against

Judah. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

2 Nephi 20

1 Wo unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousness which

they have prescribed;

2 To turn away the needy from judgment, and to take away the right from the poor

of my people, that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless! 3 And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shall

come from far? to whom will ye flee for help? and where will ye leave your glory? 4 Without me they shall bow down under the prisoners, and they shall fall under

the slain. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. 5 O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is their indignation. 6 I will send him against a hypocritical nation, and against the people of my wrath

will I give him a charge to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them

down like the mire of the streets.

7 Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so; but in his heart it is

to destroy and cut off nations not a few.

8 For he saith: Are not my princes altogether kings?

9 Is not Calno as Carchemish? Is not Hamath as Arpad? Is not Samaria as

Damascus?

10 As my hand hath founded the kingdoms of the idols, and whose graven images

did excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria;

11 Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and to

her idols?

12 Wherefore it shall come to pass that when the Lord hath performed his whole

work upon Mount Zion and upon Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout

heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks.

13 For he saith: By the strength of my hand and by my wisdom I have done these

things; for I am prudent; and I have moved the borders of the people, and have

robbed their treasures, and I have put down the inhabitants like a valiant man; 14 And my hand hath found as a nest the riches of the people; and as one gathereth

eggs that are left have I gathered all the earth; and there was none that moved the

wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped.

15 Shall the ax boast itself against him that heweth therewith? Shall the saw

magnify itself against him that shaketh it? As if the rod should shake itself against

them that lift it up, or as if the staff should lift up itself as if it were no wood! 16 Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, send among his fat ones, leanness;

2 nephi 20

73

and under his glory he shall kindle a burning like the burning of a fire. 17 And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame, and shall

burn and shall devour his thorns and his briers in one day;

18 And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful field, both soul and

body; and they shall be as when a standard-bearer fainteth.

19 And the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a child may write them. 20 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of Israel, and such as are

escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more again stay upon him that smote them,

but shall stay upon the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, in truth.

21 The remnant shall return, yea, even the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty God. 22 For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of them shall

return; the consumption decreed shall overflow with righteousness.

23 For the Lord God of Hosts shall make a consumption, even determined in all the

land.

24 Therefore, thus saith the Lord God of Hosts: O my people that dwellest in Zion,

be not afraid of the Assyrian; he shall smite thee with a rod, and shall lift up his staff

against thee, after the manner of Egypt.

25 For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their

destruction.

26 And the Lord of Hosts shall stir up a scourge for him according to the slaughter

of Midian at the rock of Oreb; and as his rod was upon the sea so shall he lift it up

after the manner of Egypt.

27 And it shall come to pass in that day that his burden shall be taken away from off

thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed

because of the anointing.

28 He is come to Aiath, he is passed to Migron; at Michmash he hath laid up his

carriages.

29 They are gone over the passage; they have taken up their lodging at Geba;

Ramath is afraid; Gibeah of Saul is fled.

30 Lift up the voice, O daughter of Gallim; cause it to be heard unto Laish, O poor

Anathoth.

31 Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of Gebim gather themselves to flee. 32 As yet shall he remain at Nob that day; he shall shake his hand against the mount

of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem.

33 Behold, the Lord, the Lord of Hosts shall lop the bough with terror; and the

high ones of stature shall be hewn down; and the haughty shall be humbled. 34 And he shall cut down the thickets of the forests with iron, and Lebanon shall

fall by a mighty one.

2 Nephi 21

1 And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow

out of his roots.

2 And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and

understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the

fear of the Lord;

3 And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord; and he shall

74

2 nephi 21

not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears. 4 But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the

meek of the earth; and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with

the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.

5 And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of

his reins.

6 The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the

kid, and the calf and the young lion and fatling together; and a little child shall lead

them.

7 And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together;

and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

8 And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child

shall put his hand on the cockatrice’s den.

9 They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, for the earth shall be

full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.

10 And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of

the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek; and his rest shall be glorious. 11 And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall set his hand again the

second time to recover the remnant of his people which shall be left, from Assyria,

and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from

Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.

12 And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of

Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth. 13 The envy of Ephraim also shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut

off; Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. 14 But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines towards the west; they

shall spoil them of the east together; they shall lay their hand upon Edom and

Moab; and the children of Ammon shall obey them.

15 And the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his

mighty wind he shall shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the seven

streams, and make men go over dry shod.

16 And there shall be a highway for the remnant of his people which shall be left,

from Assyria, like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of

Egypt.

2 Nephi 22

1 And in that day thou shalt say: O Lord, I will praise thee; though thou wast angry

with me thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me.

2 Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid; for the Lord

Jehovah is my strength and my song; he also has become my salvation. 3 Therefore, with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation. 4 And in that day shall ye say: Praise the Lord, call upon his name, declare his

doings among the people, make mention that his name is exalted.

5 Sing unto the Lord; for he hath done excellent things; this is known in all the

earth.

6 Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion; for great is the Holy One of Israel in

2 nephi 22

75

the midst of thee.

2 Nephi 23

1 The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see.

2 Lift ye up a banner upon the high mountain, exalt the voice unto them, shake the

hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles.

3 I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty ones, for

mine anger is not upon them that rejoice in my highness.

4 The noise of the multitude in the mountains like as of a great people, a

tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered together, the Lord of Hosts

mustereth the hosts of the battle.

5 They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, yea, the Lord, and the

weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land.

6 Howl ye, for the day of the Lord is at hand; it shall come as a destruction from

the Almighty.

7 Therefore shall all hands be faint, every man’s heart shall melt;

8 And they shall be afraid; pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them; they shall be

amazed one at another; their faces shall be as flames.

9 Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to

lay the land desolate; and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it. 10 For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not give their light;

the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light

to shine.

11 And I will punish the world for evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; I will

cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay down the haughtiness of the

terrible.

12 I will make a man more precious than fine gold; even a man than the golden

wedge of Ophir.

13 Therefore, I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out of her place, in

the wrath of the Lord of Hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger.

14 And it shall be as the chased roe, and as a sheep that no man taketh up; and they

shall every man turn to his own people, and flee every one into his own land. 15 Every one that is proud shall be thrust through; yea, and every one that is joined

to the wicked shall fall by the sword.

16 Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes; their houses shall

be spoiled and their wives ravished.

17 Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not regard silver and

gold, nor shall they delight in it.

18 Their bows shall also dash the young men to pieces; and they shall have no pity

on the fruit of the womb; their eyes shall not spare children.

19 And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees’ excellency,

shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.

20 It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to

generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds

make their fold there.

21 But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses shall be full of

76

2 nephi 23

doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there. 22 And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses, and dragons

in their pleasant palaces; and her time is near to come, and her day shall not be

prolonged. For I will destroy her speedily; yea, for I will be merciful unto my

people, but the wicked shall perish.

2 Nephi 24

1 For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in

their own land; and the strangers shall be joined with them, and they shall cleave to

the house of Jacob.

2 And the people shall take them and bring them to their place; yea, from far unto

the ends of the earth; and they shall return to their lands of promise. And the house

of Israel shall possess them, and the land of the Lord shall be for servants and

handmaids; and they shall take them captives unto whom they were captives; and

they shall rule over their oppressors.

3 And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall give thee rest, from thy

sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to

serve.

4 And it shall come to pass in that day, that thou shalt take up this proverb against

the king of Babylon, and say: How hath the oppressor ceased, the golden city

ceased!

5 The Lord hath broken the staff of the wicked, the scepters of the rulers. 6 He who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke, he that ruled the

nations in anger, is persecuted, and none hindereth.

7 The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet; they break forth into singing. 8 Yea, the fir trees rejoice at thee, and also the cedars of Lebanon, saying: Since

thou art laid down no feller is come up against us.

9 Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming; it stirreth up

the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth; it hath raised up from their

thrones all the kings of the nations.

10 All they shall speak and say unto thee: Art thou also become weak as we? Art

thou become like unto us?

11 Thy pomp is brought down to the grave; the noise of thy viols is not heard; the

worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee.

12 How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! Art thou cut

down to the ground, which did weaken the nations!

13 For thou hast said in thy heart: I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne

above the stars of God; I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the

sides of the north;

14 I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the Most High. 15 Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit.

16 They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and shall consider thee, and

shall say: Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms? 17 And made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof, and opened

not the house of his prisoners?

18 All the kings of the nations, yea, all of them, lie in glory, every one of them in his

2 nephi 24

77

own house.

19 But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch, and the remnant of

those that are slain, thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the

pit; as a carcass trodden under feet.

20 Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy

land and slain thy people; the seed of evil-doers shall never be renowned. 21 Prepare slaughter for his children for the iniquities of their fathers, that they do

not rise, nor possess the land, nor fill the face of the world with cities. 22 For I will rise up against them, saith the Lord of Hosts, and cut off from Babylon

the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew, saith the Lord.

23 I will also make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of water; and I will

sweep it with the besom of destruction, saith the Lord of Hosts.

24 The Lord of Hosts hath sworn, saying: Surely as I have thought, so shall it come

to pass; and as I have purposed, so shall it stand—

25 That I will bring the Assyrian in my land, and upon my mountains tread him

under foot; then shall his yoke depart from off them, and his burden depart from off

their shoulders.

26 This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth; and this is the hand

that is stretched out upon all nations.

27 For the Lord of Hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul? And his hand is

stretched out, and who shall turn it back?

28 In the year that king Ahaz died was this burden.

29 Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of him that smote thee is

broken; for out of the serpent’s root shall come forth a cockatrice, and his fruit shall

be a fiery flying serpent.

30 And the firstborn of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie down in safety;

and I will kill thy root with famine, and he shall slay thy remnant.

31 Howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou, whole Palestina, art dissolved; for there shall

come from the north a smoke, and none shall be alone in his appointed times. 32 What shall then answer the messengers of the nations? That the Lord hath

founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it.

2 Nephi 25

1 Now I, Nephi, do speak somewhat concerning the words which I have written,

which have been spoken by the mouth of Isaiah. For behold, Isaiah spake many

things which were hard for many of my people to understand; for they know not

concerning the manner of prophesying among the Jews.

2 For I, Nephi, have not taught them many things concerning the manner of the

Jews; for their works were works of darkness, and their doings were doings of

abominations.

3 Wherefore, I write unto my people, unto all those that shall receive hereafter

these things which I write, that they may know the judgments of God, that they

come upon all nations, according to the word which he hath spoken. 4 Wherefore, hearken, O my people, which are of the house of Israel, and give ear

unto my words; for because the words of Isaiah are not plain unto you, nevertheless

they are plain unto all those that are filled with the spirit of prophecy. But I give

78

2 nephi 25

unto you a prophecy, according to the spirit which is in me; wherefore I shall

prophesy according to the plainness which hath been with me from the time that I

came out from Jerusalem with my father; for behold, my soul delighteth in plainness

unto my people, that they may learn.

5 Yea, and my soul delighteth in the words of Isaiah, for I came out from Jerusalem,

and mine eyes hath beheld the things of the Jews, and I know that the Jews do

understand the things of the prophets, and there is none other people that

understand the things which were spoken unto the Jews like unto them, save it be

that they are taught after the manner of the things of the Jews.

6 But behold, I, Nephi, have not taught my children after the manner of the Jews;

but behold, I, of myself, have dwelt at Jerusalem, wherefore I know concerning the

regions round about; and I have made mention unto my children concerning the

judgments of God, which hath come to pass among the Jews, unto my children,

according to all that which Isaiah hath spoken, and I do not write them. 7 But behold, I proceed with mine own prophecy, according to my plainness; in

the which I know that no man can err; nevertheless, in the days that the prophecies

of Isaiah shall be fulfilled men shall know of a surety, at the times when they shall

come to pass.

8 Wherefore, they are of worth unto the children of men, and he that supposeth

that they are not, unto them will I speak particularly, and confine the words unto

mine own people; for I know that they shall be of great worth unto them in the last

days; for in that day shall they understand them; wherefore, for their good have I

written them.

9 And as one generation hath been destroyed among the Jews because of iniquity,

even so have they been destroyed from generation to generation according to their

iniquities; and never hath any of them been destroyed save it were foretold them by

the prophets of the Lord.

10 Wherefore, it hath been told them concerning the destruction which should

come upon them, immediately after my father left Jerusalem; nevertheless, they

hardened their hearts; and according to my prophecy they have been destroyed, save

it be those which are carried away captive into Babylon.

11 And now this I speak because of the spirit which is in me. And notwithstanding

they have been carried away they shall return again, and possess the land of

Jerusalem; wherefore, they shall be restored again to the land of their inheritance. 12 But, behold, they shall have wars, and rumors of wars; and when the day cometh

that the Only Begotten of the Father, yea, even the Father of heaven and of earth,

shall manifest himself unto them in the flesh, behold, they will reject him, because

of their iniquities, and the hardness of their hearts, and the stiffness of their necks. 13 Behold, they will crucify him; and after he is laid in a sepulchre for the space of

three days he shall rise from the dead, with healing in his wings; and all those who

shall believe on his name shall be saved in the kingdom of God. Wherefore, my soul

delighteth to prophesy concerning him, for I have seen his day, and my heart doth

magnify his holy name.

14 And behold it shall come to pass that after the Messiah hath risen from the dead,

and hath manifested himself unto his people, unto as many as will believe on his

name, behold, Jerusalem shall be destroyed again; for wo unto them that fight

against God and the people of his church.

2 nephi 25

79

15 Wherefore, the Jews shall be scattered among all nations; yea, and also Babylon

shall be destroyed; wherefore, the Jews shall be scattered by other nations. 16 And after they have been scattered, and the Lord God hath scourged them by

other nations for the space of many generations, yea, even down from generation to

generation until they shall be persuaded to believe in Christ, the Son of God, and

the atonement, which is infinite for all mankind—and when that day shall come

that they shall believe in Christ, and worship the Father in his name, with pure

hearts and clean hands, and look not forward any more for another Messiah, then,

at that time, the day will come that it must needs be expedient that they should

believe these things.

17 And the Lord will set his hand again the second time to restore his people from

their lost and fallen state. Wherefore, he will proceed to do a marvelous work and a

wonder among the children of men.

18 Wherefore, he shall bring forth his words unto them, which words shall judge

them at the last day, for they shall be given them for the purpose of convincing them

of the true Messiah, who was rejected by them; and unto the convincing of them

that they need not look forward any more for a Messiah to come, for there should

not any come, save it should be a false Messiah which should deceive the people; for

there is save one Messiah spoken of by the prophets, and that Messiah is he who

should be rejected of the Jews.

19 For according to the words of the prophets, the Messiah cometh in six hundred

years from the time that my father left Jerusalem; and according to the words of the

prophets, and also the word of the angel of God, his name shall be Jesus Christ, the

Son of God.

20 And now, my brethren, I have spoken plainly that ye cannot err. And as the Lord

God liveth that brought Israel up out of the land of Egypt, and gave unto Moses

power that he should heal the nations after they had been bitten by the poisonous

serpents, if they would cast their eyes unto the serpent which he did raise up before

them, and also gave him power that he should smite the rock and the water should

come forth; yea, behold I say unto you, that as these things are true, and as the Lord

God liveth, there is none other name given under heaven save it be this Jesus Christ,

of which I have spoken, whereby man can be saved.

21 Wherefore, for this cause hath the Lord God promised unto me that these things

which I write shall be kept and preserved, and handed down unto my seed, from

generation to generation, that the promise may be fulfilled unto Joseph, that his

seed should never perish as long as the earth should stand.

22 Wherefore, these things shall go from generation to generation as long as the

earth shall stand; and they shall go according to the will and pleasure of God; and

the nations who shall possess them shall be judged of them according to the words

which are written.

23 For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren,

to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that

we are saved, after all we can do.

24 And, notwithstanding we believe in Christ, we keep the law of Moses, and look

forward with steadfastness unto Christ, until the law shall be fulfilled. 25 For, for this end was the law given; wherefore the law hath become dead unto us,

and we are made alive in Christ because of our faith; yet we keep the law because of

80

2 nephi 25

the commandments.

26 And we talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of

Christ, and we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know to

what source they may look for a remission of their sins.

27 Wherefore, we speak concerning the law that our children may know the

deadness of the law; and they, by knowing the deadness of the law, may look

forward unto that life which is in Christ, and know for what end the law was given.

And after the law is fulfilled in Christ, that they need not harden their hearts against

him when the law ought to be done away.

28 And now behold, my people, ye are a stiffnecked people; wherefore, I have

spoken plainly unto you, that ye cannot misunderstand. And the words which I

have spoken shall stand as a testimony against you; for they are sufficient to teach

any man the right way; for the right way is to believe in Christ and deny him not;

for by denying him ye also deny the prophets and the law.

29 And now behold, I say unto you that the right way is to believe in Christ, and

deny him not; and Christ is the Holy One of Israel; wherefore ye must bow down

before him, and worship him with all your might, mind, and strength, and your

whole soul; and if ye do this ye shall in nowise be cast out.

30 And, inasmuch as it shall be expedient, ye must keep the performances and

ordinances of God until the law shall be fulfilled which was given unto Moses.

2 Nephi 26

1 And after Christ shall have risen from the dead he shall show himself unto you, my

children, and my beloved brethren; and the words which he shall speak unto you

shall be the law which ye shall do.

2 For behold, I say unto you that I have beheld that many generations shall pass

away, and there shall be great wars and contentions among my people. 3 And after the Messiah shall come there shall be signs given unto my people of his

birth, and also of his death and resurrection; and great and terrible shall that day be

unto the wicked, for they shall perish; and they perish because they cast out the

prophets, and the saints, and stone them, and slay them; wherefore the cry of the

blood of the saints shall ascend up to God from the ground against them. 4 Wherefore, all those who are proud, and that do wickedly, the day that cometh

shall burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, for they shall be as stubble. 5 And they that kill the prophets, and the saints, the depths of the earth shall

swallow them up, saith the Lord of Hosts; and mountains shall cover them, and

whirlwinds shall carry them away, and buildings shall fall upon them and crush

them to pieces and grind them to powder.

6 And they shall be visited with thunderings, and lightnings, and earthquakes, and

all manner of destructions, for the fire of the anger of the Lord shall be kindled

against them, and they shall be as stubble, and the day that cometh shall consume

them, saith the Lord of Hosts.

7 O the pain, and the anguish of my soul for the loss of the slain of my people! For

I, Nephi, have seen it, and it well nigh consumeth me before the presence of the

Lord; but I must cry unto my God: Thy ways are just.

8 But behold, the righteous that hearken unto the words of the prophets, and

2 nephi 26

81

destroy them not, but look forward unto Christ with steadfastness for the signs

which are given, notwithstanding all persecution—behold, they are they which

shall not perish.

9 But the Son of Righteousness shall appear unto them; and he shall heal them,

and they shall have peace with him, until three generations shall have passed away,

and many of the fourth generation shall have passed away in righteousness. 10 And when these things have passed away a speedy destruction cometh unto my

people; for, notwithstanding the pains of my soul, I have seen it; wherefore, I know

that it shall come to pass; and they sell themselves for naught; for, for the reward of

their pride and their foolishness they shall reap destruction; for because they yield

unto the devil and choose works of darkness rather than light, therefore they must

go down to hell.

11 For the Spirit of the Lord will not always strive with man. And when the Spirit

ceaseth to strive with man then cometh speedy destruction, and this grieveth my

soul.

12 And as I spake concerning the convincing of the Jews, that Jesus is the very

Christ, it must needs be that the Gentiles be convinced also that Jesus is the Christ,

the Eternal God;

13 And that he manifesteth himself unto all those who believe in him, by the power

of the Holy Ghost; yea, unto every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, working

mighty miracles, signs, and wonders, among the children of men according to their

faith.

14 But behold, I prophesy unto you concerning the last days; concerning the days

when the Lord God shall bring these things forth unto the children of men. 15 After my seed and the seed of my brethren shall have dwindled in unbelief, and

shall have been smitten by the Gentiles; yea, after the Lord God shall have camped

against them round about, and shall have laid siege against them with a mount, and

raised forts against them; and after they shall have been brought down low in the

dust, even that they are not, yet the words of the righteous shall be written, and the

prayers of the faithful shall be heard, and all those who have dwindled in unbelief

shall not be forgotten.

16 For those who shall be destroyed shall speak unto them out of the ground, and

their speech shall be low out of the dust, and their voice shall be as one that hath a

familiar spirit; for the Lord God will give unto him power, that he may whisper

concerning them, even as it were out of the ground; and their speech shall whisper

out of the dust.

17 For thus saith the Lord God: They shall write the things which shall be done

among them, and they shall be written and sealed up in a book, and those who have

dwindled in unbelief shall not have them, for they seek to destroy the things of God. 18 Wherefore, as those who have been destroyed have been destroyed speedily; and

the multitude of their terrible ones shall be as chaff that passeth away—yea, thus

saith the Lord God: It shall be at an instant, suddenly—

19 And it shall come to pass, that those who have dwindled in unbelief shall be

smitten by the hand of the Gentiles.

20 And the Gentiles are lifted up in the pride of their eyes, and have stumbled,

because of the greatness of their stumbling block, that they have built up many

churches; nevertheless, they put down the power and miracles of God, and preach

82

2 nephi 26

up unto themselves their own wisdom and their own learning, that they may get

gain and grind upon the face of the poor.

21 And there are many churches built up which cause envyings, and strifes, and

malice.

22 And there are also secret combinations, even as in times of old, according to the

combinations of the devil, for he is the founder of all these things; yea, the founder

of murder, and works of darkness; yea, and he leadeth them by the neck with a

flaxen cord, until he bindeth them with his strong cords forever.

23 For behold, my beloved brethren, I say unto you that the Lord God worketh not

in darkness.

24 He doeth not anything save it be for the benefit of the world; for he loveth the

world, even that he layeth down his own life that he may draw all men unto him.

Wherefore, he commandeth none that they shall not partake of his salvation. 25 Behold, doth he cry unto any, saying: Depart from me? Behold, I say unto you,

Nay; but he saith: Come unto me all ye ends of the earth, buy milk and honey,

without money and without price.

26 Behold, hath he commanded any that they should depart out of the synagogues,

or out of the houses of worship? Behold, I say unto you, Nay.

27 Hath he commanded any that they should not partake of his salvation? Behold I

say unto you, Nay; but he hath given it free for all men; and he hath commanded his

people that they should persuade all men to repentance.

28 Behold, hath the Lord commanded any that they should not partake of his

goodness? Behold I say unto you, Nay; but all men are privileged the one like unto

the other, and none are forbidden.

29 He commandeth that there shall be no priestcrafts; for, behold, priestcrafts are

that men preach and set themselves up for a light unto the world, that they may get

gain and praise of the world; but they seek not the welfare of Zion.

30 Behold, the Lord hath forbidden this thing; wherefore, the Lord God hath given

a commandment that all men should have charity, which charity is love. And except

they should have charity they were nothing. Wherefore, if they should have charity

they would not suffer the laborer in Zion to perish.

31 But the laborer in Zion shall labor for Zion; for if they labor for money they shall

perish.

32 And again, the Lord God hath commanded that men should not murder; that

they should not lie; that they should not steal; that they should not take the name

of the Lord their God in vain; that they should not envy; that they should not have

malice; that they should not contend one with another; that they should not

commit whoredoms; and that they should do none of these things; for whoso doeth

them shall perish.

33 For none of these iniquities come of the Lord; for he doeth that which is good

among the children of men; and he doeth nothing save it be plain unto the children

of men; and he inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and

he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and

female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God, both Jew and

Gentile.

2 nephi 26

83

2 Nephi 27

1 But, behold, in the last days, or in the days of the Gentiles—yea, behold all the

nations of the Gentiles and also the Jews, both those who shall come upon this land

and those who shall be upon other lands, yea, even upon all the lands of the earth,

behold, they will be drunken with iniquity and all manner of abominations— 2 And when that day shall come they shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts, with

thunder and with earthquake, and with a great noise, and with storm, and with

tempest, and with the flame of devouring fire.

3 And all the nations that fight against Zion, and that distress her, shall be as a

dream of a night vision; yea, it shall be unto them, even as unto a hungry man which

dreameth, and behold he eateth but he awaketh and his soul is empty; or like unto a

thirsty man which dreameth, and behold he drinketh but he awaketh and behold he

is faint, and his soul hath appetite; yea, even so shall the multitude of all the nations

be that fight against Mount Zion.

4 For behold, all ye that doeth iniquity, stay yourselves and wonder, for ye shall cry

out, and cry; yea, ye shall be drunken but not with wine, ye shall stagger but not

with strong drink.

5 For behold, the Lord hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep. For

behold, ye have closed your eyes, and ye have rejected the prophets; and your rulers,

and the seers hath he covered because of your iniquity.

6 And it shall come to pass that the Lord God shall bring forth unto you the words

of a book, and they shall be the words of them which have slumbered. 7 And behold the book shall be sealed; and in the book shall be a revelation from

God, from the beginning of the world to the ending thereof.

8 Wherefore, because of the things which are sealed up, the things which are sealed

shall not be delivered in the day of the wickedness and abominations of the people.

Wherefore the book shall be kept from them.

9 But the book shall be delivered unto a man, and he shall deliver the words of the

book, which are the words of those who have slumbered in the dust, and he shall

deliver these words unto another;

10 But the words which are sealed he shall not deliver, neither shall he deliver the

book. For the book shall be sealed by the power of God, and the revelation which

was sealed shall be kept in the book until the own due time of the Lord, that they

may come forth; for behold, they reveal all things from the foundation of the world

unto the end thereof.

11 And the day cometh that the words of the book which were sealed shall be read

upon the house tops; and they shall be read by the power of Christ; and all things

shall be revealed unto the children of men which ever have been among the children

of men, and which ever will be even unto the end of the earth.

12 Wherefore, at that day when the book shall be delivered unto the man of whom I

have spoken, the book shall be hid from the eyes of the world, that the eyes of none

shall behold it save it be that three witnesses shall behold it, by the power of God,

besides him to whom the book shall be delivered; and they shall testify to the truth

of the book and the things therein.

13 And there is none other which shall view it, save it be a few according to the will

of God, to bear testimony of his word unto the children of men; for the Lord God

84

2 nephi 27

hath said that the words of the faithful should speak as if it were from the dead. 14 Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to bring forth the words of the book; and

in the mouth of as many witnesses as seemeth him good will he establish his word;

and wo be unto him that rejecteth the word of God!

15 But behold, it shall come to pass that the Lord God shall say unto him to whom

he shall deliver the book: Take these words which are not sealed and deliver them to

another, that he may show them unto the learned, saying: Read this, I pray thee.

And the learned shall say: Bring hither the book, and I will read them. 16 And now, because of the glory of the world and to get gain will they say this, and

not for the glory of God.

17 And the man shall say: I cannot bring the book, for it is sealed.

18 Then shall the learned say: I cannot read it.

19 Wherefore it shall come to pass, that the Lord God will deliver again the book

and the words thereof to him that is not learned; and the man that is not learned

shall say: I am not learned.

20 Then shall the Lord God say unto him: The learned shall not read them, for they

have rejected them, and I am able to do mine own work; wherefore thou shalt read

the words which I shall give unto thee.

21 Touch not the things which are sealed, for I will bring them forth in mine own

due time; for I will show unto the children of men that I am able to do mine own

work.

22 Wherefore, when thou hast read the words which I have commanded thee, and

obtained the witnesses which I have promised unto thee, then shalt thou seal up the

book again, and hide it up unto me, that I may preserve the words which thou hast

not read, until I shall see fit in mine own wisdom to reveal all things unto the

children of men.

23 For behold, I am God; and I am a God of miracles; and I will show unto the

world that I am the same yesterday, today, and forever; and I work not among the

children of men save it be according to their faith.

24 And again it shall come to pass that the Lord shall say unto him that shall read

the words that shall be delivered him:

25 Forasmuch as this people draw near unto me with their mouth, and with their

lips do honor me, but have removed their hearts far from me, and their fear towards

me is taught by the precepts of men—

26 Therefore, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, yea, a

marvelous work and a wonder, for the wisdom of their wise and learned shall perish,

and the understanding of their prudent shall be hid.

27 And wo unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord! And

their works are in the dark; and they say: Who seeth us, and who knoweth us? And

they also say: Surely, your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the

potter’s clay. But behold, I will show unto them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that I

know all their works. For shall the work say of him that made it, he made me not?

Or shall the thing framed say of him that framed it, he had no understanding? 28 But behold, saith the Lord of Hosts: I will show unto the children of men that it

is yet a very little while and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field; and the

fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest.

29 And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the

2 nephi 27

85

blind shall see out of obscurity and out of darkness.

30 And the meek also shall increase, and their joy shall be in the Lord, and the poor

among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.

31 For assuredly as the Lord liveth they shall see that the terrible one is brought to

naught, and the scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off; 32 And they that make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that

reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of naught.

33 Therefore, thus saith the Lord, who redeemed Abraham, concerning the house of

Jacob: Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale. 34 But when he seeth his children, the work of my hands, in the midst of him, they

shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God

of Israel.

35 They also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, and they that

murmured shall learn doctrine.

2 Nephi 28

1 And now, behold, my brethren, I have spoken unto you, according as the Spirit hath

constrained me; wherefore, I know that they must surely come to pass. 2 And the things which shall be written out of the book shall be of great worth

unto the children of men, and especially unto our seed, which is a remnant of the

house of Israel.

3 For it shall come to pass in that day that the churches which are built up, and not

unto the Lord, when the one shall say unto the other: Behold, I, I am the Lord’s;

and the others shall say: I, I am the Lord’s; and thus shall every one say that hath

built up churches, and not unto the Lord—

4 And they shall contend one with another; and their priests shall contend one

with another, and they shall teach with their learning, and deny the Holy Ghost,

which giveth utterance.

5 And they deny the power of God, the Holy One of Israel; and they say unto the

people: Hearken unto us, and hear ye our precept; for behold there is no God today,

for the Lord and the Redeemer hath done his work, and he hath given his power

unto men;

6 Behold, hearken ye unto my precept; if they shall say there is a miracle wrought

by the hand of the Lord, believe it not; for this day he is not a God of miracles; he

hath done his work.

7 Yea, and there shall be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and be merry, for

tomorrow we die; and it shall be well with us.

8 And there shall also be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and be merry;

nevertheless, fear God—he will justify in committing a little sin; yea, lie a little, take

the advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no

harm in this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die; and if it so be that we are

guilty, God will beat us with a few stripes, and at last we shall be saved in the

kingdom of God.

9 Yea, and there shall be many which shall teach after this manner, false and vain

and foolish doctrines, and shall be puffed up in their hearts, and shall seek deep to

hide their counsels from the Lord; and their works shall be in the dark.

86

2 nephi 28

10 And the blood of the saints shall cry from the ground against them. 11 Yea, they have all gone out of the way; they have become corrupted. 12 Because of pride, and because of false teachers, and false doctrine, their churches

have become corrupted, and their churches are lifted up; because of pride they are

puffed up.

13 They rob the poor because of their fine sanctuaries; they rob the poor because of

their fine clothing; and they persecute the meek and the poor in heart, because in

their pride they are puffed up.

14 They wear stiff necks and high heads; yea, and because of pride, and wickedness,

and abominations, and whoredoms, they have all gone astray save it be a few, who

are the humble followers of Christ; nevertheless, they are led, that in many instances

they do err because they are taught by the precepts of men.

15 O the wise, and the learned, and the rich, that are puffed up in the pride of their

hearts, and all those who preach false doctrines, and all those who commit

whoredoms, and pervert the right way of the Lord, wo, wo, wo be unto them, saith

the Lord God Almighty, for they shall be thrust down to hell!

16 Wo unto them that turn aside the just for a thing of naught and revile against

that which is good, and say that it is of no worth! For the day shall come that the

Lord God will speedily visit the inhabitants of the earth; and in that day that they

are fully ripe in iniquity they shall perish.

17 But behold, if the inhabitants of the earth shall repent of their wickedness and

abominations they shall not be destroyed, saith the Lord of Hosts.

18 But behold, that great and abominable church, the whore of all the earth, must

tumble to the earth, and great must be the fall thereof.

19 For the kingdom of the devil must shake, and they which belong to it must needs

be stirred up unto repentance, or the devil will grasp them with his everlasting

chains, and they be stirred up to anger, and perish;

20 For behold, at that day shall he rage in the hearts of the children of men, and stir

them up to anger against that which is good.

21 And others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, that they will

say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well—and thus the devil

cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell.

22 And behold, others he flattereth away, and telleth them there is no hell; and he

saith unto them: I am no devil, for there is none—and thus he whispereth in their

ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains, from whence there is no deliverance. 23 Yea, they are grasped with death, and hell; and death, and hell, and the devil, and

all that have been seized therewith must stand before the throne of God, and be

judged according to their works, from whence they must go into the place prepared

for them, even a lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment. 24 Therefore, wo be unto him that is at ease in Zion!

25 Wo be unto him that crieth: All is well!

26 Yea, wo be unto him that hearkeneth unto the precepts of men, and denieth the

power of God, and the gift of the Holy Ghost!

27 Yea, wo be unto him that saith: We have received, and we need no more! 28 And in fine, wo unto all those who tremble, and are angry because of the truth of

God! For behold, he that is built upon the rock receiveth it with gladness; and he

that is built upon a sandy foundation trembleth lest he shall fall.

2 nephi 28

87

29 Wo be unto him that shall say: We have received the word of God, and we need

no more of the word of God, for we have enough!

30 For behold, thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line

upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those

who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn

wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say,

We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have. 31 Cursed is he that putteth his trust in man, or maketh flesh his arm, or shall

hearken unto the precepts of men, save their precepts shall be given by the power of

the Holy Ghost.

32 Wo be unto the Gentiles, saith the Lord God of Hosts! For notwithstanding I

shall lengthen out mine arm unto them from day to day, they will deny me;

nevertheless, I will be merciful unto them, saith the Lord God, if they will repent

and come unto me; for mine arm is lengthened out all the day long, saith the Lord

God of Hosts.

2 Nephi 29

1 But behold, there shall be many—at that day when I shall proceed to do a

marvelous work among them, that I may remember my covenants which I have

made unto the children of men, that I may set my hand again the second time to

recover my people, which are of the house of Israel;

2 And also, that I may remember the promises which I have made unto thee,

Nephi, and also unto thy father, that I would remember your seed; and that the

words of your seed should proceed forth out of my mouth unto your seed; and my

words shall hiss forth unto the ends of the earth, for a standard unto my people,

which are of the house of Israel;

3 And because my words shall hiss forth—many of the Gentiles shall say: A Bible!

A Bible! We have got a Bible, and there cannot be any more Bible.

4 But thus saith the Lord God: O fools, they shall have a Bible; and it shall

proceed forth from the Jews, mine ancient covenant people. And what thank they

the Jews for the Bible which they receive from them? Yea, what do the Gentiles

mean? Do they remember the travails, and the labors, and the pains of the Jews, and

their diligence unto me, in bringing forth salvation unto the Gentiles? 5 O ye Gentiles, have ye remembered the Jews, mine ancient covenant people?

Nay; but ye have cursed them, and have hated them, and have not sought to recover

them. But behold, I will return all these things upon your own heads; for I the Lord

have not forgotten my people.

6 Thou fool, that shall say: A Bible, we have got a Bible, and we need no more

Bible. Have ye obtained a Bible save it were by the Jews?

7 Know ye not that there are more nations than one? Know ye not that I, the Lord

your God, have created all men, and that I remember those who are upon the isles of

the sea; and that I rule in the heavens above and in the earth beneath; and I bring

forth my word unto the children of men, yea, even upon all the nations of the earth? 8 Wherefore murmur ye, because that ye shall receive more of my word? Know ye

not that the testimony of two nations is a witness unto you that I am God, that I

remember one nation like unto another? Wherefore, I speak the same words unto

88

2 nephi 29

one nation like unto another. And when the two nations shall run together the

testimony of the two nations shall run together also.

9 And I do this that I may prove unto many that I am the same yesterday, today,

and forever; and that I speak forth my words according to mine own pleasure. And

because that I have spoken one word ye need not suppose that I cannot speak

another; for my work is not yet finished; neither shall it be until the end of man,

neither from that time henceforth and forever.

10 Wherefore, because that ye have a Bible ye need not suppose that it contains all

my words; neither need ye suppose that I have not caused more to be written. 11 For I command all men, both in the east and in the west, and in the north, and in

the south, and in the islands of the sea, that they shall write the words which I speak

unto them; for out of the books which shall be written I will judge the world, every

man according to their works, according to that which is written.

12 For behold, I shall speak unto the Jews and they shall write it; and I shall also

speak unto the Nephites and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the other

tribes of the house of Israel, which I have led away, and they shall write it; and I shall

also speak unto all nations of the earth and they shall write it.

13 And it shall come to pass that the Jews shall have the words of the Nephites, and

the Nephites shall have the words of the Jews; and the Nephites and the Jews shall

have the words of the lost tribes of Israel; and the lost tribes of Israel shall have the

words of the Nephites and the Jews.

14 And it shall come to pass that my people, which are of the house of Israel, shall be

gathered home unto the lands of their possessions; and my word also shall be

gathered in one. And I will show unto them that fight against my word and against

my people, who are of the house of Israel, that I am God, and that I covenanted with

Abraham that I would remember his seed forever.

2 Nephi 30

1 And now behold, my beloved brethren, I would speak unto you; for I, Nephi, would

not suffer that ye should suppose that ye are more righteous than the Gentiles shall

be. For behold, except ye shall keep the commandments of God ye shall all likewise

perish; and because of the words which have been spoken ye need not suppose that

the Gentiles are utterly destroyed.

2 For behold, I say unto you that as many of the Gentiles as will repent are the

covenant people of the Lord; and as many of the Jews as will not repent shall be cast

off; for the Lord covenanteth with none save it be with them that repent and believe

in his Son, who is the Holy One of Israel.

3 And now, I would prophesy somewhat more concerning the Jews and the

Gentiles. For after the book of which I have spoken shall come forth, and be written

unto the Gentiles, and sealed up again unto the Lord, there shall be many which

shall believe the words which are written; and they shall carry them forth unto the

remnant of our seed.

4 And then shall the remnant of our seed know concerning us, how that we came

out from Jerusalem, and that they are descendants of the Jews.

5 And the gospel of Jesus Christ shall be declared among them; wherefore, they

shall be restored unto the knowledge of their fathers, and also to the knowledge of

2 nephi 30

89

Jesus Christ, which was had among their fathers.

6 And then shall they rejoice; for they shall know that it is a blessing unto them

from the hand of God; and their scales of darkness shall begin to fall from their

eyes; and many generations shall not pass away among them, save they shall be a

pure and a delightsome people.

7 And it shall come to pass that the Jews which are scattered also shall begin to

believe in Christ; and they shall begin to gather in upon the face of the land; and as

many as shall believe in Christ shall also become a delightsome people. 8 And it shall come to pass that the Lord God shall commence his work among all

nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, to bring about the restoration of his people

upon the earth.

9 And with righteousness shall the Lord God judge the poor, and reprove with

equity for the meek of the earth. And he shall smite the earth with the rod of his

mouth; and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.

10 For the time speedily cometh that the Lord God shall cause a great division

among the people, and the wicked will he destroy; and he will spare his people, yea,

even if it so be that he must destroy the wicked by fire.

11 And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of

his reins.

12 And then shall the wolf dwell with the lamb; and the leopard shall lie down with

the kid, and the calf, and the young lion, and the fatling, together; and a little child

shall lead them.

13 And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together;

and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

14 And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child

shall put his hand on the cockatrice’s den.

15 They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain; for the earth shall be

full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea.

16 Wherefore, the things of all nations shall be made known; yea, all things shall be

made known unto the children of men.

17 There is nothing which is secret save it shall be revealed; there is no work of

darkness save it shall be made manifest in the light; and there is nothing which is

sealed upon the earth save it shall be loosed.

18 Wherefore, all things which have been revealed unto the children of men shall at

that day be revealed; and Satan shall have power over the hearts of the children of

men no more, for a long time. And now, my beloved brethren, I make an end of my

sayings.

2 Nephi 31

1 And now I, Nephi, make an end of my prophesying unto you, my beloved brethren.

And I cannot write but a few things, which I know must surely come to pass;

neither can I write but a few of the words of my brother Jacob.

2 Wherefore, the things which I have written sufficeth me, save it be a few words

which I must speak concerning the doctrine of Christ; wherefore, I shall speak unto

you plainly, according to the plainness of my prophesying.

3 For my soul delighteth in plainness; for after this manner doth the Lord God

90

2 nephi 31

work among the children of men. For the Lord God giveth light unto the

understanding; for he speaketh unto men according to their language, unto their

understanding.

4 Wherefore, I would that ye should remember that I have spoken unto you

concerning that prophet which the Lord showed unto me, that should baptize the

Lamb of God, which should take away the sins of the world.

5 And now, if the Lamb of God, he being holy, should have need to be baptized by

water, to fulfil all righteousness, O then, how much more need have we, being

unholy, to be baptized, yea, even by water!

6 And now, I would ask of you, my beloved brethren, wherein the Lamb of God

did fulfil all righteousness in being baptized by water?

7 Know ye not that he was holy? But notwithstanding he being holy, he showeth

unto the children of men that, according to the flesh he humbleth himself before

the Father, and witnesseth unto the Father that he would be obedient unto him in

keeping his commandments.

8 Wherefore, after he was baptized with water the Holy Ghost descended upon

him in the form of a dove.

9 And again, it showeth unto the children of men the straitness of the path, and

the narrowness of the gate, by which they should enter, he having set the example

before them.

10 And he said unto the children of men: Follow thou me. Wherefore, my beloved

brethren, can we follow Jesus save we shall be willing to keep the commandments of

the Father?

11 And the Father said: Repent ye, repent ye, and be baptized in the name of my

Beloved Son.

12 And also, the voice of the Son came unto me, saying: He that is baptized in my

name, to him will the Father give the Holy Ghost, like unto me; wherefore, follow

me, and do the things which ye have seen me do.

13 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, I know that if ye shall follow the Son, with full

purpose of heart, acting no hypocrisy and no deception before God, but with real

intent, repenting of your sins, witnessing unto the Father that ye are willing to take

upon you the name of Christ, by baptism—yea, by following your Lord and your

Savior down into the water, according to his word, behold, then shall ye receive the

Holy Ghost; yea, then cometh the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost; and then

can ye speak with the tongue of angels, and shout praises unto the Holy One of

Israel.

14 But, behold, my beloved brethren, thus came the voice of the Son unto me,

saying: After ye have repented of your sins, and witnessed unto the Father that ye

are willing to keep my commandments, by the baptism of water, and have received

the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost, and can speak with a new tongue, yea,

even with the tongue of angels, and after this should deny me, it would have been

better for you that ye had not known me.

15 And I heard a voice from the Father, saying: Yea, the words of my Beloved are

true and faithful. He that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved. 16 And now, my beloved brethren, I know by this that unless a man shall endure to

the end, in following the example of the Son of the living God, he cannot be saved. 17 Wherefore, do the things which I have told you I have seen that your Lord and

2 nephi 31

91

your Redeemer should do; for, for this cause have they been shown unto me, that ye

might know the gate by which ye should enter. For the gate by which ye should

enter is repentance and baptism by water; and then cometh a remission of your sins

by fire and by the Holy Ghost.

18 And then are ye in this strait and narrow path which leads to eternal life; yea, ye

have entered in by the gate; ye have done according to the commandments of the

Father and the Son; and ye have received the Holy Ghost, which witnesses of the

Father and the Son, unto the fulfilling of the promise which he hath made, that if ye

entered in by the way ye should receive.

19 And now, my beloved brethren, after ye have gotten into this strait and narrow

path, I would ask if all is done? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for ye have not come

thus far save it were by the word of Christ with unshaken faith in him, relying

wholly upon the merits of him who is mighty to save.

20 Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect

brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press

forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith

the Father: Ye shall have eternal life.

21 And now, behold, my beloved brethren, this is the way; and there is none other

way nor name given under heaven whereby man can be saved in the kingdom of

God. And now, behold, this is the doctrine of Christ, and the only and true

doctrine of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which is one God,

without end. Amen.

2 Nephi 32

1 And now, behold, my beloved brethren, I suppose that ye ponder somewhat in your

hearts concerning that which ye should do after ye have entered in by the way. But,

behold, why do ye ponder these things in your hearts?

2 Do ye not remember that I said unto you that after ye had received the Holy

Ghost ye could speak with the tongue of angels? And now, how could ye speak with

the tongue of angels save it were by the Holy Ghost?

3 Angels speak by the power of the Holy Ghost; wherefore, they speak the words

of Christ. Wherefore, I said unto you, feast upon the words of Christ; for behold,

the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do.

4 Wherefore, now after I have spoken these words, if ye cannot understand them it

will be because ye ask not, neither do ye knock; wherefore, ye are not brought into

the light, but must perish in the dark.

5 For behold, again I say unto you that if ye will enter in by the way, and receive the

Holy Ghost, it will show unto you all things what ye should do.

6 Behold, this is the doctrine of Christ, and there will be no more doctrine given

until after he shall manifest himself unto you in the flesh. And when he shall

manifest himself unto you in the flesh, the things which he shall say unto you shall

ye observe to do.

7 And now I, Nephi, cannot say more; the Spirit stoppeth mine utterance, and I

am left to mourn because of the unbelief, and the wickedness, and the ignorance,

and the stiffneckedness of men; for they will not search knowledge, nor understand

great knowledge, when it is given unto them in plainness, even as plain as word can

92

2 nephi 32

be.

8 And now, my beloved brethren, I perceive that ye ponder still in your hearts; and

it grieveth me that I must speak concerning this thing. For if ye would hearken unto

the Spirit which teacheth a man to pray, ye would know that ye must pray; for the

evil spirit teacheth not a man to pray, but teacheth him that he must not pray. 9 But behold, I say unto you that ye must pray always, and not faint; that ye must

not perform any thing unto the Lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the

Father in the name of Christ, that he will consecrate thy performance unto thee,

that thy performance may be for the welfare of thy soul.

2 Nephi 33

1 And now I, Nephi, cannot write all the things which were taught among my people;

neither am I mighty in writing, like unto speaking; for when a man speaketh by the

power of the Holy Ghost the power of the Holy Ghost carrieth it unto the hearts of

the children of men.

2 But behold, there are many that harden their hearts against the Holy Spirit, that

it hath no place in them; wherefore, they cast many things away which are written

and esteem them as things of naught.

3 But I, Nephi, have written what I have written, and I esteem it as of great worth,

and especially unto my people. For I pray continually for them by day, and mine

eyes water my pillow by night, because of them; and I cry unto my God in faith, and

I know that he will hear my cry.

4 And I know that the Lord God will consecrate my prayers for the gain of my

people. And the words which I have written in weakness will be made strong unto

them; for it persuadeth them to do good; it maketh known unto them of their

fathers; and it speaketh of Jesus, and persuadeth them to believe in him, and to

endure to the end, which is life eternal.

5 And it speaketh harshly against sin, according to the plainness of the truth;

wherefore, no man will be angry at the words which I have written save he shall be

of the spirit of the devil.

6 I glory in plainness; I glory in truth; I glory in my Jesus, for he hath redeemed my

soul from hell.

7 I have charity for my people, and great faith in Christ that I shall meet many

souls spotless at his judgment-seat.

8 I have charity for the Jew—I say Jew, because I mean them from whence I came. 9 I also have charity for the Gentiles. But behold, for none of these can I hope

except they shall be reconciled unto Christ, and enter into the narrow gate, and

walk in the strait path which leads to life, and continue in the path until the end of

the day of probation.

10 And now, my beloved brethren, and also Jew, and all ye ends of the earth,

hearken unto these words and believe in Christ; and if ye believe not in these words

believe in Christ. And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for

they are the words of Christ, and he hath given them unto me; and they teach all

men that they should do good.

11 And if they are not the words of Christ, judge ye—for Christ will show unto

you, with power and great glory, that they are his words, at the last day; and you and

2 nephi 33

93

I shall stand face to face before his bar; and ye shall know that I have been

commanded of him to write these things, notwithstanding my weakness. 12 And I pray the Father in the name of Christ that many of us, if not all, may be

saved in his kingdom at that great and last day.

13 And now, my beloved brethren, all those who are of the house of Israel, and all ye

ends of the earth, I speak unto you as the voice of one crying from the dust: Farewell

until that great day shall come.

14 And you that will not partake of the goodness of God, and respect the words of

the Jews, and also my words, and the words which shall proceed forth out of the

mouth of the Lamb of God, behold, I bid you an everlasting farewell, for these

words shall condemn you at the last day.

15 For what I seal on earth, shall be brought against you at the judgment bar; for

thus hath the Lord commanded me, and I must obey. Amen.

94

2 nephi 33

The Book of Jacob

the Brother of Nephi

The words of his preaching unto his brethren. He confoundeth a man who seeketh to

overthrow the doctrine of Christ. A few words concerning the history of the people of

Nephi.

Jacob 1

1 For behold, it came to pass that fifty and five years had passed away from the time

that Lehi left Jerusalem; wherefore, Nephi gave me, Jacob, a commandment

concerning the small plates, upon which these things are engraven.

2 And he gave me, Jacob, a commandment that I should write upon these plates a

few of the things which I considered to be most precious; that I should not touch,

save it were lightly, concerning the history of this people which are called the people

of Nephi.

3 For he said that the history of his people should be engraven upon his other

plates, and that I should preserve these plates and hand them down unto my seed,

from generation to generation.

4 And if there were preaching which was sacred, or revelation which was great, or

prophesying, that I should engraven the heads of them upon these plates, and touch

upon them as much as it were possible, for Christ’s sake, and for the sake of our

people.

5 For because of faith and great anxiety, it truly had been made manifest unto us

concerning our people, what things should happen unto them.

6 And we also had many revelations, and the spirit of much prophecy; wherefore,

we knew of Christ and his kingdom, which should come.

7 Wherefore we labored diligently among our people, that we might persuade

them to come unto Christ, and partake of the goodness of God, that they might

enter into his rest, lest by any means he should swear in his wrath they should not

enter in, as in the provocation in the days of temptation while the children of Israel

were in the wilderness.

8 Wherefore, we would to God that we could persuade all men not to rebel against

God, to provoke him to anger, but that all men would believe in Christ, and view

his death, and suffer his cross and bear the shame of the world; wherefore, I, Jacob,

take it upon me to fulfil the commandment of my brother Nephi.

9 Now Nephi began to be old, and he saw that he must soon die; wherefore, he

anointed a man to be a king and a ruler over his people now, according to the reigns

of the kings.

10 The people having loved Nephi exceedingly, he having been a great protector for

them, having wielded the sword of Laban in their defence, and having labored in all

his days for their welfare—

11 Wherefore, the people were desirous to retain in remembrance his name. And

jacob 1

95

whoso should reign in his stead were called by the people, second Nephi, third

Nephi, and so forth, according to the reigns of the kings; and thus they were called

by the people, let them be of whatever name they would.

12 And it came to pass that Nephi died.

13 Now the people which were not Lamanites were Nephites; nevertheless, they

were called Nephites, Jacobites, Josephites, Zoramites, Lamanites, Lemuelites, and

Ishmaelites.

14 But I, Jacob, shall not hereafter distinguish them by these names, but I shall call

them Lamanites that seek to destroy the people of Nephi, and those who are

friendly to Nephi I shall call Nephites, or the people of Nephi, according to the

reigns of the kings.

15 And now it came to pass that the people of Nephi, under the reign of the second

king, began to grow hard in their hearts, and indulge themselves somewhat in

wicked practices, such as like unto David of old desiring many wives and

concubines, and also Solomon, his son.

16 Yea, and they also began to search much gold and silver, and began to be lifted up

somewhat in pride.

17 Wherefore I, Jacob, gave unto them these words as I taught them in the temple,

having first obtained mine errand from the Lord.

18 For I, Jacob, and my brother Joseph had been consecrated priests and teachers of

this people, by the hand of Nephi.

19 And we did magnify our office unto the Lord, taking upon us the responsibility,

answering the sins of the people upon our own heads if we did not teach them the

word of God with all diligence; wherefore, by laboring with our might their blood

might not come upon our garments; otherwise their blood would come upon our

garments, and we would not be found spotless at the last day.

Jacob 2

1 The words which Jacob, the brother of Nephi, spake unto the people of Nephi, after

the death of Nephi:

2 Now, my beloved brethren, I, Jacob, according to the responsibility which I am

under to God, to magnify mine office with soberness, and that I might rid my

garments of your sins, I come up into the temple this day that I might declare unto

you the word of God.

3 And ye yourselves know that I have hitherto been diligent in the office of my

calling; but I this day am weighed down with much more desire and anxiety for the

welfare of your souls than I have hitherto been.

4 For behold, as yet, ye have been obedient unto the word of the Lord, which I

have given unto you.

5 But behold, hearken ye unto me, and know that by the help of the all-powerful

Creator of heaven and earth I can tell you concerning your thoughts, how that ye

are beginning to labor in sin, which sin appeareth very abominable unto me, yea,

and abominable unto God.

6 Yea, it grieveth my soul and causeth me to shrink with shame before the presence

of my Maker, that I must testify unto you concerning the wickedness of your hearts. 7 And also it grieveth me that I must use so much boldness of speech concerning

96

jacob 2

you, before your wives and your children, many of whose feelings are exceedingly

tender and chaste and delicate before God, which thing is pleasing unto God; 8 And it supposeth me that they have come up hither to hear the pleasing word of

God, yea, the word which healeth the wounded soul.

9 Wherefore, it burdeneth my soul that I should be constrained, because of the

strict commandment which I have received from God, to admonish you according

to your crimes, to enlarge the wounds of those who are already wounded, instead of

consoling and healing their wounds; and those who have not been wounded,

instead of feasting upon the pleasing word of God have daggers placed to pierce

their souls and wound their delicate minds.

10 But, notwithstanding the greatness of the task, I must do according to the strict

commands of God, and tell you concerning your wickedness and abominations, in

the presence of the pure in heart, and the broken heart, and under the glance of the

piercing eye of the Almighty God.

11 Wherefore, I must tell you the truth according to the plainness of the word of

God. For behold, as I inquired of the Lord, thus came the word unto me, saying:

Jacob, get thou up into the temple on the morrow, and declare the word which I

shall give thee unto this people.

12 And now behold, my brethren, this is the word which I declare unto you, that

many of you have begun to search for gold, and for silver, and for all manner of

precious ores, in the which this land, which is a land of promise unto you and to

your seed, doth abound most plentifully.

13 And the hand of providence hath smiled upon you most pleasingly, that you have

obtained many riches; and because some of you have obtained more abundantly

than that of your brethren ye are lifted up in the pride of your hearts, and wear stiff

necks and high heads because of the costliness of your apparel, and persecute your

brethren because ye suppose that ye are better than they.

14 And now, my brethren, do ye suppose that God justifieth you in this thing?

Behold, I say unto you, Nay. But he condemneth you, and if ye persist in these

things his judgments must speedily come unto you.

15 O that he would show you that he can pierce you, and with one glance of his eye

he can smite you to the dust!

16 O that he would rid you from this iniquity and abomination. And, O that ye

would listen unto the word of his commands, and let not this pride of your hearts

destroy your souls!

17 Think of your brethren like unto yourselves, and be familiar with all and free

with your substance, that they may be rich like unto you.

18 But before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God.

19 And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek

them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good—to clothe the naked, and to

feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the

afflicted.

20 And now, my brethren, I have spoken unto you concerning pride; and those of

you which have afflicted your neighbor, and persecuted him because ye were proud

in your hearts, of the things which God hath given you, what say ye of it? 21 Do ye not suppose that such things are abominable unto him who created all

flesh? And the one being is as precious in his sight as the other. And all flesh is of

jacob 2

97

the dust; and for the selfsame end hath he created them, that they should keep his

commandments and glorify him forever.

22 And now I make an end of speaking unto you concerning this pride. And were it

not that I must speak unto you concerning a grosser crime, my heart would rejoice

exceedingly because of you.

23 But the word of God burdens me because of your grosser crimes. For behold,

thus saith the Lord: This people begin to wax in iniquity; they understand not the

scriptures, for they seek to excuse themselves in committing whoredoms, because of

the things which were written concerning David, and Solomon his son. 24 Behold, David and Solomon truly had many wives and concubines, which thing

was abominable before me, saith the Lord.

25 Wherefore, thus saith the Lord, I have led this people forth out of the land of

Jerusalem, by the power of mine arm, that I might raise up unto me a righteous

branch from the fruit of the loins of Joseph.

26 Wherefore, I the Lord God will not suffer that this people shall do like unto

them of old.

27 Wherefore, my brethren, hear me, and hearken to the word of the Lord: For

there shall not any man among you have save it be one wife; and concubines he shall

have none;

28 For I, the Lord God, delight in the chastity of women. And whoredoms are an

abomination before me; thus saith the Lord of Hosts.

29 Wherefore, this people shall keep my commandments, saith the Lord of Hosts,

or cursed be the land for their sakes.

30 For if I will, saith the Lord of Hosts, raise up seed unto me, I will command my

people; otherwise they shall hearken unto these things.

31 For behold, I, the Lord, have seen the sorrow, and heard the mourning of the

daughters of my people in the land of Jerusalem, yea, and in all the lands of my

people, because of the wickedness and abominations of their husbands. 32 And I will not suffer, saith the Lord of Hosts, that the cries of the fair daughters

of this people, which I have led out of the land of Jerusalem, shall come up unto me

against the men of my people, saith the Lord of Hosts.

33 For they shall not lead away captive the daughters of my people because of their

tenderness, save I shall visit them with a sore curse, even unto destruction; for they

shall not commit whoredoms, like unto them of old, saith the Lord of Hosts. 34 And now behold, my brethren, ye know that these commandments were given to

our father, Lehi; wherefore, ye have known them before; and ye have come unto

great condemnation; for ye have done these things which ye ought not to have done. 35 Behold, ye have done greater iniquities than the Lamanites, our brethren. Ye have

broken the hearts of your tender wives, and lost the confidence of your children,

because of your bad examples before them; and the sobbings of their hearts ascend

up to God against you. And because of the strictness of the word of God, which

cometh down against you, many hearts died, pierced with deep wounds.

Jacob 3

1 But behold, I, Jacob, would speak unto you that are pure in heart. Look unto God

with firmness of mind, and pray unto him with exceeding faith, and he will console

98

jacob 3

you in your afflictions, and he will plead your cause, and send down justice upon

those who seek your destruction.

2 O all ye that are pure in heart, lift up your heads and receive the pleasing word of

God, and feast upon his love; for ye may, if your minds are firm, forever. 3 But, wo, wo, unto you that are not pure in heart, that are filthy this day before

God; for except ye repent the land is cursed for your sakes; and the Lamanites,

which are not filthy like unto you, nevertheless they are cursed with a sore cursing,

shall scourge you even unto destruction.

4 And the time speedily cometh, that except ye repent they shall possess the land of

your inheritance, and the Lord God will lead away the righteous out from among

you.

5 Behold, the Lamanites your brethren, whom ye hate because of their filthiness

and the cursing which hath come upon their skins, are more righteous than you; for

they have not forgotten the commandment of the Lord, which was given unto our

father—that they should have save it were one wife, and concubines they should

have none, and there should not be whoredoms committed among them. 6 And now, this commandment they observe to keep; wherefore, because of this

observance, in keeping this commandment, the Lord God will not destroy them,

but will be merciful unto them; and one day they shall become a blessed people. 7 Behold, their husbands love their wives, and their wives love their husbands; and

their husbands and their wives love their children; and their unbelief and their

hatred towards you is because of the iniquity of their fathers; wherefore, how much

better are you than they, in the sight of your great Creator?

8 O my brethren, I fear that unless ye shall repent of your sins that their skins will

be whiter than yours, when ye shall be brought with them before the throne of God. 9 Wherefore, a commandment I give unto you, which is the word of God, that ye

revile no more against them because of the darkness of their skins; neither shall ye

revile against them because of their filthiness; but ye shall remember your own

filthiness, and remember that their filthiness came because of their fathers. 10 Wherefore, ye shall remember your children, how that ye have grieved their

hearts because of the example that ye have set before them; and also, remember that

ye may, because of your filthiness, bring your children unto destruction, and their

sins be heaped upon your heads at the last day.

11 O my brethren, hearken unto my words; arouse the faculties of your souls; shake

yourselves that ye may awake from the slumber of death; and loose yourselves from

the pains of hell that ye may not become angels to the devil, to be cast into that lake

of fire and brimstone which is the second death.

12 And now I, Jacob, spake many more things unto the people of Nephi, warning

them against fornication and lasciviousness, and every kind of sin, telling them the

awful consequences of them.

13 And a hundredth part of the proceedings of this people, which now began to be

numerous, cannot be written upon these plates; but many of their proceedings are

written upon the larger plates, and their wars, and their contentions, and the reigns

of their kings.

14 These plates are called the plates of Jacob, and they were made by the hand of

Nephi. And I make an end of speaking these words.

jacob 3

99

Jacob 4

1 Now behold, it came to pass that I, Jacob, having ministered much unto my people

in word, (and I cannot write but a little of my words, because of the difficulty of

engraving our words upon plates) and we know that the things which we write upon

plates must remain;

2 But whatsoever things we write upon anything save it be upon plates must perish

and vanish away; but we can write a few words upon plates, which will give our

children, and also our beloved brethren, a small degree of knowledge concerning us,

or concerning their fathers—

3 Now in this thing we do rejoice; and we labor diligently to engraven these words

upon plates, hoping that our beloved brethren and our children will receive them

with thankful hearts, and look upon them that they may learn with joy and not with

sorrow, neither with contempt, concerning their first parents.

4 For, for this intent have we written these things, that they may know that we

knew of Christ, and we had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his

coming; and not only we ourselves had a hope of his glory, but also all the holy

prophets which were before us.

5 Behold, they believed in Christ and worshiped the Father in his name, and also

we worship the Father in his name. And for this intent we keep the law of Moses, it

pointing our souls to him; and for this cause it is sanctified unto us for

righteousness, even as it was accounted unto Abraham in the wilderness to be

obedient unto the commands of God in offering up his son Isaac, which is a

similitude of God and his Only Begotten Son.

6 Wherefore, we search the prophets, and we have many revelations and the spirit

of prophecy; and having all these witnesses we obtain a hope, and our faith

becometh unshaken, insomuch that we truly can command in the name of Jesus and

the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea.

7 Nevertheless, the Lord God showeth us our weakness that we may know that it is

by his grace, and his great condescensions unto the children of men, that we have

power to do these things.

8 Behold, great and marvelous are the works of the Lord. How unsearchable are

the depths of the mysteries of him; and it is impossible that man should find out all

his ways. And no man knoweth of his ways save it be revealed unto him; wherefore,

brethren, despise not the revelations of God.

9 For behold, by the power of his word man came upon the face of the earth,

which earth was created by the power of his word. Wherefore, if God being able to

speak and the world was, and to speak and man was created, O then, why not able to

command the earth, or the workmanship of his hands upon the face of it, according

to his will and pleasure?

10 Wherefore, brethren, seek not to counsel the Lord, but to take counsel from his

hand. For behold, ye yourselves know that he counseleth in wisdom, and in justice,

and in great mercy, over all his works.

11 Wherefore, beloved brethren, be reconciled unto him through the atonement of

Christ, his Only Begotten Son, and ye may obtain a resurrection, according to the

power of the resurrection which is in Christ, and be presented as the first-fruits of

Christ unto God, having faith, and obtained a good hope of glory in him before he

manifesteth himself in the flesh.

100

jacob 4

12 And now, beloved, marvel not that I tell you these things; for why not speak of

the atonement of Christ, and attain to a perfect knowledge of him, as to attain to

the knowledge of a resurrection and the world to come?

13 Behold, my brethren, he that prophesieth, let him prophesy to the understanding

of men; for the Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not. Wherefore, it speaketh of

things as they really are, and of things as they really will be; wherefore, these things

are manifested unto us plainly, for the salvation of our souls. But behold, we are not

witnesses alone in these things; for God also spake them unto prophets of old. 14 But behold, the Jews were a stiffnecked people; and they despised the words of

plainness, and killed the prophets, and sought for things that they could not

understand. Wherefore, because of their blindness, which blindness came by

looking beyond the mark, they must needs fall; for God hath taken away his

plainness from them, and delivered unto them many things which they cannot

understand, because they desired it. And because they desired it God hath done it,

that they may stumble.

15 And now I, Jacob, am led on by the Spirit unto prophesying; for I perceive by the

workings of the Spirit which is in me, that by the stumbling of the Jews they will

reject the stone upon which they might build and have safe foundation. 16 But behold, according to the scriptures, this stone shall become the great, and

the last, and the only sure foundation, upon which the Jews can build. 17 And now, my beloved, how is it possible that these, after having rejected the sure

foundation, can ever build upon it, that it may become the head of their corner? 18 Behold, my beloved brethren, I will unfold this mystery unto you; if I do not, by

any means, get shaken from my firmness in the Spirit, and stumble because of my

over anxiety for you.

Jacob 5

1 Behold, my brethren, do ye not remember to have read the words of the prophet

Zenos, which he spake unto the house of Israel, saying:

2 Hearken, O ye house of Israel, and hear the words of me, a prophet of the Lord. 3 For behold, thus saith the Lord, I will liken thee, O house of Israel, like unto a

tame olive tree, which a man took and nourished in his vineyard; and it grew, and

waxed old, and began to decay.

4 And it came to pass that the master of the vineyard went forth, and he saw that

his olive tree began to decay; and he said: I will prune it, and dig about it, and

nourish it, that perhaps it may shoot forth young and tender branches, and it perish

not.

5 And it came to pass that he pruned it, and digged about it, and nourished it

according to his word.

6 And it came to pass that after many days it began to put forth somewhat a little,

young and tender branches; but behold, the main top thereof began to perish. 7 And it came to pass that the master of the vineyard saw it, and he said unto his

servant: It grieveth me that I should lose this tree; wherefore, go and pluck the

branches from a wild olive tree, and bring them hither unto me; and we will pluck

off those main branches which are beginning to wither away, and we will cast them

into the fire that they may be burned.

jacob 5

101

8 And behold, saith the Lord of the vineyard, I take away many of these young and

tender branches, and I will graft them whithersoever I will; and it mattereth not

that if it so be that the root of this tree will perish, I may preserve the fruit thereof

unto myself; wherefore, I will take these young and tender branches, and I will graft

them whithersoever I will.

9 Take thou the branches of the wild olive tree, and graft them in, in the stead

thereof; and these which I have plucked off I will cast into the fire and burn them,

that they may not cumber the ground of my vineyard.

10 And it came to pass that the servant of the Lord of the vineyard did according to

the word of the Lord of the vineyard, and grafted in the branches of the wild olive

tree.

11 And the Lord of the vineyard caused that it should be digged about, and pruned,

and nourished, saying unto his servant: It grieveth me that I should lose this tree;

wherefore, that perhaps I might preserve the roots thereof that they perish not, that

I might preserve them unto myself, I have done this thing.

12 Wherefore, go thy way; watch the tree, and nourish it, according to my words. 13 And these will I place in the nethermost part of my vineyard, whithersoever I

will, it mattereth not unto thee; and I do it that I may preserve unto myself the

natural branches of the tree; and also, that I may lay up fruit thereof against the

season, unto myself; for it grieveth me that I should lose this tree and the fruit

thereof.

14 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard went his way, and hid the

natural branches of the tame olive tree in the nethermost parts of the vineyard, some

in one and some in another, according to his will and pleasure.

15 And it came to pass that a long time passed away, and the Lord of the vineyard

said unto his servant: Come, let us go down into the vineyard, that we may labor in

the vineyard.

16 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard, and also the servant, went

down into the vineyard to labor. And it came to pass that the servant said unto his

master: Behold, look here; behold the tree.

17 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard looked and beheld the tree in

the which the wild olive branches had been grafted; and it had sprung forth and

begun to bear fruit. And he beheld that it was good; and the fruit thereof was like

unto the natural fruit.

18 And he said unto the servant: Behold, the branches of the wild tree have taken

hold of the moisture of the root thereof, that the root thereof hath brought forth

much strength; and because of the much strength of the root thereof the wild

branches have brought forth tame fruit. Now, if we had not grafted in these

branches, the tree thereof would have perished. And now, behold, I shall lay up

much fruit, which the tree thereof hath brought forth; and the fruit thereof I shall

lay up against the season, unto mine own self.

19 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard said unto the servant: Come,

let us go to the nethermost part of the vineyard, and behold if the natural branches

of the tree have not brought forth much fruit also, that I may lay up of the fruit

thereof against the season, unto mine own self.

20 And it came to pass that they went forth whither the master had hid the natural

branches of the tree, and he said unto the servant: Behold these; and he beheld the

102

jacob 5

first that it had brought forth much fruit; and he beheld also that it was good. And

he said unto the servant: Take of the fruit thereof, and lay it up against the season,

that I may preserve it unto mine own self; for behold, said he, this long time have I

nourished it, and it hath brought forth much fruit.

21 And it came to pass that the servant said unto his master: How comest thou

hither to plant this tree, or this branch of the tree? For behold, it was the poorest

spot in all the land of thy vineyard.

22 And the Lord of the vineyard said unto him: Counsel me not; I knew that it was

a poor spot of ground; wherefore, I said unto thee, I have nourished it this long

time, and thou beholdest that it hath brought forth much fruit.

23 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard said unto his servant: Look

hither; behold I have planted another branch of the tree also; and thou knowest

that this spot of ground was poorer than the first. But, behold the tree. I have

nourished it this long time, and it hath brought forth much fruit; therefore, gather

it, and lay it up against the season, that I may preserve it unto mine own self. 24 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard said again unto his servant:

Look hither, and behold another branch also, which I have planted; behold that I

have nourished it also, and it hath brought forth fruit.

25 And he said unto the servant: Look hither and behold the last. Behold, this have

I planted in a good spot of ground; and I have nourished it this long time, and only

a part of the tree hath brought forth tame fruit, and the other part of the tree hath

brought forth wild fruit; behold, I have nourished this tree like unto the others. 26 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard said unto the servant: Pluck off

the branches that have not brought forth good fruit, and cast them into the fire. 27 But behold, the servant said unto him: Let us prune it, and dig about it, and

nourish it a little longer, that perhaps it may bring forth good fruit unto thee, that

thou canst lay it up against the season.

28 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard and the servant of the Lord of

the vineyard did nourish all the fruit of the vineyard.

29 And it came to pass that a long time had passed away, and the Lord of the

vineyard said unto his servant: Come, let us go down into the vineyard, that we may

labor again in the vineyard. For behold, the time draweth near, and the end soon

cometh; wherefore, I must lay up fruit against the season, unto mine own self. 30 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard and the servant went down

into the vineyard; and they came to the tree whose natural branches had been

broken off, and the wild branches had been grafted in; and behold all sorts of fruit

did cumber the tree.

31 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard did taste of the fruit, every sort

according to its number. And the Lord of the vineyard said: Behold, this long time

have we nourished this tree, and I have laid up unto myself against the season much

fruit.

32 But behold, this time it hath brought forth much fruit, and there is none of it

which is good. And behold, there are all kinds of bad fruit; and it profiteth me

nothing, notwithstanding all our labor; and now it grieveth me that I should lose

this tree.

33 And the Lord of the vineyard said unto the servant: What shall we do unto the

tree, that I may preserve again good fruit thereof unto mine own self ?

jacob 5

103

34 And the servant said unto his master: Behold, because thou didst graft in the

branches of the wild olive tree they have nourished the roots, that they are alive and

they have not perished; wherefore thou beholdest that they are yet good. 35 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard said unto his servant: The tree

profiteth me nothing, and the roots thereof profit me nothing so long as it shall

bring forth evil fruit.

36 Nevertheless, I know that the roots are good, and for mine own purpose I have

preserved them; and because of their much strength they have hitherto brought

forth, from the wild branches, good fruit.

37 But behold, the wild branches have grown and have overrun the roots thereof;

and because that the wild branches have overcome the roots thereof it hath brought

forth much evil fruit; and because that it hath brought forth so much evil fruit thou

beholdest that it beginneth to perish; and it will soon become ripened, that it may

be cast into the fire, except we should do something for it to preserve it. 38 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard said unto his servant: Let us go

down into the nethermost parts of the vineyard, and behold if the natural branches

have also brought forth evil fruit.

39 And it came to pass that they went down into the nethermost parts of the

vineyard. And it came to pass that they beheld that the fruit of the natural branches

had become corrupt also; yea, the first and the second and also the last; and they

had all become corrupt.

40 And the wild fruit of the last had overcome that part of the tree which brought

forth good fruit, even that the branch had withered away and died.

41 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard wept, and said unto the

servant: What could I have done more for my vineyard?

42 Behold, I knew that all the fruit of the vineyard, save it were these, had become

corrupted. And now these which have once brought forth good fruit have also

become corrupted; and now all the trees of my vineyard are good for nothing save it

be to be hewn down and cast into the fire.

43 And behold this last, whose branch hath withered away, I did plant in a good

spot of ground; yea, even that which was choice unto me above all other parts of the

land of my vineyard.

44 And thou beheldest that I also cut down that which cumbered this spot of

ground, that I might plant this tree in the stead thereof.

45 And thou beheldest that a part thereof brought forth good fruit, and a part

thereof brought forth wild fruit; and because I plucked not the branches thereof

and cast them into the fire, behold, they have overcome the good branch that it hath

withered away.

46 And now, behold, notwithstanding all the care which we have taken of my

vineyard, the trees thereof have become corrupted, that they bring forth no good

fruit; and these I had hoped to preserve, to have laid up fruit thereof against the

season, unto mine own self. But, behold, they have become like unto the wild olive

tree, and they are of no worth but to be hewn down and cast into the fire; and it

grieveth me that I should lose them.

47 But what could I have done more in my vineyard? Have I slackened mine hand,

that I have not nourished it? Nay, I have nourished it, and I have digged about it,

and I have pruned it, and I have dunged it; and I have stretched forth mine hand

104

jacob 5

almost all the day long, and the end draweth nigh. And it grieveth me that I should

hew down all the trees of my vineyard, and cast them into the fire that they should

be burned. Who is it that has corrupted my vineyard?

48 And it came to pass that the servant said unto his master: Is it not the loftiness of

thy vineyard—have not the branches thereof overcome the roots which are good?

And because the branches have overcome the roots thereof, behold they grew faster

than the strength of the roots, taking strength unto themselves. Behold, I say, is not

this the cause that the trees of thy vineyard have become corrupted?

49 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard said unto the servant: Let us go

to and hew down the trees of the vineyard and cast them into the fire, that they shall

not cumber the ground of my vineyard, for I have done all. What could I have done

more for my vineyard?

50 But, behold, the servant said unto the Lord of the vineyard: Spare it a little

longer.

51 And the Lord said: Yea, I will spare it a little longer, for it grieveth me that I

should lose the trees of my vineyard.

52 Wherefore, let us take of the branches of these which I have planted in the

nethermost parts of my vineyard, and let us graft them into the tree from whence

they came; and let us pluck from the tree those branches whose fruit is most bitter,

and graft in the natural branches of the tree in the stead thereof.

53 And this will I do that the tree may not perish, that, perhaps, I may preserve unto

myself the roots thereof for mine own purpose.

54 And, behold, the roots of the natural branches of the tree which I planted

whithersoever I would are yet alive; wherefore, that I may preserve them also for

mine own purpose, I will take of the branches of this tree, and I will graft them in

unto them. Yea, I will graft in unto them the branches of their mother tree, that I

may preserve the roots also unto mine own self, that when they shall be sufficiently

strong perhaps they may bring forth good fruit unto me, and I may yet have glory in

the fruit of my vineyard.

55 And it came to pass that they took from the natural tree which had become wild,

and grafted in unto the natural trees, which also had become wild.

56 And they also took of the natural trees which had become wild, and grafted into

their mother tree.

57 And the Lord of the vineyard said unto the servant: Pluck not the wild branches

from the trees, save it be those which are most bitter; and in them ye shall graft

according to that which I have said.

58 And we will nourish again the trees of the vineyard, and we will trim up the

branches thereof; and we will pluck from the trees those branches which are

ripened, that must perish, and cast them into the fire.

59 And this I do that, perhaps, the roots thereof may take strength because of their

goodness; and because of the change of the branches, that the good may overcome

the evil.

60 And because that I have preserved the natural branches and the roots thereof,

and that I have grafted in the natural branches again into their mother tree, and

have preserved the roots of their mother tree, that, perhaps, the trees of my vineyard

may bring forth again good fruit; and that I may have joy again in the fruit of my

vineyard, and, perhaps, that I may rejoice exceedingly that I have preserved the roots

jacob 5

105

and the branches of the first fruit—

61 Wherefore, go to, and call servants, that we may labor diligently with our might

in the vineyard, that we may prepare the way, that I may bring forth again the

natural fruit, which natural fruit is good and the most precious above all other fruit. 62 Wherefore, let us go to and labor with our might this last time, for behold the

end draweth nigh, and this is for the last time that I shall prune my vineyard. 63 Graft in the branches; begin at the last that they may be first, and that the first

may be last, and dig about the trees, both old and young, the first and the last; and

the last and the first, that all may be nourished once again for the last time. 64 Wherefore, dig about them, and prune them, and dung them once more, for the

last time, for the end draweth nigh. And if it be so that these last grafts shall grow,

and bring forth the natural fruit, then shall ye prepare the way for them, that they

may grow.

65 And as they begin to grow ye shall clear away the branches which bring forth

bitter fruit, according to the strength of the good and the size thereof; and ye shall

not clear away the bad thereof all at once, lest the roots thereof should be too strong

for the graft, and the graft thereof shall perish, and I lose the trees of my vineyard. 66 For it grieveth me that I should lose the trees of my vineyard; wherefore ye shall

clear away the bad according as the good shall grow, that the root and the top may

be equal in strength, until the good shall overcome the bad, and the bad be hewn

down and cast into the fire, that they cumber not the ground of my vineyard; and

thus will I sweep away the bad out of my vineyard.

67 And the branches of the natural tree will I graft in again into the natural tree; 68 And the branches of the natural tree will I graft into the natural branches of the

tree; and thus will I bring them together again, that they shall bring forth the

natural fruit, and they shall be one.

69 And the bad shall be cast away, yea, even out of all the land of my vineyard; for

behold, only this once will I prune my vineyard.

70 And it came to pass that the Lord of the vineyard sent his servant; and the

servant went and did as the Lord had commanded him, and brought other servants;

and they were few.

71 And the Lord of the vineyard said unto them: Go to, and labor in the vineyard,

with your might. For behold, this is the last time that I shall nourish my vineyard;

for the end is nigh at hand, and the season speedily cometh; and if ye labor with

your might with me ye shall have joy in the fruit which I shall lay up unto myself

against the time which will soon come.

72 And it came to pass that the servants did go and labor with their mights; and the

Lord of the vineyard labored also with them; and they did obey the commandments

of the Lord of the vineyard in all things.

73 And there began to be the natural fruit again in the vineyard; and the natural

branches began to grow and thrive exceedingly; and the wild branches began to be

plucked off and to be cast away; and they did keep the root and the top thereof

equal, according to the strength thereof.

74 And thus they labored, with all diligence, according to the commandments of

the Lord of the vineyard, even until the bad had been cast away out of the vineyard,

and the Lord had preserved unto himself that the trees had become again the

natural fruit; and they became like unto one body; and the fruits were equal; and

106

jacob 5

the Lord of the vineyard had preserved unto himself the natural fruit, which was

most precious unto him from the beginning.

75 And it came to pass that when the Lord of the vineyard saw that his fruit was

good, and that his vineyard was no more corrupt, he called up his servants, and said

unto them: Behold, for this last time have we nourished my vineyard; and thou

beholdest that I have done according to my will; and I have preserved the natural

fruit, that it is good, even like as it was in the beginning. And blessed art thou; for

because ye have been diligent in laboring with me in my vineyard, and have kept my

commandments, and have brought unto me again the natural fruit, that my

vineyard is no more corrupted, and the bad is cast away, behold ye shall have joy

with me because of the fruit of my vineyard.

76 For behold, for a long time will I lay up of the fruit of my vineyard unto mine

own self against the season, which speedily cometh; and for the last time have I

nourished my vineyard, and pruned it, and dug about it, and dunged it; wherefore I

will lay up unto mine own self of the fruit, for a long time, according to that which I

have spoken.

77 And when the time cometh that evil fruit shall again come into my vineyard,

then will I cause the good and the bad to be gathered; and the good will I preserve

unto myself, and the bad will I cast away into its own place. And then cometh the

season and the end; and my vineyard will I cause to be burned with fire.

Jacob 6

1 And now, behold, my brethren, as I said unto you that I would prophesy, behold,

this is my prophecy—that the things which this prophet Zenos spake, concerning

the house of Israel, in the which he likened them unto a tame olive tree, must surely

come to pass.

2 And the day that he shall set his hand again the second time to recover his

people, is the day, yea, even the last time, that the servants of the Lord shall go forth

in his power, to nourish and prune his vineyard; and after that the end soon cometh. 3 And how blessed are they who have labored diligently in his vineyard; and how

cursed are they who shall be cast out into their own place! And the world shall be

burned with fire.

4 And how merciful is our God unto us, for he remembereth the house of Israel,

both roots and branches; and he stretches forth his hands unto them all the day

long; and they are a stiffnecked and a gainsaying people; but as many as will not

harden their hearts shall be saved in the kingdom of God.

5 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, I beseech of you in words of soberness that ye

would repent, and come with full purpose of heart, and cleave unto God as he

cleaveth unto you. And while his arm of mercy is extended towards you in the light

of the day, harden not your hearts.

6 Yea, today, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts; for why will ye die? 7 For behold, after ye have been nourished by the good word of God all the day

long, will ye bring forth evil fruit, that ye must be hewn down and cast into the fire? 8 Behold, will ye reject these words? Will ye reject the words of the prophets; and

will ye reject all the words which have been spoken concerning Christ, after so many

have spoken concerning him; and deny the good word of Christ, and the power of

jacob 6

107

God, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and quench the Holy Spirit, and make a mock

of the great plan of redemption, which hath been laid for you?

9 Know ye not that if ye will do these things, that the power of the redemption and

the resurrection, which is in Christ, will bring you to stand with shame and awful

guilt before the bar of God?

10 And according to the power of justice, for justice cannot be denied, ye must go

away into that lake of fire and brimstone, whose flames are unquenchable, and

whose smoke ascendeth up forever and ever, which lake of fire and brimstone is

endless torment.

11 O then, my beloved brethren, repent ye, and enter in at the strait gate, and

continue in the way which is narrow, until ye shall obtain eternal life. 12 O be wise; what can I say more?

13 Finally, I bid you farewell, until I shall meet you before the pleasing bar of God,

which bar striketh the wicked with awful dread and fear. Amen.

Jacob 7

1 And now it came to pass after some years had passed away, there came a man among

the people of Nephi, whose name was Sherem.

2 And it came to pass that he began to preach among the people, and to declare

unto them that there should be no Christ. And he preached many things which

were flattering unto the people; and this he did that he might overthrow the

doctrine of Christ.

3 And he labored diligently that he might lead away the hearts of the people,

insomuch that he did lead away many hearts; and he knowing that I, Jacob, had faith

in Christ who should come, he sought much opportunity that he might come unto

me.

4 And he was learned, that he had a perfect knowledge of the language of the

people; wherefore, he could use much flattery, and much power of speech,

according to the power of the devil.

5 And he had hope to shake me from the faith, notwithstanding the many

revelations and the many things which I had seen concerning these things; for I

truly had seen angels, and they had ministered unto me. And also, I had heard the

voice of the Lord speaking unto me in very word, from time to time; wherefore, I

could not be shaken.

6 And it came to pass that he came unto me, and on this wise did he speak unto

me, saying: Brother Jacob, I have sought much opportunity that I might speak unto

you; for I have heard and also know that thou goest about much, preaching that

which ye call the gospel, or the doctrine of Christ.

7 And ye have led away much of this people that they pervert the right way of God,

and keep not the law of Moses which is the right way; and convert the law of Moses

into the worship of a being which ye say shall come many hundred years hence. And

now behold, I, Sherem, declare unto you that this is blasphemy; for no man

knoweth of such things; for he cannot tell of things to come. And after this manner

did Sherem contend against me.

8 But behold, the Lord God poured in his Spirit into my soul, insomuch that I did

confound him in all his words.

108

jacob 7

9 And I said unto him: Deniest thou the Christ who shall come? And he said: If

there should be a Christ, I would not deny him; but I know that there is no Christ,

neither has been, nor ever will be.

10 And I said unto him: Believest thou the scriptures? And he said, Yea. 11 And I said unto him: Then ye do not understand them; for they truly testify of

Christ. Behold, I say unto you that none of the prophets have written, nor

prophesied, save they have spoken concerning this Christ.

12 And this is not all—it has been made manifest unto me, for I have heard and

seen; and it also has been made manifest unto me by the power of the Holy Ghost;

wherefore, I know if there should be no atonement made all mankind must be lost. 13 And it came to pass that he said unto me: Show me a sign by this power of the

Holy Ghost, in the which ye know so much.

14 And I said unto him: What am I that I should tempt God to show unto thee a

sign in the thing which thou knowest to be true? Yet thou wilt deny it, because thou

art of the devil. Nevertheless, not my will be done; but if God shall smite thee, let

that be a sign unto thee that he has power, both in heaven and in earth; and also,

that Christ shall come. And thy will, O Lord, be done, and not mine. 15 And it came to pass that when I, Jacob, had spoken these words, the power of the

Lord came upon him, insomuch that he fell to the earth. And it came to pass that he

was nourished for the space of many days.

16 And it came to pass that he said unto the people: Gather together on the morrow,

for I shall die; wherefore, I desire to speak unto the people before I shall die. 17 And it came to pass that on the morrow the multitude were gathered together;

and he spake plainly unto them and denied the things which he had taught them,

and confessed the Christ, and the power of the Holy Ghost, and the ministering of

angels.

18 And he spake plainly unto them, that he had been deceived by the power of the

devil. And he spake of hell, and of eternity, and of eternal punishment. 19 And he said: I fear lest I have committed the unpardonable sin, for I have lied

unto God; for I denied the Christ, and said that I believed the scriptures; and they

truly testify of him. And because I have thus lied unto God I greatly fear lest my case

shall be awful; but I confess unto God.

20 And it came to pass that when he had said these words he could say no more, and

he gave up the ghost.

21 And when the multitude had witnessed that he spake these things as he was

about to give up the ghost, they were astonished exceedingly; insomuch that the

power of God came down upon them, and they were overcome that they fell to the

earth.

22 Now, this thing was pleasing unto me, Jacob, for I had requested it of my Father

who was in heaven; for he had heard my cry and answered my prayer. 23 And it came to pass that peace and the love of God was restored again among the

people; and they searched the scriptures, and hearkened no more to the words of

this wicked man.

24 And it came to pass that many means were devised to reclaim and restore the

Lamanites to the knowledge of the truth; but it all was vain, for they delighted in

wars and bloodshed, and they had an eternal hatred against us, their brethren. And

they sought by the power of their arms to destroy us continually.

jacob 7

109

25 Wherefore, the people of Nephi did fortify against them with their arms, and

with all their might, trusting in the God and rock of their salvation; wherefore, they

became as yet, conquerors of their enemies.

26 And it came to pass that I, Jacob, began to be old; and the record of this people

being kept on the other plates of Nephi, wherefore, I conclude this record, declaring

that I have written according to the best of my knowledge, by saying that the time

passed away with us, and also our lives passed away like as it were unto us a dream,

we being a lonesome and a solemn people, wanderers, cast out from Jerusalem, born

in tribulation, in a wilderness, and hated of our brethren, which caused wars and

contentions; wherefore, we did mourn out our days.

27 And I, Jacob, saw that I must soon go down to my grave; wherefore, I said unto

my son Enos: Take these plates. And I told him the things which my brother Nephi

had commanded me, and he promised obedience unto the commands. And I make

an end of my writing upon these plates, which writing has been small; and to the

reader I bid farewell, hoping that many of my brethren may read my words.

Brethren, adieu.

110

jacob 7

The Book of Enos

1 Behold, it came to pass that I, Enos, knowing my father that he was a just man—for

he taught me in his language, and also in the nurture and admonition of the

Lord—and blessed be the name of my God for it—

2 And I will tell you of the wrestle which I had before God, before I received a

remission of my sins.

3 Behold, I went to hunt beasts in the forests; and the words which I had often

heard my father speak concerning eternal life, and the joy of the saints, sunk deep

into my heart.

4 And my soul hungered; and I kneeled down before my Maker, and I cried unto

him in mighty prayer and supplication for mine own soul; and all the day long did I

cry unto him; yea, and when the night came I did still raise my voice high that it

reached the heavens.

5 And there came a voice unto me, saying: Enos, thy sins are forgiven thee, and

thou shalt be blessed.

6 And I, Enos, knew that God could not lie; wherefore, my guilt was swept away. 7 And I said: Lord, how is it done?

8 And he said unto me: Because of thy faith in Christ, whom thou hast never

before heard nor seen. And many years pass away before he shall manifest himself in

the flesh; wherefore, go to, thy faith hath made thee whole.

9 Now, it came to pass that when I had heard these words I began to feel a desire

for the welfare of my brethren, the Nephites; wherefore, I did pour out my whole

soul unto God for them.

10 And while I was thus struggling in the spirit, behold, the voice of the Lord came

into my mind again, saying: I will visit thy brethren according to their diligence in

keeping my commandments. I have given unto them this land, and it is a holy land;

and I curse it not save it be for the cause of iniquity; wherefore, I will visit thy

brethren according as I have said; and their transgressions will I bring down with

sorrow upon their own heads.

11 And after I, Enos, had heard these words, my faith began to be unshaken in the

Lord; and I prayed unto him with many long strugglings for my brethren, the

Lamanites.

12 And it came to pass that after I had prayed and labored with all diligence, the

Lord said unto me: I will grant unto thee according to thy desires, because of thy

faith.

13 And now behold, this was the desire which I desired of him—that if it should so

be, that my people, the Nephites, should fall into transgression, and by any means be

destroyed, and the Lamanites should not be destroyed, that the Lord God would

preserve a record of my people, the Nephites; even if it so be by the power of his

holy arm, that it might be brought forth at some future day unto the Lamanites,

that, perhaps, they might be brought unto salvation—

14 For at the present our strugglings were vain in restoring them to the true faith.

And they swore in their wrath that, if it were possible, they would destroy our

records and us, and also all the traditions of our fathers.

15 Wherefore, I knowing that the Lord God was able to preserve our records, I

cried unto him continually, for he had said unto me: Whatsoever thing ye shall ask

enos

111

in faith, believing that ye shall receive in the name of Christ, ye shall receive it. 16 And I had faith, and I did cry unto God that he would preserve the records; and

he covenanted with me that he would bring them forth unto the Lamanites in his

own due time.

17 And I, Enos, knew it would be according to the covenant which he had made;

wherefore my soul did rest.

18 And the Lord said unto me: Thy fathers have also required of me this thing; and

it shall be done unto them according to their faith; for their faith was like unto

thine.

19 And now it came to pass that I, Enos, went about among the people of Nephi,

prophesying of things to come, and testifying of the things which I had heard and

seen.

20 And I bear record that the people of Nephi did seek diligently to restore the

Lamanites unto the true faith in God. But our labors were vain; their hatred was

fixed, and they were led by their evil nature that they became wild, and ferocious,

and a blood-thirsty people, full of idolatry and filthiness; feeding upon beasts of

prey; dwelling in tents, and wandering about in the wilderness with a short skin

girdle about their loins and their heads shaven; and their skill was in the bow, and in

the cimeter, and the ax. And many of them did eat nothing save it was raw meat;

and they were continually seeking to destroy us.

21 And it came to pass that the people of Nephi did till the land, and raise all

manner of grain, and of fruit, and flocks of herds, and flocks of all manner of cattle

of every kind, and goats, and wild goats, and also many horses.

22 And there were exceedingly many prophets among us. And the people were a

stiffnecked people, hard to understand.

23 And there was nothing save it was exceeding harshness, preaching and

prophesying of wars, and contentions, and destructions, and continually reminding

them of death, and the duration of eternity, and the judgments and the power of

God, and all these things—stirring them up continually to keep them in the fear of

the Lord. I say there was nothing short of these things, and exceedingly great

plainness of speech, would keep them from going down speedily to destruction.

And after this manner do I write concerning them.

24 And I saw wars between the Nephites and Lamanites in the course of my days. 25 And it came to pass that I began to be old, and an hundred and seventy and nine

years had passed away from the time that our father Lehi left Jerusalem. 26 And I saw that I must soon go down to my grave, having been wrought upon by

the power of God that I must preach and prophesy unto this people, and declare the

word according to the truth which is in Christ. And I have declared it in all my days,

and have rejoiced in it above that of the world.

27 And I soon go to the place of my rest, which is with my Redeemer; for I know

that in him I shall rest. And I rejoice in the day when my mortal shall put on

immortality, and shall stand before him; then shall I see his face with pleasure, and

he will say unto me: Come unto me, ye blessed, there is a place prepared for you in

the mansions of my Father. Amen.

112

enos 12 And it came to pass that by so doing they kept them from being destroyed upon

The Book of Jarom

1 Now behold, I, Jarom, write a few words according to the commandment of my

father, Enos, that our genealogy may be kept.

2 And as these plates are small, and as these things are written for the intent of the

benefit of our brethren the Lamanites, wherefore, it must needs be that I write a

little; but I shall not write the things of my prophesying, nor of my revelations. For

what could I write more than my fathers have written? For have not they revealed

the plan of salvation? I say unto you, Yea; and this sufficeth me.

3 Behold, it is expedient that much should be done among this people, because of

the hardness of their hearts, and the deafness of their ears, and the blindness of their

minds, and the stiffness of their necks; nevertheless, God is exceedingly merciful

unto them, and has not as yet swept them off from the face of the land. 4 And there are many among us who have many revelations, for they are not all

stiffnecked. And as many as are not stiffnecked and have faith, have communion

with the Holy Spirit, which maketh manifest unto the children of men, according to

their faith.

5 And now, behold, two hundred years had passed away, and the people of Nephi

had waxed strong in the land. They observed to keep the law of Moses and the

sabbath day holy unto the Lord. And they profaned not; neither did they

blaspheme. And the laws of the land were exceedingly strict.

6 And they were scattered upon much of the face of the land, and the Lamanites

also. And they were exceedingly more numerous than were they of the Nephites;

and they loved murder and would drink the blood of beasts.

7 And it came to pass that they came many times against us, the Nephites, to

battle. But our kings and our leaders were mighty men in the faith of the Lord; and

they taught the people the ways of the Lord; wherefore, we withstood the

Lamanites and swept them away out of our lands, and began to fortify our cities, or

whatsoever place of our inheritance.

8 And we multiplied exceedingly, and spread upon the face of the land, and

became exceedingly rich in gold, and in silver, and in precious things, and in fine

workmanship of wood, in buildings, and in machinery, and also in iron and copper,

and brass and steel, making all manner of tools of every kind to till the ground, and

weapons of war—yea, the sharp pointed arrow, and the quiver, and the dart, and

the javelin, and all preparations for war.

9 And thus being prepared to meet the Lamanites, they did not prosper against us.

But the word of the Lord was verified, which he spake unto our fathers, saying that:

Inasmuch as ye will keep my commandments ye shall prosper in the land. 10 And it came to pass that the prophets of the Lord did threaten the people of

Nephi, according to the word of God, that if they did not keep the commandments,

but should fall into transgression, they should be destroyed from off the face of the

land.

11 Wherefore, the prophets, and the priests, and the teachers, did labor diligently,

exhorting with all long-suffering the people to diligence; teaching the law of Moses,

and the intent for which it was given; persuading them to look forward unto the

Messiah, and believe in him to come as though he already was. And after this

manner did they teach them.

jarom

113

the face of the land; for they did prick their hearts with the word, continually

stirring them up unto repentance.

13 And it came to pass that two hundred and thirty and eight years had passed

away—after the manner of wars, and contentions, and dissensions, for the space of

much of the time.

14 And I, Jarom, do not write more, for the plates are small. But behold, my

brethren, ye can go to the other plates of Nephi; for behold, upon them the records

of our wars are engraven, according to the writings of the kings, or those which they

caused to be written.

15 And I deliver these plates into the hands of my son Omni, that they may be kept

according to the commandments of my fathers.

114

jarom

The Book of Omni

1 Behold, it came to pass that I, Omni, being commanded by my father, Jarom, that I

should write somewhat upon these plates, to preserve our genealogy— 2 Wherefore, in my days, I would that ye should know that I fought much with the

sword to preserve my people, the Nephites, from falling into the hands of their

enemies, the Lamanites. But behold, I of myself am a wicked man, and I have not

kept the statutes and the commandments of the Lord as I ought to have done. 3 And it came to pass that two hundred and seventy and six years had passed away,

and we had many seasons of peace; and we had many seasons of serious war and

bloodshed. Yea, and in fine, two hundred and eighty and two years had passed away,

and I had kept these plates according to the commandments of my fathers; and I

conferred them upon my son Amaron. And I make an end.

4 And now I, Amaron, write the things whatsoever I write, which are few, in the

book of my father.

5 Behold, it came to pass that three hundred and twenty years had passed away,

and the more wicked part of the Nephites were destroyed.

6 For the Lord would not suffer, after he had led them out of the land of Jerusalem

and kept and preserved them from falling into the hands of their enemies, yea, he

would not suffer that the words should not be verified, which he spake unto our

fathers, saying that: Inasmuch as ye will not keep my commandments ye shall not

prosper in the land.

7 Wherefore, the Lord did visit them in great judgment; nevertheless, he did spare

the righteous that they should not perish, but did deliver them out of the hands of

their enemies.

8 And it came to pass that I did deliver the plates unto my brother Chemish. 9 Now I, Chemish, write what few things I write, in the same book with my

brother; for behold, I saw the last which he wrote, that he wrote it with his own

hand; and he wrote it in the day that he delivered them unto me. And after this

manner we keep the records, for it is according to the commandments of our

fathers. And I make an end.

10 Behold, I, Abinadom, am the son of Chemish. Behold, it came to pass that I saw

much war and contention between my people, the Nephites, and the Lamanites;

and I, with my own sword, have taken the lives of many of the Lamanites in the

defence of my brethren.

11 And behold, the record of this people is engraven upon plates which is had by

the kings, according to the generations; and I know of no revelation save that which

has been written, neither prophecy; wherefore, that which is sufficient is written.

And I make an end.

12 Behold, I am Amaleki, the son of Abinadom. Behold, I will speak unto you

somewhat concerning Mosiah, who was made king over the land of Zarahemla; for

behold, he being warned of the Lord that he should flee out of the land of Nephi,

and as many as would hearken unto the voice of the Lord should also depart out of

the land with him, into the wilderness—

13 And it came to pass that he did according as the Lord had commanded him. And

they departed out of the land into the wilderness, as many as would hearken unto

the voice of the Lord; and they were led by many preachings and prophesyings. And

omni

115

they were admonished continually by the word of God; and they were led by the

power of his arm, through the wilderness until they came down into the land which

is called the land of Zarahemla.

14 And they discovered a people, who were called the people of Zarahemla. Now,

there was great rejoicing among the people of Zarahemla; and also Zarahemla did

rejoice exceedingly, because the Lord had sent the people of Mosiah with the plates

of brass which contained the record of the Jews.

15 Behold, it came to pass that Mosiah discovered that the people of Zarahemla

came out from Jerusalem at the time that Zedekiah, king of Judah, was carried away

captive into Babylon.

16 And they journeyed in the wilderness, and were brought by the hand of the Lord

across the great waters, into the land where Mosiah discovered them; and they had

dwelt there from that time forth.

17 And at the time that Mosiah discovered them, they had become exceedingly

numerous. Nevertheless, they had had many wars and serious contentions, and had

fallen by the sword from time to time; and their language had become corrupted;

and they had brought no records with them; and they denied the being of their

Creator; and Mosiah, nor the people of Mosiah, could understand them. 18 But it came to pass that Mosiah caused that they should be taught in his

language. And it came to pass that after they were taught in the language of Mosiah,

Zarahemla gave a genealogy of his fathers, according to his memory; and they are

written, but not in these plates.

19 And it came to pass that the people of Zarahemla, and of Mosiah, did unite

together; and Mosiah was appointed to be their king.

20 And it came to pass in the days of Mosiah, there was a large stone brought unto

him with engravings on it; and he did interpret the engravings by the gift and power

of God.

21 And they gave an account of one Coriantumr, and the slain of his people. And

Coriantumr was discovered by the people of Zarahemla; and he dwelt with them

for the space of nine moons.

22 It also spake a few words concerning his fathers. And his first parents came out

from the tower, at the time the Lord confounded the language of the people; and

the severity of the Lord fell upon them according to his judgments, which are just;

and their bones lay scattered in the land northward.

23 Behold, I, Amaleki, was born in the days of Mosiah; and I have lived to see his

death; and Benjamin, his son, reigneth in his stead.

24 And behold, I have seen, in the days of king Benjamin, a serious war and much

bloodshed between the Nephites and the Lamanites. But behold, the Nephites did

obtain much advantage over them; yea, insomuch that king Benjamin did drive

them out of the land of Zarahemla.

25 And it came to pass that I began to be old; and, having no seed, and knowing

king Benjamin to be a just man before the Lord, wherefore, I shall deliver up these

plates unto him, exhorting all men to come unto God, the Holy One of Israel, and

believe in prophesying, and in revelations, and in the ministering of angels, and in

the gift of speaking with tongues, and in the gift of interpreting languages, and in all

things which are good; for there is nothing which is good save it comes from the

Lord: and that which is evil cometh from the devil.

116

omni

26 And now, my beloved brethren, I would that ye should come unto Christ, who is

the Holy One of Israel, and partake of his salvation, and the power of his

redemption. Yea, come unto him, and offer your whole souls as an offering unto

him, and continue in fasting and praying, and endure to the end; and as the Lord

liveth ye will be saved.

27 And now I would speak somewhat concerning a certain number who went up

into the wilderness to return to the land of Nephi; for there was a large number who

were desirous to possess the land of their inheritance.

28 Wherefore, they went up into the wilderness. And their leader being a strong and

mighty man, and a stiffnecked man, wherefore he caused a contention among them;

and they were all slain, save fifty, in the wilderness, and they returned again to the

land of Zarahemla.

29 And it came to pass that they also took others to a considerable number, and

took their journey again into the wilderness.

30 And I, Amaleki, had a brother, who also went with them; and I have not since

known concerning them. And I am about to lie down in my grave; and these plates

are full. And I make an end of my speaking.

omni

117

The Words of Mormon

1 And now I, Mormon, being about to deliver up the record which I have been

making into the hands of my son Moroni, behold I have witnessed almost all the

destruction of my people, the Nephites.

2 And it is many hundred years after the coming of Christ that I deliver these

records into the hands of my son; and it supposeth me that he will witness the entire

destruction of my people. But may God grant that he may survive them, that he may

write somewhat concerning them, and somewhat concerning Christ, that perhaps

some day it may profit them.

3 And now, I speak somewhat concerning that which I have written; for after I had

made an abridgment from the plates of Nephi, down to the reign of this king

Benjamin, of whom Amaleki spake, I searched among the records which had been

delivered into my hands, and I found these plates, which contained this small

account of the prophets, from Jacob down to the reign of this king Benjamin, and

also many of the words of Nephi.

4 And the things which are upon these plates pleasing me, because of the

prophecies of the coming of Christ; and my fathers knowing that many of them

have been fulfilled; yea, and I also know that as many things as have been

prophesied concerning us down to this day have been fulfilled, and as many as go

beyond this day must surely come to pass—

5 Wherefore, I chose these things, to finish my record upon them, which

remainder of my record I shall take from the plates of Nephi; and I cannot write the

hundredth part of the things of my people.

6 But behold, I shall take these plates, which contain these prophesyings and

revelations, and put them with the remainder of my record, for they are choice unto

me; and I know they will be choice unto my brethren.

7 And I do this for a wise purpose; for thus it whispereth me, according to the

workings of the Spirit of the Lord which is in me. And now, I do not know all

things; but the Lord knoweth all things which are to come; wherefore, he worketh

in me to do according to his will.

8 And my prayer to God is concerning my brethren, that they may once again

come to the knowledge of God, yea, the redemption of Christ; that they may once

again be a delightsome people.

9 And now I, Mormon, proceed to finish out my record, which I take from the

plates of Nephi; and I make it according to the knowledge and the understanding

which God has given me.

10 Wherefore, it came to pass that after Amaleki had delivered up these plates into

the hands of king Benjamin, he took them and put them with the other plates,

which contained records which had been handed down by the kings, from

generation to generation until the days of king Benjamin.

11 And they were handed down from king Benjamin, from generation to generation

until they have fallen into my hands. And I, Mormon, pray to God that they may be

preserved from this time henceforth. And I know that they will be preserved; for

there are great things written upon them, out of which my people and their

brethren shall be judged at the great and last day, according to the word of God

which is written.

118

words of mormon

12 And now, concerning this king Benjamin—he had somewhat of contentions

among his own people.

13 And it came to pass also that the armies of the Lamanites came down out of the

land of Nephi, to battle against his people. But behold, king Benjamin gathered

together his armies, and he did stand against them; and he did fight with the

strength of his own arm, with the sword of Laban.

14 And in the strength of the Lord they did contend against their enemies, until

they had slain many thousands of the Lamanites. And it came to pass that they did
