35 And he returned again privily to his own camp, and behold, his men were asleep,

and he awoke them and told them all the things that he had done.

36 And he caused that his armies should stand in readiness, lest the Lamanites had

awakened and should come upon them.

37 And thus endeth the twenty and fifth year of the reign of the judges over the

people of Nephi; and thus endeth the days of Amalickiah.

alma 51

289

Alma 52

1 And now, it came to pass in the twenty and sixth year of the reign of the judges over

the people of Nephi, behold, when the Lamanites awoke on the first morning of the

first month, behold, they found Amalickiah was dead in his own tent; and they also

saw that Teancum was ready to give them battle on that day.

2 And now, when the Lamanites saw this they were affrighted; and they

abandoned their design in marching into the land northward, and retreated with all

their army into the city of Mulek, and sought protection in their fortifications. 3 And it came to pass that the brother of Amalickiah was appointed king over the

people; and his name was Ammoron; thus king Ammoron, the brother of king

Amalickiah, was appointed to reign in his stead.

4 And it came to pass that he did command that his people should maintain those

cities, which they had taken by the shedding of blood; for they had not taken any

cities save they had lost much blood.

5 And now, Teancum saw that the Lamanites were determined to maintain those

cities which they had taken, and those parts of the land which they had obtained

possession of; and also seeing the enormity of their number, Teancum thought it

was not expedient that he should attempt to attack them in their forts. 6 But he kept his men round about, as if making preparations for war; yea, and

truly he was preparing to defend himself against them, by casting up walls round

about and preparing places of resort.

7 And it came to pass that he kept thus preparing for war until Moroni had sent a

large number of men to strengthen his army.

8 And Moroni also sent orders unto him that he should retain all the prisoners

who fell into his hands; for as the Lamanites had taken many prisoners, that he

should retain all the prisoners of the Lamanites as a ransom for those whom the

Lamanites had taken.

9 And he also sent orders unto him that he should fortify the land Bountiful, and

secure the narrow pass which led into the land northward, lest the Lamanites should

obtain that point and should have power to harass them on every side. 10 And Moroni also sent unto him, desiring him that he would be faithful in

maintaining that quarter of the land, and that he would seek every opportunity to

scourge the Lamanites in that quarter, as much as was in his power, that perhaps he

might take again by stratagem or some other way those cities which had been taken

out of their hands; and that he also would fortify and strengthen the cities round

about, which had not fallen into the hands of the Lamanites.

11 And he also said unto him, I would come unto you, but behold, the Lamanites

are upon us in the borders of the land by the west sea; and behold, I go against them,

therefore I cannot come unto you.

12 Now, the king (Ammoron) had departed out of the land of Zarahemla, and had

made known unto the queen concerning the death of his brother, and had gathered

together a large number of men, and had marched forth against the Nephites on the

borders by the west sea.

13 And thus he was endeavoring to harass the Nephites, and to draw away a part of

their forces to that part of the land, while he had commanded those whom he had

left to possess the cities which he had taken, that they should also harass the

Nephites on the borders by the east sea, and should take possession of their lands as

290

alma 52

much as it was in their power, according to the power of their armies. 14 And thus were the Nephites in those dangerous circumstances in the ending of

the twenty and sixth year of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi. 15 But behold, it came to pass in the twenty and seventh year of the reign of the

judges, that Teancum, by the command of Moroni—who had established armies to

protect the south and the west borders of the land, and had begun his march

towards the land Bountiful, that he might assist Teancum with his men in retaking

the cities which they had lost—

16 And it came to pass that Teancum had received orders to make an attack upon

the city of Mulek, and retake it if it were possible.

17 And it came to pass that Teancum made preparations to make an attack upon the

city of Mulek, and march forth with his army against the Lamanites; but he saw that

it was impossible that he could overpower them while they were in their

fortifications; therefore he abandoned his designs and returned again to the city

Bountiful, to wait for the coming of Moroni, that he might receive strength to his

army.

18 And it came to pass that Moroni did arrive with his army at the land of

Bountiful, in the latter end of the twenty and seventh year of the reign of the judges

over the people of Nephi.

19 And in the commencement of the twenty and eighth year, Moroni and Teancum

and many of the chief captains held a council of war—what they should do to cause

the Lamanites to come out against them to battle; or that they might by some

means flatter them out of their strongholds, that they might gain advantage over

them and take again the city of Mulek.

20 And it came to pass they sent embassies to the army of the Lamanites, which

protected the city of Mulek, to their leader, whose name was Jacob, desiring him

that he would come out with his armies to meet them upon the plains between the

two cities. But behold, Jacob, who was a Zoramite, would not come out with his

army to meet them upon the plains.

21 And it came to pass that Moroni, having no hopes of meeting them upon fair

grounds, therefore, he resolved upon a plan that he might decoy the Lamanites out

of their strongholds.

22 Therefore he caused that Teancum should take a small number of men and march

down near the seashore; and Moroni and his army, by night, marched in the

wilderness, on the west of the city Mulek; and thus, on the morrow, when the

guards of the Lamanites had discovered Teancum, they ran and told it unto Jacob,

their leader.

23 And it came to pass that the armies of the Lamanites did march forth against

Teancum, supposing by their numbers to overpower Teancum because of the

smallness of his numbers. And as Teancum saw the armies of the Lamanites coming

out against him he began to retreat down by the seashore, northward. 24 And it came to pass that when the Lamanites saw that he began to flee, they took

courage and pursued them with vigor. And while Teancum was thus leading away

the Lamanites who were pursuing them in vain, behold, Moroni commanded that a

part of his army who were with him should march forth into the city, and take

possession of it.

25 And thus they did, and slew all those who had been left to protect the city, yea,

alma 52

291

all those who would not yield up their weapons of war.

26 And thus Moroni had obtained possession of the city Mulek with a part of his

army, while he marched with the remainder to meet the Lamanites when they

should return from the pursuit of Teancum.

27 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did pursue Teancum until they came near

the city Bountiful, and then they were met by Lehi and a small army, which had

been left to protect the city Bountiful.

28 And now behold, when the chief captains of the Lamanites had beheld Lehi with

his army coming against them, they fled in much confusion, lest perhaps they

should not obtain the city Mulek before Lehi should overtake them; for they were

wearied because of their march, and the men of Lehi were fresh.

29 Now the Lamanites did not know that Moroni had been in their rear with his

army; and all they feared was Lehi and his men.

30 Now Lehi was not desirous to overtake them till they should meet Moroni and

his army.

31 And it came to pass that before the Lamanites had retreated far they were

surrounded by the Nephites, by the men of Moroni on one hand, and the men of

Lehi on the other, all of whom were fresh and full of strength; but the Lamanites

were wearied because of their long march.

32 And Moroni commanded his men that they should fall upon them until they

had given up their weapons of war.

33 And it came to pass that Jacob, being their leader, being also a Zoramite, and

having an unconquerable spirit, he led the Lamanites forth to battle with exceeding

fury against Moroni.

34 Moroni being in their course of march, therefore Jacob was determined to slay

them and cut his way through to the city of Mulek. But behold, Moroni and his

men were more powerful; therefore they did not give way before the Lamanites. 35 And it came to pass that they fought on both hands with exceeding fury; and

there were many slain on both sides; yea, and Moroni was wounded and Jacob was

killed.

36 And Lehi pressed upon their rear with such fury with his strong men, that the

Lamanites in the rear delivered up their weapons of war; and the remainder of them,

being much confused, knew not whither to go or to strike.

37 Now Moroni seeing their confusion, he said unto them: If ye will bring forth

your weapons of war and deliver them up, behold we will forbear shedding your

blood.

38 And it came to pass that when the Lamanites had heard these words, their chief

captains, all those who were not slain, came forth and threw down their weapons of

war at the feet of Moroni, and also commanded their men that they should do the

same.

39 But behold, there were many that would not; and those who would not deliver

up their swords were taken and bound, and their weapons of war were taken from

them, and they were compelled to march with their brethren forth into the land

Bountiful.

40 And now the number of prisoners who were taken exceeded more than the

number of those who had been slain, yea, more than those who had been slain on

both sides.

292

alma 52

Alma 53

1 And it came to pass that they did set guards over the prisoners of the Lamanites, and

did compel them to go forth and bury their dead, yea, and also the dead of the

Nephites who were slain; and Moroni placed men over them to guard them while

they should perform their labors.

2 And Moroni went to the city of Mulek with Lehi, and took command of the city

and gave it unto Lehi. Now behold, this Lehi was a man who had been with Moroni

in the more part of all his battles; and he was a man like unto Moroni, and they

rejoiced in each other’s safety; yea, they were beloved by each other, and also

beloved by all the people of Nephi.

3 And it came to pass that after the Lamanites had finished burying their dead and

also the dead of the Nephites, they were marched back into the land Bountiful; and

Teancum, by the orders of Moroni, caused that they should commence laboring in

digging a ditch round about the land, or the city, Bountiful.

4 And he caused that they should build a breastwork of timbers upon the inner

bank of the ditch; and they cast up dirt out of the ditch against the breastwork of

timbers; and thus they did cause the Lamanites to labor until they had encircled the

city of Bountiful round about with a strong wall of timbers and earth, to an

exceeding height.

5 And this city became an exceeding stronghold ever after; and in this city they did

guard the prisoners of the Lamanites; yea, even within a wall which they had caused

them to build with their own hands. Now Moroni was compelled to cause the

Lamanites to labor, because it was easy to guard them while at their labor; and he

desired all his forces when he should make an attack upon the Lamanites. 6 And it came to pass that Moroni had thus gained a victory over one of the

greatest of the armies of the Lamanites, and had obtained possession of the city of

Mulek, which was one of the strongest holds of the Lamanites in the land of Nephi;

and thus he had also built a stronghold to retain his prisoners.

7 And it came to pass that he did no more attempt a battle with the Lamanites in

that year, but he did employ his men in preparing for war, yea, and in making

fortifications to guard against the Lamanites, yea, and also delivering their women

and their children from famine and affliction, and providing food for their armies. 8 And now it came to pass that the armies of the Lamanites, on the west sea, south,

while in the absence of Moroni on account of some intrigue amongst the Nephites,

which caused dissensions amongst them, had gained some ground over the

Nephites, yea, insomuch that they had obtained possession of a number of their

cities in that part of the land.

9 And thus because of iniquity amongst themselves, yea, because of dissensions and

intrigue among themselves they were placed in the most dangerous circumstances. 10 And now behold, I have somewhat to say concerning the people of Ammon,

who, in the beginning, were Lamanites; but by Ammon and his brethren, or rather

by the power and word of God, they had been converted unto the Lord; and they

had been brought down into the land of Zarahemla, and had ever since been

protected by the Nephites.

11 And because of their oath they had been kept from taking up arms against their

brethren; for they had taken an oath that they never would shed blood more; and

according to their oath they would have perished; yea, they would have suffered

alma 53

293

themselves to have fallen into the hands of their brethren, had it not been for the

pity and the exceeding love which Ammon and his brethren had had for them. 12 And for this cause they were brought down into the land of Zarahemla; and they

ever had been protected by the Nephites.

13 But it came to pass that when they saw the danger, and the many afflictions and

tribulations which the Nephites bore for them, they were moved with compassion

and were desirous to take up arms in the defence of their country.

14 But behold, as they were about to take their weapons of war, they were

overpowered by the persuasions of Helaman and his brethren, for they were about

to break the oath which they had made.

15 And Helaman feared lest by so doing they should lose their souls; therefore all

those who had entered into this covenant were compelled to behold their brethren

wade through their afflictions, in their dangerous circumstances at this time. 16 But behold, it came to pass they had many sons, who had not entered into a

covenant that they would not take their weapons of war to defend themselves

against their enemies; therefore they did assemble themselves together at this time,

as many as were able to take up arms, and they called themselves Nephites. 17 And they entered into a covenant to fight for the liberty of the Nephites, yea, to

protect the land unto the laying down of their lives; yea, even they covenanted that

they never would give up their liberty, but they would fight in all cases to protect

the Nephites and themselves from bondage.

18 Now behold, there were two thousand of those young men, who entered into

this covenant and took their weapons of war to defend their country. 19 And now behold, as they never had hitherto been a disadvantage to the

Nephites, they became now at this period of time also a great support; for they took

their weapons of war, and they would that Helaman should be their leader. 20 And they were all young men, and they were exceedingly valiant for courage, and

also for strength and activity; but behold, this was not all—they were men who

were true at all times in whatsoever thing they were entrusted.

21 Yea, they were men of truth and soberness, for they had been taught to keep the

commandments of God and to walk uprightly before him.

22 And now it came to pass that Helaman did march at the head of his two

thousand stripling soldiers, to the support of the people in the borders of the land

on the south by the west sea.

23 And thus ended the twenty and eighth year of the reign of the judges over the

people of Nephi.

Alma 54

1 And now it came to pass in the commencement of the twenty and ninth year of the

judges, that Ammoron sent unto Moroni desiring that he would exchange prisoners. 2 And it came to pass that Moroni felt to rejoice exceedingly at this request, for he

desired the provisions which were imparted for the support of the Lamanite

prisoners for the support of his own people; and he also desired his own people for

the strengthening of his army.

3 Now the Lamanites had taken many women and children, and there was not a

woman nor a child among all the prisoners of Moroni, or the prisoners whom

294

alma 54

Moroni had taken; therefore Moroni resolved upon a stratagem to obtain as many

prisoners of the Nephites from the Lamanites as it were possible.

4 Therefore he wrote an epistle, and sent it by the servant of Ammoron, the same

who had brought an epistle to Moroni. Now these are the words which he wrote

unto Ammoron, saying:

5 Behold, Ammoron, I have written unto you somewhat concerning this war

which ye have waged against my people, or rather which thy brother hath waged

against them, and which ye are still determined to carry on after his death. 6 Behold, I would tell you somewhat concerning the justice of God, and the sword

of his almighty wrath, which doth hang over you except ye repent and withdraw

your armies into your own lands, or the land of your possessions, which is the land

of Nephi.

7 Yea, I would tell you these things if ye were capable of hearkening unto them;

yea, I would tell you concerning that awful hell that awaits to receive such

murderers as thou and thy brother have been, except ye repent and withdraw your

murderous purposes, and return with your armies to your own lands. 8 But as ye have once rejected these things, and have fought against the people of

the Lord, even so I may expect you will do it again.

9 And now behold, we are prepared to receive you; yea, and except you withdraw

your purposes, behold, ye will pull down the wrath of that God whom you have

rejected upon you, even to your utter destruction.

10 But, as the Lord liveth, our armies shall come upon you except ye withdraw, and

ye shall soon be visited with death, for we will retain our cities and our lands; yea,

and we will maintain our religion and the cause of our God.

11 But behold, it supposeth me that I talk to you concerning these things in vain; or

it supposeth me that thou art a child of hell; therefore I will close my epistle by

telling you that I will not exchange prisoners, save it be on conditions that ye will

deliver up a man and his wife and his children, for one prisoner; if this be the case

that ye will do it, I will exchange.

12 And behold, if ye do not this, I will come against you with my armies; yea, even I

will arm my women and my children, and I will come against you, and I will follow

you even into your own land, which is the land of our first inheritance; yea, and it

shall be blood for blood, yea, life for life; and I will give you battle even until you are

destroyed from off the face of the earth.

13 Behold, I am in my anger, and also my people; ye have sought to murder us, and

we have only sought to defend ourselves. But behold, if ye seek to destroy us more

we will seek to destroy you; yea, and we will seek our land, the land of our first

inheritance.

14 Now I close my epistle. I am Moroni; I am a leader of the people of the Nephites. 15 Now it came to pass that Ammoron, when he had received this epistle, was

angry; and he wrote another epistle unto Moroni, and these are the words which he

wrote, saying:

16 I am Ammoron, the king of the Lamanites; I am the brother of Amalickiah

whom ye have murdered. Behold, I will avenge his blood upon you, yea, and I will

come upon you with my armies for I fear not your threatenings.

17 For behold, your fathers did wrong their brethren, insomuch that they did rob

them of their right to the government when it rightly belonged unto them.

alma 54

295

18 And now behold, if ye will lay down your arms, and subject yourselves to be

governed by those to whom the government doth rightly belong, then will I cause

that my people shall lay down their weapons and shall be at war no more. 19 Behold, ye have breathed out many threatenings against me and my people; but

behold, we fear not your threatenings.

20 Nevertheless, I will grant to exchange prisoners according to your request, gladly,

that I may preserve my food for my men of war; and we will wage a war which shall

be eternal, either to the subjecting the Nephites to our authority or to their eternal

extinction.

21 And as concerning that God whom ye say we have rejected, behold, we know not

such a being; neither do ye; but if it so be that there is such a being, we know not

but that he hath made us as well as you.

22 And if it so be that there is a devil and a hell, behold will he not send you there to

dwell with my brother whom ye have murdered, whom ye have hinted that he hath

gone to such a place? But behold these things matter not.

23 I am Ammoron, and a descendant of Zoram, whom your fathers pressed and

brought out of Jerusalem.

24 And behold now, I am a bold Lamanite; behold, this war hath been waged to

avenge their wrongs, and to maintain and to obtain their rights to the government;

and I close my epistle to Moroni.

Alma 55

1 Now it came to pass that when Moroni had received this epistle he was more angry,

because he knew that Ammoron had a perfect knowledge of his fraud; yea, he knew

that Ammoron knew that it was not a just cause that had caused him to wage a war

against the people of Nephi.

2 And he said: Behold, I will not exchange prisoners with Ammoron save he will

withdraw his purpose, as I have stated in my epistle; for I will not grant unto him

that he shall have any more power than what he hath got.

3 Behold, I know the place where the Lamanites do guard my people whom they

have taken prisoners; and as Ammoron would not grant unto me mine epistle,

behold, I will give unto him according to my words; yea, I will seek death among

them until they shall sue for peace.

4 And now it came to pass that when Moroni had said these words, he caused that

a search should be made among his men, that perhaps he might find a man who was

a descendant of Laman among them.

5 And it came to pass that they found one, whose name was Laman; and he was

one of the servants of the king who was murdered by Amalickiah.

6 Now Moroni caused that Laman and a small number of his men should go forth

unto the guards who were over the Nephites.

7 Now the Nephites were guarded in the city of Gid; therefore Moroni appointed

Laman and caused that a small number of men should go with him.

8 And when it was evening Laman went to the guards who were over the Nephites,

and behold, they saw him coming and they hailed him; but he saith unto them:

Fear not; behold, I am a Lamanite. Behold, we have escaped from the Nephites, and

they sleep; and behold we have taken of their wine and brought with us.

296

alma 55

9 Now when the Lamanites heard these words they received him with joy; and

they said unto him: Give us of your wine, that we may drink; we are glad that ye

have thus taken wine with you for we are weary.

10 But Laman said unto them: Let us keep of our wine till we go against the

Nephites to battle. But this saying only made them more desirous to drink of the

wine;

11 For, said they: We are weary, therefore let us take of the wine, and by and by we

shall receive wine for our rations, which will strengthen us to go against the

Nephites.

12 And Laman said unto them: You may do according to your desires. 13 And it came to pass that they did take of the wine freely; and it was pleasant to

their taste, therefore they took of it more freely; and it was strong, having been

prepared in its strength.

14 And it came to pass they did drink and were merry, and by and by they were all

drunken.

15 And now when Laman and his men saw that they were all drunken, and were in a

deep sleep, they returned to Moroni and told him all the things that had happened. 16 And now this was according to the design of Moroni. And Moroni had prepared

his men with weapons of war; and he went to the city Gid, while the Lamanites

were in a deep sleep and drunken, and cast in weapons of war unto the prisoners,

insomuch that they were all armed;

17 Yea, even to their women, and all those of their children, as many as were able to

use a weapon of war, when Moroni had armed all those prisoners; and all those

things were done in a profound silence.

18 But had they awakened the Lamanites, behold they were drunken and the

Nephites could have slain them.

19 But behold, this was not the desire of Moroni; he did not delight in murder or

bloodshed, but he delighted in the saving of his people from destruction; and for

this cause he might not bring upon him injustice, he would not fall upon the

Lamanites and destroy them in their drunkenness.

20 But he had obtained his desires; for he had armed those prisoners of the

Nephites who were within the wall of the city, and had given them power to gain

possession of those parts which were within the walls.

21 And then he caused the men who were with him to withdraw a pace from them,

and surround the armies of the Lamanites.

22 Now behold this was done in the night-time, so that when the Lamanites awoke

in the morning they beheld that they were surrounded by the Nephites without, and

that their prisoners were armed within.

23 And thus they saw that the Nephites had power over them; and in these

circumstances they found that it was not expedient that they should fight with the

Nephites; therefore their chief captains demanded their weapons of war, and they

brought them forth and cast them at the feet of the Nephites, pleading for mercy. 24 Now behold, this was the desire of Moroni. He took them prisoners of war, and

took possession of the city, and caused that all the prisoners should be liberated,

who were Nephites; and they did join the army of Moroni, and were a great strength

to his army.

25 And it came to pass that he did cause the Lamanites, whom he had taken

alma 55

297

prisoners, that they should commence a labor in strengthening the fortifications

round about the city Gid.

26 And it came to pass that when he had fortified the city Gid, according to his

desires, he caused that his prisoners should be taken to the city Bountiful; and he

also guarded that city with an exceedingly strong force.

27 And it came to pass that they did, notwithstanding all the intrigues of the

Lamanites, keep and protect all the prisoners whom they had taken, and also

maintain all the ground and the advantage which they had retaken.

28 And it came to pass that the Nephites began again to be victorious, and to

reclaim their rights and their privileges.

29 Many times did the Lamanites attempt to encircle them about by night, but in

these attempts they did lose many prisoners.

30 And many times did they attempt to administer of their wine to the Nephites,

that they might destroy them with poison or with drunkenness.

31 But behold, the Nephites were not slow to remember the Lord their God in this

their time of affliction. They could not be taken in their snares; yea, they would not

partake of their wine, save they had first given to some of the Lamanite prisoners. 32 And they were thus cautious that no poison should be administered among

them; for if their wine would poison a Lamanite it would also poison a Nephite;

and thus they did try all their liquors.

33 And now it came to pass that it was expedient for Moroni to make preparations

to attack the city Morianton; for behold, the Lamanites had, by their labors,

fortified the city Morianton until it had become an exceeding stronghold. 34 And they were continually bringing new forces into that city, and also new

supplies of provisions.

35 And thus ended the twenty and ninth year of the reign of the judges over the

people of Nephi.

Alma 56

1 And now it came to pass in the commencement of the thirtieth year of the reign of

the judges, on the second day in the first month, Moroni received an epistle from

Helaman, stating the affairs of the people in that quarter of the land. 2 And these are the words which he wrote, saying: My dearly beloved brother,

Moroni, as well in the Lord as in the tribulations of our warfare; behold, my beloved

brother, I have somewhat to tell you concerning our warfare in this part of the land. 3 Behold, two thousand of the sons of those men whom Ammon brought down

out of the land of Nephi—now ye have known that these were descendants of

Laman, who was the eldest son of our father Lehi;

4 Now I need not rehearse unto you concerning their traditions or their unbelief,

for thou knowest concerning all these things—

5 Therefore it sufficeth me that I tell you that two thousand of these young men

have taken their weapons of war, and would that I should be their leader; and we

have come forth to defend our country.

6 And now ye also know concerning the covenant which their fathers made, that

they would not take up their weapons of war against their brethren to shed blood. 7 But in the twenty and sixth year, when they saw our afflictions and our

298

alma 56

tribulations for them, they were about to break the covenant which they had made

and take up their weapons of war in our defence.

8 But I would not suffer them that they should break this covenant which they had

made, supposing that God would strengthen us, insomuch that we should not suffer

more because of the fulfilling the oath which they had taken.

9 But behold, here is one thing in which we may have great joy. For behold, in the

twenty and sixth year, I, Helaman, did march at the head of these two thousand

young men to the city of Judea, to assist Antipus, whom ye had appointed a leader

over the people of that part of the land.

10 And I did join my two thousand sons, (for they are worthy to be called sons) to

the army of Antipus, in which strength Antipus did rejoice exceedingly; for behold,

his army had been reduced by the Lamanites because their forces had slain a vast

number of our men, for which cause we have to mourn.

11 Nevertheless, we may console ourselves in this point, that they have died in the

cause of their country and of their God, yea, and they are happy.

12 And the Lamanites had also retained many prisoners, all of whom are chief

captains, for none other have they spared alive. And we suppose that they are now at

this time in the land of Nephi; it is so if they are not slain.

13 And now these are the cities of which the Lamanites have obtained possession by

the shedding of the blood of so many of our valiant men:

14 The land of Manti, or the city of Manti, and the city of Zeezrom, and the city of

Cumeni, and the city of Antiparah.

15 And these are the cities which they possessed when I arrived at the city of Judea;

and I found Antipus and his men toiling with their might to fortify the city. 16 Yea, and they were depressed in body as well as in spirit, for they had fought

valiantly by day and toiled by night to maintain their cities; and thus they had

suffered great afflictions of every kind.

17 And now they were determined to conquer in this place or die; therefore you

may well suppose that this little force which I brought with me, yea, those sons of

mine, gave them great hopes and much joy.

18 And now it came to pass that when the Lamanites saw that Antipus had received

a greater strength to his army, they were compelled by the orders of Ammoron to

not come against the city of Judea, or against us, to battle.

19 And thus were we favored of the Lord; for had they come upon us in this our

weakness they might have perhaps destroyed our little army; but thus were we

preserved.

20 They were commanded by Ammoron to maintain those cities which they had

taken. And thus ended the twenty and sixth year. And in the commencement of the

twenty and seventh year we had prepared our city and ourselves for defence. 21 Now we were desirous that the Lamanites should come upon us; for we were not

desirous to make an attack upon them in their strongholds.

22 And it came to pass that we kept spies out round about, to watch the movements

of the Lamanites, that they might not pass us by night nor by day to make an attack

upon our other cities which were on the northward.

23 For we knew in those cities they were not sufficiently strong to meet them;

therefore we were desirous, if they should pass by us, to fall upon them in their rear,

and thus bring them up in the rear at the same time they were met in the front. We

alma 56

299

supposed that we could overpower them; but behold, we were disappointed in this

our desire.

24 They durst not pass by us with their whole army, neither durst they with a part,

lest they should not be sufficiently strong and they should fall.

25 Neither durst they march down against the city of Zarahemla; neither durst they

cross the head of Sidon, over to the city of Nephihah.

26 And thus, with their forces, they were determined to maintain those cities which

they had taken.

27 And now it came to pass in the second month of this year, there was brought

unto us many provisions from the fathers of those my two thousand sons. 28 And also there were sent two thousand men unto us from the land of Zarahemla.

And thus we were prepared with ten thousand men, and provisions for them, and

also for their wives and their children.

29 And the Lamanites, thus seeing our forces increase daily, and provisions arrive for

our support, they began to be fearful, and began to sally forth, if it were possible to

put an end to our receiving provisions and strength.

30 Now when we saw that the Lamanites began to grow uneasy on this wise, we

were desirous to bring a stratagem into effect upon them; therefore Antipus ordered

that I should march forth with my little sons to a neighboring city, as if we were

carrying provisions to a neighboring city.

31 And we were to march near the city of Antiparah, as if we were going to the city

beyond, in the borders by the seashore.

32 And it came to pass that we did march forth, as if with our provisions, to go to

that city.

33 And it came to pass that Antipus did march forth with a part of his army, leaving

the remainder to maintain the city. But he did not march forth until I had gone

forth with my little army, and came near the city Antiparah.

34 And now, in the city Antiparah were stationed the strongest army of the

Lamanites; yea, the most numerous.

35 And it came to pass that when they had been informed by their spies, they came

forth with their army and marched against us.

36 And it came to pass that we did flee before them, northward. And thus we did

lead away the most powerful army of the Lamanites;

37 Yea, even to a considerable distance, insomuch that when they saw the army of

Antipus pursuing them, with their might, they did not turn to the right nor to the

left, but pursued their march in a straight course after us; and, as we suppose, it was

their intent to slay us before Antipus should overtake them, and this that they might

not be surrounded by our people.

38 And now Antipus, beholding our danger, did speed the march of his army. But

behold, it was night; therefore they did not overtake us, neither did Antipus

overtake them; therefore we did camp for the night.

39 And it came to pass that before the dawn of the morning, behold, the Lamanites

were pursuing us. Now we were not sufficiently strong to contend with them; yea, I

would not suffer that my little sons should fall into their hands; therefore we did

continue our march, and we took our march into the wilderness.

40 Now they durst not turn to the right nor to the left lest they should be

surrounded; neither would I turn to the right nor to the left lest they should

300

alma 56

overtake me, and we could not stand against them, but be slain, and they would

make their escape; and thus we did flee all that day into the wilderness, even until it

was dark.

41 And it came to pass that again, when the light of the morning came we saw the

Lamanites upon us, and we did flee before them.

42 But it came to pass that they did not pursue us far before they halted; and it was

in the morning of the third day of the seventh month.

43 And now, whether they were overtaken by Antipus we knew not, but I said unto

my men: Behold, we know not but they have halted for the purpose that we should

come against them, that they might catch us in their snare;

44 Therefore what say ye, my sons, will ye go against them to battle?

45 And now I say unto you, my beloved brother Moroni, that never had I seen so

great courage, nay, not amongst all the Nephites.

46 For as I had ever called them my sons (for they were all of them very young) even

so they said unto me: Father, behold our God is with us, and he will not suffer that

we should fall; then let us go forth; we would not slay our brethren if they would let

us alone; therefore let us go, lest they should overpower the army of Antipus. 47 Now they never had fought, yet they did not fear death; and they did think more

upon the liberty of their fathers than they did upon their lives; yea, they had been

taught by their mothers, that if they did not doubt, God would deliver them. 48 And they rehearsed unto me the words of their mothers, saying: We do not

doubt our mothers knew it.

49 And it came to pass that I did return with my two thousand against these

Lamanites who had pursued us. And now behold, the armies of Antipus had

overtaken them, and a terrible battle had commenced.

50 The army of Antipus being weary, because of their long march in so short a space

of time, were about to fall into the hands of the Lamanites; and had I not returned

with my two thousand they would have obtained their purpose.

51 For Antipus had fallen by the sword, and many of his leaders, because of their

weariness, which was occasioned by the speed of their march—therefore the men of

Antipus, being confused because of the fall of their leaders, began to give way before

the Lamanites.

52 And it came to pass that the Lamanites took courage, and began to pursue them;

and thus were the Lamanites pursuing them with great vigor when Helaman came

upon their rear with his two thousand, and began to slay them exceedingly,

insomuch that the whole army of the Lamanites halted and turned upon Helaman. 53 Now when the people of Antipus saw that the Lamanites had turned them about,

they gathered together their men and came again upon the rear of the Lamanites. 54 And now it came to pass that we, the people of Nephi, the people of Antipus,

and I with my two thousand, did surround the Lamanites, and did slay them; yea,

insomuch that they were compelled to deliver up their weapons of war and also

themselves as prisoners of war.

55 And now it came to pass that when they had surrendered themselves up unto us,

behold, I numbered those young men who had fought with me, fearing lest there

were many of them slain.

56 But behold, to my great joy, there had not one soul of them fallen to the earth;

yea, and they had fought as if with the strength of God; yea, never were men known

alma 56

301

to have fought with such miraculous strength; and with such mighty power did they

fall upon the Lamanites, that they did frighten them; and for this cause did the

Lamanites deliver themselves up as prisoners of war.

57 And as we had no place for our prisoners, that we could guard them to keep them

from the armies of the Lamanites, therefore we sent them to the land of Zarahemla,

and a part of those men who were not slain of Antipus, with them; and the

remainder I took and joined them to my stripling Ammonites, and took our march

back to the city of Judea.

Alma 57

1 And now it came to pass that I received an epistle from Ammoron, the king, stating

that if I would deliver up those prisoners of war whom we had taken that he would

deliver up the city of Antiparah unto us.

2 But I sent an epistle unto the king, that we were sure our forces were sufficient to

take the city of Antiparah by our force; and by delivering up the prisoners for that

city we should suppose ourselves unwise, and that we would only deliver up our

prisoners on exchange.

3 And Ammoron refused mine epistle, for he would not exchange prisoners;

therefore we began to make preparations to go against the city of Antiparah. 4 But the people of Antiparah did leave the city, and fled to their other cities,

which they had possession of, to fortify them; and thus the city of Antiparah fell

into our hands.

5 And thus ended the twenty and eighth year of the reign of the judges. 6 And it came to pass that in the commencement of the twenty and ninth year, we

received a supply of provisions, and also an addition to our army, from the land of

Zarahemla, and from the land round about, to the number of six thousand men,

besides sixty of the sons of the Ammonites who had come to join their brethren, my

little band of two thousand. And now behold, we were strong, yea, and we had also

plenty of provisions brought unto us.

7 And it came to pass that it was our desire to wage a battle with the army which

was placed to protect the city Cumeni.

8 And now behold, I will show unto you that we soon accomplished our desire;

yea, with our strong force, or with a part of our strong force, we did surround, by

night, the city Cumeni, a little before they were to receive a supply of provisions. 9 And it came to pass that we did camp round about the city for many nights; but

we did sleep upon our swords, and keep guards, that the Lamanites could not come

upon us by night and slay us, which they attempted many times; but as many times

as they attempted this their blood was spilt.

10 At length their provisions did arrive, and they were about to enter the city by

night. And we, instead of being Lamanites, were Nephites; therefore, we did take

them and their provisions.

11 And notwithstanding the Lamanites being cut off from their support after this

manner, they were still determined to maintain the city; therefore it became

expedient that we should take those provisions and send them to Judea, and our

prisoners to the land of Zarahemla.

12 And it came to pass that not many days had passed away before the Lamanites

302

alma 57

began to lose all hopes of succor; therefore they yielded up the city unto our hands;

and thus we had accomplished our designs in obtaining the city Cumeni. 13 But it came to pass that our prisoners were so numerous that, notwithstanding

the enormity of our numbers, we were obliged to employ all our force to keep them,

or to put them to death.

14 For behold, they would break out in great numbers, and would fight with stones,

and with clubs, or whatsoever thing they could get into their hands, insomuch that

we did slay upwards of two thousand of them after they had surrendered themselves

prisoners of war.

15 Therefore it became expedient for us, that we should put an end to their lives, or

guard them, sword in hand, down to the land of Zarahemla; and also our provisions

were not any more than sufficient for our own people, notwithstanding that which

we had taken from the Lamanites.

16 And now, in those critical circumstances, it became a very serious matter to

determine concerning these prisoners of war; nevertheless, we did resolve to send

them down to the land of Zarahemla; therefore we selected a part of our men, and

gave them charge over our prisoners to go down to the land of Zarahemla. 17 But it came to pass that on the morrow they did return. And now behold, we did

not inquire of them concerning the prisoners; for behold, the Lamanites were upon

us, and they returned in season to save us from falling into their hands. For behold,

Ammoron had sent to their support a new supply of provisions and also a numerous

army of men.

18 And it came to pass that those men whom we sent with the prisoners did arrive

in season to check them, as they were about to overpower us.

19 But behold, my little band of two thousand and sixty fought most desperately;

yea, they were firm before the Lamanites, and did administer death unto all those

who opposed them.

20 And as the remainder of our army were about to give way before the Lamanites,

behold, those two thousand and sixty were firm and undaunted.

21 Yea, and they did obey and observe to perform every word of command with

exactness; yea, and even according to their faith it was done unto them; and I did

remember the words which they said unto me that their mothers had taught them. 22 And now behold, it was these my sons, and those men who had been selected to

convey the prisoners, to whom we owe this great victory; for it was they who did

beat the Lamanites; therefore they were driven back to the city of Manti. 23 And we retained our city Cumeni, and were not all destroyed by the sword;

nevertheless, we had suffered great loss.

24 And it came to pass that after the Lamanites had fled, I immediately gave orders

that my men who had been wounded should be taken from among the dead, and

caused that their wounds should be dressed.

25 And it came to pass that there were two hundred, out of my two thousand and

sixty, who had fainted because of the loss of blood; nevertheless, according to the

goodness of God, and to our great astonishment, and also the joy of our whole army,

there was not one soul of them who did perish; yea, and neither was there one soul

among them who had not received many wounds.

26 And now, their preservation was astonishing to our whole army, yea, that they

should be spared while there was a thousand of our brethren who were slain. And

alma 57

303

we do justly ascribe it to the miraculous power of God, because of their exceeding

faith in that which they had been taught to believe—that there was a just God, and

whosoever did not doubt, that they should be preserved by his marvelous power. 27 Now this was the faith of these of whom I have spoken; they are young, and their

minds are firm, and they do put their trust in God continually.

28 And now it came to pass that after we had thus taken care of our wounded men,

and had buried our dead and also the dead of the Lamanites, who were many,

behold, we did inquire of Gid concerning the prisoners whom they had started to

go down to the land of Zarahemla with.

29 Now Gid was the chief captain over the band who was appointed to guard them

down to the land.

30 And now, these are the words which Gid said unto me: Behold, we did start to

go down to the land of Zarahemla with our prisoners. And it came to pass that we

did meet the spies of our armies, who had been sent out to watch the camp of the

Lamanites.

31 And they cried unto us, saying—Behold, the armies of the Lamanites are

marching towards the city of Cumeni; and behold, they will fall upon them, yea,

and will destroy our people.

32 And it came to pass that our prisoners did hear their cries, which caused them to

take courage; and they did rise up in rebellion against us.

33 And it came to pass because of their rebellion we did cause that our swords

should come upon them. And it came to pass that they did in a body run upon our

swords, in the which, the greater number of them were slain; and the remainder of

them broke through and fled from us.

34 And behold, when they had fled and we could not overtake them, we took our

march with speed towards the city Cumeni; and behold, we did arrive in time that

we might assist our brethren in preserving the city.

35 And behold, we are again delivered out of the hands of our enemies. And blessed

is the name of our God; for behold, it is he that has delivered us; yea, that has done

this great thing for us.

36 Now it came to pass that when I, Helaman, had heard these words of Gid, I was

filled with exceeding joy because of the goodness of God in preserving us, that we

might not all perish; yea, and I trust that the souls of them who have been slain have

entered into the rest of their God.

Alma 58

1 And behold, now it came to pass that our next object was to obtain the city of

Manti; but behold, there was no way that we could lead them out of the city by our

small bands. For behold, they remembered that which we had hitherto done;

therefore we could not decoy them away from their strongholds.

2 And they were so much more numerous than was our army that we durst not go

forth and attack them in their strongholds.

3 Yea, and it became expedient that we should employ our men to the maintaining

those parts of the land which we had regained of our possessions; therefore it

became expedient that we should wait, that we might receive more strength from

the land of Zarahemla and also a new supply of provisions.

304

alma 58

4 And it came to pass that I thus did send an embassy to the governor of our land,

to acquaint him concerning the affairs of our people. And it came to pass that we

did wait to receive provisions and strength from the land of Zarahemla. 5 But behold, this did profit us but little; for the Lamanites were also receiving

great strength from day to day, and also many provisions; and thus were our

circumstances at this period of time.

6 And the Lamanites were sallying forth against us from time to time, resolving by

stratagem to destroy us; nevertheless we could not come to battle with them,

because of their retreats and their strongholds.

7 And it came to pass that we did wait in these difficult circumstances for the space

of many months, even until we were about to perish for the want of food. 8 But it came to pass that we did receive food, which was guarded to us by an army

of two thousand men to our assistance; and this is all the assistance which we did

receive, to defend ourselves and our country from falling into the hands of our

enemies, yea, to contend with an enemy which was innumerable.

9 And now the cause of these our embarrassments, or the cause why they did not

send more strength unto us, we knew not; therefore we were grieved and also filled

with fear, lest by any means the judgments of God should come upon our land, to

our overthrow and utter destruction.

10 Therefore we did pour out our souls in prayer to God, that he would strengthen

us and deliver us out of the hands of our enemies, yea, and also give us strength that

we might retain our cities, and our lands, and our possessions, for the support of our

people.

11 Yea, and it came to pass that the Lord our God did visit us with assurances that he

would deliver us; yea, insomuch that he did speak peace to our souls, and did grant

unto us great faith, and did cause us that we should hope for our deliverance in him. 12 And we did take courage with our small force which we had received, and were

fixed with a determination to conquer our enemies, and to maintain our lands, and

our possessions, and our wives, and our children, and the cause of our liberty. 13 And thus we did go forth with all our might against the Lamanites, who were in

the city of Manti; and we did pitch our tents by the wilderness side, which was near

to the city.

14 And it came to pass that on the morrow, that when the Lamanites saw that we

were in the borders by the wilderness which was near the city, that they sent out

their spies round about us that they might discover the number and the strength of

our army.

15 And it came to pass that when they saw that we were not strong, according to our

numbers, and fearing that we should cut them off from their support except they

should come out to battle against us and kill us, and also supposing that they could

easily destroy us with their numerous hosts, therefore they began to make

preparations to come out against us to battle.

16 And when we saw that they were making preparations to come out against us,

behold, I caused that Gid, with a small number of men, should secrete himself in the

wilderness, and also that Teomner and a small number of men should secrete

themselves also in the wilderness.

17 Now Gid and his men were on the right and the others on the left; and when

they had thus secreted themselves, behold, I remained, with the remainder of my

alma 58

305

army, in that same place where we had first pitched our tents against the time that

the Lamanites should come out to battle.

18 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did come out with their numerous army

against us. And when they had come and were about to fall upon us with the sword,

I caused that my men, those who were with me, should retreat into the wilderness. 19 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did follow after us with great speed, for

they were exceedingly desirous to overtake us that they might slay us; therefore they

did follow us into the wilderness; and we did pass by in the midst of Gid and

Teomner, insomuch that they were not discovered by the Lamanites. 20 And it came to pass that when the Lamanites had passed by, or when the army

had passed by, Gid and Teomner did rise up from their secret places, and did cut off

the spies of the Lamanites that they should not return to the city.

21 And it came to pass that when they had cut them off, they ran to the city and fell

upon the guards who were left to guard the city, insomuch that they did destroy

them and did take possession of the city.

22 Now this was done because the Lamanites did suffer their whole army, save a few

guards only, to be led away into the wilderness.

23 And it came to pass that Gid and Teomner by this means had obtained

possession of their strongholds. And it came to pass that we took our course, after

having traveled much in the wilderness towards the land of Zarahemla. 24 And when the Lamanites saw that they were marching towards the land of

Zarahemla, they were exceedingly afraid, lest there was a plan laid to lead them on

to destruction; therefore they began to retreat into the wilderness again, yea, even

back by the same way which they had come.

25 And behold, it was night and they did pitch their tents, for the chief captains of

the Lamanites had supposed that the Nephites were weary because of their march;

and supposing that they had driven their whole army therefore they took no

thought concerning the city of Manti.

26 Now it came to pass that when it was night, I caused that my men should not

sleep, but that they should march forward by another way towards the land of

Manti.

27 And because of this our march in the night-time, behold, on the morrow we were

beyond the Lamanites, insomuch that we did arrive before them at the city of Manti. 28 And thus it came to pass, that by this stratagem we did take possession of the city

of Manti without the shedding of blood.

29 And it came to pass that when the armies of the Lamanites did arrive near the

city, and saw that we were prepared to meet them, they were astonished exceedingly

and struck with great fear, insomuch that they did flee into the wilderness. 30 Yea, and it came to pass that the armies of the Lamanites did flee out of all this

quarter of the land. But behold, they have carried with them many women and

children out of the land.

31 And those cities which had been taken by the Lamanites, all of them are at this

period of time in our possession; and our fathers and our women and our children

are returning to their homes, all save it be those who have been taken prisoners and

carried off by the Lamanites.

32 But behold, our armies are small to maintain so great a number of cities and so

great possessions.

306

alma 58

33 But behold, we trust in our God who has given us victory over those lands,

insomuch that we have obtained those cities and those lands, which were our own. 34 Now we do not know the cause that the government does not grant us more

strength; neither do those men who came up unto us know why we have not

received greater strength.

35 Behold, we do not know but what ye are unsuccessful, and ye have drawn away

the forces into that quarter of the land; if so, we do not desire to murmur. 36 And if it is not so, behold, we fear that there is some faction in the government,

that they do not send more men to our assistance; for we know that they are more

numerous than that which they have sent.

37 But, behold, it mattereth not—we trust God will deliver us, notwithstanding

the weakness of our armies, yea, and deliver us out of the hands of our enemies. 38 Behold, this is the twenty and ninth year, in the latter end, and we are in the

possession of our lands; and the Lamanites have fled to the land of Nephi. 39 And those sons of the people of Ammon, of whom I have so highly spoken, are

with me in the city of Manti; and the Lord has supported them, yea, and kept them

from falling by the sword, insomuch that even one soul has not been slain. 40 But behold, they have received many wounds; nevertheless they stand fast in that

liberty wherewith God has made them free; and they are strict to remember the

Lord their God from day to day; yea, they do observe to keep his statutes, and his

judgments, and his commandments continually; and their faith is strong in the

prophecies concerning that which is to come.

41 And now, my beloved brother, Moroni, may the Lord our God, who has

redeemed us and made us free, keep you continually in his presence; yea, and may he

favor this people, even that ye may have success in obtaining the possession of all

that which the Lamanites have taken from us, which was for our support. And now,

behold, I close mine epistle. I am Helaman, the son of Alma.

Alma 59

1 Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year of the reign of the judges over the people of

Nephi, after Moroni had received and had read Helaman’s epistle, he was

exceedingly rejoiced because of the welfare, yea, the exceeding success which

Helaman had had, in obtaining those lands which were lost.

2 Yea, and he did make it known unto all his people, in all the land round about in

that part where he was, that they might rejoice also.

3 And it came to pass that he immediately sent an epistle to Pahoran, desiring that

he should cause men to be gathered together to strengthen Helaman, or the armies

of Helaman, insomuch that he might with ease maintain that part of the land which

he had been so miraculously prospered in regaining.

4 And it came to pass when Moroni had sent this epistle to the land of Zarahemla,

he began again to lay a plan that he might obtain the remainder of those possessions

and cities which the Lamanites had taken from them.

5 And it came to pass that while Moroni was thus making preparations to go

against the Lamanites to battle, behold, the people of Nephihah, who were gathered

together from the city of Moroni and the city of Lehi and the city of Morianton,

were attacked by the Lamanites.

alma 59

307

6 Yea, even those who had been compelled to flee from the land of Manti, and

from the land round about, had come over and joined the Lamanites in this part of

the land.

7 And thus being exceedingly numerous, yea, and receiving strength from day to

day, by the command of Ammoron they came forth against the people of Nephihah,

and they did begin to slay them with an exceedingly great slaughter.

8 And their armies were so numerous that the remainder of the people of

Nephihah were obliged to flee before them; and they came even and joined the

army of Moroni.

9 And now as Moroni had supposed that there should be men sent to the city of

Nephihah, to the assistance of the people to maintain that city, and knowing that it

was easier to keep the city from falling into the hands of the Lamanites than to

retake it from them, he supposed that they would easily maintain that city. 10 Therefore he retained all his force to maintain those places which he had

recovered.

11 And now, when Moroni saw that the city of Nephihah was lost he was

exceedingly sorrowful, and began to doubt, because of the wickedness of the people,

whether they should not fall into the hands of their brethren.

12 Now this was the case with all his chief captains. They doubted and marveled

also because of the wickedness of the people, and this because of the success of the

Lamanites over them.

13 And it came to pass that Moroni was angry with the government, because of

their indifference concerning the freedom of their country.

Alma 60

1 And it came to pass that he wrote again to the governor of the land, who was

Pahoran, and these are the words which he wrote, saying: Behold, I direct mine

epistle to Pahoran, in the city of Zarahemla, who is the chief judge and the governor

over the land, and also to all those who have been chosen by this people to govern

and manage the affairs of this war.

2 For behold, I have somewhat to say unto them by the way of condemnation; for

behold, ye yourselves know that ye have been appointed to gather together men, and

arm them with swords, and with cimeters, and all manner of weapons of war of

every kind, and send forth against the Lamanites, in whatsoever parts they should

come into our land.

3 And now behold, I say unto you that myself, and also my men, and also Helaman

and his men, have suffered exceedingly great sufferings; yea, even hunger, thirst, and

fatigue, and all manner of afflictions of every kind.

4 But behold, were this all we had suffered we would not murmur nor complain. 5 But behold, great has been the slaughter among our people; yea, thousands have

fallen by the sword, while it might have otherwise been if ye had rendered unto our

armies sufficient strength and succor for them. Yea, great has been your neglect

towards us.

6 And now behold, we desire to know the cause of this exceedingly great neglect;

yea, we desire to know the cause of your thoughtless state.

7 Can you think to sit upon your thrones in a state of thoughtless stupor, while

308

alma 60

your enemies are spreading the work of death around you? Yea, while they are

murdering thousands of your brethren—

8 Yea, even they who have looked up to you for protection, yea, have placed you in

a situation that ye might have succored them, yea, ye might have sent armies unto

them, to have strengthened them, and have saved thousands of them from falling by

the sword.

9 But behold, this is not all—ye have withheld your provisions from them,

insomuch that many have fought and bled out their lives because of their great

desires which they had for the welfare of this people; yea, and this they have done

when they were about to perish with hunger, because of your exceedingly great

neglect towards them.

10 And now, my beloved brethren—for ye ought to be beloved; yea, and ye ought

to have stirred yourselves more diligently for the welfare and the freedom of this

people; but behold, ye have neglected them insomuch that the blood of thousands

shall come upon your heads for vengeance; yea, for known unto God were all their

cries, and all their sufferings—

11 Behold, could ye suppose that ye could sit upon your thrones, and because of the

exceeding goodness of God ye could do nothing and he would deliver you? Behold,

if ye have supposed this ye have supposed in vain.

12 Do ye suppose that, because so many of your brethren have been killed it is

because of their wickedness? I say unto you, if ye have supposed this ye have

supposed in vain; for I say unto you, there are many who have fallen by the sword;

and behold it is to your condemnation;

13 For the Lord suffereth the righteous to be slain that his justice and judgment may

come upon the wicked; therefore ye need not suppose that the righteous are lost

because they are slain; but behold, they do enter into the rest of the Lord their God. 14 And now behold, I say unto you, I fear exceedingly that the judgments of God

will come upon this people, because of their exceeding slothfulness, yea, even the

slothfulness of our government, and their exceedingly great neglect towards their

brethren, yea, towards those who have been slain.

15 For were it not for the wickedness which first commenced at our head, we could

have withstood our enemies that they could have gained no power over us. 16 Yea, had it not been for the war which broke out among ourselves; yea, were it

not for these king-men, who caused so much bloodshed among ourselves; yea, at the

time we were contending among ourselves, if we had united our strength as we

hitherto have done; yea, had it not been for the desire of power and authority which

those king-men had over us; had they been true to the cause of our freedom, and

united with us, and gone forth against our enemies, instead of taking up their swords

against us, which was the cause of so much bloodshed among ourselves; yea, if we

had gone forth against them in the strength of the Lord, we should have dispersed

our enemies, for it would have been done, according to the fulfilling of his word. 17 But behold, now the Lamanites are coming upon us, taking possession of our

lands, and they are murdering our people with the sword, yea, our women and our

children, and also carrying them away captive, causing them that they should suffer

all manner of afflictions, and this because of the great wickedness of those who are

seeking for power and authority, yea, even those king-men.

18 But why should I say much concerning this matter? For we know not but what

alma 60

309

ye yourselves are seeking for authority. We know not but what ye are also traitors to

your country.

19 Or is it that ye have neglected us because ye are in the heart of our country and ye

are surrounded by security, that ye do not cause food to be sent unto us, and also

men to strengthen our armies?

20 Have ye forgotten the commandments of the Lord your God? Yea, have ye

forgotten the captivity of our fathers? Have ye forgotten the many times we have

been delivered out of the hands of our enemies?

21 Or do ye suppose that the Lord will still deliver us, while we sit upon our thrones

and do not make use of the means which the Lord has provided for us? 22 Yea, will ye sit in idleness while ye are surrounded with thousands of those, yea,

and tens of thousands, who do also sit in idleness, while there are thousands round

about in the borders of the land who are falling by the sword, yea, wounded and

bleeding?

23 Do ye suppose that God will look upon you as guiltless while ye sit still and

behold these things? Behold I say unto you, Nay. Now I would that ye should

remember that God has said that the inward vessel shall be cleansed first, and then

shall the outer vessel be cleansed also.

24 And now, except ye do repent of that which ye have done, and begin to be up and

doing, and send forth food and men unto us, and also unto Helaman, that he may

support those parts of our country which he has regained, and that we may also

recover the remainder of our possessions in these parts, behold it will be expedient

that we contend no more with the Lamanites until we have first cleansed our inward

vessel, yea, even the great head of our government.

25 And except ye grant mine epistle, and come out and show unto me a true spirit of

freedom, and strive to strengthen and fortify our armies, and grant unto them food

for their support, behold I will leave a part of my freemen to maintain this part of

our land, and I will leave the strength and the blessings of God upon them, that

none other power can operate against them—

26 And this because of their exceeding faith, and their patience in their

tribulations—

27 And I will come unto you, and if there be any among you that has a desire for

freedom, yea, if there be even a spark of freedom remaining, behold I will stir up

insurrections among you, even until those who have desires to usurp power and

authority shall become extinct.

28 Yea, behold I do not fear your power nor your authority, but it is my God whom

I fear; and it is according to his commandments that I do take my sword to defend

the cause of my country, and it is because of your iniquity that we have suffered so

much loss.

29 Behold it is time, yea, the time is now at hand, that except ye do bestir yourselves

in the defence of your country and your little ones, the sword of justice doth hang

over you; yea, and it shall fall upon you and visit you even to your utter destruction. 30 Behold, I wait for assistance from you; and, except ye do administer unto our

relief, behold, I come unto you, even in the land of Zarahemla, and smite you with

the sword, insomuch that ye can have no more power to impede the progress of this

people in the cause of our freedom.

31 For behold, the Lord will not suffer that ye shall live and wax strong in your

310

alma 60

iniquities to destroy his righteous people.

32 Behold, can you suppose that the Lord will spare you and come out in judgment

against the Lamanites, when it is the tradition of their fathers that has caused their

hatred, yea, and it has been redoubled by those who have dissented from us, while

your iniquity is for the cause of your love of glory and the vain things of the world? 33 Ye know that ye do transgress the laws of God, and ye do know that ye do

trample them under your feet. Behold, the Lord saith unto me: If those whom ye

have appointed your governors do not repent of their sins and iniquities, ye shall go

up to battle against them.

34 And now behold, I, Moroni, am constrained, according to the covenant which I

have made to keep the commandments of my God; therefore I would that ye should

adhere to the word of God, and send speedily unto me of your provisions and of

your men, and also to Helaman.

35 And behold, if ye will not do this I come unto you speedily; for behold, God will

not suffer that we should perish with hunger; therefore he will give unto us of your

food, even if it must be by the sword. Now see that ye fulfil the word of God. 36 Behold, I am Moroni, your chief captain. I seek not for power, but to pull it

down. I seek not for honor of the world, but for the glory of my God, and the

freedom and welfare of my country. And thus I close mine epistle.

Alma 61

1 Behold, now it came to pass that soon after Moroni had sent his epistle unto the

chief governor, he received an epistle from Pahoran, the chief governor. And these

are the words which he received:

2 I, Pahoran, who am the chief governor of this land, do send these words unto

Moroni, the chief captain over the army. Behold, I say unto you, Moroni, that I do

not joy in your great afflictions, yea, it grieves my soul.

3 But behold, there are those who do joy in your afflictions, yea, insomuch that

they have risen up in rebellion against me, and also those of my people who are

freemen, yea, and those who have risen up are exceedingly numerous. 4 And it is those who have sought to take away the judgment-seat from me that

have been the cause of this great iniquity; for they have used great flattery, and they

have led away the hearts of many people, which will be the cause of sore affliction

among us; they have withheld our provisions, and have daunted our freemen that

they have not come unto you.

5 And behold, they have driven me out before them, and I have fled to the land of

Gideon, with as many men as it were possible that I could get.

6 And behold, I have sent a proclamation throughout this part of the land; and

behold, they are flocking to us daily, to their arms, in the defence of their country

and their freedom, and to avenge our wrongs.

7 And they have come unto us, insomuch that those who have risen up in rebellion

against us are set at defiance, yea, insomuch that they do fear us and durst not come

out against us to battle.

8 They have got possession of the land, or the city, of Zarahemla; they have

appointed a king over them, and he hath written unto the king of the Lamanites, in

the which he hath joined an alliance with him; in the which alliance he hath agreed

alma 61

311

to maintain the city of Zarahemla, which maintenance he supposeth will enable the

Lamanites to conquer the remainder of the land, and he shall be placed king over

this people when they shall be conquered under the Lamanites.

9 And now, in your epistle you have censured me, but it mattereth not; I am not

angry, but do rejoice in the greatness of your heart. I, Pahoran, do not seek for

power, save only to retain my judgment-seat that I may preserve the rights and the

liberty of my people. My soul standeth fast in that liberty in the which God hath

made us free.

10 And now, behold, we will resist wickedness even unto bloodshed. We would not

shed the blood of the Lamanites if they would stay in their own land. 11 We would not shed the blood of our brethren if they would not rise up in

rebellion and take the sword against us.

12 We would subject ourselves to the yoke of bondage if it were requisite with the

justice of God, or if he should command us so to do.

13 But behold he doth not command us that we shall subject ourselves to our

enemies, but that we should put our trust in him, and he will deliver us. 14 Therefore, my beloved brother, Moroni, let us resist evil, and whatsoever evil we

cannot resist with our words, yea, such as rebellions and dissensions, let us resist

them with our swords, that we may retain our freedom, that we may rejoice in the

great privilege of our church, and in the cause of our Redeemer and our God. 15 Therefore, come unto me speedily with a few of your men, and leave the

remainder in the charge of Lehi and Teancum; give unto them power to conduct the

war in that part of the land, according to the Spirit of God, which is also the spirit of

freedom which is in them.

16 Behold I have sent a few provisions unto them, that they may not perish until ye

can come unto me.

17 Gather together whatsoever force ye can upon your march hither, and we will go

speedily against those dissenters, in the strength of our God according to the faith

which is in us.

18 And we will take possession of the city of Zarahemla, that we may obtain more

food to send forth unto Lehi and Teancum; yea, we will go forth against them in the

strength of the Lord, and we will put an end to this great iniquity.

19 And now, Moroni, I do joy in receiving your epistle, for I was somewhat worried

concerning what we should do, whether it should be just in us to go against our

brethren.

20 But ye have said, except they repent the Lord hath commanded you that ye

should go against them.

21 See that ye strengthen Lehi and Teancum in the Lord; tell them to fear not, for

God will deliver them, yea, and also all those who stand fast in that liberty

wherewith God hath made them free. And now I close mine epistle to my beloved

brother, Moroni.

Alma 62

1 And now it came to pass that when Moroni had received this epistle his heart did

take courage, and was filled with exceedingly great joy because of the faithfulness of

Pahoran, that he was not also a traitor to the freedom and cause of his country.

312

alma 62

2 But he did also mourn exceedingly because of the iniquity of those who had

driven Pahoran from the judgment-seat, yea, in fine because of those who had

rebelled against their country and also their God.

3 And it came to pass that Moroni took a small number of men, according to the

desire of Pahoran, and gave Lehi and Teancum command over the remainder of his

army, and took his march towards the land of Gideon.

4 And he did raise the standard of liberty in whatsoever place he did enter, and

gained whatsoever force he could in all his march towards the land of Gideon. 5 And it came to pass that thousands did flock unto his standard, and did take up

their swords in the defence of their freedom, that they might not come into

bondage.

6 And thus, when Moroni had gathered together whatsoever men he could in all

his march, he came to the land of Gideon; and uniting his forces with those of

Pahoran they became exceedingly strong, even stronger than the men of Pachus,

who was the king of those dissenters who had driven the freemen out of the land of

Zarahemla and had taken possession of the land.

7 And it came to pass that Moroni and Pahoran went down with their armies into

the land of Zarahemla, and went forth against the city, and did meet the men of

Pachus, insomuch that they did come to battle.

8 And behold, Pachus was slain and his men were taken prisoners, and Pahoran

was restored to his judgment-seat.

9 And the men of Pachus received their trial, according to the law, and also those

king-men who had been taken and cast into prison; and they were executed

according to the law; yea, those men of Pachus and those king-men, whosoever

would not take up arms in the defence of their country, but would fight against it,

were put to death.

10 And thus it became expedient that this law should be strictly observed for the

safety of their country; yea, and whosoever was found denying their freedom was

speedily executed according to the law.

11 And thus ended the thirtieth year of the reign of the judges over the people of

Nephi; Moroni and Pahoran having restored peace to the land of Zarahemla,

among their own people, having inflicted death upon all those who were not true to

the cause of freedom.

12 And it came to pass in the commencement of the thirty and first year of the reign

of the judges over the people of Nephi, Moroni immediately caused that provisions

should be sent, and also an army of six thousand men should be sent unto Helaman,

to assist him in preserving that part of the land.

13 And he also caused that an army of six thousand men, with a sufficient quantity

of food, should be sent to the armies of Lehi and Teancum. And it came to pass that

this was done to fortify the land against the Lamanites.

14 And it came to pass that Moroni and Pahoran, leaving a large body of men in the

land of Zarahemla, took their march with a large body of men towards the land of

Nephihah, being determined to overthrow the Lamanites in that city. 15 And it came to pass that as they were marching towards the land, they took a

large body of men of the Lamanites, and slew many of them, and took their

provisions and their weapons of war.

16 And it came to pass after they had taken them, they caused them to enter into a

alma 62

313

covenant that they would no more take up their weapons of war against the

Nephites.

17 And when they had entered into this covenant they sent them to dwell with the

people of Ammon, and they were in number about four thousand who had not

been slain.

18 And it came to pass that when they had sent them away they pursued their march

towards the land of Nephihah. And it came to pass that when they had come to the

city of Nephihah, they did pitch their tents in the plains of Nephihah, which is near

the city of Nephihah.

19 Now Moroni was desirous that the Lamanites should come out to battle against

them, upon the plains; but the Lamanites, knowing of their exceedingly great

courage, and beholding the greatness of their numbers, therefore they durst not

come out against them; therefore they did not come to battle in that day. 20 And when the night came, Moroni went forth in the darkness of the night, and

came upon the top of the wall to spy out in what part of the city the Lamanites did

camp with their army.

21 And it came to pass that they were on the east, by the entrance; and they were all

asleep. And now Moroni returned to his army, and caused that they should prepare

in haste strong cords and ladders, to be let down from the top of the wall into the

inner part of the wall.

22 And it came to pass that Moroni caused that his men should march forth and

come upon the top of the wall, and let themselves down into that part of the city,

yea, even on the west, where the Lamanites did not camp with their armies. 23 And it came to pass that they were all let down into the city by night, by the

means of their strong cords and their ladders; thus when the morning came they

were all within the walls of the city.

24 And now, when the Lamanites awoke and saw that the armies of Moroni were

within the walls, they were affrighted exceedingly, insomuch that they did flee out

by the pass.

25 And now when Moroni saw that they were fleeing before him, he did cause that

his men should march forth against them, and slew many, and surrounded many

others, and took them prisoners; and the remainder of them fled into the land of

Moroni, which was in the borders by the seashore.

26 Thus had Moroni and Pahoran obtained the possession of the city of Nephihah

without the loss of one soul; and there were many of the Lamanites who were slain. 27 Now it came to pass that many of the Lamanites that were prisoners were

desirous to join the people of Ammon and become a free people.

28 And it came to pass that as many as were desirous, unto them it was granted

according to their desires.

29 Therefore, all the prisoners of the Lamanites did join the people of Ammon, and

did begin to labor exceedingly, tilling the ground, raising all manner of grain, and

flocks and herds of every kind; and thus were the Nephites relieved from a great

burden; yea, insomuch that they were relieved from all the prisoners of the

Lamanites.

30 Now it came to pass that Moroni, after he had obtained possession of the city of

Nephihah, having taken many prisoners, which did reduce the armies of the

Lamanites exceedingly, and having regained many of the Nephites who had been

314

alma 62

taken prisoners, which did strengthen the army of Moroni exceedingly; therefore

Moroni went forth from the land of Nephihah to the land of Lehi.

31 And it came to pass that when the Lamanites saw that Moroni was coming

against them, they were again frightened and fled before the army of Moroni. 32 And it came to pass that Moroni and his army did pursue them from city to city,

until they were met by Lehi and Teancum; and the Lamanites fled from Lehi and

Teancum, even down upon the borders by the seashore, until they came to the land

of Moroni.

33 And the armies of the Lamanites were all gathered together, insomuch that they

were all in one body in the land of Moroni. Now Ammoron, the king of the

Lamanites, was also with them.

34 And it came to pass that Moroni and Lehi and Teancum did encamp with their

armies round about in the borders of the land of Moroni, insomuch that the

Lamanites were encircled about in the borders by the wilderness on the south, and

in the borders by the wilderness on the east.

35 And thus they did encamp for the night. For behold, the Nephites and the

Lamanites also were weary because of the greatness of the march; therefore they did

not resolve upon any stratagem in the night-time, save it were Teancum; for he was

exceedingly angry with Ammoron, insomuch that he considered that Ammoron,

and Amalickiah his brother, had been the cause of this great and lasting war

between them and the Lamanites, which had been the cause of so much war and

bloodshed, yea, and so much famine.

36 And it came to pass that Teancum in his anger did go forth into the camp of the

Lamanites, and did let himself down over the walls of the city. And he went forth

with a cord, from place to place, insomuch that he did find the king; and he did cast

a javelin at him, which did pierce him near the heart. But behold, the king did

awaken his servants before he died, insomuch that they did pursue Teancum, and

slew him.

37 Now it came to pass that when Lehi and Moroni knew that Teancum was dead

they were exceedingly sorrowful; for behold, he had been a man who had fought

valiantly for his country, yea, a true friend to liberty; and he had suffered very many

exceedingly sore afflictions. But behold, he was dead, and had gone the way of all

the earth.

38 Now it came to pass that Moroni marched forth on the morrow, and came upon

the Lamanites, insomuch that they did slay them with a great slaughter; and they

did drive them out of the land; and they did flee, even that they did not return at

that time against the Nephites.

39 And thus ended the thirty and first year of the reign of the judges over the people

of Nephi; and thus they had had wars, and bloodsheds, and famine, and affliction,

for the space of many years.

40 And there had been murders, and contentions, and dissensions, and all manner

of iniquity among the people of Nephi; nevertheless for the righteous’ sake, yea,

because of the prayers of the righteous, they were spared.

41 But behold, because of the exceedingly great length of the war between the

Nephites and the Lamanites many had become hardened, because of the

exceedingly great length of the war; and many were softened because of their

afflictions, insomuch that they did humble themselves before God, even in the

alma 62

315

depth of humility.

42 And it came to pass that after Moroni had fortified those parts of the land which

were most exposed to the Lamanites, until they were sufficiently strong, he returned

to the city of Zarahemla; and also Helaman returned to the place of his inheritance;

and there was once more peace established among the people of Nephi. 43 And Moroni yielded up the command of his armies into the hands of his son,

whose name was Moronihah; and he retired to his own house that he might spend

the remainder of his days in peace.

44 And Pahoran did return to his judgment-seat; and Helaman did take upon him

again to preach unto the people the word of God; for because of so many wars and

contentions it had become expedient that a regulation should be made again in the

church.

45 Therefore, Helaman and his brethren went forth, and did declare the word of

God with much power unto the convincing of many people of their wickedness,

which did cause them to repent of their sins and to be baptized unto the Lord their

God.

46 And it came to pass that they did establish again the church of God, throughout

all the land.

47 Yea, and regulations were made concerning the law. And their judges, and their

chief judges were chosen.

48 And the people of Nephi began to prosper again in the land, and began to

multiply and to wax exceedingly strong again in the land. And they began to grow

exceedingly rich.

49 But notwithstanding their riches, or their strength, or their prosperity, they were

not lifted up in the pride of their eyes; neither were they slow to remember the Lord

their God; but they did humble themselves exceedingly before him.

50 Yea, they did remember how great things the Lord had done for them, that he

had delivered them from death, and from bonds, and from prisons, and from all

manner of afflictions, and he had delivered them out of the hands of their enemies. 51 And they did pray unto the Lord their God continually, insomuch that the Lord

did bless them, according to his word, so that they did wax strong and prosper in the

land.

52 And it came to pass that all these things were done. And Helaman died, in the

thirty and fifth year of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi.

Alma 63

1 And it came to pass in the commencement of the thirty and sixth year of the reign

of the judges over the people of Nephi, that Shiblon took possession of those sacred

things which had been delivered unto Helaman by Alma.

2 And he was a just man, and he did walk uprightly before God; and he did

observe to do good continually, to keep the commandments of the Lord his God;

and also did his brother.

3 And it came to pass that Moroni died also. And thus ended the thirty and sixth

year of the reign of the judges.

4 And it came to pass that in the thirty and seventh year of the reign of the judges,

there was a large company of men, even to the amount of five thousand and four

316

alma 63

hundred men, with their wives and their children, departed out of the land of

Zarahemla into the land which was northward.

5 And it came to pass that Hagoth, he being an exceedingly curious man, therefore

he went forth and built him an exceedingly large ship, on the borders of the land

Bountiful, by the land Desolation, and launched it forth into the west sea, by the

narrow neck which led into the land northward.

6 And behold, there were many of the Nephites who did enter therein and did sail

forth with much provisions, and also many women and children; and they took

their course northward. And thus ended the thirty and seventh year. 7 And in the thirty and eighth year, this man built other ships. And the first ship

did also return, and many more people did enter into it; and they also took much

provisions, and set out again to the land northward.

8 And it came to pass that they were never heard of more. And we suppose that

they were drowned in the depths of the sea. And it came to pass that one other ship

also did sail forth; and whither she did go we know not.

9 And it came to pass that in this year there were many people who went forth into

the land northward. And thus ended the thirty and eighth year.

10 And it came to pass in the thirty and ninth year of the reign of the judges,

Shiblon died also, and Corianton had gone forth to the land northward in a ship, to

carry forth provisions unto the people who had gone forth into that land. 11 Therefore it became expedient for Shiblon to confer those sacred things, before

his death, upon the son of Helaman, who was called Helaman, being called after the

name of his father.

12 Now behold, all those engravings which were in the possession of Helaman were

written and sent forth among the children of men throughout all the land, save it

were those parts which had been commanded by Alma should not go forth. 13 Nevertheless, these things were to be kept sacred, and handed down from one

generation to another; therefore, in this year, they had been conferred upon

Helaman, before the death of Shiblon.

14 And it came to pass also in this year that there were some dissenters who had

gone forth unto the Lamanites; and they were stirred up again to anger against the

Nephites.

15 And also in this same year they came down with a numerous army to war against

the people of Moronihah, or against the army of Moronihah, in the which they were

beaten and driven back again to their own lands, suffering great loss. 16 And thus ended the thirty and ninth year of the reign of the judges over the

people of Nephi.

17 And thus ended the account of Alma, and Helaman his son, and also Shiblon,

who was his son.

alma 63

317

The Book of Helaman

An account of the Nephites. Their wars and contentions, and their dissensions. And

also the prophecies of many holy prophets, before the coming of Christ, according to the

records of Helaman, who was the son of Helaman, and also according to the records of

his sons, even down to the coming of Christ. And also many of the Lamanites are

converted. An account of their conversion. An account of the righteousness of the

Lamanites, and the wickedness and abominations of the Nephites, according to the

record of Helaman and his sons, even down to the coming of Christ, which is called the

book of Helaman, and so forth.

Helaman 1

1 And now behold, it came to pass in the commencement of the fortieth year of the

reign of the judges over the people of Nephi, there began to be a serious difficulty

among the people of the Nephites.

2 For behold, Pahoran had died, and gone the way of all the earth; therefore there

began to be a serious contention concerning who should have the judgment-seat

among the brethren, who were the sons of Pahoran.

3 Now these are their names who did contend for the judgment-seat, who did also

cause the people to contend: Pahoran, Paanchi, and Pacumeni.

4 Now these are not all the sons of Pahoran (for he had many), but these are they

who did contend for the judgment-seat; therefore, they did cause three divisions

among the people.

5 Nevertheless, it came to pass that Pahoran was appointed by the voice of the

people to be chief judge and a governor over the people of Nephi.

6 And it came to pass that Pacumeni, when he saw that he could not obtain the

judgment-seat, he did unite with the voice of the people.

7 But behold, Paanchi, and that part of the people that were desirous that he

should be their governor, was exceedingly wroth; therefore, he was about to flatter

away those people to rise up in rebellion against their brethren.

8 And it came to pass as he was about to do this, behold, he was taken, and was

tried according to the voice of the people, and condemned unto death; for he had

raised up in rebellion and sought to destroy the liberty of the people. 9 Now when those people who were desirous that he should be their governor saw

that he was condemned unto death, therefore they were angry, and behold, they sent

forth one Kishkumen, even to the judgment-seat of Pahoran, and murdered

Pahoran as he sat upon the judgment-seat.

10 And he was pursued by the servants of Pahoran; but behold, so speedy was the

flight of Kishkumen that no man could overtake him.

11 And he went unto those that sent him, and they all entered into a covenant, yea,

swearing by their everlasting Maker, that they would tell no man that Kishkumen

had murdered Pahoran.

12 Therefore, Kishkumen was not known among the people of Nephi, for he was in

disguise at the time that he murdered Pahoran. And Kishkumen and his band, who

318

helaman 1

had covenanted with him, did mingle themselves among the people, in a manner

that they all could not be found; but as many as were found were condemned unto

death.

13 And now behold, Pacumeni was appointed, according to the voice of the people,

to be a chief judge and a governor over the people, to reign in the stead of his

brother Pahoran; and it was according to his right. And all this was done in the

fortieth year of the reign of the judges; and it had an end.

14 And it came to pass in the forty and first year of the reign of the judges, that the

Lamanites had gathered together an innumerable army of men, and armed them

with swords, and with cimeters and with bows, and with arrows, and with

head-plates, and with breastplates, and with all manner of shields of every kind. 15 And they came down again that they might pitch battle against the Nephites.

And they were led by a man whose name was Coriantumr; and he was a descendant

of Zarahemla; and he was a dissenter from among the Nephites; and he was a large

and a mighty man.

16 Therefore, the king of the Lamanites, whose name was Tubaloth, who was the

son of Ammoron, supposing that Coriantumr, being a mighty man, could stand

against the Nephites, with his strength and also with his great wisdom, insomuch

that by sending him forth he should gain power over the Nephites— 17 Therefore he did stir them up to anger, and he did gather together his armies, and

he did appoint Coriantumr to be their leader, and did cause that they should march

down to the land of Zarahemla to battle against the Nephites.

18 And it came to pass that because of so much contention and so much difficulty

in the government, that they had not kept sufficient guards in the land of

Zarahemla; for they had supposed that the Lamanites durst not come into the heart

of their lands to attack that great city Zarahemla.

19 But it came to pass that Coriantumr did march forth at the head of his numerous

host, and came upon the inhabitants of the city, and their march was with such

exceedingly great speed that there was no time for the Nephites to gather together

their armies.

20 Therefore Coriantumr did cut down the watch by the entrance of the city, and

did march forth with his whole army into the city, and they did slay every one who

did oppose them, insomuch that they did take possession of the whole city. 21 And it came to pass that Pacumeni, who was the chief judge, did flee before

Coriantumr, even to the walls of the city. And it came to pass that Coriantumr did

smite him against the wall, insomuch that he died. And thus ended the days of

Pacumeni.

22 And now when Coriantumr saw that he was in possession of the city of

Zarahemla, and saw that the Nephites had fled before them, and were slain, and

were taken, and were cast into prison, and that he had obtained the possession of the

strongest hold in all the land, his heart took courage insomuch that he was about to

go forth against all the land.

23 And now he did not tarry in the land of Zarahemla, but he did march forth with

a large army, even towards the city of Bountiful; for it was his determination to go

forth and cut his way through with the sword, that he might obtain the north parts

of the land.

24 And, supposing that their greatest strength was in the center of the land,

helaman 1

319

therefore he did march forth, giving them no time to assemble themselves together

save it were in small bodies; and in this manner they did fall upon them and cut

them down to the earth.

25 But behold, this march of Coriantumr through the center of the land gave

Moronihah great advantage over them, notwithstanding the greatness of the

number of the Nephites who were slain.

26 For behold, Moronihah had supposed that the Lamanites durst not come into

the center of the land, but that they would attack the cities round about in the

borders as they had hitherto done; therefore Moronihah had caused that their

strong armies should maintain those parts round about by the borders. 27 But behold, the Lamanites were not frightened according to his desire, but they

had come into the center of the land, and had taken the capital city which was the

city of Zarahemla, and were marching through the most capital parts of the land,

slaying the people with a great slaughter, both men, women, and children, taking

possession of many cities and of many strongholds.

28 But when Moronihah had discovered this, he immediately sent forth Lehi with

an army round about to head them before they should come to the land Bountiful. 29 And thus he did; and he did head them before they came to the land Bountiful,

and gave unto them battle, insomuch that they began to retreat back towards the

land of Zarahemla.

30 And it came to pass that Moronihah did head them in their retreat, and did give

unto them battle, insomuch that it became an exceedingly bloody battle; yea, many

were slain, and among the number who were slain Coriantumr was also found. 31 And now, behold, the Lamanites could not retreat either way, neither on the

north, nor on the south, nor on the east, nor on the west, for they were surrounded

on every hand by the Nephites.

32 And thus had Coriantumr plunged the Lamanites into the midst of the

Nephites, insomuch that they were in the power of the Nephites, and he himself was

slain, and the Lamanites did yield themselves into the hands of the Nephites. 33 And it came to pass that Moronihah took possession of the city of Zarahemla

again, and caused that the Lamanites who had been taken prisoners should depart

out of the land in peace.

34 And thus ended the forty and first year of the reign of the judges.

Helaman 2

1 And it came to pass in the forty and second year of the reign of the judges, after

Moronihah had established again peace between the Nephites and the Lamanites,

behold there was no one to fill the judgment-seat; therefore there began to be a

contention again among the people concerning who should fill the judgment-seat. 2 And it came to pass that Helaman, who was the son of Helaman, was appointed

to fill the judgment-seat, by the voice of the people.

3 But behold, Kishkumen, who had murdered Pahoran, did lay wait to destroy

Helaman also; and he was upheld by his band, who had entered into a covenant that

no one should know his wickedness.

4 For there was one Gadianton, who was exceedingly expert in many words, and

also in his craft, to carry on the secret work of murder and of robbery; therefore he

320

helaman 2

became the leader of the band of Kishkumen.

5 Therefore he did flatter them, and also Kishkumen, that if they would place him

in the judgment-seat he would grant unto those who belonged to his band that they

should be placed in power and authority among the people; therefore Kishkumen

sought to destroy Helaman.

6 And it came to pass as he went forth towards the judgment-seat to destroy

Helaman, behold one of the servants of Helaman, having been out by night, and

having obtained, through disguise, a knowledge of those plans which had been laid

by this band to destroy Helaman—

7 And it came to pass that he met Kishkumen, and he gave unto him a sign;

therefore Kishkumen made known unto him the object of his desire, desiring that

he would conduct him to the judgment-seat that he might murder Helaman. 8 And when the servant of Helaman had known all the heart of Kishkumen, and

how that it was his object to murder, and also that it was the object of all those who

belonged to his band to murder, and to rob, and to gain power, (and this was their

secret plan, and their combination) the servant of Helaman said unto Kishkumen:

Let us go forth unto the judgment-seat.

9 Now this did please Kishkumen exceedingly, for he did suppose that he should

accomplish his design; but behold, the servant of Helaman, as they were going forth

unto the judgment-seat, did stab Kishkumen even to the heart, that he fell dead

without a groan. And he ran and told Helaman all the things which he had seen,

and heard, and done.

10 And it came to pass that Helaman did send forth to take this band of robbers and

secret murderers, that they might be executed according to the law.

11 But behold, when Gadianton had found that Kishkumen did not return he

feared lest that he should be destroyed; therefore he caused that his band should

follow him. And they took their flight out of the land, by a secret way, into the

wilderness; and thus when Helaman sent forth to take them they could nowhere be

found.

12 And more of this Gadianton shall be spoken hereafter. And thus ended the forty

and second year of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi.

13 And behold, in the end of this book ye shall see that this Gadianton did prove

the overthrow, yea, almost the entire destruction of the people of Nephi. 14 Behold I do not mean the end of the book of Helaman, but I mean the end of the

book of Nephi, from which I have taken all the account which I have written.

Helaman 3

1 And now it came to pass in the forty and third year of the reign of the judges, there

was no contention among the people of Nephi save it were a little pride which was

in the church, which did cause some little dissensions among the people, which

affairs were settled in the ending of the forty and third year.

2 And there was no contention among the people in the forty and fourth year;

neither was there much contention in the forty and fifth year.

3 And it came to pass in the forty and sixth, yea, there was much contention and

many dissensions; in the which there were an exceedingly great many who departed

out of the land of Zarahemla, and went forth unto the land northward to inherit the

helaman 3

321

land.

4 And they did travel to an exceedingly great distance, insomuch that they came to

large bodies of water and many rivers.

5 Yea, and even they did spread forth into all parts of the land, into whatever parts

it had not been rendered desolate and without timber, because of the many

inhabitants who had before inherited the land.

6 And now no part of the land was desolate, save it were for timber; but because of

the greatness of the destruction of the people who had before inhabited the land it

was called desolate.

7 And there being but little timber upon the face of the land, nevertheless the

people who went forth became exceedingly expert in the working of cement;

therefore they did build houses of cement, in the which they did dwell. 8 And it came to pass that they did multiply and spread, and did go forth from the

land southward to the land northward, and did spread insomuch that they began to

cover the face of the whole earth, from the sea south to the sea north, from the sea

west to the sea east.

9 And the people who were in the land northward did dwell in tents, and in houses

of cement, and they did suffer whatsoever tree should spring up upon the face of the

land that it should grow up, that in time they might have timber to build their

houses, yea, their cities, and their temples, and their synagogues, and their

sanctuaries, and all manner of their buildings.

10 And it came to pass as timber was exceedingly scarce in the land northward, they

did send forth much by the way of shipping.

11 And thus they did enable the people in the land northward that they might build

many cities, both of wood and of cement.

12 And it came to pass that there were many of the people of Ammon, who were

Lamanites by birth, did also go forth into this land.

13 And now there are many records kept of the proceedings of this people, by many

of this people, which are particular and very large, concerning them. 14 But behold, a hundredth part of the proceedings of this people, yea, the account

of the Lamanites and of the Nephites, and their wars, and contentions, and

dissensions, and their preaching, and their prophecies, and their shipping and their

building of ships, and their building of temples, and of synagogues and their

sanctuaries, and their righteousness, and their wickedness, and their murders, and

their robbings, and their plundering, and all manner of abominations and

whoredoms, cannot be contained in this work.

15 But behold, there are many books and many records of every kind, and they have

been kept chiefly by the Nephites.

16 And they have been handed down from one generation to another by the

Nephites, even until they have fallen into transgression and have been murdered,

plundered, and hunted, and driven forth, and slain, and scattered upon the face of

the earth, and mixed with the Lamanites until they are no more called the Nephites,

becoming wicked, and wild, and ferocious, yea, even becoming Lamanites. 17 And now I return again to mine account; therefore, what I have spoken had

passed after there had been great contentions, and disturbances, and wars, and

dissensions, among the people of Nephi.

18 The forty and sixth year of the reign of the judges ended;

322

helaman 3

19 And it came to pass that there was still great contention in the land, yea, even in

the forty and seventh year, and also in the forty and eighth year.

20 Nevertheless Helaman did fill the judgment-seat with justice and equity; yea, he

did observe to keep the statutes, and the judgments, and the commandments of

God; and he did do that which was right in the sight of God continually; and he did

walk after the ways of his father, insomuch that he did prosper in the land. 21 And it came to pass that he had two sons. He gave unto the eldest the name of

Nephi, and unto the youngest, the name of Lehi. And they began to grow up unto

the Lord.

22 And it came to pass that the wars and contentions began to cease, in a small

degree, among the people of the Nephites, in the latter end of the forty and eighth

year of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi.

23 And it came to pass in the forty and ninth year of the reign of the judges, there

was continual peace established in the land, all save it were the secret combinations

which Gadianton the robber had established in the more settled parts of the land,

which at that time were not known unto those who were at the head of government;

therefore they were not destroyed out of the land.

24 And it came to pass that in this same year there was exceedingly great prosperity

in the church, insomuch that there were thousands who did join themselves unto

the church and were baptized unto repentance.

25 And so great was the prosperity of the church, and so many the blessings which

were poured out upon the people, that even the high priests and the teachers were

themselves astonished beyond measure.

26 And it came to pass that the work of the Lord did prosper unto the baptizing and

uniting to the church of God, many souls, yea, even tens of thousands. 27 Thus we may see that the Lord is merciful unto all who will, in the sincerity of

their hearts, call upon his holy name.

28 Yea, thus we see that the gate of heaven is open unto all, even to those who will

believe on the name of Jesus Christ, who is the Son of God.

29 Yea, we see that whosoever will may lay hold upon the word of God, which is

quick and powerful, which shall divide asunder all the cunning and the snares and

the wiles of the devil, and lead the man of Christ in a strait and narrow course across

that everlasting gulf of misery which is prepared to engulf the wicked— 30 And land their souls, yea, their immortal souls, at the right hand of God in the

kingdom of heaven, to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and with Jacob, and with

all our holy fathers, to go no more out.

31 And in this year there was continual rejoicing in the land of Zarahemla, and in all

the regions round about, even in all the land which was possessed by the Nephites. 32 And it came to pass that there was peace and exceedingly great joy in the

remainder of the forty and ninth year; yea, and also there was continual peace and

great joy in the fiftieth year of the reign of the judges.

33 And in the fifty and first year of the reign of the judges there was peace also, save

it were the pride which began to enter into the church—not into the church of

God, but into the hearts of the people who professed to belong to the church of

God—

34 And they were lifted up in pride, even to the persecution of many of their

brethren. Now this was a great evil, which did cause the more humble part of the

helaman 3

323

people to suffer great persecutions, and to wade through much affliction. 35 Nevertheless they did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger and stronger in their

humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls

with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of their

hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God. 36 And it came to pass that the fifty and second year ended in peace also, save it

were the exceedingly great pride which had gotten into the hearts of the people; and

it was because of their exceedingly great riches and their prosperity in the land; and

it did grow upon them from day to day.

37 And it came to pass in the fifty and third year of the reign of the judges, Helaman

died, and his eldest son Nephi began to reign in his stead. And it came to pass that

he did fill the judgment-seat with justice and equity; yea, he did keep the

commandments of God, and did walk in the ways of his father.

Helaman 4

1 And it came to pass in the fifty and fourth year there were many dissensions in the

church, and there was also a contention among the people, insomuch that there was

much bloodshed.

2 And the rebellious part were slain and driven out of the land, and they did go

unto the king of the Lamanites.

3 And it came to pass that they did endeavor to stir up the Lamanites to war

against the Nephites; but behold, the Lamanites were exceedingly afraid, insomuch

that they would not hearken to the words of those dissenters.

4 But it came to pass in the fifty and sixth year of the reign of the judges, there were

dissenters who went up from the Nephites unto the Lamanites; and they succeeded

with those others in stirring them up to anger against the Nephites; and they were

all that year preparing for war.

5 And in the fifty and seventh year they did come down against the Nephites to

battle, and they did commence the work of death; yea, insomuch that in the fifty

and eighth year of the reign of the judges they succeeded in obtaining possession of

the land of Zarahemla; yea, and also all the lands, even unto the land which was

near the land Bountiful.

6 And the Nephites and the armies of Moronihah were driven even into the land

of Bountiful;

7 And there they did fortify against the Lamanites, from the west sea, even unto

the east; it being a day’s journey for a Nephite, on the line which they had fortified

and stationed their armies to defend their north country.

8 And thus those dissenters of the Nephites, with the help of a numerous army of

the Lamanites, had obtained all the possession of the Nephites which was in the

land southward. And all this was done in the fifty and eighth and ninth years of the

reign of the judges.

9 And it came to pass in the sixtieth year of the reign of the judges, Moronihah did

succeed with his armies in obtaining many parts of the land; yea, they regained

many cities which had fallen into the hands of the Lamanites.

10 And it came to pass in the sixty and first year of the reign of the judges they

succeeded in regaining even the half of all their possessions.

324

helaman 4

11 Now this great loss of the Nephites, and the great slaughter which was among

them, would not have happened had it not been for their wickedness and their

abomination which was among them; yea, and it was among those also who

professed to belong to the church of God.

12 And it was because of the pride of their hearts, because of their exceeding riches,

yea, it was because of their oppression to the poor, withholding their food from the

hungry, withholding their clothing from the naked, and smiting their humble

brethren upon the cheek, making a mock of that which was sacred, denying the

spirit of prophecy and of revelation, murdering, plundering, lying, stealing,

committing adultery, rising up in great contentions, and deserting away into the

land of Nephi, among the Lamanites—

13 And because of this their great wickedness, and their boastings in their own

strength, they were left in their own strength; therefore they did not prosper, but

were afflicted and smitten, and driven before the Lamanites, until they had lost

possession of almost all their lands.

14 But behold, Moronihah did preach many things unto the people because of their

iniquity, and also Nephi and Lehi, who were the sons of Helaman, did preach many

things unto the people, yea, and did prophesy many things unto them concerning

their iniquities, and what should come unto them if they did not repent of their sins. 15 And it came to pass that they did repent, and inasmuch as they did repent they

did begin to prosper.

16 For when Moronihah saw that they did repent he did venture to lead them forth

from place to place, and from city to city, even until they had regained the one-half

of their property and the one-half of all their lands.

17 And thus ended the sixty and first year of the reign of the judges.

18 And it came to pass in the sixty and second year of the reign of the judges, that

Moronihah could obtain no more possessions over the Lamanites.

19 Therefore they did abandon their design to obtain the remainder of their lands,

for so numerous were the Lamanites that it became impossible for the Nephites to

obtain more power over them; therefore Moronihah did employ all his armies in

maintaining those parts which he had taken.

20 And it came to pass, because of the greatness of the number of the Lamanites the

Nephites were in great fear, lest they should be overpowered, and trodden down,

and slain, and destroyed.

21 Yea, they began to remember the prophecies of Alma, and also the words of

Mosiah; and they saw that they had been a stiffnecked people, and that they had set

at naught the commandments of God;

22 And that they had altered and trampled under their feet the laws of Mosiah, or

that which the Lord commanded him to give unto the people; and they saw that

their laws had become corrupted, and that they had become a wicked people,

insomuch that they were wicked even like unto the Lamanites.

23 And because of their iniquity the church had begun to dwindle; and they began

to disbelieve in the spirit of prophecy and in the spirit of revelation; and the

judgments of God did stare them in the face.

24 And they saw that they had become weak, like unto their brethren, the

Lamanites, and that the Spirit of the Lord did no more preserve them; yea, it had

withdrawn from them because the Spirit of the Lord doth not dwell in unholy

helaman 4

325

temples—

25 Therefore the Lord did cease to preserve them by his miraculous and matchless

power, for they had fallen into a state of unbelief and awful wickedness; and they

saw that the Lamanites were exceedingly more numerous than they, and except they

should cleave unto the Lord their God they must unavoidably perish. 26 For behold, they saw that the strength of the Lamanites was as great as their

strength, even man for man. And thus had they fallen into this great transgression;

yea, thus had they become weak, because of their transgression, in the space of not

many years.

Helaman 5

1 And it came to pass that in this same year, behold, Nephi delivered up the

judgment-seat to a man whose name was Cezoram.

2 For as their laws and their governments were established by the voice of the

people, and they who chose evil were more numerous than they who chose good,

therefore they were ripening for destruction, for the laws had become corrupted. 3 Yea, and this was not all; they were a stiffnecked people, insomuch that they

could not be governed by the law nor justice, save it were to their destruction. 4 And it came to pass that Nephi had become weary because of their iniquity; and

he yielded up the judgment-seat, and took it upon him to preach the word of God

all the remainder of his days, and his brother Lehi also, all the remainder of his days; 5 For they remembered the words which their father Helaman spake unto them.

And these are the words which he spake:

6 Behold, my sons, I desire that ye should remember to keep the commandments

of God; and I would that ye should declare unto the people these words. Behold, I

have given unto you the names of our first parents who came out of the land of

Jerusalem; and this I have done that when you remember your names ye may

remember them; and when ye remember them ye may remember their works; and

when ye remember their works ye may know how that it is said, and also written,

that they were good.

7 Therefore, my sons, I would that ye should do that which is good, that it may be

said of you, and also written, even as it has been said and written of them. 8 And now my sons, behold I have somewhat more to desire of you, which desire

is, that ye may not do these things that ye may boast, but that ye may do these things

to lay up for yourselves a treasure in heaven, yea, which is eternal, and which fadeth

not away; yea, that ye may have that precious gift of eternal life, which we have

reason to suppose hath been given to our fathers.

9 O remember, remember, my sons, the words which king Benjamin spake unto his

people; yea, remember that there is no other way nor means whereby man can be

saved, only through the atoning blood of Jesus Christ, who shall come; yea,

remember that he cometh to redeem the world.

10 And remember also the words which Amulek spake unto Zeezrom, in the city of

Ammonihah; for he said unto him that the Lord surely should come to redeem his

people, but that he should not come to redeem them in their sins, but to redeem

them from their sins.

11 And he hath power given unto him from the Father to redeem them from their

326

helaman 5

sins because of repentance; therefore he hath sent his angels to declare the tidings of

the conditions of repentance, which bringeth unto the power of the Redeemer, unto

the salvation of their souls.

12 And now, my sons, remember, remember that it is upon the rock of our

Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation; that

when the devil shall send forth his mighty winds, yea, his shafts in the whirlwind,

yea, when all his hail and his mighty storm shall beat upon you, it shall have no

power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless wo, because of

the rock upon which ye are built, which is a sure foundation, a foundation whereon

if men build they cannot fall.

13 And it came to pass that these were the words which Helaman taught to his sons;

yea, he did teach them many things which are not written, and also many things

which are written.

14 And they did remember his words; and therefore they went forth, keeping the

commandments of God, to teach the word of God among all the people of Nephi,

beginning at the city Bountiful;

15 And from thenceforth to the city of Gid; and from the city of Gid to the city of

Mulek;

16 And even from one city to another, until they had gone forth among all the

people of Nephi who were in the land southward; and from thence into the land of

Zarahemla, among the Lamanites.

17 And it came to pass that they did preach with great power, insomuch that they

did confound many of those dissenters who had gone over from the Nephites,

insomuch that they came forth and did confess their sins and were baptized unto

repentance, and immediately returned to the Nephites to endeavor to repair unto

them the wrongs which they had done.

18 And it came to pass that Nephi and Lehi did preach unto the Lamanites with

such great power and authority, for they had power and authority given unto them

that they might speak, and they also had what they should speak given unto them— 19 Therefore they did speak unto the great astonishment of the Lamanites, to the

convincing them, insomuch that there were eight thousand of the Lamanites who

were in the land of Zarahemla and round about baptized unto repentance, and were

convinced of the wickedness of the traditions of their fathers.

20 And it came to pass that Nephi and Lehi did proceed from thence to go to the

land of Nephi.

21 And it came to pass that they were taken by an army of the Lamanites and cast

into prison; yea, even in that same prison in which Ammon and his brethren were

cast by the servants of Limhi.

22 And after they had been cast into prison many days without food, behold, they

went forth into the prison to take them that they might slay them.

23 And it came to pass that Nephi and Lehi were encircled about as if by fire, even

insomuch that they durst not lay their hands upon them for fear lest they should be

burned. Nevertheless, Nephi and Lehi were not burned; and they were as standing

in the midst of fire and were not burned.

24 And when they saw that they were encircled about with a pillar of fire, and that it

burned them not, their hearts did take courage.

25 For they saw that the Lamanites durst not lay their hands upon them; neither

helaman 5

327

durst they come near unto them, but stood as if they were struck dumb with

amazement.

26 And it came to pass that Nephi and Lehi did stand forth and began to speak unto

them, saying: Fear not, for behold, it is God that has shown unto you this marvelous

thing, in the which is shown unto you that ye cannot lay your hands on us to slay us. 27 And behold, when they had said these words, the earth shook exceedingly, and

the walls of the prison did shake as if they were about to tumble to the earth; but

behold, they did not fall. And behold, they that were in the prison were Lamanites

and Nephites who were dissenters.

28 And it came to pass that they were overshadowed with a cloud of darkness, and

an awful solemn fear came upon them.

29 And it came to pass that there came a voice as if it were above the cloud of

darkness, saying: Repent ye, repent ye, and seek no more to destroy my servants

whom I have sent unto you to declare good tidings.

30 And it came to pass when they heard this voice, and beheld that it was not a

voice of thunder, neither was it a voice of a great tumultuous noise, but behold, it

was a still voice of perfect mildness, as if it had been a whisper, and it did pierce even

to the very soul—

31 And notwithstanding the mildness of the voice, behold the earth shook

exceedingly, and the walls of the prison trembled again, as if it were about to tumble

to the earth; and behold the cloud of darkness, which had overshadowed them, did

not disperse—

32 And behold the voice came again, saying: Repent ye, repent ye, for the kingdom

of heaven is at hand; and seek no more to destroy my servants. And it came to pass

that the earth shook again, and the walls trembled.

33 And also again the third time the voice came, and did speak unto them

marvelous words which cannot be uttered by man; and the walls did tremble again,

and the earth shook as if it were about to divide asunder.

34 And it came to pass that the Lamanites could not flee because of the cloud of

darkness which did overshadow them; yea, and also they were immovable because of

the fear which did come upon them.

35 Now there was one among them who was a Nephite by birth, who had once

belonged to the church of God but had dissented from them.

36 And it came to pass that he turned him about, and behold, he saw through the

cloud of darkness the faces of Nephi and Lehi; and behold, they did shine

exceedingly, even as the faces of angels. And he beheld that they did lift their eyes to

heaven; and they were in the attitude as if talking or lifting their voices to some

being whom they beheld.

37 And it came to pass that this man did cry unto the multitude, that they might

turn and look. And behold, there was power given unto them that they did turn and

look; and they did behold the faces of Nephi and Lehi.

38 And they said unto the man: Behold, what do all these things mean, and who is

it with whom these men do converse?

39 Now the man’s name was Aminadab. And Aminadab said unto them: They do

converse with the angels of God.

40 And it came to pass that the Lamanites said unto him: What shall we do, that

this cloud of darkness may be removed from overshadowing us?

328

helaman 5

41 And Aminadab said unto them: You must repent, and cry unto the voice, even

until ye shall have faith in Christ, who was taught unto you by Alma, and Amulek,

and Zeezrom; and when ye shall do this, the cloud of darkness shall be removed

from overshadowing you.

42 And it came to pass that they all did begin to cry unto the voice of him who had

shaken the earth; yea, they did cry even until the cloud of darkness was dispersed. 43 And it came to pass that when they cast their eyes about, and saw that the cloud

of darkness was dispersed from overshadowing them, behold, they saw that they

were encircled about, yea every soul, by a pillar of fire.

44 And Nephi and Lehi were in the midst of them; yea, they were encircled about;

yea, they were as if in the midst of a flaming fire, yet it did harm them not, neither

did it take hold upon the walls of the prison; and they were filled with that joy

which is unspeakable and full of glory.

45 And behold, the Holy Spirit of God did come down from heaven, and did enter

into their hearts, and they were filled as if with fire, and they could speak forth

marvelous words.

46 And it came to pass that there came a voice unto them, yea, a pleasant voice, as if

it were a whisper, saying:

47 Peace, peace be unto you, because of your faith in my Well Beloved, who was

from the foundation of the world.

48 And now, when they heard this they cast up their eyes as if to behold from

whence the voice came; and behold, they saw the heavens open; and angels came

down out of heaven and ministered unto them.

49 And there were about three hundred souls who saw and heard these things; and

they were bidden to go forth and marvel not, neither should they doubt. 50 And it came to pass that they did go forth, and did minister unto the people,

declaring throughout all the regions round about all the things which they had

heard and seen, insomuch that the more part of the Lamanites were convinced of

them, because of the greatness of the evidences which they had received. 51 And as many as were convinced did lay down their weapons of war, and also their

hatred and the tradition of their fathers.

52 And it came to pass that they did yield up unto the Nephites the lands of their

possession.

Helaman 6

1 And it came to pass that when the sixty and second year of the reign of the judges

had ended, all these things had happened and the Lamanites had become, the more

part of them, a righteous people, insomuch that their righteousness did exceed that

of the Nephites, because of their firmness and their steadiness in the faith. 2 For behold, there were many of the Nephites who had become hardened and

impenitent and grossly wicked, insomuch that they did reject the word of God and

all the preaching and prophesying which did come among them.

3 Nevertheless, the people of the church did have great joy because of the

conversion of the Lamanites, yea, because of the church of God, which had been

established among them. And they did fellowship one with another, and did rejoice

one with another, and did have great joy.

helaman 6

329

4 And it came to pass that many of the Lamanites did come down into the land of

Zarahemla, and did declare unto the people of the Nephites the manner of their

conversion, and did exhort them to faith and repentance.

5 Yea, and many did preach with exceedingly great power and authority, unto the

bringing down many of them into the depths of humility, to be the humble

followers of God and the Lamb.

6 And it came to pass that many of the Lamanites did go into the land northward;

and also Nephi and Lehi went into the land northward, to preach unto the people.

And thus ended the sixty and third year.

7 And behold, there was peace in all the land, insomuch that the Nephites did go

into whatsoever part of the land they would, whether among the Nephites or the

Lamanites.

8 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did also go whithersoever they would,

whether it were among the Lamanites or among the Nephites; and thus they did

have free intercourse one with another, to buy and to sell, and to get gain, according

to their desire.

9 And it came to pass that they became exceedingly rich, both the Lamanites and

the Nephites; and they did have an exceeding plenty of gold, and of silver, and of all

manner of precious metals, both in the land south and in the land north. 10 Now the land south was called Lehi, and the land north was called Mulek, which

was after the son of Zedekiah; for the Lord did bring Mulek into the land north,

and Lehi into the land south.

11 And behold, there was all manner of gold in both these lands, and of silver, and

of precious ore of every kind; and there were also curious workmen, who did work

all kinds of ore and did refine it; and thus they did become rich.

12 They did raise grain in abundance, both in the north and in the south; and they

did flourish exceedingly, both in the north and in the south. And they did multiply

and wax exceedingly strong in the land. And they did raise many flocks and herds,

yea, many fatlings.

13 Behold their women did toil and spin, and did make all manner of cloth, of

fine-twined linen and cloth of every kind, to clothe their nakedness. And thus the

sixty and fourth year did pass away in peace.

14 And in the sixty and fifth year they did also have great joy and peace, yea, much

preaching and many prophecies concerning that which was to come. And thus

passed away the sixty and fifth year.

15 And it came to pass that in the sixty and sixth year of the reign of the judges,

behold, Cezoram was murdered by an unknown hand as he sat upon the

judgment-seat. And it came to pass that in the same year, that his son, who had been

appointed by the people in his stead, was also murdered. And thus ended the sixty

and sixth year.

16 And in the commencement of the sixty and seventh year the people began to

grow exceedingly wicked again.

17 For behold, the Lord had blessed them so long with the riches of the world that

they had not been stirred up to anger, to wars, nor to bloodshed; therefore they

began to set their hearts upon their riches; yea, they began to seek to get gain that

they might be lifted up one above another; therefore they began to commit secret

murders, and to rob and to plunder, that they might get gain.

330

helaman 6

18 And now behold, those murderers and plunderers were a band who had been

formed by Kishkumen and Gadianton. And now it had come to pass that there

were many, even among the Nephites, of Gadianton’s band. But behold, they were

more numerous among the more wicked part of the Lamanites. And they were

called Gadianton’s robbers and murderers.

19 And it was they who did murder the chief judge Cezoram, and his son, while in

the judgment-seat; and behold, they were not found.

20 And now it came to pass that when the Lamanites found that there were robbers

among them they were exceedingly sorrowful; and they did use every means in their

power to destroy them off the face of the earth.

21 But behold, Satan did stir up the hearts of the more part of the Nephites,

insomuch that they did unite with those bands of robbers, and did enter into their

covenants and their oaths, that they would protect and preserve one another in

whatsoever difficult circumstances they should be placed, that they should not

suffer for their murders, and their plunderings, and their stealings.

22 And it came to pass that they did have their signs, yea, their secret signs, and their

secret words; and this that they might distinguish a brother who had entered into

the covenant, that whatsoever wickedness his brother should do he should not be

injured by his brother, nor by those who did belong to his band, who had taken this

covenant.

23 And thus they might murder, and plunder, and steal, and commit whoredoms

and all manner of wickedness, contrary to the laws of their country and also the laws

of their God.

24 And whosoever of those who belonged to their band should reveal unto the

world of their wickedness and their abominations, should be tried, not according to

the laws of their country, but according to the laws of their wickedness, which had

been given by Gadianton and Kishkumen.

25 Now behold, it is these secret oaths and covenants which Alma commanded his

son should not go forth unto the world, lest they should be a means of bringing

down the people unto destruction.

26 Now behold, those secret oaths and covenants did not come forth unto

Gadianton from the records which were delivered unto Helaman; but behold, they

were put into the heart of Gadianton by that same being who did entice our first

parents to partake of the forbidden fruit—

27 Yea, that same being who did plot with Cain, that if he would murder his brother

Abel it should not be known unto the world. And he did plot with Cain and his

followers from that time forth.

28 And also it is that same being who put it into the hearts of the people to build a

tower sufficiently high that they might get to heaven. And it was that same being

who led on the people who came from that tower into this land; who spread the

works of darkness and abominations over all the face of the land, until he dragged

the people down to an entire destruction, and to an everlasting hell.

29 Yea, it is that same being who put it into the heart of Gadianton to still carry on

the work of darkness, and of secret murder; and he has brought it forth from the

beginning of man even down to this time.

30 And behold, it is he who is the author of all sin. And behold, he doth carry on

his works of darkness and secret murder, and doth hand down their plots, and their

helaman 6

331

oaths, and their covenants, and their plans of awful wickedness, from generation to

generation according as he can get hold upon the hearts of the children of men. 31 And now behold, he had got great hold upon the hearts of the Nephites; yea,

insomuch that they had become exceedingly wicked; yea, the more part of them had

turned out of the way of righteousness, and did trample under their feet the

commandments of God, and did turn unto their own ways, and did build up unto

themselves idols of their gold and their silver.

32 And it came to pass that all these iniquities did come unto them in the space of

not many years, insomuch that a more part of it had come unto them in the sixty

and seventh year of the reign of the judges over the people of Nephi. 33 And they did grow in their iniquities in the sixty and eighth year also, to the

great sorrow and lamentation of the righteous.

34 And thus we see that the Nephites did begin to dwindle in unbelief, and grow in

wickedness and abominations, while the Lamanites began to grow exceedingly in

the knowledge of their God; yea, they did begin to keep his statutes and

commandments, and to walk in truth and uprightness before him.

35 And thus we see that the Spirit of the Lord began to withdraw from the

Nephites, because of the wickedness and the hardness of their hearts. 36 And thus we see that the Lord began to pour out his Spirit upon the Lamanites,

because of their easiness and willingness to believe in his words.

37 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did hunt the band of robbers of

Gadianton; and they did preach the word of God among the more wicked part of

them, insomuch that this band of robbers was utterly destroyed from among the

Lamanites.

38 And it came to pass on the other hand, that the Nephites did build them up and

support them, beginning at the more wicked part of them, until they had overspread

all the land of the Nephites, and had seduced the more part of the righteous until

they had come down to believe in their works and partake of their spoils, and to join

with them in their secret murders and combinations.

39 And thus they did obtain the sole management of the government, insomuch

that they did trample under their feet and smite and rend and turn their backs upon

the poor and the meek, and the humble followers of God.

40 And thus we see that they were in an awful state, and ripening for an everlasting

destruction.

41 And it came to pass that thus ended the sixty and eighth year of the reign of the

judges over the people of Nephi.

The Prophecy of Nephi, the Son of Helaman—God threatens the people of

Nephi that he will visit them in his anger, to their utter destruction except they repent

of their wickedness. God smiteth the people of Nephi with pestilence; they repent and

turn unto him. Samuel, a Lamanite, prophesies unto the Nephites.

Helaman 7

1 Behold, now it came to pass in the sixty and ninth year of the reign of the judges

over the people of the Nephites, that Nephi, the son of Helaman, returned to the

332

helaman 7

land of Zarahemla from the land northward.

2 For he had been forth among the people who were in the land northward, and

did preach the word of God unto them, and did prophesy many things unto them; 3 And they did reject all his words, insomuch that he could not stay among them,

but returned again unto the land of his nativity.

4 And seeing the people in a state of such awful wickedness, and those Gadianton

robbers filling the judgment-seats—having usurped the power and authority of the

land; laying aside the commandments of God, and not in the least aright before

him; doing no justice unto the children of men;

5 Condemning the righteous because of their righteousness; letting the guilty and

the wicked go unpunished because of their money; and moreover to be held in

office at the head of government, to rule and do according to their wills, that they

might get gain and glory of the world, and, moreover, that they might the more

easily commit adultery, and steal, and kill, and do according to their own wills— 6 Now this great iniquity had come upon the Nephites, in the space of not many

years; and when Nephi saw it, his heart was swollen with sorrow within his breast;

and he did exclaim in the agony of his soul:

7 Oh, that I could have had my days in the days when my father Nephi first came

out of the land of Jerusalem, that I could have joyed with him in the promised land;

then were his people easy to be entreated, firm to keep the commandments of God,

and slow to be led to do iniquity; and they were quick to hearken unto the words of

the Lord—

8 Yea, if my days could have been in those days, then would my soul have had joy in

the righteousness of my brethren.

9 But behold, I am consigned that these are my days, and that my soul shall be

filled with sorrow because of this the wickedness of my brethren.

10 And behold, now it came to pass that it was upon a tower, which was in the

garden of Nephi, which was by the highway which led to the chief market, which

was in the city of Zarahemla; therefore, Nephi had bowed himself upon the tower

which was in his garden, which tower was also near unto the garden gate by which

led the highway.

11 And it came to pass that there were certain men passing by and saw Nephi as he

was pouring out his soul unto God upon the tower; and they ran and told the

people what they had seen, and the people came together in multitudes that they

might know the cause of so great mourning for the wickedness of the people. 12 And now, when Nephi arose he beheld the multitudes of people who had

gathered together.

13 And it came to pass that he opened his mouth and said unto them: Behold, why

have ye gathered yourselves together? That I may tell you of your iniquities? 14 Yea, because I have got upon my tower that I might pour out my soul unto my

God, because of the exceeding sorrow of my heart, which is because of your

iniquities!

15 And because of my mourning and lamentation ye have gathered yourselves

together, and do marvel; yea, and ye have great need to marvel; yea, ye ought to

marvel because ye are given away that the devil has got so great hold upon your

hearts.

16 Yea, how could you have given way to the enticing of him who is seeking to hurl

helaman 7

333

away your souls down to everlasting misery and endless wo?

17 O repent ye, repent ye! Why will ye die? Turn ye, turn ye unto the Lord your

God. Why has he forsaken you?

18 It is because you have hardened your hearts; yea, ye will not hearken unto the

voice of the good shepherd; yea, ye have provoked him to anger against you. 19 And behold, instead of gathering you, except ye will repent, behold, he shall

scatter you forth that ye shall become meat for dogs and wild beasts. 20 O, how could you have forgotten your God in the very day that he has delivered

you?

21 But behold, it is to get gain, to be praised of men, yea, and that ye might get gold

and silver. And ye have set your hearts upon the riches and the vain things of this

world, for the which ye do murder, and plunder, and steal, and bear false witness

against your neighbor, and do all manner of iniquity.

22 And for this cause wo shall come unto you except ye shall repent. For if ye will

not repent, behold, this great city, and also all those great cities which are round

about, which are in the land of our possession, shall be taken away that ye shall have

no place in them; for behold, the Lord will not grant unto you strength, as he has

hitherto done, to withstand against your enemies.

23 For behold, thus saith the Lord: I will not show unto the wicked of my strength,

to one more than the other, save it be unto those who repent of their sins, and

hearken unto my words. Now therefore, I would that ye should behold, my

brethren, that it shall be better for the Lamanites than for you except ye shall repent. 24 For behold, they are more righteous than you, for they have not sinned against

that great knowledge which ye have received; therefore the Lord will be merciful

unto them; yea, he will lengthen out their days and increase their seed, even when

thou shalt be utterly destroyed except thou shalt repent.

25 Yea, wo be unto you because of that great abomination which has come among

you; and ye have united yourselves unto it, yea, to that secret band which was

established by Gadianton!

26 Yea, wo shall come unto you because of that pride which ye have suffered to enter

your hearts, which has lifted you up beyond that which is good because of your

exceedingly great riches!

27 Yea, wo be unto you because of your wickedness and abominations! 28 And except ye repent ye shall perish; yea, even your lands shall be taken from

you, and ye shall be destroyed from off the face of the earth.

29 Behold now, I do not say that these things shall be, of myself, because it is not of

myself that I know these things; but behold, I know that these things are true

because the Lord God has made them known unto me, therefore I testify that they

shall be.

Helaman 8

1 And now it came to pass that when Nephi had said these words, behold, there were

men who were judges, who also belonged to the secret band of Gadianton, and they

were angry, and they cried out against him, saying unto the people: Why do ye not

seize upon this man and bring him forth, that he may be condemned according to

the crime which he has done?

334

helaman 8

2 Why seest thou this man, and hearest him revile against this people and against

our law?

3 For behold, Nephi had spoken unto them concerning the corruptness of their

law; yea, many things did Nephi speak which cannot be written; and nothing did he

speak which was contrary to the commandments of God.

4 And those judges were angry with him because he spake plainly unto them

concerning their secret works of darkness; nevertheless, they durst not lay their own

hands upon him, for they feared the people lest they should cry out against them. 5 Therefore they did cry unto the people, saying: Why do you suffer this man to

revile against us? For behold he doth condemn all this people, even unto

destruction; yea, and also that these our great cities shall be taken from us, that we

shall have no place in them.

6 And now we know that this is impossible, for behold, we are powerful, and our

cities great, therefore our enemies can have no power over us.

7 And it came to pass that thus they did stir up the people to anger against Nephi,

and raised contentions among them; for there were some who did cry out: Let this

man alone, for he is a good man, and those things which he saith will surely come to

pass except we repent;

8 Yea, behold, all the judgments will come upon us which he has testified unto us;

for we know that he has testified aright unto us concerning our iniquities. And

behold they are many, and he knoweth as well all things which shall befall us as he

knoweth of our iniquities;

9 Yea, and behold, if he had not been a prophet he could not have testified

concerning those things.

10 And it came to pass that those people who sought to destroy Nephi were

compelled because of their fear, that they did not lay their hands on him; therefore

he began again to speak unto them, seeing that he had gained favor in the eyes of

some, insomuch that the remainder of them did fear.

11 Therefore he was constrained to speak more unto them saying: Behold, my

brethren, have ye not read that God gave power unto one man, even Moses, to smite

upon the waters of the Red Sea, and they parted hither and thither, insomuch that

the Israelites, who were our fathers, came through upon dry ground, and the waters

closed upon the armies of the Egyptians and swallowed them up?

12 And now behold, if God gave unto this man such power, then why should ye

dispute among yourselves, and say that he hath given unto me no power whereby I

may know concerning the judgments that shall come upon you except ye repent? 13 But, behold, ye not only deny my words, but ye also deny all the words which

have been spoken by our fathers, and also the words which were spoken by this man,

Moses, who had such great power given unto him, yea, the words which he hath

spoken concerning the coming of the Messiah.

14 Yea, did he not bear record that the Son of God should come? And as he lifted up

the brazen serpent in the wilderness, even so shall he be lifted up who should come. 15 And as many as should look upon that serpent should live, even so as many as

should look upon the Son of God with faith, having a contrite spirit, might live,

even unto that life which is eternal.

16 And now behold, Moses did not only testify of these things, but also all the holy

prophets, from his days even to the days of Abraham.

helaman 8

335

17 Yea, and behold, Abraham saw of his coming, and was filled with gladness and

did rejoice.

18 Yea, and behold I say unto you, that Abraham not only knew of these things, but

there were many before the days of Abraham who were called by the order of God;

yea, even after the order of his Son; and this that it should be shown unto the

people, a great many thousand years before his coming, that even redemption

should come unto them.

19 And now I would that ye should know, that even since the days of Abraham

there have been many prophets that have testified these things; yea, behold, the

prophet Zenos did testify boldly; for the which he was slain.

20 And behold, also Zenock, and also Ezias, and also Isaiah, and Jeremiah,

( Jeremiah being that same prophet who testified of the destruction of Jerusalem)

and now we know that Jerusalem was destroyed according to the words of Jeremiah.

O then why not the Son of God come, according to his prophecy?

21 And now will you dispute that Jerusalem was destroyed? Will ye say that the sons

of Zedekiah were not slain, all except it were Mulek? Yea, and do ye not behold that

the seed of Zedekiah are with us, and they were driven out of the land of Jerusalem?

But behold, this is not all—

22 Our father Lehi was driven out of Jerusalem because he testified of these things.

Nephi also testified of these things, and also almost all of our fathers, even down to

this time; yea, they have testified of the coming of Christ, and have looked forward,

and have rejoiced in his day which is to come.

23 And behold, he is God, and he is with them, and he did manifest himself unto

them, that they were redeemed by him; and they gave unto him glory, because of

that which is to come.

24 And now, seeing ye know these things and cannot deny them except ye shall lie,

therefore in this ye have sinned, for ye have rejected all these things,

notwithstanding so many evidences which ye have received; yea, even ye have

received all things, both things in heaven, and all things which are in the earth, as a

witness that they are true.

25 But behold, ye have rejected the truth, and rebelled against your holy God; and

even at this time, instead of laying up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where

nothing doth corrupt, and where nothing can come which is unclean, ye are heaping

up for yourselves wrath against the day of judgment.

26 Yea, even at this time ye are ripening, because of your murders and your

fornication and wickedness, for everlasting destruction; yea, and except ye repent it

will come unto you soon.

27 Yea, behold it is now even at your doors; yea, go ye in unto the judgment-seat,

and search; and behold, your judge is murdered, and he lieth in his blood; and he

hath been murdered by his brother, who seeketh to sit in the judgment-seat. 28 And behold, they both belong to your secret band, whose author is Gadianton

and the evil one who seeketh to destroy the souls of men.

Helaman 9

1 Behold, now it came to pass that when Nephi had spoken these words, certain men

who were among them ran to the judgment-seat; yea, even there were five who went,

336

helaman 9

and they said among themselves, as they went:

2 Behold, now we will know of a surety whether this man be a prophet and God

hath commanded him to prophesy such marvelous things unto us. Behold, we do

not believe that he hath; yea, we do not believe that he is a prophet; nevertheless, if

this thing which he has said concerning the chief judge be true, that he be dead,

then will we believe that the other words which he has spoken are true. 3 And it came to pass that they ran in their might, and came in unto the

judgment-seat; and behold, the chief judge had fallen to the earth, and did lie in his

blood.

4 And now behold, when they saw this they were astonished exceedingly,

insomuch that they fell to the earth; for they had not believed the words which

Nephi had spoken concerning the chief judge.

5 But now, when they saw they believed, and fear came upon them lest all the

judgments which Nephi had spoken should come upon the people; therefore they

did quake, and had fallen to the earth.

6 Now, immediately when the judge had been murdered—he being stabbed by his

brother by a garb of secrecy, and he fled, and the servants ran and told the people,

raising the cry of murder among them;

7 And behold the people did gather themselves together unto the place of the

judgment-seat—and behold, to their astonishment they saw those five men who

had fallen to the earth.

8 And now behold, the people knew nothing concerning the multitude who had

gathered together at the garden of Nephi; therefore they said among themselves:

These men are they who have murdered the judge, and God has smitten them that

they could not flee from us.

9 And it came to pass that they laid hold on them, and bound them and cast them

into prison. And there was a proclamation sent abroad that the judge was slain, and

that the murderers had been taken and were cast into prison.

10 And it came to pass that on the morrow the people did assemble themselves

together to mourn and to fast, at the burial of the great chief judge who had been

slain.

11 And thus also those judges who were at the garden of Nephi, and heard his

words, were also gathered together at the burial.

12 And it came to pass that they inquired among the people, saying: Where are the

five who were sent to inquire concerning the chief judge whether he was dead? And

they answered and said: Concerning this five whom ye say ye have sent, we know

not; but there are five who are the murderers, whom we have cast into prison. 13 And it came to pass that the judges desired that they should be brought; and they

were brought, and behold they were the five who were sent; and behold the judges

inquired of them to know concerning the matter, and they told them all that they

had done, saying:

14 We ran and came to the place of the judgment-seat, and when we saw all things

even as Nephi had testified, we were astonished insomuch that we fell to the earth;

and when we were recovered from our astonishment, behold they cast us into

prison.

15 Now, as for the murder of this man, we know not who has done it; and only this

much we know, we ran and came according as ye desired, and behold he was dead,

helaman 9

337

according to the words of Nephi.

16 And now it came to pass that the judges did expound the matter unto the people,

and did cry out against Nephi, saying: Behold, we know that this Nephi must have

agreed with some one to slay the judge, and then he might declare it unto us, that he

might convert us unto his faith, that he might raise himself to be a great man,

chosen of God, and a prophet.

17 And now behold, we will detect this man, and he shall confess his fault and make

known unto us the true murderer of this judge.

18 And it came to pass that the five were liberated on the day of the burial.

Nevertheless, they did rebuke the judges in the words which they had spoken

against Nephi, and did contend with them one by one, insomuch that they did

confound them.

19 Nevertheless, they caused that Nephi should be taken and bound and brought

before the multitude, and they began to question him in divers ways that they might

cross him, that they might accuse him to death—

20 Saying unto him: Thou art confederate; who is this man that hath done this

murder? Now tell us, and acknowledge thy fault; saying, Behold here is money; and

also we will grant unto thee thy life if thou wilt tell us, and acknowledge the

agreement which thou hast made with him.

21 But Nephi said unto them: O ye fools, ye uncircumcised of heart, ye blind, and

ye stiffnecked people, do ye know how long the Lord your God will suffer you that

ye shall go on in this your way of sin?

22 O ye ought to begin to howl and mourn, because of the great destruction which

at this time doth await you, except ye shall repent.

23 Behold ye say that I have agreed with a man that he should murder Seezoram,

our chief judge. But behold, I say unto you, that this is because I have testified unto

you that ye might know concerning this thing; yea, even for a witness unto you, that

I did know of the wickedness and abominations which are among you. 24 And because I have done this, ye say that I have agreed with a man that he should

do this thing; yea, because I showed unto you this sign ye are angry with me, and

seek to destroy my life.

25 And now behold, I will show unto you another sign, and see if ye will in this

thing seek to destroy me.

26 Behold I say unto you: Go to the house of Seantum, who is the brother of

Seezoram, and say unto him—

27 Has Nephi, the pretended prophet, who doth prophesy so much evil concerning

this people, agreed with thee, in the which ye have murdered Seezoram, who is your

brother?

28 And behold, he shall say unto you, Nay.

29 And ye shall say unto him: Have ye murdered your brother?

30 And he shall stand with fear, and wist not what to say. And behold, he shall deny

unto you; and he shall make as if he were astonished; nevertheless, he shall declare

unto you that he is innocent.

31 But behold, ye shall examine him, and ye shall find blood upon the skirts of his

cloak.

32 And when ye have seen this, ye shall say: From whence cometh this blood? Do

we not know that it is the blood of your brother?

338

helaman 9

33 And then shall he tremble, and shall look pale, even as if death had come upon

him.

34 And then shall ye say: Because of this fear and this paleness which has come

upon your face, behold, we know that thou art guilty.

35 And then shall greater fear come upon him; and then shall he confess unto you,

and deny no more that he has done this murder.

36 And then shall he say unto you, that I, Nephi, know nothing concerning the

matter save it were given unto me by the power of God. And then shall ye know that

I am an honest man, and that I am sent unto you from God.

37 And it came to pass that they went and did, even according as Nephi had said

unto them. And behold, the words which he had said were true; for according to

the words he did deny; and also according to the words he did confess. 38 And he was brought to prove that he himself was the very murderer, insomuch

that the five were set at liberty, and also was Nephi.

39 And there were some of the Nephites who believed on the words of Nephi; and

there were some also, who believed because of the testimony of the five, for they had

been converted while they were in prison.

40 And now there were some among the people, who said that Nephi was a prophet. 41 And there were others who said: Behold, he is a god, for except he was a god he

could not know of all things. For behold, he has told us the thoughts of our hearts,

and also has told us things; and even he has brought unto our knowledge the true

murderer of our chief judge.

Helaman 10

1 And it came to pass that there arose a division among the people, insomuch that

they divided hither and thither and went their ways, leaving Nephi alone, as he was

standing in the midst of them.

2 And it came to pass that Nephi went his way towards his own house, pondering

upon the things which the Lord had shown unto him.

3 And it came to pass as he was thus pondering—being much cast down because

of the wickedness of the people of the Nephites, their secret works of darkness, and

their murderings, and their plunderings, and all manner of iniquities—and it came

to pass as he was thus pondering in his heart, behold, a voice came unto him saying: 4 Blessed art thou, Nephi, for those things which thou hast done; for I have beheld

how thou hast with unwearyingness declared the word, which I have given unto

thee, unto this people. And thou hast not feared them, and hast not sought thine

own life, but hast sought my will, and to keep my commandments.

5 And now, because thou hast done this with such unwearyingness, behold, I will

bless thee forever; and I will make thee mighty in word and in deed, in faith and in

works; yea, even that all things shall be done unto thee according to thy word, for

thou shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will.

6 Behold, thou art Nephi, and I am God. Behold, I declare it unto thee in the

presence of mine angels, that ye shall have power over this people, and shall smite

the earth with famine, and with pestilence, and destruction, according to the

wickedness of this people.

7 Behold, I give unto you power, that whatsoever ye shall seal on earth shall be

helaman 10

339

sealed in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven;

and thus shall ye have power among this people.

8 And thus, if ye shall say unto this temple it shall be rent in twain, it shall be done. 9 And if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou cast down and become smooth, it

shall be done.

10 And behold, if ye shall say that God shall smite this people, it shall come to pass. 11 And now behold, I command you, that ye shall go and declare unto this people,

that thus saith the Lord God, who is the Almighty: Except ye repent ye shall be

smitten, even unto destruction.

12 And behold, now it came to pass that when the Lord had spoken these words

unto Nephi, he did stop and did not go unto his own house, but did return unto the

multitudes who were scattered about upon the face of the land, and began to declare

unto them the word of the Lord which had been spoken unto him, concerning their

destruction if they did not repent.

13 Now behold, notwithstanding that great miracle which Nephi had done in

telling them concerning the death of the chief judge, they did harden their hearts

and did not hearken unto the words of the Lord.

14 Therefore Nephi did declare unto them the word of the Lord, saying: Except ye

repent, thus saith the Lord, ye shall be smitten even unto destruction. 15 And it came to pass that when Nephi had declared unto them the word, behold,

they did still harden their hearts and would not hearken unto his words; therefore

they did revile against him, and did seek to lay their hands upon him that they

might cast him into prison.

16 But behold, the power of God was with him, and they could not take him to cast

him into prison, for he was taken by the Spirit and conveyed away out of the midst

of them.

17 And it came to pass that thus he did go forth in the Spirit, from multitude to

multitude, declaring the word of God, even until he had declared it unto them all,

or sent it forth among all the people.

18 And it came to pass that they would not hearken unto his words; and there

began to be contentions, insomuch that they were divided against themselves and

began to slay one another with the sword.

19 And thus ended the seventy and first year of the reign of the judges over the

people of Nephi.

Helaman 11

1 And now it came to pass in the seventy and second year of the reign of the judges

that the contentions did increase, insomuch that there were wars throughout all the

land among all the people of Nephi.

2 And it was this secret band of robbers who did carry on this work of destruction

and wickedness. And this war did last all that year; and in the seventy and third year

it did also last.

3 And it came to pass that in this year Nephi did cry unto the Lord, saying: 4 O Lord, do not suffer that this people shall be destroyed by the sword; but O

Lord, rather let there be a famine in the land, to stir them up in remembrance of the

Lord their God, and perhaps they will repent and turn unto thee.

340

helaman 11

5 And so it was done, according to the words of Nephi. And there was a great

famine upon the land, among all the people of Nephi. And thus in the seventy and

fourth year the famine did continue, and the work of destruction did cease by the

sword but became sore by famine.

6 And this work of destruction did also continue in the seventy and fifth year. For

the earth was smitten that it was dry, and did not yield forth grain in the season of

grain; and the whole earth was smitten, even among the Lamanites as well as among

the Nephites, so that they were smitten that they did perish by thousands in the

more wicked parts of the land.

7 And it came to pass that the people saw that they were about to perish by famine,

and they began to remember the Lord their God; and they began to remember the

words of Nephi.

8 And the people began to plead with their chief judges and their leaders, that they

would say unto Nephi: Behold, we know that thou art a man of God, and therefore

cry unto the Lord our God that he turn away from us this famine, lest all the words

which thou hast spoken concerning our destruction be fulfilled.

9 And it came to pass that the judges did say unto Nephi, according to the words

which had been desired. And it came to pass that when Nephi saw that the people

had repented and did humble themselves in sackcloth, he cried again unto the Lord,

saying:

10 O Lord, behold this people repenteth; and they have swept away the band of

Gadianton from amongst them insomuch that they have become extinct, and they

have concealed their secret plans in the earth.

11 Now, O Lord, because of this their humility wilt thou turn away thine anger, and

let thine anger be appeased in the destruction of those wicked men whom thou hast

already destroyed.

12 O Lord, wilt thou turn away thine anger, yea, thy fierce anger, and cause that this

famine may cease in this land.

13 O Lord, wilt thou hearken unto me, and cause that it may be done according to

my words, and send forth rain upon the face of the earth, that she may bring forth

her fruit, and her grain in the season of grain.

14 O Lord, thou didst hearken unto my words when I said, Let there be a famine,

that the pestilence of the sword might cease; and I know that thou wilt, even at this

time, hearken unto my words, for thou saidst that: If this people repent I will spare

them.

15 Yea, O Lord, and thou seest that they have repented, because of the famine and

the pestilence and destruction which has come unto them.

16 And now, O Lord, wilt thou turn away thine anger, and try again if they will

serve thee? And if so, O Lord, thou canst bless them according to thy words which

thou hast said.

17 And it came to pass that in the seventy and sixth year the Lord did turn away his

anger from the people, and caused that rain should fall upon the earth, insomuch

that it did bring forth her fruit in the season of her fruit. And it came to pass that it

did bring forth her grain in the season of her grain.

18 And behold, the people did rejoice and glorify God, and the whole face of the

land was filled with rejoicing; and they did no more seek to destroy Nephi, but they

did esteem him as a great prophet, and a man of God, having great power and

helaman 11

341

authority given unto him from God.

19 And behold, Lehi, his brother, was not a whit behind him as to things pertaining

to righteousness.

20 And thus it did come to pass that the people of Nephi began to prosper again in

the land, and began to build up their waste places, and began to multiply and

spread, even until they did cover the whole face of the land, both on the northward

and on the southward, from the sea west to the sea east.

21 And it came to pass that the seventy and sixth year did end in peace. And the

seventy and seventh year began in peace; and the church did spread throughout the

face of all the land; and the more part of the people, both the Nephites and the

Lamanites, did belong to the church; and they did have exceedingly great peace in

the land; and thus ended the seventy and seventh year.

22 And also they had peace in the seventy and eighth year, save it were a few

contentions concerning the points of doctrine which had been laid down by the

prophets.

23 And in the seventy and ninth year there began to be much strife. But it came to

pass that Nephi and Lehi, and many of their brethren who knew concerning the

true points of doctrine, having many revelations daily, therefore they did preach

unto the people, insomuch that they did put an end to their strife in that same year. 24 And it came to pass that in the eightieth year of the reign of the judges over the

people of Nephi, there were a certain number of the dissenters from the people of

Nephi, who had some years before gone over unto the Lamanites, and taken upon

themselves the name of Lamanites, and also a certain number who were real

descendants of the Lamanites, being stirred up to anger by them, or by those

dissenters, therefore they commenced a war with their brethren.

25 And they did commit murder and plunder; and then they would retreat back

into the mountains, and into the wilderness and secret places, hiding themselves

that they could not be discovered, receiving daily an addition to their numbers,

inasmuch as there were dissenters that went forth unto them.

26 And thus in time, yea, even in the space of not many years, they became an

exceedingly great band of robbers; and they did search out all the secret plans of

Gadianton; and thus they became robbers of Gadianton.

27 Now behold, these robbers did make great havoc, yea, even great destruction

among the people of Nephi, and also among the people of the Lamanites. 28 And it came to pass that it was expedient that there should be a stop put to this

work of destruction; therefore they sent an army of strong men into the wilderness

and upon the mountains to search out this band of robbers, and to destroy them. 29 But behold, it came to pass that in that same year they were driven back even into

their own lands. And thus ended the eightieth year of the reign of the judges over

the people of Nephi.

30 And it came to pass in the commencement of the eighty and first year they did go

forth again against this band of robbers, and did destroy many; and they were also

visited with much destruction.

31 And they were again obliged to return out of the wilderness and out of the

mountains unto their own lands, because of the exceeding greatness of the numbers

of those robbers who infested the mountains and the wilderness.

32 And it came to pass that thus ended this year. And the robbers did still increase

342

helaman 11

and wax strong, insomuch that they did defy the whole armies of the Nephites, and

also of the Lamanites; and they did cause great fear to come unto the people upon

all the face of the land.

33 Yea, for they did visit many parts of the land, and did do great destruction unto

them; yea, did kill many, and did carry away others captive into the wilderness, yea,

and more especially their women and their children.

34 Now this great evil, which came unto the people because of their iniquity, did

stir them up again in remembrance of the Lord their God.

35 And thus ended the eighty and first year of the reign of the judges. 36 And in the eighty and second year they began again to forget the Lord their

God. And in the eighty and third year they began to wax strong in iniquity. And in

the eighty and fourth year they did not mend their ways.

37 And it came to pass in the eighty and fifth year they did wax stronger and

stronger in their pride, and in their wickedness; and thus they were ripening again

for destruction.

38 And thus ended the eighty and fifth year.

Helaman 12

1 And thus we can behold how false, and also the unsteadiness of the hearts of the

children of men; yea, we can see that the Lord in his great infinite goodness doth

bless and prosper those who put their trust in him.

2 Yea, and we may see at the very time when he doth prosper his people, yea, in the

increase of their fields, their flocks and their herds, and in gold, and in silver, and in

all manner of precious things of every kind and art; sparing their lives, and delivering

them out of the hands of their enemies; softening the hearts of their enemies that

they should not declare wars against them; yea, and in fine, doing all things for the

welfare and happiness of his people; yea, then is the time that they do harden their

hearts, and do forget the Lord their God, and do trample under their feet the Holy

One—yea, and this because of their ease, and their exceedingly great prosperity. 3 And thus we see that except the Lord doth chasten his people with many

afflictions, yea, except he doth visit them with death and with terror, and with

famine and with all manner of pestilence, they will not remember him. 4 O how foolish, and how vain, and how evil, and devilish, and how quick to do

iniquity, and how slow to do good, are the children of men; yea, how quick to

hearken unto the words of the evil one, and to set their hearts upon the vain things

of the world!

5 Yea, how quick to be lifted up in pride; yea, how quick to boast, and do all

manner of that which is iniquity; and how slow are they to remember the Lord their

God, and to give ear unto his counsels, yea, how slow to walk in wisdom’s paths! 6 Behold, they do not desire that the Lord their God, who hath created them,

should rule and reign over them; notwithstanding his great goodness and his mercy

towards them, they do set at naught his counsels, and they will not that he should be

their guide.

7 O how great is the nothingness of the children of men; yea, even they are less

than the dust of the earth.

8 For behold, the dust of the earth moveth hither and thither, to the dividing

helaman 12

343

asunder, at the command of our great and everlasting God.

9 Yea, behold at his voice do the hills and the mountains tremble and quake. 10 And by the power of his voice they are broken up, and become smooth, yea, even

like unto a valley.

11 Yea, by the power of his voice doth the whole earth shake;

12 Yea, by the power of his voice, do the foundations rock, even to the very center. 13 Yea, and if he say unto the earth—Move—it is moved.

14 Yea, if he say unto the earth—Thou shalt go back, that it lengthen out the day

for many hours—it is done;

15 And thus, according to his word the earth goeth back, and it appeareth unto man

that the sun standeth still; yea, and behold, this is so; for surely it is the earth that

moveth and not the sun.

16 And behold, also, if he say unto the waters of the great deep—Be thou dried

up—it is done.

17 Behold, if he say unto this mountain—Be thou raised up, and come over and fall

upon that city, that it be buried up—behold it is done.

18 And behold, if a man hide up a treasure in the earth, and the Lord shall say—Let

it be accursed, because of the iniquity of him who hath hid it up—behold, it shall

be accursed.

19 And if the Lord shall say—Be thou accursed, that no man shall find thee from

this time henceforth and forever—behold, no man getteth it henceforth and

forever.

20 And behold, if the Lord shall say unto a man—Because of thine iniquities, thou

shalt be accursed forever—it shall be done.

21 And if the Lord shall say—Because of thine iniquities thou shalt be cut off from

my presence—he will cause that it shall be so.

22 And wo unto him to whom he shall say this, for it shall be unto him that will do

iniquity, and he cannot be saved; therefore, for this cause, that men might be saved,

hath repentance been declared.

23 Therefore, blessed are they who will repent and hearken unto the voice of the

Lord their God; for these are they that shall be saved.

24 And may God grant, in his great fulness, that men might be brought unto

repentance and good works, that they might be restored unto grace for grace,

according to their works.

25 And I would that all men might be saved. But we read that in the great and last

day there are some who shall be cast out, yea, who shall be cast off from the presence

of the Lord;

26 Yea, who shall be consigned to a state of endless misery, fulfilling the words

which say: They that have done good shall have everlasting life; and they that have

done evil shall have everlasting damnation. And thus it is. Amen.

The prophecy of Samuel, the Lamanite, to the Nephites.

344

helaman 12

Helaman 13

1 And now it came to pass in the eighty and sixth year, the Nephites did still remain in

wickedness, yea, in great wickedness, while the Lamanites did observe strictly to

keep the commandments of God, according to the law of Moses.

2 And it came to pass that in this year there was one Samuel, a Lamanite, came into

the land of Zarahemla, and began to preach unto the people. And it came to pass

that he did preach, many days, repentance unto the people, and they did cast him

out, and he was about to return to his own land.

3 But behold, the voice of the Lord came unto him, that he should return again,

and prophesy unto the people whatsoever things should come into his heart. 4 And it came to pass that they would not suffer that he should enter into the city;

therefore he went and got upon the wall thereof, and stretched forth his hand and

cried with a loud voice, and prophesied unto the people whatsoever things the Lord

put into his heart.

5 And he said unto them: Behold, I, Samuel, a Lamanite, do speak the words of

the Lord which he doth put into my heart; and behold he hath put it into my heart

to say unto this people that the sword of justice hangeth over this people; and four

hundred years pass not away save the sword of justice falleth upon this people. 6 Yea, heavy destruction awaiteth this people, and it surely cometh unto this

people, and nothing can save this people save it be repentance and faith on the Lord

Jesus Christ, who surely shall come into the world, and shall suffer many things and

shall be slain for his people.

7 And behold, an angel of the Lord hath declared it unto me, and he did bring glad

tidings to my soul. And behold, I was sent unto you to declare it unto you also, that

ye might have glad tidings; but behold ye would not receive me.

8 Therefore, thus saith the Lord: Because of the hardness of the hearts of the

people of the Nephites, except they repent I will take away my word from them, and

I will withdraw my Spirit from them, and I will suffer them no longer, and I will

turn the hearts of their brethren against them.

9 And four hundred years shall not pass away before I will cause that they shall be

smitten; yea, I will visit them with the sword and with famine and with pestilence. 10 Yea, I will visit them in my fierce anger, and there shall be those of the fourth

generation who shall live, of your enemies, to behold your utter destruction; and

this shall surely come except ye repent, saith the Lord; and those of the fourth

generation shall visit your destruction.

11 But if ye will repent and return unto the Lord your God I will turn away mine

anger, saith the Lord; yea, thus saith the Lord, blessed are they who will repent and

turn unto me, but wo unto him that repenteth not.

12 Yea, wo unto this great city of Zarahemla; for behold, it is because of those who

are righteous that it is saved; yea, wo unto this great city, for I perceive, saith the

Lord, that there are many, yea, even the more part of this great city, that will harden

their hearts against me, saith the Lord.

13 But blessed are they who will repent, for them will I spare. But behold, if it were

not for the righteous who are in this great city, behold, I would cause that fire

should come down out of heaven and destroy it.

14 But behold, it is for the righteous’ sake that it is spared. But behold, the time

cometh, saith the Lord, that when ye shall cast out the righteous from among you,

helaman 13

345

then shall ye be ripe for destruction; yea, wo be unto this great city, because of the

wickedness and abominations which are in her.

15 Yea, and wo be unto the city of Gideon, for the wickedness and abominations

which are in her.

16 Yea, and wo be unto all the cities which are in the land round about, which are

possessed by the Nephites, because of the wickedness and abominations which are

in them.

17 And behold, a curse shall come upon the land, saith the Lord of Hosts, because

of the people’s sake who are upon the land, yea, because of their wickedness and

their abominations.

18 And it shall come to pass, saith the Lord of Hosts, yea, our great and true God,
