he had chosen, had all gone to the paradise of God, save it were the three who

should tarry; and there were other disciples ordained in their stead; and also many

of that generation had passed away.

15 And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land, because of the love

of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people.

16 And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings,

nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a

happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God. 17 There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanites, nor any

manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the

kingdom of God.

18 And how blessed were they! For the Lord did bless them in all their doings; yea,

even they were blessed and prospered until an hundred and ten years had passed

away; and the first generation from Christ had passed away, and there was no

contention in all the land.

19 And it came to pass that Nephi, he that kept this last record, (and he kept it upon

the plates of Nephi) died, and his son Amos kept it in his stead; and he kept it upon

the plates of Nephi also.

20 And he kept it eighty and four years, and there was still peace in the land, save it

were a small part of the people who had revolted from the church and taken upon

them the name of Lamanites; therefore there began to be Lamanites again in the

land.

21 And it came to pass that Amos died also, (and it was an hundred and ninety and

four years from the coming of Christ) and his son Amos kept the record in his

stead; and he also kept it upon the plates of Nephi; and it was also written in the

book of Nephi, which is this book.

22 And it came to pass that two hundred years had passed away; and the second

generation had all passed away save it were a few.

23 And now I, Mormon, would that ye should know that the people had multiplied,

insomuch that they were spread upon all the face of the land, and that they had

become exceedingly rich, because of their prosperity in Christ.

24 And now, in this two hundred and first year there began to be among them those

who were lifted up in pride, such as the wearing of costly apparel, and all manner of

fine pearls, and of the fine things of the world.

25 And from that time forth they did have their goods and their substance no more

common among them.

26 And they began to be divided into classes; and they began to build up churches

unto themselves to get gain, and began to deny the true church of Christ. 27 And it came to pass that when two hundred and ten years had passed away there

were many churches in the land; yea, there were many churches which professed to

know the Christ, and yet they did deny the more parts of his gospel, insomuch that

they did receive all manner of wickedness, and did administer that which was sacred

unto him to whom it had been forbidden because of unworthiness.

28 And this church did multiply exceedingly because of iniquity, and because of the

4 nephi

405

power of Satan who did get hold upon their hearts.

29 And again, there was another church which denied the Christ; and they did

persecute the true church of Christ, because of their humility and their belief in

Christ; and they did despise them because of the many miracles which were

wrought among them.

30 Therefore they did exercise power and authority over the disciples of Jesus who

did tarry with them, and they did cast them into prison; but by the power of the

word of God, which was in them, the prisons were rent in twain, and they went

forth doing mighty miracles among them.

31 Nevertheless, and notwithstanding all these miracles, the people did harden their

hearts, and did seek to kill them, even as the Jews at Jerusalem sought to kill Jesus,

according to his word.

32 And they did cast them into furnaces of fire, and they came forth receiving no

harm.

33 And they also cast them into dens of wild beasts, and they did play with the wild

beasts even as a child with a lamb; and they did come forth from among them,

receiving no harm.

34 Nevertheless, the people did harden their hearts, for they were led by many

priests and false prophets to build up many churches, and to do all manner of

iniquity. And they did smite upon the people of Jesus; but the people of Jesus did

not smite again. And thus they did dwindle in unbelief and wickedness, from year

to year, even until two hundred and thirty years had passed away.

35 And now it came to pass in this year, yea, in the two hundred and thirty and first

year, there was a great division among the people.

36 And it came to pass that in this year there arose a people who were called the

Nephites, and they were true believers in Christ; and among them there were those

who were called by the Lamanites—Jacobites, and Josephites, and Zoramites; 37 Therefore the true believers in Christ, and the true worshipers of Christ, (among

whom were the three disciples of Jesus who should tarry) were called Nephites, and

Jacobites, and Josephites, and Zoramites.

38 And it came to pass that they who rejected the gospel were called Lamanites, and

Lemuelites, and Ishmaelites; and they did not dwindle in unbelief, but they did

wilfully rebel against the gospel of Christ; and they did teach their children that

they should not believe, even as their fathers, from the beginning, did dwindle. 39 And it was because of the wickedness and abomination of their fathers, even as it

was in the beginning. And they were taught to hate the children of God, even as the

Lamanites were taught to hate the children of Nephi from the beginning. 40 And it came to pass that two hundred and forty and four years had passed away,

and thus were the affairs of the people. And the more wicked part of the people did

wax strong, and became exceedingly more numerous than were the people of God. 41 And they did still continue to build up churches unto themselves, and adorn

them with all manner of precious things. And thus did two hundred and fifty years

pass away, and also two hundred and sixty years.

42 And it came to pass that the wicked part of the people began again to build up

the secret oaths and combinations of Gadianton.

43 And also the people who were called the people of Nephi began to be proud in

their hearts, because of their exceeding riches, and become vain like unto their

406

4 nephi

brethren, the Lamanites.

44 And from this time the disciples began to sorrow for the sins of the world. 45 And it came to pass that when three hundred years had passed away, both the

people of Nephi and the Lamanites had become exceedingly wicked one like unto

another.

46 And it came to pass that the robbers of Gadianton did spread over all the face of

the land; and there were none that were righteous save it were the disciples of Jesus.

And gold and silver did they lay up in store in abundance, and did traffic in all

manner of traffic.

47 And it came to pass that after three hundred and five years had passed away, (and

the people did still remain in wickedness) Amos died; and his brother, Ammaron,

did keep the record in his stead.

48 And it came to pass that when three hundred and twenty years had passed away,

Ammaron, being constrained by the Holy Ghost, did hide up the records which

were sacred—yea, even all the sacred records which had been handed down from

generation to generation, which were sacred—even until the three hundred and

twentieth year from the coming of Christ.

49 And he did hide them up unto the Lord, that they might come again unto the

remnant of the house of Jacob, according to the prophecies and the promises of the

Lord. And thus is the end of the record of Ammaron.

4 nephi

407

The Book of Mormon

Mormon 1

1 And now I, Mormon, make a record of the things which I have both seen and heard,

and call it the Book of Mormon.

2 And about the time that Ammaron hid up the records unto the Lord, he came

unto me, (I being about ten years of age, and I began to be learned somewhat after

the manner of the learning of my people) and Ammaron said unto me: I perceive

that thou art a sober child, and art quick to observe;

3 Therefore, when ye are about twenty and four years old I would that ye should

remember the things that ye have observed concerning this people; and when ye are

of that age go to the land Antum, unto a hill which shall be called Shim; and there

have I deposited unto the Lord all the sacred engravings concerning this people. 4 And behold, ye shall take the plates of Nephi unto yourself, and the remainder

shall ye leave in the place where they are; and ye shall engrave on the plates of Nephi

all the things that ye have observed concerning this people.

5 And I, Mormon, being a descendant of Nephi, (and my father’s name was

Mormon) I remembered the things which Ammaron commanded me. 6 And it came to pass that I, being eleven years old, was carried by my father into

the land southward, even to the land of Zarahemla.

7 The whole face of the land had become covered with buildings, and the people

were as numerous almost, as it were the sand of the sea.

8 And it came to pass in this year there began to be a war between the Nephites,

who consisted of the Nephites and the Jacobites and the Josephites and the

Zoramites; and this war was between the Nephites, and the Lamanites and the

Lemuelites and the Ishmaelites.

9 Now the Lamanites and the Lemuelites and the Ishmaelites were called

Lamanites, and the two parties were Nephites and Lamanites.

10 And it came to pass that the war began to be among them in the borders of

Zarahemla, by the waters of Sidon.

11 And it came to pass that the Nephites had gathered together a great number of

men, even to exceed the number of thirty thousand. And it came to pass that they

did have in this same year a number of battles, in which the Nephites did beat the

Lamanites and did slay many of them.

12 And it came to pass that the Lamanites withdrew their design, and there was

peace settled in the land; and peace did remain for the space of about four years,

that there was no bloodshed.

13 But wickedness did prevail upon the face of the whole land, insomuch that the

Lord did take away his beloved disciples, and the work of miracles and of healing

did cease because of the iniquity of the people.

14 And there were no gifts from the Lord, and the Holy Ghost did not come upon

any, because of their wickedness and unbelief.

15 And I, being fifteen years of age and being somewhat of a sober mind, therefore I

was visited of the Lord, and tasted and knew of the goodness of Jesus. 16 And I did endeavor to preach unto this people, but my mouth was shut, and I

was forbidden that I should preach unto them; for behold they had wilfully rebelled

408

mormon 1

against their God; and the beloved disciples were taken away out of the land,

because of their iniquity.

17 But I did remain among them, but I was forbidden to preach unto them, because

of the hardness of their hearts; and because of the hardness of their hearts the land

was cursed for their sake.

18 And these Gadianton robbers, who were among the Lamanites, did infest the

land, insomuch that the inhabitants thereof began to hide up their treasures in the

earth; and they became slippery, because the Lord had cursed the land, that they

could not hold them, nor retain them again.

19 And it came to pass that there were sorceries, and witchcrafts, and magics; and

the power of the evil one was wrought upon all the face of the land, even unto the

fulfilling of all the words of Abinadi, and also Samuel the Lamanite.

Mormon 2

1 And it came to pass in that same year there began to be a war again between the

Nephites and the Lamanites. And notwithstanding I being young, was large in

stature; therefore the people of Nephi appointed me that I should be their leader, or

the leader of their armies.

2 Therefore it came to pass that in my sixteenth year I did go forth at the head of an

army of the Nephites, against the Lamanites; therefore three hundred and twenty

and six years had passed away.

3 And it came to pass that in the three hundred and twenty and seventh year the

Lamanites did come upon us with exceedingly great power, insomuch that they did

frighten my armies; therefore they would not fight, and they began to retreat

towards the north countries.

4 And it came to pass that we did come to the city of Angola, and we did take

possession of the city, and make preparations to defend ourselves against the

Lamanites. And it came to pass that we did fortify the city with our might; but

notwithstanding all our fortifications the Lamanites did come upon us and did

drive us out of the city.

5 And they did also drive us forth out of the land of David.

6 And we marched forth and came to the land of Joshua, which was in the borders

west by the seashore.

7 And it came to pass that we did gather in our people as fast as it were possible,

that we might get them together in one body.

8 But behold, the land was filled with robbers and with Lamanites; and

notwithstanding the great destruction which hung over my people, they did not

repent of their evil doings; therefore there was blood and carnage spread throughout

all the face of the land, both on the part of the Nephites and also on the part of the

Lamanites; and it was one complete revolution throughout all the face of the land. 9 And now, the Lamanites had a king, and his name was Aaron; and he came

against us with an army of forty and four thousand. And behold, I withstood him

with forty and two thousand. And it came to pass that I beat him with my army that

he fled before me. And behold, all this was done, and three hundred and thirty years

had passed away.

10 And it came to pass that the Nephites began to repent of their iniquity, and

mormon 2

409

began to cry even as had been prophesied by Samuel the prophet; for behold no

man could keep that which was his own, for the thieves, and the robbers, and the

murderers, and the magic art, and the witchcraft which was in the land. 11 Thus there began to be a mourning and a lamentation in all the land because of

these things, and more especially among the people of Nephi.

12 And it came to pass that when I, Mormon, saw their lamentation and their

mourning and their sorrow before the Lord, my heart did begin to rejoice within

me, knowing the mercies and the long-suffering of the Lord, therefore supposing

that he would be merciful unto them that they would again become a righteous

people.

13 But behold this my joy was vain, for their sorrowing was not unto repentance,

because of the goodness of God; but it was rather the sorrowing of the damned,

because the Lord would not always suffer them to take happiness in sin. 14 And they did not come unto Jesus with broken hearts and contrite spirits, but

they did curse God, and wish to die. Nevertheless they would struggle with the

sword for their lives.

15 And it came to pass that my sorrow did return unto me again, and I saw that the

day of grace was passed with them, both temporally and spiritually; for I saw

thousands of them hewn down in open rebellion against their God, and heaped up

as dung upon the face of the land. And thus three hundred and forty and four years

had passed away.

16 And it came to pass that in the three hundred and forty and fifth year the

Nephites did begin to flee before the Lamanites; and they were pursued until they

came even to the land of Jashon, before it was possible to stop them in their retreat. 17 And now, the city of Jashon was near the land where Ammaron had deposited

the records unto the Lord, that they might not be destroyed. And behold I had

gone according to the word of Ammaron, and taken the plates of Nephi, and did

make a record according to the words of Ammaron.

18 And upon the plates of Nephi I did make a full account of all the wickedness and

abominations; but upon these plates I did forbear to make a full account of their

wickedness and abominations, for behold, a continual scene of wickedness and

abominations has been before mine eyes ever since I have been sufficient to behold

the ways of man.

19 And wo is me because of their wickedness; for my heart has been filled with

sorrow because of their wickedness, all my days; nevertheless, I know that I shall be

lifted up at the last day.

20 And it came to pass that in this year the people of Nephi again were hunted and

driven. And it came to pass that we were driven forth until we had come northward

to the land which was called Shem.

21 And it came to pass that we did fortify the city of Shem, and we did gather in our

people as much as it were possible, that perhaps we might save them from

destruction.

22 And it came to pass in the three hundred and forty and sixth year they began to

come upon us again.

23 And it came to pass that I did speak unto my people, and did urge them with

great energy, that they would stand boldly before the Lamanites and fight for their

wives, and their children, and their houses, and their homes.

410

mormon 2

24 And my words did arouse them somewhat to vigor, insomuch that they did not

flee from before the Lamanites, but did stand with boldness against them. 25 And it came to pass that we did contend with an army of thirty thousand against

an army of fifty thousand. And it came to pass that we did stand before them with

such firmness that they did flee from before us.

26 And it came to pass that when they had fled we did pursue them with our armies,

and did meet them again, and did beat them; nevertheless the strength of the Lord

was not with us; yea, we were left to ourselves, that the Spirit of the Lord did not

abide in us; therefore we had become weak like unto our brethren.

27 And my heart did sorrow because of this the great calamity of my people, because

of their wickedness and their abominations. But behold, we did go forth against the

Lamanites and the robbers of Gadianton, until we had again taken possession of the

lands of our inheritance.

28 And the three hundred and forty and ninth year had passed away. And in the

three hundred and fiftieth year we made a treaty with the Lamanites and the robbers

of Gadianton, in which we did get the lands of our inheritance divided. 29 And the Lamanites did give unto us the land northward, yea, even to the narrow

passage which led into the land southward. And we did give unto the Lamanites all

the land southward.

Mormon 3

1 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did not come to battle again until ten years

more had passed away. And behold, I had employed my people, the Nephites, in

preparing their lands and their arms against the time of battle.

2 And it came to pass that the Lord did say unto me: Cry unto this

people—Repent ye, and come unto me, and be ye baptized, and build up again my

church, and ye shall be spared.

3 And I did cry unto this people, but it was in vain; and they did not realize that it

was the Lord that had spared them, and granted unto them a chance for repentance.

And behold they did harden their hearts against the Lord their God. 4 And it came to pass that after this tenth year had passed away, making, in the

whole, three hundred and sixty years from the coming of Christ, the king of the

Lamanites sent an epistle unto me, which gave unto me to know that they were

preparing to come again to battle against us.

5 And it came to pass that I did cause my people that they should gather

themselves together at the land Desolation, to a city which was in the borders, by

the narrow pass which led into the land southward.

6 And there we did place our armies, that we might stop the armies of the

Lamanites, that they might not get possession of any of our lands; therefore we did

fortify against them with all our force.

7 And it came to pass that in the three hundred and sixty and first year the

Lamanites did come down to the city of Desolation to battle against us; and it came

to pass that in that year we did beat them, insomuch that they did return to their

own lands again.

8 And in the three hundred and sixty and second year they did come down again

to battle. And we did beat them again, and did slay a great number of them, and

mormon 3

411

their dead were cast into the sea.

9 And now, because of this great thing which my people, the Nephites, had done,

they began to boast in their own strength, and began to swear before the heavens

that they would avenge themselves of the blood of their brethren who had been

slain by their enemies.

10 And they did swear by the heavens, and also by the throne of God, that they

would go up to battle against their enemies, and would cut them off from the face of

the land.

11 And it came to pass that I, Mormon, did utterly refuse from this time forth to be

a commander and a leader of this people, because of their wickedness and

abomination.

12 Behold, I had led them, notwithstanding their wickedness I had led them many

times to battle, and had loved them, according to the love of God which was in me,

with all my heart; and my soul had been poured out in prayer unto my God all the

day long for them; nevertheless, it was without faith, because of the hardness of

their hearts.

13 And thrice have I delivered them out of the hands of their enemies, and they have

repented not of their sins.

14 And when they had sworn by all that had been forbidden them by our Lord and

Savior Jesus Christ, that they would go up unto their enemies to battle, and avenge

themselves of the blood of their brethren, behold the voice of the Lord came unto

me, saying:

15 Vengeance is mine, and I will repay; and because this people repented not after I

had delivered them, behold, they shall be cut off from the face of the earth. 16 And it came to pass that I utterly refused to go up against mine enemies; and I

did even as the Lord had commanded me; and I did stand as an idle witness to

manifest unto the world the things which I saw and heard, according to the

manifestations of the Spirit which had testified of things to come.

17 Therefore I write unto you, Gentiles, and also unto you, house of Israel, when the

work shall commence, that ye shall be about to prepare to return to the land of your

inheritance;

18 Yea, behold, I write unto all the ends of the earth; yea, unto you, twelve tribes of

Israel, who shall be judged according to your works by the twelve whom Jesus chose

to be his disciples in the land of Jerusalem.

19 And I write also unto the remnant of this people, who shall also be judged by the

twelve whom Jesus chose in this land; and they shall be judged by the other twelve

whom Jesus chose in the land of Jerusalem.

20 And these things doth the Spirit manifest unto me; therefore I write unto you

all. And for this cause I write unto you, that ye may know that ye must all stand

before the judgment-seat of Christ, yea, every soul who belongs to the whole human

family of Adam; and ye must stand to be judged of your works, whether they be

good or evil;

21 And also that ye may believe the gospel of Jesus Christ, which ye shall have

among you; and also that the Jews, the covenant people of the Lord, shall have other

witness besides him whom they saw and heard, that Jesus, whom they slew, was the

very Christ and the very God.

22 And I would that I could persuade all ye ends of the earth to repent and prepare

412

mormon 3

to stand before the judgment-seat of Christ.

Mormon 4

1 And now it came to pass that in the three hundred and sixty and third year the

Nephites did go up with their armies to battle against the Lamanites, out of the land

Desolation.

2 And it came to pass that the armies of the Nephites were driven back again to the

land of Desolation. And while they were yet weary, a fresh army of the Lamanites

did come upon them; and they had a sore battle, insomuch that the Lamanites did

take possession of the city Desolation, and did slay many of the Nephites, and did

take many prisoners.

3 And the remainder did flee and join the inhabitants of the city Teancum. Now

the city Teancum lay in the borders by the seashore; and it was also near the city

Desolation.

4 And it was because the armies of the Nephites went up unto the Lamanites that

they began to be smitten; for were it not for that, the Lamanites could have had no

power over them.

5 But, behold, the judgments of God will overtake the wicked; and it is by the

wicked that the wicked are punished; for it is the wicked that stir up the hearts of

the children of men unto bloodshed.

6 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did make preparations to come against

the city Teancum.

7 And it came to pass in the three hundred and sixty and fourth year the Lamanites

did come against the city Teancum, that they might take possession of the city

Teancum also.

8 And it came to pass that they were repulsed and driven back by the Nephites.

And when the Nephites saw that they had driven the Lamanites they did again

boast of their own strength; and they went forth in their own might, and took

possession again of the city Desolation.

9 And now all these things had been done, and there had been thousands slain on

both sides, both the Nephites and the Lamanites.

10 And it came to pass that the three hundred and sixty and sixth year had passed

away, and the Lamanites came again upon the Nephites to battle; and yet the

Nephites repented not of the evil they had done, but persisted in their wickedness

continually.

11 And it is impossible for the tongue to describe, or for man to write a perfect

description of the horrible scene of the blood and carnage which was among the

people, both of the Nephites and of the Lamanites; and every heart was hardened,

so that they delighted in the shedding of blood continually.

12 And there never had been so great wickedness among all the children of Lehi,

nor even among all the house of Israel, according to the words of the Lord, as was

among this people.

13 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did take possession of the city

Desolation, and this because their number did exceed the number of the Nephites. 14 And they did also march forward against the city Teancum, and did drive the

inhabitants forth out of her, and did take many prisoners both women and children,

mormon 4

413

and did offer them up as sacrifices unto their idol gods.

15 And it came to pass that in the three hundred and sixty and seventh year, the

Nephites being angry because the Lamanites had sacrificed their women and their

children, that they did go against the Lamanites with exceedingly great anger,

insomuch that they did beat again the Lamanites, and drive them out of their lands. 16 And the Lamanites did not come again against the Nephites until the three

hundred and seventy and fifth year.

17 And in this year they did come down against the Nephites with all their powers;

and they were not numbered because of the greatness of their number. 18 And from this time forth did the Nephites gain no power over the Lamanites,

but began to be swept off by them even as a dew before the sun.

19 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did come down against the city

Desolation; and there was an exceedingly sore battle fought in the land Desolation,

in the which they did beat the Nephites.

20 And they fled again from before them, and they came to the city Boaz; and there

they did stand against the Lamanites with exceeding boldness, insomuch that the

Lamanites did not beat them until they had come again the second time. 21 And when they had come the second time, the Nephites were driven and

slaughtered with an exceedingly great slaughter; their women and their children

were again sacrificed unto idols.

22 And it came to pass that the Nephites did again flee from before them, taking all

the inhabitants with them, both in towns and villages.

23 And now I, Mormon, seeing that the Lamanites were about to overthrow the

land, therefore I did go to the hill Shim, and did take up all the records which

Ammaron had hid up unto the Lord.

Mormon 5

1 And it came to pass that I did go forth among the Nephites, and did repent of the

oath which I had made that I would no more assist them; and they gave me

command again of their armies, for they looked upon me as though I could deliver

them from their afflictions.

2 But behold, I was without hope, for I knew the judgments of the Lord which

should come upon them; for they repented not of their iniquities, but did struggle

for their lives without calling upon that Being who created them.

3 And it came to pass that the Lamanites did come against us as we had fled to the

city of Jordan; but behold, they were driven back that they did not take the city at

that time.

4 And it came to pass that they came against us again, and we did maintain the

city. And there were also other cities which were maintained by the Nephites, which

strongholds did cut them off that they could not get into the country which lay

before us, to destroy the inhabitants of our land.

5 But it came to pass that whatsoever lands we had passed by, and the inhabitants

thereof were not gathered in, were destroyed by the Lamanites, and their towns, and

villages, and cities were burned with fire; and thus three hundred and seventy and

nine years passed away.

6 And it came to pass that in the three hundred and eightieth year the Lamanites

414

mormon 5

did come again against us to battle, and we did stand against them boldly; but it was

all in vain, for so great were their numbers that they did tread the people of the

Nephites under their feet.

7 And it came to pass that we did again take to flight, and those whose flight was

swifter than the Lamanites’ did escape, and those whose flight did not exceed the

Lamanites’ were swept down and destroyed.

8 And now behold, I, Mormon, do not desire to harrow up the souls of men in

casting before them such an awful scene of blood and carnage as was laid before

mine eyes; but I, knowing that these things must surely be made known, and that all

things which are hid must be revealed upon the house-tops—

9 And also that a knowledge of these things must come unto the remnant of these

people, and also unto the Gentiles, who the Lord hath said should scatter this

people, and this people should be counted as naught among them—therefore I

write a small abridgment, daring not to give a full account of the things which I have

seen, because of the commandment which I have received, and also that ye might

not have too great sorrow because of the wickedness of this people.

10 And now behold, this I speak unto their seed, and also to the Gentiles who have

care for the house of Israel, that realize and know from whence their blessings come. 11 For I know that such will sorrow for the calamity of the house of Israel; yea, they

will sorrow for the destruction of this people; they will sorrow that this people had

not repented that they might have been clasped in the arms of Jesus. 12 Now these things are written unto the remnant of the house of Jacob; and they

are written after this manner, because it is known of God that wickedness will not

bring them forth unto them; and they are to be hid up unto the Lord that they may

come forth in his own due time.

13 And this is the commandment which I have received; and behold, they shall

come forth according to the commandment of the Lord, when he shall see fit, in his

wisdom.

14 And behold, they shall go unto the unbelieving of the Jews; and for this intent

shall they go—that they may be persuaded that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the

living God; that the Father may bring about, through his most Beloved, his great

and eternal purpose, in restoring the Jews, or all the house of Israel, to the land of

their inheritance, which the Lord their God hath given them, unto the fulfilling of

his covenant;

15 And also that the seed of this people may more fully believe his gospel, which

shall go forth unto them from the Gentiles; for this people shall be scattered, and

shall become a dark, a filthy, and a loathsome people, beyond the description of that

which ever hath been amongst us, yea, even that which hath been among the

Lamanites, and this because of their unbelief and idolatry.

16 For behold, the Spirit of the Lord hath already ceased to strive with their fathers;

and they are without Christ and God in the world; and they are driven about as

chaff before the wind.

17 They were once a delightsome people, and they had Christ for their shepherd;

yea, they were led even by God the Father.

18 But now, behold, they are led about by Satan, even as chaff is driven before the

wind, or as a vessel is tossed about upon the waves, without sail or anchor, or

without anything wherewith to steer her; and even as she is, so are they.

mormon 5

415

19 And behold, the Lord hath reserved their blessings, which they might have

received in the land, for the Gentiles who shall possess the land.

20 But behold, it shall come to pass that they shall be driven and scattered by the

Gentiles; and after they have been driven and scattered by the Gentiles, behold, then

will the Lord remember the covenant which he made unto Abraham and unto all

the house of Israel.

21 And also the Lord will remember the prayers of the righteous, which have been

put up unto him for them.

22 And then, O ye Gentiles, how can ye stand before the power of God, except ye

shall repent and turn from your evil ways?

23 Know ye not that ye are in the hands of God? Know ye not that he hath all

power, and at his great command the earth shall be rolled together as a scroll? 24 Therefore, repent ye, and humble yourselves before him, lest he shall come out in

justice against you—lest a remnant of the seed of Jacob shall go forth among you as

a lion, and tear you in pieces, and there is none to deliver.

Mormon 6

1 And now I finish my record concerning the destruction of my people, the Nephites.

And it came to pass that we did march forth before the Lamanites.

2 And I, Mormon, wrote an epistle unto the king of the Lamanites, and desired of

him that he would grant unto us that we might gather together our people unto the

land of Cumorah, by a hill which was called Cumorah, and there we could give

them battle.

3 And it came to pass that the king of the Lamanites did grant unto me the thing

which I desired.

4 And it came to pass that we did march forth to the land of Cumorah, and we did

pitch our tents around about the hill Cumorah; and it was in a land of many waters,

rivers, and fountains; and here we had hope to gain advantage over the Lamanites. 5 And when three hundred and eighty and four years had passed away, we had

gathered in all the remainder of our people unto the land of Cumorah. 6 And it came to pass that when we had gathered in all our people in one to the

land of Cumorah, behold I, Mormon, began to be old; and knowing it to be the last

struggle of my people, and having been commanded of the Lord that I should not

suffer the records which had been handed down by our fathers, which were sacred,

to fall into the hands of the Lamanites, (for the Lamanites would destroy them)

therefore I made this record out of the plates of Nephi, and hid up in the hill

Cumorah all the records which had been entrusted to me by the hand of the Lord,

save it were these few plates which I gave unto my son Moroni.

7 And it came to pass that my people, with their wives and their children, did now

behold the armies of the Lamanites marching towards them; and with that awful

fear of death which fills the breasts of all the wicked, did they await to receive them. 8 And it came to pass that they came to battle against us, and every soul was filled

with terror because of the greatness of their numbers.

9 And it came to pass that they did fall upon my people with the sword, and with

the bow, and with the arrow, and with the ax, and with all manner of weapons of

war.

416

mormon 6

10 And it came to pass that my men were hewn down, yea, even my ten thousand

who were with me, and I fell wounded in the midst; and they passed by me that they

did not put an end to my life.

11 And when they had gone through and hewn down all my people save it were

twenty and four of us, (among whom was my son Moroni) and we having survived

the dead of our people, did behold on the morrow, when the Lamanites had

returned unto their camps, from the top of the hill Cumorah, the ten thousand of

my people who were hewn down, being led in the front by me.

12 And we also beheld the ten thousand of my people who were led by my son

Moroni.

13 And behold, the ten thousand of Gidgiddonah had fallen, and he also in the

midst.

14 And Lamah had fallen with his ten thousand; and Gilgal had fallen with his ten

thousand; and Limhah had fallen with his ten thousand; and Jeneum had fallen

with his ten thousand; and Cumenihah, and Moronihah, and Antionum, and

Shiblom, and Shem, and Josh, had fallen with their ten thousand each. 15 And it came to pass that there were ten more who did fall by the sword, with their

ten thousand each; yea, even all my people, save it were those twenty and four who

were with me, and also a few who had escaped into the south countries, and a few

who had deserted over unto the Lamanites, had fallen; and their flesh, and bones,

and blood lay upon the face of the earth, being left by the hands of those who slew

them to molder upon the land, and to crumble and to return to their mother earth. 16 And my soul was rent with anguish, because of the slain of my people, and I cried: 17 O ye fair ones, how could ye have departed from the ways of the Lord! O ye fair

ones, how could ye have rejected that Jesus, who stood with open arms to receive

you!

18 Behold, if ye had not done this, ye would not have fallen. But behold, ye are

fallen, and I mourn your loss.

19 O ye fair sons and daughters, ye fathers and mothers, ye husbands and wives, ye

fair ones, how is it that ye could have fallen!

20 But behold, ye are gone, and my sorrows cannot bring your return. 21 And the day soon cometh that your mortal must put on immortality, and these

bodies which are now moldering in corruption must soon become incorruptible

bodies; and then ye must stand before the judgment-seat of Christ, to be judged

according to your works; and if it so be that ye are righteous, then are ye blessed

with your fathers who have gone before you.

22 O that ye had repented before this great destruction had come upon you. But

behold, ye are gone, and the Father, yea, the Eternal Father of heaven, knoweth your

state; and he doeth with you according to his justice and mercy.

Mormon 7

1 And now, behold, I would speak somewhat unto the remnant of this people who are

spared, if it so be that God may give unto them my words, that they may know of

the things of their fathers; yea, I speak unto you, ye remnant of the house of Israel;

and these are the words which I speak:

2 Know ye that ye are of the house of Israel.

mormon 7

417

3 Know ye that ye must come unto repentance, or ye cannot be saved. 4 Know ye that ye must lay down your weapons of war, and delight no more in the

shedding of blood, and take them not again, save it be that God shall command you. 5 Know ye that ye must come to the knowledge of your fathers, and repent of all

your sins and iniquities, and believe in Jesus Christ, that he is the Son of God, and

that he was slain by the Jews, and by the power of the Father he hath risen again,

whereby he hath gained the victory over the grave; and also in him is the sting of

death swallowed up.

6 And he bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead, whereby man must be

raised to stand before his judgment-seat.

7 And he hath brought to pass the redemption of the world, whereby he that is

found guiltless before him at the judgment day hath it given unto him to dwell in

the presence of God in his kingdom, to sing ceaseless praises with the choirs above,

unto the Father, and unto the Son, and unto the Holy Ghost, which are one God, in

a state of happiness which hath no end.

8 Therefore repent, and be baptized in the name of Jesus, and lay hold upon the

gospel of Christ, which shall be set before you, not only in this record but also in the

record which shall come unto the Gentiles from the Jews, which record shall come

from the Gentiles unto you.

9 For behold, this is written for the intent that ye may believe that; and if ye believe

that ye will believe this also; and if ye believe this ye will know concerning your

fathers, and also the marvelous works which were wrought by the power of God

among them.

10 And ye will also know that ye are a remnant of the seed of Jacob; therefore ye are

numbered among the people of the first covenant; and if it so be that ye believe in

Christ, and are baptized, first with water, then with fire and with the Holy Ghost,

following the example of our Savior, according to that which he hath commanded

us, it shall be well with you in the day of judgment. Amen.

Mormon 8

1 Behold I, Moroni, do finish the record of my father, Mormon. Behold, I have but

few things to write, which things I have been commanded by my father. 2 And now it came to pass that after the great and tremendous battle at Cumorah,

behold, the Nephites who had escaped into the country southward were hunted by

the Lamanites, until they were all destroyed.

3 And my father also was killed by them, and I even remain alone to write the sad

tale of the destruction of my people. But behold, they are gone, and I fulfil the

commandment of my father. And whether they will slay me, I know not. 4 Therefore I will write and hide up the records in the earth; and whither I go it

mattereth not.

5 Behold, my father hath made this record, and he hath written the intent thereof.

And behold, I would write it also if I had room upon the plates, but I have not; and

ore I have none, for I am alone. My father hath been slain in battle, and all my

kinsfolk, and I have not friends nor whither to go; and how long the Lord will suffer

that I may live I know not.

6 Behold, four hundred years have passed away since the coming of our Lord and

418

mormon 8

Savior.

7 And behold, the Lamanites have hunted my people, the Nephites, down from

city to city and from place to place, even until they are no more; and great has been

their fall; yea, great and marvelous is the destruction of my people, the Nephites. 8 And behold, it is the hand of the Lord which hath done it. And behold also, the

Lamanites are at war one with another; and the whole face of this land is one

continual round of murder and bloodshed; and no one knoweth the end of the war. 9 And now, behold, I say no more concerning them, for there are none save it be

the Lamanites and robbers that do exist upon the face of the land.

10 And there are none that do know the true God save it be the disciples of Jesus,

who did tarry in the land until the wickedness of the people was so great that the

Lord would not suffer them to remain with the people; and whether they be upon

the face of the land no man knoweth.

11 But behold, my father and I have seen them, and they have ministered unto us. 12 And whoso receiveth this record, and shall not condemn it because of the

imperfections which are in it, the same shall know of greater things than these.

Behold, I am Moroni; and were it possible, I would make all things known unto you. 13 Behold, I make an end of speaking concerning this people. I am the son of

Mormon, and my father was a descendant of Nephi.

14 And I am the same who hideth up this record unto the Lord; the plates thereof

are of no worth, because of the commandment of the Lord. For he truly saith that

no one shall have them to get gain; but the record thereof is of great worth; and

whoso shall bring it to light, him will the Lord bless.

15 For none can have power to bring it to light save it be given him of God; for God

wills that it shall be done with an eye single to his glory, or the welfare of the ancient

and long dispersed covenant people of the Lord.

16 And blessed be he that shall bring this thing to light; for it shall be brought out

of darkness unto light, according to the word of God; yea, it shall be brought out of

the earth, and it shall shine forth out of darkness, and come unto the knowledge of

the people; and it shall be done by the power of God.

17 And if there be faults they be the faults of a man. But behold, we know no fault;

nevertheless God knoweth all things; therefore, he that condemneth, let him be

aware lest he shall be in danger of hell fire.

18 And he that saith: Show unto me, or ye shall be smitten—let him beware lest he

commandeth that which is forbidden of the Lord.

19 For behold, the same that judgeth rashly shall be judged rashly again; for

according to his works shall his wages be; therefore, he that smiteth shall be smitten

again, of the Lord.

20 Behold what the scripture says—man shall not smite, neither shall he judge; for

judgment is mine, saith the Lord, and vengeance is mine also, and I will repay. 21 And he that shall breathe out wrath and strifes against the work of the Lord, and

against the covenant people of the Lord who are the house of Israel, and shall say:

We will destroy the work of the Lord, and the Lord will not remember his covenant

which he hath made unto the house of Israel—the same is in danger to be hewn

down and cast into the fire;

22 For the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all his promises shall be

fulfilled.

mormon 8

419

23 Search the prophecies of Isaiah. Behold, I cannot write them. Yea, behold I say

unto you, that those saints who have gone before me, who have possessed this land,

shall cry, yea, even from the dust will they cry unto the Lord; and as the Lord liveth

he will remember the covenant which he hath made with them.

24 And he knoweth their prayers, that they were in behalf of their brethren. And he

knoweth their faith, for in his name could they remove mountains; and in his name

could they cause the earth to shake; and by the power of his word did they cause

prisons to tumble to the earth; yea, even the fiery furnace could not harm them,

neither wild beasts nor poisonous serpents, because of the power of his word. 25 And behold, their prayers were also in behalf of him that the Lord should suffer

to bring these things forth.

26 And no one need say they shall not come, for they surely shall, for the Lord hath

spoken it; for out of the earth shall they come, by the hand of the Lord, and none

can stay it; and it shall come in a day when it shall be said that miracles are done

away; and it shall come even as if one should speak from the dead.

27 And it shall come in a day when the blood of saints shall cry unto the Lord,

because of secret combinations and the works of darkness.

28 Yea, it shall come in a day when the power of God shall be denied, and churches

become defiled and be lifted up in the pride of their hearts; yea, even in a day when

leaders of churches and teachers shall rise in the pride of their hearts, even to the

envying of them who belong to their churches.

29 Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be heard of fires, and tempests, and

vapors of smoke in foreign lands;

30 And there shall also be heard of wars, rumors of wars, and earthquakes in divers

places.

31 Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be great pollutions upon the face of

the earth; there shall be murders, and robbing, and lying, and deceivings, and

whoredoms, and all manner of abominations; when there shall be many who will

say, Do this, or do that, and it mattereth not, for the Lord will uphold such at the

last day. But wo unto such, for they are in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of

iniquity.

32 Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be churches built up that shall say:

Come unto me, and for your money you shall be forgiven of your sins. 33 O ye wicked and perverse and stiffnecked people, why have ye built up churches

unto yourselves to get gain? Why have ye transfigured the holy word of God, that ye

might bring damnation upon your souls? Behold, look ye unto the revelations of

God; for behold, the time cometh at that day when all these things must be fulfilled. 34 Behold, the Lord hath shown unto me great and marvelous things concerning

that which must shortly come, at that day when these things shall come forth

among you.

35 Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold,

Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing.

36 And I know that ye do walk in the pride of your hearts; and there are none save a

few only who do not lift themselves up in the pride of their hearts, unto the wearing

of very fine apparel, unto envying, and strifes, and malice, and persecutions, and all

manner of iniquities; and your churches, yea, even every one, have become polluted

because of the pride of your hearts.

420

mormon 8

37 For behold, ye do love money, and your substance, and your fine apparel, and the

adorning of your churches, more than ye love the poor and the needy, the sick and

the afflicted.

38 O ye pollutions, ye hypocrites, ye teachers, who sell yourselves for that which will

canker, why have ye polluted the holy church of God? Why are ye ashamed to take

upon you the name of Christ? Why do ye not think that greater is the value of an

endless happiness than that misery which never dies—because of the praise of the

world?

39 Why do ye adorn yourselves with that which hath no life, and yet suffer the

hungry, and the needy, and the naked, and the sick and the afflicted to pass by you,

and notice them not?

40 Yea, why do ye build up your secret abominations to get gain, and cause that

widows should mourn before the Lord, and also orphans to mourn before the Lord,

and also the blood of their fathers and their husbands to cry unto the Lord from the

ground, for vengeance upon your heads?

41 Behold, the sword of vengeance hangeth over you; and the time soon cometh

that he avengeth the blood of the saints upon you, for he will not suffer their cries

any longer.

Mormon 9

1 And now, I speak also concerning those who do not believe in Christ. 2 Behold, will ye believe in the day of your visitation—behold, when the Lord

shall come, yea, even that great day when the earth shall be rolled together as a scroll,

and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, yea, in that great day when ye shall be

brought to stand before the Lamb of God—then will ye say that there is no God? 3 Then will ye longer deny the Christ, or can ye behold the Lamb of God? Do ye

suppose that ye shall dwell with him under a consciousness of your guilt? Do ye

suppose that ye could be happy to dwell with that holy Being, when your souls are

racked with a consciousness of guilt that ye have ever abused his laws? 4 Behold, I say unto you that ye would be more miserable to dwell with a holy and

just God, under a consciousness of your filthiness before him, than ye would to

dwell with the damned souls in hell.

5 For behold, when ye shall be brought to see your nakedness before God, and also

the glory of God, and the holiness of Jesus Christ, it will kindle a flame of

unquenchable fire upon you.

6 O then ye unbelieving, turn ye unto the Lord; cry mightily unto the Father in the

name of Jesus, that perhaps ye may be found spotless, pure, fair, and white, having

been cleansed by the blood of the Lamb, at that great and last day.

7 And again I speak unto you who deny the revelations of God, and say that they

are done away, that there are no revelations, nor prophecies, nor gifts, nor healing,

nor speaking with tongues, and the interpretation of tongues;

8 Behold I say unto you, he that denieth these things knoweth not the gospel of

Christ; yea, he has not read the scriptures; if so, he does not understand them. 9 For do we not read that God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and in him

there is no variableness neither shadow of changing?

10 And now, if ye have imagined up unto yourselves a god who doth vary, and in

mormon 9

421

whom there is shadow of changing, then have ye imagined up unto yourselves a god

who is not a God of miracles.

11 But behold, I will show unto you a God of miracles, even the God of Abraham,

and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and it is that same God who created the

heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are.

12 Behold, he created Adam, and by Adam came the fall of man. And because of the

fall of man came Jesus Christ, even the Father and the Son; and because of Jesus

Christ came the redemption of man.

13 And because of the redemption of man, which came by Jesus Christ, they are

brought back into the presence of the Lord; yea, this is wherein all men are

redeemed, because the death of Christ bringeth to pass the resurrection, which

bringeth to pass a redemption from an endless sleep, from which sleep all men shall

be awakened by the power of God when the trump shall sound; and they shall come

forth, both small and great, and all shall stand before his bar, being redeemed and

loosed from this eternal band of death, which death is a temporal death. 14 And then cometh the judgment of the Holy One upon them; and then cometh

the time that he that is filthy shall be filthy still; and he that is righteous shall be

righteous still; he that is happy shall be happy still; and he that is unhappy shall be

unhappy still.

15 And now, O all ye that have imagined up unto yourselves a god who can do no

miracles, I would ask of you, have all these things passed, of which I have spoken?

Has the end come yet? Behold I say unto you, Nay; and God has not ceased to be a

God of miracles.

16 Behold, are not the things that God hath wrought marvelous in our eyes? Yea,

and who can comprehend the marvelous works of God?

17 Who shall say that it was not a miracle that by his word the heaven and the earth

should be; and by the power of his word man was created of the dust of the earth;

and by the power of his word have miracles been wrought?

18 And who shall say that Jesus Christ did not do many mighty miracles? And there

were many mighty miracles wrought by the hands of the apostles.

19 And if there were miracles wrought then, why has God ceased to be a God of

miracles and yet be an unchangeable Being? And behold, I say unto you he

changeth not; if so he would cease to be God; and he ceaseth not to be God, and is a

God of miracles.

20 And the reason why he ceaseth to do miracles among the children of men is

because that they dwindle in unbelief, and depart from the right way, and know not

the God in whom they should trust.

21 Behold, I say unto you that whoso believeth in Christ, doubting nothing,

whatsoever he shall ask the Father in the name of Christ it shall be granted him; and

this promise is unto all, even unto the ends of the earth.

22 For behold, thus said Jesus Christ, the Son of God, unto his disciples who should

tarry, yea, and also to all his disciples, in the hearing of the multitude: Go ye into all

the world, and preach the gospel to every creature;

23 And he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth not

shall be damned;

24 And these signs shall follow them that believe—in my name shall they cast out

devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they

422

mormon 9

drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick and

they shall recover;

25 And whosoever shall believe in my name, doubting nothing, unto him will I

confirm all my words, even unto the ends of the earth.

26 And now, behold, who can stand against the works of the Lord? Who can deny

his sayings? Who will rise up against the almighty power of the Lord? Who will

despise the works of the Lord? Who will despise the children of Christ? Behold, all

ye who are despisers of the works of the Lord, for ye shall wonder and perish. 27 O then despise not, and wonder not, but hearken unto the words of the Lord,

and ask the Father in the name of Jesus for what things soever ye shall stand in need.

Doubt not, but be believing, and begin as in times of old, and come unto the Lord

with all your heart, and work out your own salvation with fear and trembling before

him.

28 Be wise in the days of your probation; strip yourselves of all uncleanness; ask not,

that ye may consume it on your lusts, but ask with a firmness unshaken, that ye will

yield to no temptation, but that ye will serve the true and living God. 29 See that ye are not baptized unworthily; see that ye partake not of the sacrament

of Christ unworthily; but see that ye do all things in worthiness, and do it in the

name of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God; and if ye do this, and endure to the

end, ye will in nowise be cast out.

30 Behold, I speak unto you as though I spake from the dead; for I know that ye

shall have my words.

31 Condemn me not because of mine imperfection, neither my father, because of

his imperfection, neither them who have written before him; but rather give thanks

unto God that he hath made manifest unto you our imperfections, that ye may learn

to be more wise than we have been.

32 And now, behold, we have written this record according to our knowledge, in

the characters which are called among us the reformed Egyptian, being handed

down and altered by us, according to our manner of speech.

33 And if our plates had been sufficiently large we should have written in Hebrew;

but the Hebrew hath been altered by us also; and if we could have written in

Hebrew, behold, ye would have had no imperfection in our record.

34 But the Lord knoweth the things which we have written, and also that none

other people knoweth our language; and because that none other people knoweth

our language, therefore he hath prepared means for the interpretation thereof. 35 And these things are written that we may rid our garments of the blood of our

brethren, who have dwindled in unbelief.

36 And behold, these things which we have desired concerning our brethren, yea,

even their restoration to the knowledge of Christ, are according to the prayers of all

the saints who have dwelt in the land.

37 And may the Lord Jesus Christ grant that their prayers may be answered

according to their faith; and may God the Father remember the covenant which he

hath made with the house of Israel; and may he bless them forever, through faith on

the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

mormon 9

423

The Book of Ether

Ether 1

1 And now I, Moroni, proceed to give an account of those ancient inhabitants who

were destroyed by the hand of the Lord upon the face of this north country. 2 And I take mine account from the twenty and four plates which were found by

the people of Limhi, which is called the Book of Ether.

3 And as I suppose that the first part of this record, which speaks concerning the

creation of the world, and also of Adam, and an account from that time even to the

great tower, and whatsoever things transpired among the children of men until that

time, is had among the Jews—

4 Therefore I do not write those things which transpired from the days of Adam

until that time; but they are had upon the plates; and whoso findeth them, the same

will have power that he may get the full account.

5 But behold, I give not the full account, but a part of the account I give, from the

tower down until they were destroyed.

6 And on this wise do I give the account. He that wrote this record was Ether, and

he was a descendant of Coriantor.

7 Coriantor was the son of Moron.

8 And Moron was the son of Ethem.

9 And Ethem was the son of Ahah.

10 And Ahah was the son of Seth.

11 And Seth was the son of Shiblon.

12 And Shiblon was the son of Com.

13 And Com was the son of Coriantum.

14 And Coriantum was the son of Amnigaddah.

15 And Amnigaddah was the son of Aaron.

16 And Aaron was a descendant of Heth, who was the son of Hearthom. 17 And Hearthom was the son of Lib.

18 And Lib was the son of Kish.

19 And Kish was the son of Corom.

20 And Corom was the son of Levi.

21 And Levi was the son of Kim.

22 And Kim was the son of Morianton.

23 And Morianton was a descendant of Riplakish.

24 And Riplakish was the son of Shez.

25 And Shez was the son of Heth.

26 And Heth was the son of Com.

27 And Com was the son of Coriantum.

28 And Coriantum was the son of Emer.

29 And Emer was the son of Omer.

30 And Omer was the son of Shule.

31 And Shule was the son of Kib.

32 And Kib was the son of Orihah, who was the son of Jared;

33 Which Jared came forth with his brother and their families, with some others and

their families, from the great tower, at the time the Lord confounded the language

424

ether 1

of the people, and swore in his wrath that they should be scattered upon all the face

of the earth; and according to the word of the Lord the people were scattered. 34 And the brother of Jared being a large and mighty man, and a man highly

favored of the Lord, Jared, his brother, said unto him: Cry unto the Lord, that he

will not confound us that we may not understand our words.

35 And it came to pass that the brother of Jared did cry unto the Lord, and the Lord

had compassion upon Jared; therefore he did not confound the language of Jared;

and Jared and his brother were not confounded.

36 Then Jared said unto his brother: Cry again unto the Lord, and it may be that he

will turn away his anger from them who are our friends, that he confound not their

language.

37 And it came to pass that the brother of Jared did cry unto the Lord, and the Lord

had compassion upon their friends and their families also, that they were not

confounded.

38 And it came to pass that Jared spake again unto his brother, saying: Go and

inquire of the Lord whether he will drive us out of the land, and if he will drive us

out of the land, cry unto him whither we shall go. And who knoweth but the Lord

will carry us forth into a land which is choice above all the earth? And if it so be, let

us be faithful unto the Lord, that we may receive it for our inheritance. 39 And it came to pass that the brother of Jared did cry unto the Lord according to

that which had been spoken by the mouth of Jared.

40 And it came to pass that the Lord did hear the brother of Jared, and had

compassion upon him, and said unto him:

41 Go to and gather together thy flocks, both male and female, of every kind; and

also of the seed of the earth of every kind; and thy families; and also Jared thy

brother and his family; and also thy friends and their families, and the friends of

Jared and their families.

42 And when thou hast done this thou shalt go at the head of them down into the

valley which is northward. And there will I meet thee, and I will go before thee into

a land which is choice above all the lands of the earth.

43 And there will I bless thee and thy seed, and raise up unto me of thy seed, and of

the seed of thy brother, and they who shall go with thee, a great nation. And there

shall be none greater than the nation which I will raise up unto me of thy seed, upon

all the face of the earth. And thus I will do unto thee because this long time ye have

cried unto me.

Ether 2

1 And it came to pass that Jared and his brother, and their families, and also the

friends of Jared and his brother and their families, went down into the valley which

was northward, (and the name of the valley was Nimrod, being called after the

mighty hunter) with their flocks which they had gathered together, male and

female, of every kind.

2 And they did also lay snares and catch fowls of the air; and they did also prepare

a vessel, in which they did carry with them the fish of the waters.

3 And they did also carry with them deseret, which, by interpretation, is a honey

bee; and thus they did carry with them swarms of bees, and all manner of that which

ether 2

425

was upon the face of the land, seeds of every kind.

4 And it came to pass that when they had come down into the valley of Nimrod

the Lord came down and talked with the brother of Jared; and he was in a cloud,

and the brother of Jared saw him not.

5 And it came to pass that the Lord commanded them that they should go forth

into the wilderness, yea, into that quarter where there never had man been. And it

came to pass that the Lord did go before them, and did talk with them as he stood

in a cloud, and gave directions whither they should travel.

6 And it came to pass that they did travel in the wilderness, and did build barges, in

which they did cross many waters, being directed continually by the hand of the

Lord.

7 And the Lord would not suffer that they should stop beyond the sea in the

wilderness, but he would that they should come forth even unto the land of

promise, which was choice above all other lands, which the Lord God had preserved

for a righteous people.

8 And he had sworn in his wrath unto the brother of Jared, that whoso should

possess this land of promise, from that time henceforth and forever, should serve

him, the true and only God, or they should be swept off when the fulness of his

wrath should come upon them.

9 And now, we can behold the decrees of God concerning this land, that it is a land

of promise; and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God, or they shall be

swept off when the fulness of his wrath shall come upon them. And the fulness of

his wrath cometh upon them when they are ripened in iniquity.

10 For behold, this is a land which is choice above all other lands; wherefore he that

doth possess it shall serve God or shall be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of

God. And it is not until the fulness of iniquity among the children of the land, that

they are swept off.

11 And this cometh unto you, O ye Gentiles, that ye may know the decrees of

God—that ye may repent, and not continue in your iniquities until the fulness

come, that ye may not bring down the fulness of the wrath of God upon you as the

inhabitants of the land have hitherto done.

12 Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free

from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they

will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, who hath been manifested by

the things which we have written.

13 And now I proceed with my record; for behold, it came to pass that the Lord did

bring Jared and his brethren forth even to that great sea which divideth the lands.

And as they came to the sea they pitched their tents; and they called the name of the

place Moriancumer; and they dwelt in tents, and dwelt in tents upon the seashore

for the space of four years.

14 And it came to pass at the end of four years that the Lord came again unto the

brother of Jared, and stood in a cloud and talked with him. And for the space of

three hours did the Lord talk with the brother of Jared, and chastened him because

he remembered not to call upon the name of the Lord.

15 And the brother of Jared repented of the evil which he had done, and did call

upon the name of the Lord for his brethren who were with him. And the Lord said

unto him: I will forgive thee and thy brethren of their sins; but thou shalt not sin

426

ether 2

any more, for ye shall remember that my Spirit will not always strive with man;

wherefore, if ye will sin until ye are fully ripe ye shall be cut off from the presence of

the Lord. And these are my thoughts upon the land which I shall give you for your

inheritance; for it shall be a land choice above all other lands.

16 And the Lord said: Go to work and build, after the manner of barges which ye

have hitherto built. And it came to pass that the brother of Jared did go to work,

and also his brethren, and built barges after the manner which they had built,

according to the instructions of the Lord. And they were small, and they were light

upon the water, even like unto the lightness of a fowl upon the water. 17 And they were built after a manner that they were exceedingly tight, even that

they would hold water like unto a dish; and the bottom thereof was tight like unto a

dish; and the sides thereof were tight like unto a dish; and the ends thereof were

peaked; and the top thereof was tight like unto a dish; and the length thereof was

the length of a tree; and the door thereof, when it was shut, was tight like unto a

dish.

18 And it came to pass that the brother of Jared cried unto the Lord, saying: O

Lord, I have performed the work which thou hast commanded me, and I have made

the barges according as thou hast directed me.

19 And behold, O Lord, in them there is no light; whither shall we steer? And also

we shall perish, for in them we cannot breathe, save it is the air which is in them;

therefore we shall perish.

20 And the Lord said unto the brother of Jared: Behold, thou shalt make a hole in

the top, and also in the bottom; and when thou shalt suffer for air thou shalt unstop

the hole and receive air. And if it be so that the water come in upon thee, behold, ye

shall stop the hole, that ye may not perish in the flood.

21 And it came to pass that the brother of Jared did so, according as the Lord had

commanded.

22 And he cried again unto the Lord saying: O Lord, behold I have done even as

thou hast commanded me; and I have prepared the vessels for my people, and

behold there is no light in them. Behold, O Lord, wilt thou suffer that we shall cross

this great water in darkness?

23 And the Lord said unto the brother of Jared: What will ye that I should do that

ye may have light in your vessels? For behold, ye cannot have windows, for they will

be dashed in pieces; neither shall ye take fire with you, for ye shall not go by the

light of fire.

24 For behold, ye shall be as a whale in the midst of the sea; for the mountain waves

shall dash upon you. Nevertheless, I will bring you up again out of the depths of the

sea; for the winds have gone forth out of my mouth, and also the rains and the

floods have I sent forth.

25 And behold, I prepare you against these things; for ye cannot cross this great

deep save I prepare you against the waves of the sea, and the winds which have gone

forth, and the floods which shall come. Therefore what will ye that I should prepare

for you that ye may have light when ye are swallowed up in the depths of the sea?

ether 2

427

Ether 3

1 And it came to pass that the brother of Jared, (now the number of the vessels which

had been prepared was eight) went forth unto the mount, which they called the

mount Shelem, because of its exceeding height, and did molten out of a rock sixteen

small stones; and they were white and clear, even as transparent glass; and he did

carry them in his hands upon the top of the mount, and cried again unto the Lord,

saying:

2 O Lord, thou hast said that we must be encompassed about by the floods. Now

behold, O Lord, and do not be angry with thy servant because of his weakness

before thee; for we know that thou art holy and dwellest in the heavens, and that we

are unworthy before thee; because of the fall our natures have become evil

continually; nevertheless, O Lord, thou hast given us a commandment that we must

call upon thee, that from thee we may receive according to our desires. 3 Behold, O Lord, thou hast smitten us because of our iniquity, and hast driven us

forth, and for these many years we have been in the wilderness; nevertheless, thou

hast been merciful unto us. O Lord, look upon me in pity, and turn away thine

anger from this thy people, and suffer not that they shall go forth across this raging

deep in darkness; but behold these things which I have molten out of the rock. 4 And I know, O Lord, that thou hast all power, and can do whatsoever thou wilt

for the benefit of man; therefore touch these stones, O Lord, with thy finger, and

prepare them that they may shine forth in darkness; and they shall shine forth unto

us in the vessels which we have prepared, that we may have light while we shall cross

the sea.

5 Behold, O Lord, thou canst do this. We know that thou art able to show forth

great power, which looks small unto the understanding of men.

6 And it came to pass that when the brother of Jared had said these words, behold,

the Lord stretched forth his hand and touched the stones one by one with his finger.

And the veil was taken from off the eyes of the brother of Jared, and he saw the

finger of the Lord; and it was as the finger of a man, like unto flesh and blood; and

the brother of Jared fell down before the Lord, for he was struck with fear. 7 And the Lord saw that the brother of Jared had fallen to the earth; and the Lord

said unto him: Arise, why hast thou fallen?

8 And he saith unto the Lord: I saw the finger of the Lord, and I feared lest he

should smite me; for I knew not that the Lord had flesh and blood.

9 And the Lord said unto him: Because of thy faith thou hast seen that I shall take

upon me flesh and blood; and never has man come before me with such exceeding

faith as thou hast; for were it not so ye could not have seen my finger. Sawest thou

more than this?

10 And he answered: Nay; Lord, show thyself unto me.

11 And the Lord said unto him: Believest thou the words which I shall speak? 12 And he answered: Yea, Lord, I know that thou speakest the truth, for thou art a

God of truth, and canst not lie.

13 And when he had said these words, behold, the Lord showed himself unto him,

and said: Because thou knowest these things ye are redeemed from the fall;

therefore ye are brought back into my presence; therefore I show myself unto you. 14 Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem

my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ. I am the Father and the Son. In me shall all

428

ether 3

mankind have life, and that eternally, even they who shall believe on my name; and

they shall become my sons and my daughters.

15 And never have I showed myself unto man whom I have created, for never has

man believed in me as thou hast. Seest thou that ye are created after mine own

image? Yea, even all men were created in the beginning after mine own image. 16 Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I

created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit

will I appear unto my people in the flesh.

17 And now, as I, Moroni, said I could not make a full account of these things

which are written, therefore it sufficeth me to say that Jesus showed himself unto

this man in the spirit, even after the manner and in the likeness of the same body

even as he showed himself unto the Nephites.

18 And he ministered unto him even as he ministered unto the Nephites; and all

this, that this man might know that he was God, because of the many great works

which the Lord had showed unto him.

19 And because of the knowledge of this man he could not be kept from beholding

within the veil; and he saw the finger of Jesus, which, when he saw, he fell with fear;

for he knew that it was the finger of the Lord; and he had faith no longer, for he

knew, nothing doubting.

20 Wherefore, having this perfect knowledge of God, he could not be kept from

within the veil; therefore he saw Jesus; and he did minister unto him. 21 And it came to pass that the Lord said unto the brother of Jared: Behold, thou

shalt not suffer these things which ye have seen and heard to go forth unto the

world, until the time cometh that I shall glorify my name in the flesh; wherefore, ye

shall treasure up the things which ye have seen and heard, and show it to no man. 22 And behold, when ye shall come unto me, ye shall write them and shall seal them

up, that no one can interpret them; for ye shall write them in a language that they

cannot be read.

23 And behold, these two stones will I give unto thee, and ye shall seal them up also

with the things which ye shall write.

24 For behold, the language which ye shall write I have confounded; wherefore I

will cause in my own due time that these stones shall magnify to the eyes of men

these things which ye shall write.

25 And when the Lord had said these words, he showed unto the brother of Jared all

the inhabitants of the earth which had been, and also all that would be; and he

withheld them not from his sight, even unto the ends of the earth.

26 For he had said unto him in times before, that if he would believe in him that he

could show unto him all things—it should be shown unto him; therefore the Lord

could not withhold anything from him, for he knew that the Lord could show him

all things.

27 And the Lord said unto him: Write these things and seal them up; and I will

show them in mine own due time unto the children of men.

28 And it came to pass that the Lord commanded him that he should seal up the

two stones which he had received, and show them not, until the Lord should show

them unto the children of men.

ether 3

429

Ether 4

1 And the Lord commanded the brother of Jared to go down out of the mount from

the presence of the Lord, and write the things which he had seen; and they were

forbidden to come unto the children of men until after that he should be lifted up

upon the cross; and for this cause did king Mosiah keep them, that they should not

come unto the world until after Christ should show himself unto his people. 2 And after Christ truly had showed himself unto his people he commanded that

they should be made manifest.

3 And now, after that, they have all dwindled in unbelief; and there is none save it

be the Lamanites, and they have rejected the gospel of Christ; therefore I am

commanded that I should hide them up again in the earth.

4 Behold, I have written upon these plates the very things which the brother of

Jared saw; and there never were greater things made manifest than those which were

made manifest unto the brother of Jared.

5 Wherefore the Lord hath commanded me to write them; and I have written

them. And he commanded me that I should seal them up; and he also hath

commanded that I should seal up the interpretation thereof; wherefore I have sealed

up the interpreters, according to the commandment of the Lord.

6 For the Lord said unto me: They shall not go forth unto the Gentiles until the

day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become clean before the Lord. 7 And in that day that they shall exercise faith in me, saith the Lord, even as the

brother of Jared did, that they may become sanctified in me, then will I manifest

unto them the things which the brother of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto

them all my revelations, saith Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of the heavens

and of the earth, and all things that in them are.

8 And he that will contend against the word of the Lord, let him be accursed; and

he that shall deny these things, let him be accursed; for unto them will I show no

greater things, saith Jesus Christ; for I am he who speaketh.

9 And at my command the heavens are opened and are shut; and at my word the

earth shall shake; and at my command the inhabitants thereof shall pass away, even

so as by fire.

10 And he that believeth not my words believeth not my disciples; and if it so be

that I do not speak, judge ye; for ye shall know that it is I that speaketh, at the last

day.

11 But he that believeth these things which I have spoken, him will I visit with the

manifestations of my Spirit, and he shall know and bear record. For because of my

Spirit he shall know that these things are true; for it persuadeth men to do good. 12 And whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do good is of me; for good cometh of

none save it be of me. I am the same that leadeth men to all good; he that will not

believe my words will not believe me—that I am; and he that will not believe me

will not believe the Father who sent me. For behold, I am the Father, I am the light,

and the life, and the truth of the world.

13 Come unto me, O ye Gentiles, and I will show unto you the greater things, the

knowledge which is hid up because of unbelief.

14 Come unto me, O ye house of Israel, and it shall be made manifest unto you how

great things the Father hath laid up for you, from the foundation of the world; and

it hath not come unto you, because of unbelief.

430

ether 4

15 Behold, when ye shall rend that veil of unbelief which doth cause you to remain

in your awful state of wickedness, and hardness of heart, and blindness of mind,

then shall the great and marvelous things which have been hid up from the

foundation of the world from you—yea, when ye shall call upon the Father in my

name, with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, then shall ye know that the Father

hath remembered the covenant which he made unto your fathers, O house of Israel. 16 And then shall my revelations which I have caused to be written by my servant

John be unfolded in the eyes of all the people. Remember, when ye see these things,

ye shall know that the time is at hand that they shall be made manifest in very deed. 17 Therefore, when ye shall receive this record ye may know that the work of the

Father has commenced upon all the face of the land.

18 Therefore, repent all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me, and believe in my

gospel, and be baptized in my name; for he that believeth and is baptized shall be

saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned; and signs shall follow them that

believe in my name.

19 And blessed is he that is found faithful unto my name at the last day, for he shall

be lifted up to dwell in the kingdom prepared for him from the foundation of the

world. And behold it is I that hath spoken it. Amen.

Ether 5

1 And now I, Moroni, have written the words which were commanded me, according

to my memory; and I have told you the things which I have sealed up; therefore

touch them not in order that ye may translate; for that thing is forbidden you,

except by and by it shall be wisdom in God.

2 And behold, ye may be privileged that ye may show the plates unto those who

shall assist to bring forth this work;

3 And unto three shall they be shown by the power of God; wherefore they shall

know of a surety that these things are true.

4 And in the mouth of three witnesses shall these things be established; and the

testimony of three, and this work, in the which shall be shown forth the power of

God and also his word, of which the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost bear

record—and all this shall stand as a testimony against the world at the last day. 5 And if it so be that they repent and come unto the Father in the name of Jesus,

they shall be received into the kingdom of God.

6 And now, if I have no authority for these things, judge ye; for ye shall know that I

have authority when ye shall see me, and we shall stand before God at the last day.

Amen.

Ether 6

1 And now I, Moroni, proceed to give the record of Jared and his brother. 2 For it came to pass after the Lord had prepared the stones which the brother of

Jared had carried up into the mount, the brother of Jared came down out of the

mount, and he did put forth the stones into the vessels which were prepared, one in

each end thereof; and behold, they did give light unto the vessels.

ether 5

431

3 And thus the Lord caused stones to shine in darkness, to give light unto men,

women, and children, that they might not cross the great waters in darkness. 4 And it came to pass that when they had prepared all manner of food, that thereby

they might subsist upon the water, and also food for their flocks and herds, and

whatsoever beast or animal or fowl that they should carry with them—and it came

to pass that when they had done all these things they got aboard of their vessels or

barges, and set forth into the sea, commending themselves unto the Lord their God. 5 And it came to pass that the Lord God caused that there should be a furious

wind blow upon the face of the waters, towards the promised land; and thus they

were tossed upon the waves of the sea before the wind.

6 And it came to pass that they were many times buried in the depths of the sea,

because of the mountain waves which broke upon them, and also the great and

terrible tempests which were caused by the fierceness of the wind.

7 And it came to pass that when they were buried in the deep there was no water

that could hurt them, their vessels being tight like unto a dish, and also they were

tight like unto the ark of Noah; therefore when they were encompassed about by

many waters they did cry unto the Lord, and he did bring them forth again upon

the top of the waters.

8 And it came to pass that the wind did never cease to blow towards the promised

land while they were upon the waters; and thus they were driven forth before the

wind.

9 And they did sing praises unto the Lord; yea, the brother of Jared did sing praises

unto the Lord, and he did thank and praise the Lord all the day long; and when the

night came, they did not cease to praise the Lord.

10 And thus they were driven forth; and no monster of the sea could break them,

neither whale that could mar them; and they did have light continually, whether it

was above the water or under the water.

11 And thus they were driven forth, three hundred and forty and four days upon

the water.

12 And they did land upon the shore of the promised land. And when they had set

their feet upon the shores of the promised land they bowed themselves down upon

the face of the land, and did humble themselves before the Lord, and did shed tears

of joy before the Lord, because of the multitude of his tender mercies over them. 13 And it came to pass that they went forth upon the face of the land, and began to

till the earth.

14 And Jared had four sons; and they were called Jacom, and Gilgah, and Mahah,

and Orihah.

15 And the brother of Jared also begat sons and daughters.

16 And the friends of Jared and his brother were in number about twenty and two

souls; and they also begat sons and daughters before they came to the promised

land; and therefore they began to be many.

17 And they were taught to walk humbly before the Lord; and they were also taught

from on high.

18 And it came to pass that they began to spread upon the face of the land, and to

multiply and to till the earth; and they did wax strong in the land.

19 And the brother of Jared began to be old, and saw that he must soon go down to

the grave; wherefore he said unto Jared: Let us gather together our people that we

432

ether 6

may number them, that we may know of them what they will desire of us before we

go down to our graves.

20 And accordingly the people were gathered together. Now the number of the sons

and the daughters of the brother of Jared were twenty and two souls; and the

number of sons and daughters of Jared were twelve, he having four sons. 21 And it came to pass that they did number their people; and after that they had

numbered them, they did desire of them the things which they would that they

should do before they went down to their graves.

22 And it came to pass that the people desired of them that they should anoint one

of their sons to be a king over them.

23 And now behold, this was grievous unto them. And the brother of Jared said

unto them: Surely this thing leadeth into captivity.

24 But Jared said unto his brother: Suffer them that they may have a king. And

therefore he said unto them: Choose ye out from among our sons a king, even

whom ye will.

25 And it came to pass that they chose even the firstborn of the brother of Jared;

and his name was Pagag. And it came to pass that he refused and would not be their

king. And the people would that his father should constrain him, but his father

would not; and he commanded them that they should constrain no man to be their

king.

26 And it came to pass that they chose all the brothers of Pagag, and they would not. 27 And it came to pass that neither would the sons of Jared, even all save it were

one; and Orihah was anointed to be king over the people.

28 And he began to reign, and the people began to prosper; and they became

exceedingly rich.

29 And it came to pass that Jared died, and his brother also.

30 And it came to pass that Orihah did walk humbly before the Lord, and did

remember how great things the Lord had done for his father, and also taught his

people how great things the Lord had done for their fathers.

Ether 7

1 And it came to pass that Orihah did execute judgment upon the land in

righteousness all his days, whose days were exceedingly many.

2 And he begat sons and daughters; yea, he begat thirty and one, among whom

were twenty and three sons.

3 And it came to pass that he also begat Kib in his old age. And it came to pass that

Kib reigned in his stead; and Kib begat Corihor.

4 And when Corihor was thirty and two years old he rebelled against his father,

and went over and dwelt in the land of Nehor; and he begat sons and daughters, and

they became exceedingly fair; wherefore Corihor drew away many people after him. 5 And when he had gathered together an army he came up unto the land of Moron

where the king dwelt, and took him captive, which brought to pass the saying of the

brother of Jared that they would be brought into captivity.

6 Now the land of Moron, where the king dwelt, was near the land which is called

Desolation by the Nephites.

7 And it came to pass that Kib dwelt in captivity, and his people under Corihor his

ether 7

433

son, until he became exceedingly old; nevertheless Kib begat Shule in his old age,

while he was yet in captivity.

8 And it came to pass that Shule was angry with his brother; and Shule waxed

strong, and became mighty as to the strength of a man; and he was also mighty in

judgment.

9 Wherefore, he came to the hill Ephraim, and he did molten out of the hill, and

made swords out of steel for those whom he had drawn away with him; and after he

had armed them with swords he returned to the city Nehor, and gave battle unto his

brother Corihor, by which means he obtained the kingdom and restored it unto his

father Kib.

10 And now because of the thing which Shule had done, his father bestowed upon

him the kingdom; therefore he began to reign in the stead of his father. 11 And it came to pass that he did execute judgment in righteousness; and he did

spread his kingdom upon all the face of the land, for the people had become

exceedingly numerous.

12 And it came to pass that Shule also begat many sons and daughters. 13 And Corihor repented of the many evils which he had done; wherefore Shule

gave him power in his kingdom.

14 And it came to pass that Corihor had many sons and daughters. And among the

sons of Corihor there was one whose name was Noah.

15 And it came to pass that Noah rebelled against Shule, the king, and also his

father Corihor, and drew away Cohor his brother, and also all his brethren and

many of the people.

16 And he gave battle unto Shule, the king, in which he did obtain the land of their

first inheritance; and he became a king over that part of the land.

17 And it came to pass that he gave battle again unto Shule, the king; and he took

Shule, the king, and carried him away captive into Moron.

18 And it came to pass as he was about to put him to death, the sons of Shule crept

into the house of Noah by night and slew him, and broke down the door of the

prison and brought out their father, and placed him upon his throne in his own

kingdom.

19 Wherefore, the son of Noah did build up his kingdom in his stead; nevertheless

they did not gain power any more over Shule the king, and the people who were

under the reign of Shule the king did prosper exceedingly and wax great. 20 And the country was divided; and there were two kingdoms, the kingdom of

Shule, and the kingdom of Cohor, the son of Noah.

21 And Cohor, the son of Noah, caused that his people should give battle unto

Shule, in which Shule did beat them and did slay Cohor.

22 And now Cohor had a son who was called Nimrod; and Nimrod gave up the

kingdom of Cohor unto Shule, and he did gain favor in the eyes of Shule; wherefore

Shule did bestow great favors upon him, and he did do in the kingdom of Shule

according to his desires.

23 And also in the reign of Shule there came prophets among the people, who were

sent from the Lord, prophesying that the wickedness and idolatry of the people was

bringing a curse upon the land, and they should be destroyed if they did not repent. 24 And it came to pass that the people did revile against the prophets, and did mock

them. And it came to pass that king Shule did execute judgment against all those

434

ether 7

who did revile against the prophets.

25 And he did execute a law throughout all the land, which gave power unto the

prophets that they should go whithersoever they would; and by this cause the

people were brought unto repentance.

26 And because the people did repent of their iniquities and idolatries the Lord did

spare them, and they began to prosper again in the land. And it came to pass that

Shule begat sons and daughters in his old age.

27 And there were no more wars in the days of Shule; and he remembered the great

things that the Lord had done for his fathers in bringing them across the great deep

into the promised land; wherefore he did execute judgment in righteousness all his

days.

Ether 8

1 And it came to pass that he begat Omer, and Omer reigned in his stead. And Omer

begat Jared; and Jared begat sons and daughters.

2 And Jared rebelled against his father, and came and dwelt in the land of Heth.

And it came to pass that he did flatter many people, because of his cunning words,

until he had gained the half of the kingdom.

3 And when he had gained the half of the kingdom he gave battle unto his father,

and he did carry away his father into captivity, and did make him serve in captivity; 4 And now, in the days of the reign of Omer he was in captivity the half of his days.

And it came to pass that he begat sons and daughters, among whom were Esrom and

Coriantumr;

5 And they were exceedingly angry because of the doings of Jared their brother,

insomuch that they did raise an army and gave battle unto Jared. And it came to

pass that they did give battle unto him by night.

6 And it came to pass that when they had slain the army of Jared they were about

to slay him also; and he pled with them that they would not slay him, and he would

give up the kingdom unto his father. And it came to pass that they did grant unto

him his life.

7 And now Jared became exceedingly sorrowful because of the loss of the kingdom,

for he had set his heart upon the kingdom and upon the glory of the world. 8 Now the daughter of Jared being exceedingly expert, and seeing the sorrows of

her father, thought to devise a plan whereby she could redeem the kingdom unto

her father.

9 Now the daughter of Jared was exceedingly fair. And it came to pass that she did

talk with her father, and said unto him: Whereby hath my father so much sorrow?

Hath he not read the record which our fathers brought across the great deep?

Behold, is there not an account concerning them of old, that they by their secret

plans did obtain kingdoms and great glory?

10 And now, therefore, let my father send for Akish, the son of Kimnor; and behold,

I am fair, and I will dance before him, and I will please him, that he will desire me to

wife; wherefore if he shall desire of thee that ye shall give unto him me to wife, then

shall ye say: I will give her if ye will bring unto me the head of my father, the king. 11 And now Omer was a friend to Akish; wherefore, when Jared had sent for Akish,

the daughter of Jared danced before him that she pleased him, insomuch that he

ether 8

435

desired her to wife. And it came to pass that he said unto Jared: Give her unto me to

wife.

12 And Jared said unto him: I will give her unto you, if ye will bring unto me the

head of my father, the king.

13 And it came to pass that Akish gathered in unto the house of Jared all his

kinsfolk, and said unto them: Will ye swear unto me that ye will be faithful unto me

in the thing which I shall desire of you?

14 And it came to pass that they all sware unto him, by the God of heaven, and also

by the heavens, and also by the earth, and by their heads, that whoso should vary

from the assistance which Akish desired should lose his head; and whoso should

divulge whatsoever thing Akish made known unto them, the same should lose his

life.

15 And it came to pass that thus they did agree with Akish. And Akish did

administer unto them the oaths which were given by them of old who also sought

power, which had been handed down even from Cain, who was a murderer from the

beginning.

16 And they were kept up by the power of the devil to administer these oaths unto

the people, to keep them in darkness, to help such as sought power to gain power,

and to murder, and to plunder, and to lie, and to commit all manner of wickedness

and whoredoms.

17 And it was the daughter of Jared who put it into his heart to search up these

things of old; and Jared put it into the heart of Akish; wherefore, Akish

administered it unto his kindred and friends, leading them away by fair promises to

do whatsoever thing he desired.

18 And it came to pass that they formed a secret combination, even as they of old;

which combination is most abominable and wicked above all, in the sight of God; 19 For the Lord worketh not in secret combinations, neither doth he will that man

should shed blood, but in all things hath forbidden it, from the beginning of man. 20 And now I, Moroni, do not write the manner of their oaths and combinations,

for it hath been made known unto me that they are had among all people, and they

are had among the Lamanites.

21 And they have caused the destruction of this people of whom I am now

speaking, and also the destruction of the people of Nephi.

22 And whatsoever nation shall uphold such secret combinations, to get power and

gain, until they shall spread over the nation, behold, they shall be destroyed; for the

Lord will not suffer that the blood of his saints, which shall be shed by them, shall

always cry unto him from the ground for vengeance upon them and yet he avenge

them not.

23 Wherefore, O ye Gentiles, it is wisdom in God that these things should be

shown unto you, that thereby ye may repent of your sins, and suffer not that these

murderous combinations shall get above you, which are built up to get power and

gain—and the work, yea, even the work of destruction come upon you, yea, even

the sword of the justice of the Eternal God shall fall upon you, to your overthrow

and destruction if ye shall suffer these things to be.

24 Wherefore, the Lord commandeth you, when ye shall see these things come

among you that ye shall awake to a sense of your awful situation, because of this

secret combination which shall be among you; or wo be unto it, because of the

436

ether 8

blood of them who have been slain; for they cry from the dust for vengeance upon

it, and also upon those who built it up.

25 For it cometh to pass that whoso buildeth it up seeketh to overthrow the

freedom of all lands, nations, and countries; and it bringeth to pass the destruction

of all people, for it is built up by the devil, who is the father of all lies; even that same

liar who beguiled our first parents, yea, even that same liar who hath caused man to

commit murder from the beginning; who hath hardened the hearts of men that

they have murdered the prophets, and stoned them, and cast them out from the

beginning.

26 Wherefore, I, Moroni, am commanded to write these things that evil may be

done away, and that the time may come that Satan may have no power upon the

hearts of the children of men, but that they may be persuaded to do good

continually, that they may come unto the fountain of all righteousness and be saved.

Ether 9

1 And now I, Moroni, proceed with my record. Therefore, behold, it came to pass

that because of the secret combinations of Akish and his friends, behold, they did

overthrow the kingdom of Omer.

2 Nevertheless, the Lord was merciful unto Omer, and also to his sons and to his

daughters who did not seek his destruction.

3 And the Lord warned Omer in a dream that he should depart out of the land;

wherefore Omer departed out of the land with his family, and traveled many days,

and came over and passed by the hill of Shim, and came over by the place where the

Nephites were destroyed, and from thence eastward, and came to a place which was

called Ablom, by the seashore, and there he pitched his tent, and also his sons and

his daughters, and all his household, save it were Jared and his family. 4 And it came to pass that Jared was anointed king over the people, by the hand of

wickedness; and he gave unto Akish his daughter to wife.

5 And it came to pass that Akish sought the life of his father-in-law; and he applied

unto those whom he had sworn by the oath of the ancients, and they obtained the

head of his father-in-law, as he sat upon his throne, giving audience to his people. 6 For so great had been the spreading of this wicked and secret society that it had

corrupted the hearts of all the people; therefore Jared was murdered upon his

throne, and Akish reigned in his stead.

7 And it came to pass that Akish began to be jealous of his son, therefore he shut

him up in prison, and kept him upon little or no food until he had suffered death. 8 And now the brother of him that suffered death, (and his name was Nimrah) was

angry with his father because of that which his father had done unto his brother. 9 And it came to pass that Nimrah gathered together a small number of men, and

fled out of the land, and came over and dwelt with Omer.

10 And it came to pass that Akish begat other sons, and they won the hearts of the

people, notwithstanding they had sworn unto him to do all manner of iniquity

according to that which he desired.

11 Now the people of Akish were desirous for gain, even as Akish was desirous for

power; wherefore, the sons of Akish did offer them money, by which means they

drew away the more part of the people after them.

ether 9

437

12 And there began to be a war between the sons of Akish and Akish, which lasted

for the space of many years, yea, unto the destruction of nearly all the people of the

kingdom, yea, even all, save it were thirty souls, and they who fled with the house of

Omer.

13 Wherefore, Omer was restored again to the land of his inheritance. 14 And it came to pass that Omer began to be old; nevertheless, in his old age he

begat Emer; and he anointed Emer to be king to reign in his stead.

15 And after that he had anointed Emer to be king he saw peace in the land for the

space of two years, and he died, having seen exceedingly many days, which were full

of sorrow. And it came to pass that Emer did reign in his stead, and did fill the steps

of his father.

16 And the Lord began again to take the curse from off the land, and the house of

Emer did prosper exceedingly under the reign of Emer; and in the space of sixty and

two years they had become exceedingly strong, insomuch that they became

exceedingly rich—

17 Having all manner of fruit, and of grain, and of silks, and of fine linen, and of

gold, and of silver, and of precious things;

18 And also all manner of cattle, of oxen, and cows, and of sheep, and of swine, and

of goats, and also many other kinds of animals which were useful for the food of

man.

19 And they also had horses, and asses, and there were elephants and cureloms and

cumoms; all of which were useful unto man, and more especially the elephants and

cureloms and cumoms.

20 And thus the Lord did pour out his blessings upon this land, which was choice

above all other lands; and he commanded that whoso should possess the land should

possess it unto the Lord, or they should be destroyed when they were ripened in

iniquity; for upon such, saith the Lord: I will pour out the fulness of my wrath. 21 And Emer did execute judgment in righteousness all his days, and he begat many

sons and daughters; and he begat Coriantum, and he anointed Coriantum to reign

in his stead.

22 And after he had anointed Coriantum to reign in his stead he lived four years,

and he saw peace in the land; yea, and he even saw the Son of Righteousness, and

did rejoice and glory in his day; and he died in peace.

23 And it came to pass that Coriantum did walk in the steps of his father, and did

build many mighty cities, and did administer that which was good unto his people

in all his days. And it came to pass that he had no children even until he was

exceedingly old.

24 And it came to pass that his wife died, being an hundred and two years old. And

it came to pass that Coriantum took to wife, in his old age, a young maid, and begat

sons and daughters; wherefore he lived until he was an hundred and forty and two

years old.

25 And it came to pass that he begat Com, and Com reigned in his stead; and he

reigned forty and nine years, and he begat Heth; and he also begat other sons and

daughters.

26 And the people had spread again over all the face of the land, and there began

again to be an exceedingly great wickedness upon the face of the land, and Heth

began to embrace the secret plans again of old, to destroy his father.

438

ether 9

27 And it came to pass that he did dethrone his father, for he slew him with his own

sword; and he did reign in his stead.

28 And there came prophets in the land again, crying repentance unto them—that

they must prepare the way of the Lord or there should come a curse upon the face of

the land; yea, even there should be a great famine, in which they should be

destroyed if they did not repent.

29 But the people believed not the words of the prophets, but they cast them out;

and some of them they cast into pits and left them to perish. And it came to pass

that they did all these things according to the commandment of the king, Heth. 30 And it came to pass that there began to be a great dearth upon the land, and the

inhabitants began to be destroyed exceedingly fast because of the dearth, for there

was no rain upon the face of the earth.

31 And there came forth poisonous serpents also upon the face of the land, and did

poison many people. And it came to pass that their flocks began to flee before the

poisonous serpents, towards the land southward, which was called by the Nephites

Zarahemla.

32 And it came to pass that there were many of them which did perish by the way;

nevertheless, there were some which fled into the land southward.

33 And it came to pass that the Lord did cause the serpents that they should pursue

them no more, but that they should hedge up the way that the people could not

pass, that whoso should attempt to pass might fall by the poisonous serpents. 34 And it came to pass that the people did follow the course of the beasts, and did

devour the carcasses of them which fell by the way, until they had devoured them all.

Now when the people saw that they must perish they began to repent of their

iniquities and cry unto the Lord.

35 And it came to pass that when they had humbled themselves sufficiently before

the Lord he did send rain upon the face of the earth; and the people began to revive

again, and there began to be fruit in the north countries, and in all the countries

round about. And the Lord did show forth his power unto them in preserving them

from famine.

Ether 10

1 And it came to pass that Shez, who was a descendant of Heth—for Heth had

perished by the famine, and all his household save it were Shez—wherefore, Shez

began to build up again a broken people.

2 And it came to pass that Shez did remember the destruction of his fathers, and

he did build up a righteous kingdom; for he remembered what the Lord had done

in bringing Jared and his brother across the deep; and he did walk in the ways of the

Lord; and he begat sons and daughters.

3 And his eldest son, whose name was Shez, did rebel against him; nevertheless,

Shez was smitten by the hand of a robber, because of his exceeding riches, which

brought peace again unto his father.

4 And it came to pass that his father did build up many cities upon the face of the

land, and the people began again to spread over all the face of the land. And Shez

did live to an exceedingly old age; and he begat Riplakish. And he died, and

Riplakish reigned in his stead.

ether 10

439

5 And it came to pass that Riplakish did not do that which was right in the sight of

the Lord, for he did have many wives and concubines, and did lay that upon men’s

shoulders which was grievous to be borne; yea, he did tax them with heavy taxes;

and with the taxes he did build many spacious buildings.

6 And he did erect him an exceedingly beautiful throne; and he did build many

prisons, and whoso would not be subject unto taxes he did cast into prison; and

whoso was not able to pay taxes he did cast into prison; and he did cause that they

should labor continually for their support; and whoso refused to labor he did cause

to be put to death.

7 Wherefore he did obtain all his fine work, yea, even his fine gold he did cause to

be refined in prison; and all manner of fine workmanship he did cause to be

wrought in prison. And it came to pass that he did afflict the people with his

whoredoms and abominations.

8 And when he had reigned for the space of forty and two years the people did rise

up in rebellion against him; and there began to be war again in the land, insomuch

that Riplakish was killed, and his descendants were driven out of the land. 9 And it came to pass after the space of many years, Morianton, (he being a

descendant of Riplakish) gathered together an army of outcasts, and went forth and

gave battle unto the people; and he gained power over many cities; and the war

became exceedingly sore, and did last for the space of many years; and he did gain

power over all the land, and did establish himself king over all the land. 10 And after that he had established himself king he did ease the burden of the

people, by which he did gain favor in the eyes of the people, and they did anoint

him to be their king.

11 And he did do justice unto the people, but not unto himself because of his many

whoredoms; wherefore he was cut off from the presence of the Lord. 12 And it came to pass that Morianton built up many cities, and the people became

exceedingly rich under his reign, both in buildings, and in gold and silver, and in

raising grain, and in flocks, and herds, and such things which had been restored

unto them.

13 And Morianton did live to an exceedingly great age, and then he begat Kim; and

Kim did reign in the stead of his father; and he did reign eight years, and his father

died. And it came to pass that Kim did not reign in righteousness, wherefore he was

not favored of the Lord.

14 And his brother did rise up in rebellion against him, by which he did bring him

into captivity; and he did remain in captivity all his days; and he begat sons and

daughters in captivity, and in his old age he begat Levi; and he died.

15 And it came to pass that Levi did serve in captivity after the death of his father,

for the space of forty and two years. And he did make war against the king of the

land, by which he did obtain unto himself the kingdom.

16 And after he had obtained unto himself the kingdom he did that which was right

in the sight of the Lord; and the people did prosper in the land; and he did live to a

good old age, and begat sons and daughters; and he also begat Corom, whom he

anointed king in his stead.

17 And it came to pass that Corom did that which was good in the sight of the Lord

all his days; and he begat many sons and daughters; and after he had seen many days

he did pass away, even like unto the rest of the earth; and Kish reigned in his stead.

440

ether 10

18 And it came to pass that Kish passed away also, and Lib reigned in his stead. 19 And it came to pass that Lib also did that which was good in the sight of the

Lord. And in the days of Lib the poisonous serpents were destroyed. Wherefore

they did go into the land southward, to hunt food for the people of the land, for the

land was covered with animals of the forest. And Lib also himself became a great

hunter.

20 And they built a great city by the narrow neck of land, by the place where the sea

divides the land.

21 And they did preserve the land southward for a wilderness, to get game. And the

whole face of the land northward was covered with inhabitants.

22 And they were exceedingly industrious, and they did buy and sell and traffic one

with another, that they might get gain.

23 And they did work in all manner of ore, and they did make gold, and silver, and

iron, and brass, and all manner of metals; and they did dig it out of the earth;

wherefore, they did cast up mighty heaps of earth to get ore, of gold, and of silver,

and of iron, and of copper. And they did work all manner of fine work. 24 And they did have silks, and fine-twined linen; and they did work all manner of

cloth, that they might clothe themselves from their nakedness.

25 And they did make all manner of tools to till the earth, both to plow and to sow,

to reap and to hoe, and also to thrash.

26 And they did make all manner of tools with which they did work their beasts. 27 And they did make all manner of weapons of war. And they did work all manner

of work of exceedingly curious workmanship.

28 And never could be a people more blessed than were they, and more prospered

by the hand of the Lord. And they were in a land that was choice above all lands, for

the Lord had spoken it.

29 And it came to pass that Lib did live many years, and begat sons and daughters;

and he also begat Hearthom.

30 And it came to pass that Hearthom reigned in the stead of his father. And when

Hearthom had reigned twenty and four years, behold, the kingdom was taken away

from him. And he served many years in captivity, yea, even all the remainder of his

days.

31 And he begat Heth, and Heth lived in captivity all his days. And Heth begat

Aaron, and Aaron dwelt in captivity all his days; and he begat Amnigaddah, and

Amnigaddah also dwelt in captivity all his days; and he begat Coriantum, and

Coriantum dwelt in captivity all his days; and he begat Com.

32 And it came to pass that Com drew away the half of the kingdom. And he

reigned over the half of the kingdom forty and two years; and he went to battle

against the king, Amgid, and they fought for the space of many years, during which

time Com gained power over Amgid, and obtained power over the remainder of the

kingdom.

33 And in the days of Com there began to be robbers in the land; and they adopted

the old plans, and administered oaths after the manner of the ancients, and sought

again to destroy the kingdom.

34 Now Com did fight against them much; nevertheless, he did not prevail against

them.

ether 10

441

Ether 11

1 And there came also in the days of Com many prophets, and prophesied of the

destruction of that great people except they should repent, and turn unto the Lord,

and forsake their murders and wickedness.

2 And it came to pass that the prophets were rejected by the people, and they fled

unto Com for protection, for the people sought to destroy them.

3 And they prophesied unto Com many things; and he was blessed in all the

remainder of his days.

4 And he lived to a good old age, and begat Shiblom; and Shiblom reigned in his

stead. And the brother of Shiblom rebelled against him, and there began to be an

exceedingly great war in all the land.

5 And it came to pass that the brother of Shiblom caused that all the prophets who

prophesied of the destruction of the people should be put to death;

6 And there was great calamity in all the land, for they had testified that a great

curse should come upon the land, and also upon the people, and that there should

be a great destruction among them, such an one as never had been upon the face of

the earth, and their bones should become as heaps of earth upon the face of the land

except they should repent of their wickedness.

7 And they hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord, because of their wicked

combinations; wherefore, there began to be wars and contentions in all the land,

and also many famines and pestilences, insomuch that there was a great destruction,

such an one as never had been known upon the face of the earth; and all this came

to pass in the days of Shiblom.

8 And the people began to repent of their iniquity; and inasmuch as they did the

Lord did have mercy on them.

9 And it came to pass that Shiblom was slain, and Seth was brought into captivity,

and did dwell in captivity all his days.

10 And it came to pass that Ahah, his son, did obtain the kingdom; and he did reign

over the people all his days. And he did do all manner of iniquity in his days, by

which he did cause the shedding of much blood; and few were his days. 11 And Ethem, being a descendant of Ahah, did obtain the kingdom; and he also

did do that which was wicked in his days.

12 And it came to pass that in the days of Ethem there came many prophets, and

prophesied again unto the people; yea, they did prophesy that the Lord would

utterly destroy them from off the face of the earth except they repented of their

iniquities.

13 And it came to pass that the people hardened their hearts, and would not hearken

unto their words; and the prophets mourned and withdrew from among the people. 14 And it came to pass that Ethem did execute judgment in wickedness all his days;

and he begat Moron. And it came to pass that Moron did reign in his stead; and

Moron did that which was wicked before the Lord.

15 And it came to pass that there arose a rebellion among the people, because of that

secret combination which was built up to get power and gain; and there arose a

mighty man among them in iniquity, and gave battle unto Moron, in which he did

overthrow the half of the kingdom; and he did maintain the half of the kingdom for

many years.

16 And it came to pass that Moron did overthrow him, and did obtain the kingdom

442

ether 11

again.

17 And it came to pass that there arose another mighty man; and he was a

descendant of the brother of Jared.

18 And it came to pass that he did overthrow Moron and obtain the kingdom;

wherefore, Moron dwelt in captivity all the remainder of his days; and he begat

Coriantor.

19 And it came to pass that Coriantor dwelt in captivity all his days.

20 And in the days of Coriantor there also came many prophets, and prophesied of

great and marvelous things, and cried repentance unto the people, and except they

should repent the Lord God would execute judgment against them to their utter

destruction;

21 And that the Lord God would send or bring forth another people to possess the

land, by his power, after the manner by which he brought their fathers. 22 And they did reject all the words of the prophets, because of their secret society

and wicked abominations.

23 And it came to pass that Coriantor begat Ether, and he died, having dwelt in

captivity all his days.

Ether 12

1 And it came to pass that the days of Ether were in the days of Coriantumr; and

Coriantumr was king over all the land.

2 And Ether was a prophet of the Lord; wherefore Ether came forth in the days of

Coriantumr, and began to prophesy unto the people, for he could not be restrained

because of the Spirit of the Lord which was in him.

3 For he did cry from the morning, even until the going down of the sun,

exhorting the people to believe in God unto repentance lest they should be

destroyed, saying unto them that by faith all things are fulfilled—

4 Wherefore, whoso believeth in God might with surety hope for a better world,

yea, even a place at the right hand of God, which hope cometh of faith, maketh an

anchor to the souls of men, which would make them sure and steadfast, always

abounding in good works, being led to glorify God.

5 And it came to pass that Ether did prophesy great and marvelous things unto the

people, which they did not believe, because they saw them not.

6 And now, I, Moroni, would speak somewhat concerning these things; I would

show unto the world that faith is things which are hoped for and not seen;

wherefore, dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the

trial of your faith.

7 For it was by faith that Christ showed himself unto our fathers, after he had risen

from the dead; and he showed not himself unto them until after they had faith in

him; wherefore, it must needs be that some had faith in him, for he showed himself

not unto the world.

8 But because of the faith of men he has shown himself unto the world, and

glorified the name of the Father, and prepared a way that thereby others might be

partakers of the heavenly gift, that they might hope for those things which they have

not seen.

9 Wherefore, ye may also have hope, and be partakers of the gift, if ye will but have

ether 12

443

faith.

10 Behold it was by faith that they of old were called after the holy order of God. 11 Wherefore, by faith was the law of Moses given. But in the gift of his Son hath

God prepared a more excellent way; and it is by faith that it hath been fulfilled. 12 For if there be no faith among the children of men God can do no miracle

among them; wherefore, he showed not himself until after their faith. 13 Behold, it was the faith of Alma and Amulek that caused the prison to tumble to

the earth.

14 Behold, it was the faith of Nephi and Lehi that wrought the change upon the

Lamanites, that they were baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost. 15 Behold, it was the faith of Ammon and his brethren which wrought so great a

miracle among the Lamanites.

16 Yea, and even all they who wrought miracles wrought them by faith, even those

who were before Christ and also those who were after.

17 And it was by faith that the three disciples obtained a promise that they should

not taste of death; and they obtained not the promise until after their faith. 18 And neither at any time hath any wrought miracles until after their faith;

wherefore they first believed in the Son of God.

19 And there were many whose faith was so exceedingly strong, even before Christ

came, who could not be kept from within the veil, but truly saw with their eyes the

things which they had beheld with an eye of faith, and they were glad. 20 And behold, we have seen in this record that one of these was the brother of

Jared; for so great was his faith in God, that when God put forth his finger he could

not hide it from the sight of the brother of Jared, because of his word which he had

spoken unto him, which word he had obtained by faith.

21 And after the brother of Jared had beheld the finger of the Lord, because of the

promise which the brother of Jared had obtained by faith, the Lord could not

withhold anything from his sight; wherefore he showed him all things, for he could

no longer be kept without the veil.

22 And it is by faith that my fathers have obtained the promise that these things

should come unto their brethren through the Gentiles; therefore the Lord hath

commanded me, yea, even Jesus Christ.

23 And I said unto him: Lord, the Gentiles will mock at these things, because of our

weakness in writing; for Lord thou hast made us mighty in word by faith, but thou

hast not made us mighty in writing; for thou hast made all this people that they

could speak much, because of the Holy Ghost which thou hast given them; 24 And thou hast made us that we could write but little, because of the

awkwardness of our hands. Behold, thou hast not made us mighty in writing like

unto the brother of Jared, for thou madest him that the things which he wrote were

mighty even as thou art, unto the overpowering of man to read them. 25 Thou hast also made our words powerful and great, even that we cannot write

them; wherefore, when we write we behold our weakness, and stumble because of

the placing of our words; and I fear lest the Gentiles shall mock at our words. 26 And when I had said this, the Lord spake unto me, saying: Fools mock, but they

shall mourn; and my grace is sufficient for the meek, that they shall take no

advantage of your weakness;

27 And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men

444

ether 12

weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that

humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have

faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them. 28 Behold, I will show unto the Gentiles their weakness, and I will show unto them

that faith, hope and charity bringeth unto me—the fountain of all righteousness. 29 And I, Moroni, having heard these words, was comforted, and said: O Lord, thy

righteous will be done, for I know that thou workest unto the children of men

according to their faith;

30 For the brother of Jared said unto the mountain Zerin, Remove—and it was

removed. And if he had not had faith it would not have moved; wherefore thou

workest after men have faith.

31 For thus didst thou manifest thyself unto thy disciples; for after they had faith,

and did speak in thy name, thou didst show thyself unto them in great power. 32 And I also remember that thou hast said that thou hast prepared a house for

man, yea, even among the mansions of thy Father, in which man might have a more

excellent hope; wherefore man must hope, or he cannot receive an inheritance in

the place which thou hast prepared.

33 And again, I remember that thou hast said that thou hast loved the world, even

unto the laying down of thy life for the world, that thou mightest take it again to

prepare a place for the children of men.

34 And now I know that this love which thou hast had for the children of men is

charity; wherefore, except men shall have charity they cannot inherit that place

which thou hast prepared in the mansions of thy Father.

35 Wherefore, I know by this thing which thou hast said, that if the Gentiles have

not charity, because of our weakness, that thou wilt prove them, and take away their

talent, yea, even that which they have received, and give unto them who shall have

more abundantly.

36 And it came to pass that I prayed unto the Lord that he would give unto the

Gentiles grace, that they might have charity.

37 And it came to pass that the Lord said unto me: If they have not charity it

mattereth not unto thee, thou hast been faithful; wherefore, thy garments shall be

made clean. And because thou hast seen thy weakness thou shalt be made strong,

even unto the sitting down in the place which I have prepared in the mansions of my

Father.

38 And now I, Moroni, bid farewell unto the Gentiles, yea, and also unto my

brethren whom I love, until we shall meet before the judgment-seat of Christ, where

all men shall know that my garments are not spotted with your blood. 39 And then shall ye know that I have seen Jesus, and that he hath talked with me

face to face, and that he told me in plain humility, even as a man telleth another in

mine own language, concerning these things;

40 And only a few have I written, because of my weakness in writing. 41 And now, I would commend you to seek this Jesus of whom the prophets and

apostles have written, that the grace of God the Father, and also the Lord Jesus

Christ, and the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of them, may be and abide in you

forever. Amen.

ether 12

445

Ether 13

1 And now I, Moroni, proceed to finish my record concerning the destruction of the

people of whom I have been writing.

2 For behold, they rejected all the words of Ether; for he truly told them of all

things, from the beginning of man; and that after the waters had receded from off

the face of this land it became a choice land above all other lands, a chosen land of

the Lord; wherefore the Lord would have that all men should serve him who dwell

upon the face thereof;

3 And that it was the place of the New Jerusalem, which should come down out of

heaven, and the holy sanctuary of the Lord.

4 Behold, Ether saw the days of Christ, and he spake concerning a New Jerusalem

upon this land.

5 And he spake also concerning the house of Israel, and the Jerusalem from whence

Lehi should come—after it should be destroyed it should be built up again, a holy

city unto the Lord; wherefore, it could not be a new Jerusalem for it had been in a

time of old; but it should be built up again, and become a holy city of the Lord; and

it should be built unto the house of Israel—

6 And that a New Jerusalem should be built up upon this land, unto the remnant

of the seed of Joseph, for which things there has been a type.

7 For as Joseph brought his father down into the land of Egypt, even so he died

there; wherefore, the Lord brought a remnant of the seed of Joseph out of the land

of Jerusalem, that he might be merciful unto the seed of Joseph that they should

perish not, even as he was merciful unto the father of Joseph that he should perish

not.

8 Wherefore, the remnant of the house of Joseph shall be built upon this land; and

it shall be a land of their inheritance; and they shall build up a holy city unto the

Lord, like unto the Jerusalem of old; and they shall no more be confounded, until

the end come when the earth shall pass away.

9 And there shall be a new heaven and a new earth; and they shall be like unto the

old save the old have passed away, and all things have become new.

10 And then cometh the New Jerusalem; and blessed are they who dwell therein, for

it is they whose garments are white through the blood of the Lamb; and they are

they who are numbered among the remnant of the seed of Joseph, who were of the

house of Israel.

11 And then also cometh the Jerusalem of old; and the inhabitants thereof, blessed

are they, for they have been washed in the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who

were scattered and gathered in from the four quarters of the earth, and from the

north countries, and are partakers of the fulfilling of the covenant which God made

with their father, Abraham.

12 And when these things come, bringeth to pass the scripture which saith, there

are they who were first, who shall be last; and there are they who were last, who shall

be first.

13 And I was about to write more, but I am forbidden; but great and marvelous

were the prophecies of Ether; but they esteemed him as naught, and cast him out;

and he hid himself in the cavity of a rock by day, and by night he went forth viewing

the things which should come upon the people.

14 And as he dwelt in the cavity of a rock he made the remainder of this record,

446

ether 13

viewing the destructions which came upon the people, by night.

15 And it came to pass that in that same year in which he was cast out from among

the people there began to be a great war among the people, for there were many who

rose up, who were mighty men, and sought to destroy Coriantumr by their secret

plans of wickedness, of which hath been spoken.

16 And now Coriantumr, having studied, himself, in all the arts of war and all the

cunning of the world, wherefore he gave battle unto them who sought to destroy

him.

17 But he repented not, neither his fair sons nor daughters; neither the fair sons and

daughters of Cohor; neither the fair sons and daughters of Corihor; and in fine,

there were none of the fair sons and daughters upon the face of the whole earth who

repented of their sins.

18 Wherefore, it came to pass that in the first year that Ether dwelt in the cavity of a

rock, there were many people who were slain by the sword of those secret

combinations, fighting against Coriantumr that they might obtain the kingdom. 19 And it came to pass that the sons of Coriantumr fought much and bled much. 20 And in the second year the word of the Lord came to Ether, that he should go

and prophesy unto Coriantumr that, if he would repent, and all his household, the

Lord would give unto him his kingdom and spare the people—

21 Otherwise they should be destroyed, and all his household save it were himself.

And he should only live to see the fulfilling of the prophecies which had been

spoken concerning another people receiving the land for their inheritance; and

Coriantumr should receive a burial by them; and every soul should be destroyed

save it were Coriantumr.

22 And it came to pass that Coriantumr repented not, neither his household,

neither the people; and the wars ceased not; and they sought to kill Ether, but he

fled from before them and hid again in the cavity of the rock.

23 And it came to pass that there arose up Shared, and he also gave battle unto

Coriantumr; and he did beat him, insomuch that in the third year he did bring him

into captivity.

24 And the sons of Coriantumr, in the fourth year, did beat Shared, and did obtain

the kingdom again unto their father.

25 Now there began to be a war upon all the face of the land, every man with his

band fighting for that which he desired.

26 And there were robbers, and in fine, all manner of wickedness upon all the face

of the land.

27 And it came to pass that Coriantumr was exceedingly angry with Shared, and he

went against him with his armies to battle; and they did meet in great anger, and

they did meet in the valley of Gilgal; and the battle became exceedingly sore. 28 And it came to pass that Shared fought against him for the space of three days.

And it came to pass that Coriantumr beat him, and did pursue him until he came to

the plains of Heshlon.

29 And it came to pass that Shared gave him battle again upon the plains; and

behold, he did beat Coriantumr, and drove him back again to the valley of Gilgal. 30 And Coriantumr gave Shared battle again in the valley of Gilgal, in which he

beat Shared and slew him.

31 And Shared wounded Coriantumr in his thigh, that he did not go to battle again

ether 13

447

for the space of two years, in which time all the people upon the face of the land

were shedding blood, and there was none to restrain them.

Ether 14

1 And now there began to be a great curse upon all the land because of the iniquity of

the people, in which, if a man should lay his tool or his sword upon his shelf, or

upon the place whither he would keep it, behold, upon the morrow, he could not

find it, so great was the curse upon the land.

2 Wherefore every man did cleave unto that which was his own, with his hands,

and would not borrow neither would he lend; and every man kept the hilt of his

sword in his right hand, in the defence of his property and his own life and of his

wives and children.

3 And now, after the space of two years, and after the death of Shared, behold,

there arose the brother of Shared and he gave battle unto Coriantumr, in which

Coriantumr did beat him and did pursue him to the wilderness of Akish. 4 And it came to pass that the brother of Shared did give battle unto him in the

wilderness of Akish; and the battle became exceedingly sore, and many thousands

fell by the sword.

5 And it came to pass that Coriantumr did lay siege to the wilderness; and the

brother of Shared did march forth out of the wilderness by night, and slew a part of

the army of Coriantumr, as they were drunken.

6 And he came forth to the land of Moron, and placed himself upon the throne of

Coriantumr.

7 And it came to pass that Coriantumr dwelt with his army in the wilderness for

the space of two years, in which he did receive great strength to his army. 8 Now the brother of Shared, whose name was Gilead, also received great strength

to his army, because of secret combinations.

9 And it came to pass that his high priest murdered him as he sat upon his throne. 10 And it came to pass that one of the secret combinations murdered him in a secret

pass, and obtained unto himself the kingdom; and his name was Lib; and Lib was a

man of great stature, more than any other man among all the people. 11 And it came to pass that in the first year of Lib, Coriantumr came up unto the

land of Moron, and gave battle unto Lib.

12 And it came to pass that he fought with Lib, in which Lib did smite upon his

arm that he was wounded; nevertheless, the army of Coriantumr did press forward

upon Lib, that he fled to the borders upon the seashore.

13 And it came to pass that Coriantumr pursued him; and Lib gave battle unto him

upon the seashore.

14 And it came to pass that Lib did smite the army of Coriantumr, that they fled

again to the wilderness of Akish.

15 And it came to pass that Lib did pursue him until he came to the plains of Agosh.

And Coriantumr had taken all the people with him as he fled before Lib in that

quarter of the land whither he fled.

16 And when he had come to the plains of Agosh he gave battle unto Lib, and he

smote upon him until he died; nevertheless, the brother of Lib did come against

Coriantumr in the stead thereof, and the battle became exceedingly sore, in the

448

ether 14

which Coriantumr fled again before the army of the brother of Lib.

17 Now the name of the brother of Lib was called Shiz. And it came to pass that

Shiz pursued after Coriantumr, and he did overthrow many cities, and he did slay

both women and children, and he did burn the cities.

18 And there went a fear of Shiz throughout all the land; yea, a cry went forth

throughout the land—Who can stand before the army of Shiz? Behold, he

sweepeth the earth before him!

19 And it came to pass that the people began to flock together in armies,

throughout all the face of the land.

20 And they were divided; and a part of them fled to the army of Shiz, and a part of

them fled to the army of Coriantumr.

21 And so great and lasting had been the war, and so long had been the scene of

bloodshed and carnage, that the whole face of the land was covered with the bodies

of the dead.

22 And so swift and speedy was the war that there was none left to bury the dead,

but they did march forth from the shedding of blood to the shedding of blood,

leaving the bodies of both men, women, and children strewed upon the face of the

land, to become a prey to the worms of the flesh.

23 And the scent thereof went forth upon the face of the land, even upon all the

face of the land; wherefore the people became troubled by day and by night, because

of the scent thereof.

24 Nevertheless, Shiz did not cease to pursue Coriantumr; for he had sworn to

avenge himself upon Coriantumr of the blood of his brother, who had been slain,

and the word of the Lord which came to Ether that Coriantumr should not fall by

the sword.

25 And thus we see that the Lord did visit them in the fulness of his wrath, and their

wickedness and abominations had prepared a way for their everlasting destruction. 26 And it came to pass that Shiz did pursue Coriantumr eastward, even to the

borders by the seashore, and there he gave battle unto Shiz for the space of three

days.

27 And so terrible was the destruction among the armies of Shiz that the people

began to be frightened, and began to flee before the armies of Coriantumr; and they

fled to the land of Corihor, and swept off the inhabitants before them, all them that

would not join them.

28 And they pitched their tents in the valley of Corihor; and Coriantumr pitched

his tents in the valley of Shurr. Now the valley of Shurr was near the hill Comnor;

wherefore, Coriantumr did gather his armies together upon the hill Comnor, and

did sound a trumpet unto the armies of Shiz to invite them forth to battle. 29 And it came to pass that they came forth, but were driven again; and they came

the second time, and they were driven again the second time. And it came to pass

that they came again the third time, and the battle became exceedingly sore. 30 And it came to pass that Shiz smote upon Coriantumr that he gave him many

deep wounds; and Coriantumr, having lost his blood, fainted, and was carried away

as though he were dead.

31 Now the loss of men, women and children on both sides was so great that Shiz

commanded his people that they should not pursue the armies of Coriantumr;

wherefore, they returned to their camp.

ether 14

449

Ether 15

1 And it came to pass when Coriantumr had recovered of his wounds, he began to

remember the words which Ether had spoken unto him.

2 He saw that there had been slain by the sword already nearly two millions of his

people, and he began to sorrow in his heart; yea, there had been slain two millions

of mighty men, and also their wives and their children.

3 He began to repent of the evil which he had done; he began to remember the

words which had been spoken by the mouth of all the prophets, and he saw them

that they were fulfilled thus far, every whit; and his soul mourned and refused to be

comforted.

4 And it came to pass that he wrote an epistle unto Shiz, desiring him that he

would spare the people, and he would give up the kingdom for the sake of the lives

of the people.

5 And it came to pass that when Shiz had received his epistle he wrote an epistle

unto Coriantumr, that if he would give himself up, that he might slay him with his

own sword, that he would spare the lives of the people.

6 And it came to pass that the people repented not of their iniquity; and the

people of Coriantumr were stirred up to anger against the people of Shiz; and the

people of Shiz were stirred up to anger against the people of Coriantumr;

wherefore, the people of Shiz did give battle unto the people of Coriantumr. 7 And when Coriantumr saw that he was about to fall he fled again before the

people of Shiz.

8 And it came to pass that he came to the waters of Ripliancum, which, by

interpretation, is large, or to exceed all; wherefore, when they came to these waters

they pitched their tents; and Shiz also pitched his tents near unto them; and

therefore on the morrow they did come to battle.

9 And it came to pass that they fought an exceedingly sore battle, in which

Coriantumr was wounded again, and he fainted with the loss of blood. 10 And it came to pass that the armies of Coriantumr did press upon the armies of

Shiz that they beat them, that they caused them to flee before them; and they did

flee southward, and did pitch their tents in a place which was called Ogath. 11 And it came to pass that the army of Coriantumr did pitch their tents by the hill

Ramah; and it was that same hill where my father Mormon did hide up the records

unto the Lord, which were sacred.

12 And it came to pass that they did gather together all the people upon all the face

of the land, who had not been slain, save it was Ether.

13 And it came to pass that Ether did behold all the doings of the people; and he

beheld that the people who were for Coriantumr were gathered together to the

army of Coriantumr; and the people who were for Shiz were gathered together to

the army of Shiz.

14 Wherefore, they were for the space of four years gathering together the people,

that they might get all who were upon the face of the land, and that they might

receive all the strength which it was possible that they could receive. 15 And it came to pass that when they were all gathered together, every one to the

army which he would, with their wives and their children—both men, women and

children being armed with weapons of war, having shields, and breastplates, and

head-plates, and being clothed after the manner of war—they did march forth one

450

ether 15

against another to battle; and they fought all that day, and conquered not. 16 And it came to pass that when it was night they were weary, and retired to their

camps; and after they had retired to their camps they took up a howling and a

lamentation for the loss of the slain of their people; and so great were their cries,

their howlings and lamentations, that they did rend the air exceedingly. 17 And it came to pass that on the morrow they did go again to battle, and great and

terrible was that day; nevertheless, they conquered not, and when the night came

again they did rend the air with their cries, and their howlings, and their mournings,

for the loss of the slain of their people.

18 And it came to pass that Coriantumr wrote again an epistle unto Shiz, desiring

that he would not come again to battle, but that he would take the kingdom, and

spare the lives of the people.

19 But behold, the Spirit of the Lord had ceased striving with them, and Satan had

full power over the hearts of the people; for they were given up unto the hardness of

their hearts, and the blindness of their minds that they might be destroyed;

wherefore they went again to battle.

20 And it came to pass that they fought all that day, and when the night came they

slept upon their swords.

21 And on the morrow they fought even until the night came.

22 And when the night came they were drunken with anger, even as a man who is

drunken with wine; and they slept again upon their swords.

23 And on the morrow they fought again; and when the night came they had all

fallen by the sword save it were fifty and two of the people of Coriantumr, and sixty

and nine of the people of Shiz.

24 And it came to pass that they slept upon their swords that night, and on the

morrow they fought again, and they contended in their might with their swords

and with their shields, all that day.

25 And when the night came there were thirty and two of the people of Shiz, and

twenty and seven of the people of Coriantumr.

26 And it came to pass that they ate and slept, and prepared for death on the

morrow. And they were large and mighty men as to the strength of men. 27 And it came to pass that they fought for the space of three hours, and they

fainted with the loss of blood.

28 And it came to pass that when the men of Coriantumr had received sufficient

strength that they could walk, they were about to flee for their lives; but behold,

Shiz arose, and also his men, and he swore in his wrath that he would slay

Coriantumr or he would perish by the sword.

29 Wherefore, he did pursue them, and on the morrow he did overtake them; and

they fought again with the sword. And it came to pass that when they had all fallen

by the sword, save it were Coriantumr and Shiz, behold Shiz had fainted with the

loss of blood.

30 And it came to pass that when Coriantumr had leaned upon his sword, that he

rested a little, he smote off the head of Shiz.

31 And it came to pass that after he had smitten off the head of Shiz, that Shiz raised

up on his hands and fell; and after that he had struggled for breath, he died. 32 And it came to pass that Coriantumr fell to the earth, and became as if he had no

life.

ether 15

451

33 And the Lord spake unto Ether, and said unto him: Go forth. And he went

forth, and beheld that the words of the Lord had all been fulfilled; and he finished

his record; (and the hundredth part I have not written) and he hid them in a

manner that the people of Limhi did find them.

34 Now the last words which are written by Ether are these: Whether the Lord will

that I be translated, or that I suffer the will of the Lord in the flesh, it mattereth not,

if it so be that I am saved in the kingdom of God. Amen.

452

ether 15

The Book of Moroni

Moroni 1

1 Now I, Moroni, after having made an end of abridging the account of the people of

Jared, I had supposed not to have written more, but I have not as yet perished; and I

make not myself known to the Lamanites lest they should destroy me. 2 For behold, their wars are exceedingly fierce among themselves; and because of

their hatred they put to death every Nephite that will not deny the Christ. 3 And I, Moroni, will not deny the Christ; wherefore, I wander whithersoever I

can for the safety of mine own life.

4 Wherefore, I write a few more things, contrary to that which I had supposed; for

I had supposed not to have written any more; but I write a few more things, that

perhaps they may be of worth unto my brethren, the Lamanites, in some future day,

according to the will of the Lord.

Moroni 2

1 The words of Christ, which he spake unto his disciples, the twelve whom he had

chosen, as he laid his hands upon them—

2 And he called them by name, saying: Ye shall call on the Father in my name, in

mighty prayer; and after ye have done this ye shall have power that to him upon

whom ye shall lay your hands, ye shall give the Holy Ghost; and in my name shall ye

give it, for thus do mine apostles.

3 Now Christ spake these words unto them at the time of his first appearing; and

the multitude heard it not, but the disciples heard it; and on as many as they laid

their hands, fell the Holy Ghost.

Moroni 3

1 The manner which the disciples, who were called the elders of the church, ordained

priests and teachers—

2 After they had prayed unto the Father in the name of Christ, they laid their

hands upon them, and said:

3 In the name of Jesus Christ I ordain you to be a priest (or if he be a teacher, I

ordain you to be a teacher) to preach repentance and remission of sins through Jesus

Christ, by the endurance of faith on his name to the end. Amen.

4 And after this manner did they ordain priests and teachers, according to the gifts

and callings of God unto men; and they ordained them by the power of the Holy

Ghost, which was in them.

Moroni 4

1 The manner of their elders and priests administering the flesh and blood of Christ

unto the church; and they administered it according to the commandments of

Christ; wherefore we know the manner to be true; and the elder or priest did

minister it—

moroni 1

453

2 And they did kneel down with the church, and pray to the Father in the name of

Christ, saying:

3 O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to

bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it; that they may

eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God, the

Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and

always remember him, and keep his commandments which he hath given them, that

they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen.

Moroni 5

1 The manner of administering the wine—Behold, they took the cup, and said: 2 O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee, in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to

bless and sanctify this wine to the souls of all those who drink of it, that they may do

it in remembrance of the blood of thy Son, which was shed for them; that they may

witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they do always remember him,

that they may have his Spirit to be with them. Amen.

Moroni 6

1 And now I speak concerning baptism. Behold, elders, priests, and teachers were

baptized; and they were not baptized save they brought forth fruit meet that they

were worthy of it.

2 Neither did they receive any unto baptism save they came forth with a broken

heart and a contrite spirit, and witnessed unto the church that they truly repented

of all their sins.

3 And none were received unto baptism save they took upon them the name of

Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end.

4 And after they had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and

cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of

the church of Christ; and their names were taken, that they might be remembered

and nourished by the good word of God, to keep them in the right way, to keep

them continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who

was the author and the finisher of their faith.

5 And the church did meet together oft, to fast and to pray, and to speak one with

another concerning the welfare of their souls.

6 And they did meet together oft to partake of bread and wine, in remembrance of

the Lord Jesus.

7 And they were strict to observe that there should be no iniquity among them;

and whoso was found to commit iniquity, and three witnesses of the church did

condemn them before the elders, and if they repented not, and confessed not, their

names were blotted out, and they were not numbered among the people of Christ. 8 But as oft as they repented and sought forgiveness, with real intent, they were

forgiven.

9 And their meetings were conducted by the church after the manner of the

workings of the Spirit, and by the power of the Holy Ghost; for as the power of the

454

moroni 6

Holy Ghost led them whether to preach, or to exhort, or to pray, or to supplicate, or

to sing, even so it was done.

Moroni 7

1 And now I, Moroni, write a few of the words of my father Mormon, which he spake

concerning faith, hope, and charity; for after this manner did he speak unto the

people, as he taught them in the synagogue which they had built for the place of

worship.

2 And now I, Mormon, speak unto you, my beloved brethren; and it is by the grace

of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and his holy will, because of the gift of

his calling unto me, that I am permitted to speak unto you at this time. 3 Wherefore, I would speak unto you that are of the church, that are the peaceable

followers of Christ, and that have obtained a sufficient hope by which ye can enter

into the rest of the Lord, from this time henceforth until ye shall rest with him in

heaven.

4 And now my brethren, I judge these things of you because of your peaceable

walk with the children of men.

5 For I remember the word of God which saith by their works ye shall know them;

for if their works be good, then they are good also.

6 For behold, God hath said a man being evil cannot do that which is good; for if

he offereth a gift, or prayeth unto God, except he shall do it with real intent it

profiteth him nothing.

7 For behold, it is not counted unto him for righteousness.

8 For behold, if a man being evil giveth a gift, he doeth it grudgingly; wherefore it

is counted unto him the same as if he had retained the gift; wherefore he is counted

evil before God.

9 And likewise also is it counted evil unto a man, if he shall pray and not with real

intent of heart; yea, and it profiteth him nothing, for God receiveth none such. 10 Wherefore, a man being evil cannot do that which is good; neither will he give a

good gift.

11 For behold, a bitter fountain cannot bring forth good water; neither can a good

fountain bring forth bitter water; wherefore, a man being a servant of the devil

cannot follow Christ; and if he follow Christ he cannot be a servant of the devil. 12 Wherefore, all things which are good cometh of God; and that which is evil

cometh of the devil; for the devil is an enemy unto God, and fighteth against him

continually, and inviteth and enticeth to sin, and to do that which is evil continually. 13 But behold, that which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good continually;

wherefore, every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good, and to love God,

and to serve him, is inspired of God.

14 Wherefore, take heed, my beloved brethren, that ye do not judge that which is

evil to be of God, or that which is good and of God to be of the devil. 15 For behold, my brethren, it is given unto you to judge, that ye may know good

from evil; and the way to judge is as plain, that ye may know with a perfect

knowledge, as the daylight is from the dark night.

16 For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good

from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which

moroni 7

455

inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power

and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God. 17 But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, and believe not in Christ, and

deny him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of

the devil; for after this manner doth the devil work, for he persuadeth no man to do

good, no, not one; neither do his angels; neither do they who subject themselves

unto him.

18 And now, my brethren, seeing that ye know the light by which ye may judge,

which light is the light of Christ, see that ye do not judge wrongfully; for with that

same judgment which ye judge ye shall also be judged.

19 Wherefore, I beseech of you, brethren, that ye should search diligently in the

light of Christ that ye may know good from evil; and if ye will lay hold upon every

good thing, and condemn it not, ye certainly will be a child of Christ. 20 And now, my brethren, how is it possible that ye can lay hold upon every good

thing?

21 And now I come to that faith, of which I said I would speak; and I will tell you

the way whereby ye may lay hold on every good thing.

22 For behold, God knowing all things, being from everlasting to everlasting,

behold, he sent angels to minister unto the children of men, to make manifest

concerning the coming of Christ; and in Christ there should come every good thing. 23 And God also declared unto prophets, by his own mouth, that Christ should

come.

24 And behold, there were divers ways that he did manifest things unto the children

of men, which were good; and all things which are good cometh of Christ;

otherwise men were fallen, and there could no good thing come unto them. 25 Wherefore, by the ministering of angels, and by every word which proceeded

forth out of the mouth of God, men began to exercise faith in Christ; and thus by

faith, they did lay hold upon every good thing; and thus it was until the coming of

Christ.

26 And after that he came men also were saved by faith in his name; and by faith,

they become the sons of God. And as surely as Christ liveth he spake these words

unto our fathers, saying: Whatsoever thing ye shall ask the Father in my name,

which is good, in faith believing that ye shall receive, behold, it shall be done unto

you.

27 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, have miracles ceased because Christ hath

ascended into heaven, and hath sat down on the right hand of God, to claim of the

Father his rights of mercy which he hath upon the children of men?

28 For he hath answered the ends of the law, and he claimeth all those who have

faith in him; and they who have faith in him will cleave unto every good thing;

wherefore he advocateth the cause of the children of men; and he dwelleth eternally

in the heavens.

29 And because he hath done this, my beloved brethren, have miracles ceased?

Behold I say unto you, Nay; neither have angels ceased to minister unto the children

of men.

30 For behold, they are subject unto him, to minister according to the word of his

command, showing themselves unto them of strong faith and a firm mind in every

form of godliness.

456

moroni 7

31 And the office of their ministry is to call men unto repentance, and to fulfil and

to do the work of the covenants of the Father, which he hath made unto the children

of men, to prepare the way among the children of men, by declaring the word of

Christ unto the chosen vessels of the Lord, that they may bear testimony of him. 32 And by so doing, the Lord God prepareth the way that the residue of men may

have faith in Christ, that the Holy Ghost may have place in their hearts, according

to the power thereof; and after this manner bringeth to pass the Father, the

covenants which he hath made unto the children of men.

33 And Christ hath said: If ye will have faith in me ye shall have power to do

whatsoever thing is expedient in me.

34 And he hath said: Repent all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me, and be

baptized in my name, and have faith in me, that ye may be saved.

35 And now, my beloved brethren, if this be the case that these things are true which

I have spoken unto you, and God will show unto you, with power and great glory at

the last day, that they are true, and if they are true has the day of miracles ceased? 36 Or have angels ceased to appear unto the children of men? Or has he withheld

the power of the Holy Ghost from them? Or will he, so long as time shall last, or the

earth shall stand, or there shall be one man upon the face thereof to be saved? 37 Behold I say unto you, Nay; for it is by faith that miracles are wrought; and it is

by faith that angels appear and minister unto men; wherefore, if these things have

ceased wo be unto the children of men, for it is because of unbelief, and all is vain. 38 For no man can be saved, according to the words of Christ, save they shall have

faith in his name; wherefore, if these things have ceased, then has faith ceased also;

and awful is the state of man, for they are as though there had been no redemption

made.

39 But behold, my beloved brethren, I judge better things of you, for I judge that ye

have faith in Christ because of your meekness; for if ye have not faith in him then ye

are not fit to be numbered among the people of his church.

40 And again, my beloved brethren, I would speak unto you concerning hope. How

is it that ye can attain unto faith, save ye shall have hope?

41 And what is it that ye shall hope for? Behold I say unto you that ye shall have

hope through the atonement of Christ and the power of his resurrection, to be

raised unto life eternal, and this because of your faith in him according to the

promise.

42 Wherefore, if a man have faith he must needs have hope; for without faith there

cannot be any hope.

43 And again, behold I say unto you that he cannot have faith and hope, save he

shall be meek, and lowly of heart.

44 If so, his faith and hope is vain, for none is acceptable before God, save the meek

and lowly in heart; and if a man be meek and lowly in heart, and confesses by the

power of the Holy Ghost that Jesus is the Christ, he must needs have charity; for if

he have not charity he is nothing; wherefore he must needs have charity. 45 And charity suffereth long, and is kind, and envieth not, and is not puffed up,

seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil, and rejoiceth not in

iniquity but rejoiceth in the truth, beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all

things, endureth all things.

46 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, if ye have not charity, ye are nothing, for

moroni 7

457

charity never faileth. Wherefore, cleave unto charity, which is the greatest of all, for

all things must fail—

47 But charity is the pure love of Christ, and it endureth forever; and whoso is

found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with him.

48 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, pray unto the Father with all the energy of

heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are

true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons of God; that

when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is; that we may

have this hope; that we may be purified even as he is pure. Amen.

Moroni 8

1 An epistle of my father Mormon, written to me, Moroni; and it was written unto me

soon after my calling to the ministry. And on this wise did he write unto me, saying: 2 My beloved son, Moroni, I rejoice exceedingly that your Lord Jesus Christ hath

been mindful of you, and hath called you to his ministry, and to his holy work. 3 I am mindful of you always in my prayers, continually praying unto God the

Father in the name of his Holy Child, Jesus, that he, through his infinite goodness

and grace, will keep you through the endurance of faith on his name to the end. 4 And now, my son, I speak unto you concerning that which grieveth me

exceedingly; for it grieveth me that there should disputations rise among you. 5 For, if I have learned the truth, there have been disputations among you

concerning the baptism of your little children.

6 And now, my son, I desire that ye should labor diligently, that this gross error

should be removed from among you; for, for this intent I have written this epistle. 7 For immediately after I had learned these things of you I inquired of the Lord

concerning the matter. And the word of the Lord came to me by the power of the

Holy Ghost, saying:

8 Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and your God. Behold,

I came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; the whole

need no physician, but they that are sick; wherefore, little children are whole, for

they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from

them in me, that it hath no power over them; and the law of circumcision is done

away in me.

9 And after this manner did the Holy Ghost manifest the word of God unto me;

wherefore, my beloved son, I know that it is solemn mockery before God, that ye

should baptize little children.

10 Behold I say unto you that this thing shall ye teach—repentance and baptism

unto those who are accountable and capable of committing sin; yea, teach parents

that they must repent and be baptized, and humble themselves as their little

children, and they shall all be saved with their little children.

11 And their little children need no repentance, neither baptism. Behold, baptism is

unto repentance to the fulfilling the commandments unto the remission of sins. 12 But little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world; if

not so, God is a partial God, and also a changeable God, and a respecter to persons;

for how many little children have died without baptism!

13 Wherefore, if little children could not be saved without baptism, these must have

458

moroni 8

gone to an endless hell.

14 Behold I say unto you, that he that supposeth that little children need baptism is

in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity; for he hath neither faith, hope,

nor charity; wherefore, should he be cut off while in the thought, he must go down

to hell.

15 For awful is the wickedness to suppose that God saveth one child because of

baptism, and the other must perish because he hath no baptism.

16 Wo be unto them that shall pervert the ways of the Lord after this manner, for

they shall perish except they repent. Behold, I speak with boldness, having authority

from God; and I fear not what man can do; for perfect love casteth out all fear. 17 And I am filled with charity, which is everlasting love; wherefore, all children are

alike unto me; wherefore, I love little children with a perfect love; and they are all

alike and partakers of salvation.

18 For I know that God is not a partial God, neither a changeable being; but he is

unchangeable from all eternity to all eternity.

19 Little children cannot repent; wherefore, it is awful wickedness to deny the pure

mercies of God unto them, for they are all alive in him because of his mercy. 20 And he that saith that little children need baptism denieth the mercies of Christ,

and setteth at naught the atonement of him and the power of his redemption. 21 Wo unto such, for they are in danger of death, hell, and an endless torment. I

speak it boldly; God hath commanded me. Listen unto them and give heed, or they

stand against you at the judgment-seat of Christ.

22 For behold that all little children are alive in Christ, and also all they that are

without the law. For the power of redemption cometh on all them that have no law;

wherefore, he that is not condemned, or he that is under no condemnation, cannot

repent; and unto such baptism availeth nothing—

23 But it is mockery before God, denying the mercies of Christ, and the power of

his Holy Spirit, and putting trust in dead works.

24 Behold, my son, this thing ought not to be; for repentance is unto them that are

under condemnation and under the curse of a broken law.

25 And the first fruits of repentance is baptism; and baptism cometh by faith unto

the fulfilling the commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth

remission of sins;

26 And the remission of sins bringeth meekness, and lowliness of heart; and because

of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which

Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence

unto prayer, until the end shall come, when all the saints shall dwell with God. 27 Behold, my son, I will write unto you again if I go not out soon against the

Lamanites. Behold, the pride of this nation, or the people of the Nephites, hath

proven their destruction except they should repent.

28 Pray for them, my son, that repentance may come unto them. But behold, I fear

lest the Spirit hath ceased striving with them; and in this part of the land they are

also seeking to put down all power and authority which cometh from God; and

they are denying the Holy Ghost.

29 And after rejecting so great a knowledge, my son, they must perish soon, unto the

fulfilling of the prophecies which were spoken by the prophets, as well as the words

of our Savior himself.

moroni 8

459

30 Farewell, my son, until I shall write unto you, or shall meet you again. Amen.

The second epistle of Mormon to his son Moroni.

Moroni 9

1 My beloved son, I write unto you again that ye may know that I am yet alive; but I

write somewhat of that which is grievous.

2 For behold, I have had a sore battle with the Lamanites, in which we did not

conquer; and Archeantus has fallen by the sword, and also Luram and Emron; yea,

and we have lost a great number of our choice men.

3 And now behold, my son, I fear lest the Lamanites shall destroy this people; for

they do not repent, and Satan stirreth them up continually to anger one with

another.

4 Behold, I am laboring with them continually; and when I speak the word of God

with sharpness they tremble and anger against me; and when I use no sharpness

they harden their hearts against it; wherefore, I fear lest the Spirit of the Lord hath

ceased striving with them.

5 For so exceedingly do they anger that it seemeth me that they have no fear of

death; and they have lost their love, one towards another; and they thirst after blood

and revenge continually.

6 And now, my beloved son, notwithstanding their hardness, let us labor diligently;

for if we should cease to labor, we should be brought under condemnation; for we

have a labor to perform whilst in this tabernacle of clay, that we may conquer the

enemy of all righteousness, and rest our souls in the kingdom of God. 7 And now I write somewhat concerning the sufferings of this people. For

according to the knowledge which I have received from Amoron, behold, the

Lamanites have many prisoners, which they took from the tower of Sherrizah; and

there were men, women, and children.

8 And the husbands and fathers of those women and children they have slain; and

they feed the women upon the flesh of their husbands, and the children upon the

flesh of their fathers; and no water, save a little, do they give unto them. 9 And notwithstanding this great abomination of the Lamanites, it doth not

exceed that of our people in Moriantum. For behold, many of the daughters of the

Lamanites have they taken prisoners; and after depriving them of that which was

most dear and precious above all things, which is chastity and virtue— 10 And after they had done this thing, they did murder them in a most cruel

manner, torturing their bodies even unto death; and after they have done this, they

devour their flesh like unto wild beasts, because of the hardness of their hearts; and

they do it for a token of bravery.

11 O my beloved son, how can a people like this, that are without civilization— 12 (And only a few years have passed away, and they were a civil and a delightsome

people)

13 But O my son, how can a people like this, whose delight is in so much

abomination—

14 How can we expect that God will stay his hand in judgment against us?

460

moroni 9

15 Behold, my heart cries: Wo unto this people. Come out in judgment, O God,

and hide their sins, and wickedness, and abominations from before thy face! 16 And again, my son, there are many widows and their daughters who remain in

Sherrizah; and that part of the provisions which the Lamanites did not carry away,

behold, the army of Zenephi has carried away, and left them to wander

whithersoever they can for food; and many old women do faint by the way and die. 17 And the army which is with me is weak; and the armies of the Lamanites are

betwixt Sherrizah and me; and as many as have fled to the army of Aaron have fallen

victims to their awful brutality.

18 O the depravity of my people! They are without order and without mercy.

Behold, I am but a man, and I have but the strength of a man, and I cannot any

longer enforce my commands.

19 And they have become strong in their perversion; and they are alike brutal,

sparing none, neither old nor young; and they delight in everything save that which

is good; and the suffering of our women and our children upon all the face of this

land doth exceed everything; yea, tongue cannot tell, neither can it be written. 20 And now, my son, I dwell no longer upon this horrible scene. Behold, thou

knowest the wickedness of this people; thou knowest that they are without

principle, and past feeling; and their wickedness doth exceed that of the Lamanites. 21 Behold, my son, I cannot recommend them unto God lest he should smite me. 22 But behold, my son, I recommend thee unto God, and I trust in Christ that thou

wilt be saved; and I pray unto God that he will spare thy life, to witness the return of

his people unto him, or their utter destruction; for I know that they must perish

except they repent and return unto him.

23 And if they perish it will be like unto the Jaredites, because of the wilfulness of

their hearts, seeking for blood and revenge.

24 And if it so be that they perish, we know that many of our brethren have deserted

over unto the Lamanites, and many more will also desert over unto them;

wherefore, write somewhat a few things, if thou art spared and I shall perish and not

see thee; but I trust that I may see thee soon; for I have sacred records that I would

deliver up unto thee.

25 My son, be faithful in Christ; and may not the things which I have written grieve

thee, to weigh thee down unto death; but may Christ lift thee up, and may his

sufferings and death, and the showing his body unto our fathers, and his mercy and

long-suffering, and the hope of his glory and of eternal life, rest in your mind forever. 26 And may the grace of God the Father, whose throne is high in the heavens, and

our Lord Jesus Christ, who sitteth on the right hand of his power, until all things

shall become subject unto him, be, and abide with you forever. Amen.

Moroni 10

1 Now I, Moroni, write somewhat as seemeth me good; and I write unto my brethren,

the Lamanites; and I would that they should know that more than four hundred

and twenty years have passed away since the sign was given of the coming of Christ. 2 And I seal up these records, after I have spoken a few words by way of

exhortation unto you.

3 Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall read these things, if it be wisdom

moroni 10

461

in God that ye should read them, that ye would remember how merciful the Lord

hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the

time that ye shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts.

4 And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask

God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye

shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will

manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

5 And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things. 6 And whatsoever thing is good is just and true; wherefore, nothing that is good

denieth the Christ, but acknowledgeth that he is.

7 And ye may know that he is, by the power of the Holy Ghost; wherefore I would

exhort you that ye deny not the power of God; for he worketh by power, according

to the faith of the children of men, the same today and tomorrow, and forever. 8 And again, I exhort you, my brethren, that ye deny not the gifts of God, for they

are many; and they come from the same God. And there are different ways that

these gifts are administered; but it is the same God who worketh all in all; and they

are given by the manifestations of the Spirit of God unto men, to profit them. 9 For behold, to one is given by the Spirit of God, that he may teach the word of

wisdom;

10 And to another, that he may teach the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; 11 And to another, exceedingly great faith; and to another, the gifts of healing by

the same Spirit;

12 And again, to another, that he may work mighty miracles;

13 And again, to another, that he may prophesy concerning all things; 14 And again, to another, the beholding of angels and ministering spirits; 15 And again, to another, all kinds of tongues;

16 And again, to another, the interpretation of languages and of divers kinds of

tongues.

17 And all these gifts come by the Spirit of Christ; and they come unto every man

severally, according as he will.

18 And I would exhort you, my beloved brethren, that ye remember that every good

gift cometh of Christ.

19 And I would exhort you, my beloved brethren, that ye remember that he is the

same yesterday, today, and forever, and that all these gifts of which I have spoken,

which are spiritual, never will be done away, even as long as the world shall stand,

only according to the unbelief of the children of men.

20 Wherefore, there must be faith; and if there must be faith there must also be

hope; and if there must be hope there must also be charity.

21 And except ye have charity ye can in nowise be saved in the kingdom of God;

neither can ye be saved in the kingdom of God if ye have not faith; neither can ye if

ye have no hope.

22 And if ye have no hope ye must needs be in despair; and despair cometh because

of iniquity.

23 And Christ truly said unto our fathers: If ye have faith ye can do all things which

are expedient unto me.

24 And now I speak unto all the ends of the earth—that if the day cometh that the

power and gifts of God shall be done away among you, it shall be because of unbelief.

462

moroni 10

25 And wo be unto the children of men if this be the case; for there shall be none

that doeth good among you, no not one. For if there be one among you that doeth

good, he shall work by the power and gifts of God.

26 And wo unto them who shall do these things away and die, for they die in their

sins, and they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God; and I speak it according to

the words of Christ; and I lie not.

27 And I exhort you to remember these things; for the time speedily cometh that ye

shall know that I lie not, for ye shall see me at the bar of God; and the Lord God

will say unto you: Did I not declare my words unto you, which were written by this

man, like as one crying from the dead, yea, even as one speaking out of the dust? 28 I declare these things unto the fulfilling of the prophecies. And behold, they

shall proceed forth out of the mouth of the everlasting God; and his word shall hiss

forth from generation to generation.

29 And God shall show unto you, that that which I have written is true. 30 And again I would exhort you that ye would come unto Christ, and lay hold

upon every good gift, and touch not the evil gift, nor the unclean thing. 31 And awake, and arise from the dust, O Jerusalem; yea, and put on thy beautiful

garments, O daughter of Zion; and strengthen thy stakes and enlarge thy borders

forever, that thou mayest no more be confounded, that the covenants of the Eternal

Father which he hath made unto thee, O house of Israel, may be fulfilled. 32 Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all

ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all

your might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace

ye may be perfect in Christ; and if by the grace of God ye are perfect in Christ, ye

can in nowise deny the power of God.

33 And again, if ye by the grace of God are perfect in Christ, and deny not his

power, then are ye sanctified in Christ by the grace of God, through the shedding of

the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father unto the remission of

your sins, that ye become holy, without spot.

34 And now I bid unto all, farewell. I soon go to rest in the paradise of God, until

my spirit and body shall again reunite, and I am brought forth triumphant through

the air, to meet you before the pleasing bar of the great Jehovah, the Eternal Judge of

both quick and dead. Amen.

The End

moroni 10

463
