What does it mean to have faith? Faith is believing in things that are not seen but are true (see Alma 32:21). The first principle of the gospel is to have faith in Jesus Christ. Even though we have not seen Jesus, we can have faith that He lives and loves us.

Our faith in Jesus Christ will grow as we read about Him. The New Testament teaches of when He was on the earth. We can read about Jesus healing a blind man and calming a storm. The New Testament teaches that He suffered for our sins, that He died, and that He was resurrected on the third day.

The Book of Mormon teaches that after Jesus Christ was resurrected, He visited the people in America. Many saw and touched Jesus. He administered the sacrament, healed the sick, and organized His Church.

The Pearl of Great Price gives us the account of Joseph Smith’s First Vision. Joseph Smith had faith that Heavenly Father would answer his prayer. Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ appeared to Joseph Smith.

We can read the testimony of Joseph Smith in the Doctrine and Covenants: “This is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God” (D&C 76:22–23). As we read the testimonies of those who knew Him, our faith will grow and we too will bear testimony that Jesus Christ lives today and that He knows and loves us.

Remove page F4 from the magazine, and glue it to heavy paper. Cut along the solid lines. Form the long panel into a box by folding the dotted lines and gluing the tab. Draw or glue a picture of yourself in the blank panel, and write something you will do on the blank lines. Fold the five small panels along the dotted lines so the pictures and scriptures are on the outside. Punch holes where indicated. Attach pieces of string to the top of the box. Tie the picture of yourself to the strings at the top of the box so it hangs through the center of the box. Tie the four remaining pictures to the bottom of the box. (See illustration.)

And Christ hath said: If ye will have faith in me ye shall have power to do whatsoever thing is expedient in me (Moro. 7:33).

And Noah did according unto all that the Lord commanded him (Gen. 7:5).

I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded (1 Ne. 3:7).

I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to God (JS—H 1:15).

Get on your knees and pray and stand on your feet and do His will and put your trust and faith in Him, and God will bless you (Ensign, Apr. 2002, 5).

Because of my faith in Jesus Christ, I will _______________________.

Note: If you do not wish to remove pages from the magazine, this activity may be copied, traced, or printed out from the Internet at www.lds.org. For English, click on “Gospel Library.” For other languages, click on the world map.

1.  Using the shield in the front of the CTR manuals as a pattern, draw a large shield. Cut it into seven puzzle pieces, and write on each piece one of the following scripture references: Abr. 3:27 (Christ chosen as Savior), Jacob 4:9 (Creator), John 20:31 (Son of God), 3 Ne. 27:21 (example), John 11:25 (made it possible for us to be resurrected), Alma 34:8 (atoned for our sins), D&C 110:2–8 (He lives today and guides His prophet). Teach the children the fourth article of faith and that faith in Jesus Christ is the first principle of the gospel. Divide the children into seven groups, and give each group a puzzle piece. Invite each group to decide what the scripture reference teaches about Jesus Christ. Invite one child from each group to bring the piece up and put the puzzle together. Ask, “How can our faith in Jesus Christ form a shield?” Discuss D&C 27:15–17.

2.  Put the following pictures facedown: Gospel Art Picture Kit 304 (Lehi and His People Arrive in the Promised Land), 308 (Abinadi before King Noah), 310 (Ammon Defends the Flocks of King Lamoni), 313 (Two Thousand Young Warriors), 314 (Samuel the Lamanite on the Wall), and 321 (Conversion of Alma the Younger). Have a child select a picture and play “Who Am I?” by answering questions with yes or no. The children must ask questions beginning with “Did your faith in Christ …” (For example, “Did your faith in Christ help you protect the king’s flocks?”) Play until each prophet is identified.
