Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Preface

For as many years as I can remember the question has been, "How is your father?" My response to the question most often is to detail the latest news of his health and then add, "He still works harder than anyone I know." In this often-repeated exchange I am continually reminded of three major facts about him.

First, he is a widely known and loved man. Wherever I go people tell me about encounters with him—his remembering a name after years without contact, pulling on overalls to help his host milk the cows, writing individual letters to the parents of missionaries met during mission tours, giving his overcoat to someone who needed it more, and on and on—and they sense about him a dedication to the work of the Lord and a concern about them personally, which warms their feelings toward him and their memories of him.

Second, though he is no hypochondriac and suffers stoically through it all, he has had during his amazingly active life enough illnesses to make one wince simply at the listing—typhoid fever, smallpox, Bell's palsy, years of boils and carbuncles, a major heart attack, cancer of the throat resulting in the removal of most of his vocal cords, recurrence of cancer requiring radiation treatment, heart disease requiring open-heart surgery to replace a valve and transplant an artery, and most recently Bell's palsy again. It is no wonder then that when someone asks about my father, it is typically to inquire about his health. However, considering his health history and his age—77—he is in amazingly good condition, having over a period of months since April, 1972, largely regained his strength after heart surgery so drastic as to have significant mortality rates in men his age.

Third, his capacity for work is phenomenal. He works hard and effectively and with rare dedication. Since his acceptance of the call as a General Authority, he has not stinted in his labors. He works to the point of exhaustion, yet recuperates remarkably quickly. It can be honestly said of him that he has hidden wells of strength upon which he calls so often and so substantially that one begins to think, erroneously, that they are inexhaustible.

For those who do not know them, some basic facts of his personal history may be of interest. Spencer W. Kimball was born in Salt Lake City, March 28, 1895, to Andrew and Olive Woolley Kimball. When he was a small child his father was called to move to Arizona to preside over a stake there. The family lived in Thatcher, Arizona. Father worked on the family farm, worked in a dairy in Globe, Arizona, in summers to earn his school money, and excelled academically and athletically in high school. He served a mission in the Central States. His university work was ended by a call to military service in World War I, but the war ended while he was still waiting for induction.

In 1918 he married Camilla Eyring, whose family had been driven from the Mormon colonies in Mexico during the Mexican Revolution in 1912; they lived in Pima, Arizona, a few miles from Thatcher. He was first employed in a bank and then helped develop an insurance and real estate partnership. He was called to serve as stake clerk under his father. Then, when his father died, he was called to serve as a counselor to the new stake president. In 1938 the stake was divided and he became the first stake president of the new Mount Graham Stake, with headquarters in Safford, Arizona, and a membership extending all the way to El Paso, Texas, 250 miles away.

During these years of laboriously building up a new business, attending to the leadership of a scattered stake, and running a small family acreage, he found time and energy for sports (especially handball) and community affairs. He contributed his efforts to the Boy Scout program, served on educational committees, worked in the Chamber of Commerce, and presided as a district governor of Rotary International. Though the family did not see him as much as other families might have seen their father, I felt no sense of abandonment; he was very much involved with us.

His call to the Council of the Twelve Apostles in 1943 was a soul-wrenching experience for him, as it must be for others called to that awesome responsibility. He described that climactic event in his life in his first conference address:

* * * * *

I feel extremely humble in this calling that has come to me. Many people have asked me if I was surprised when it came. That, of course, is a very weak word for this experience. I was completely bewildered and shocked. I did have a premonition that it was coming, but very brief, however. On the eighth of July, when President J. Reuben Clark called me, I was electrified with a strong presentiment that something of this kind was going to happen. As I came home at noon, my boy was answering the telephone and he said, "Daddy, Salt Lake is calling."

I had had many calls from Salt Lake City. They hadn't ever worried me like this one. I knew that I had no unfinished business in Salt Lake City, and the thought came over me quickly, "You're going to be called to an important position." Then I hurriedly swept it from my mind, because it seemed so unworthy and so presumptuous, and I had convinced myself that such a thing was impossible by the time that I heard President Clark's voice a thousand miles away, saying: "Spencer, this is Brother Clark speaking. The brethren have just called you to fill one of the vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles."

Like a bolt of lightning it came. I did a great deal of thinking in the brief moments that I was on the wire. There were quite a number of things said about disposing of my business, moving to headquarters, and other things to be expected of me. I couldn't repeat them all; my mind seemed to be traveling many paths all at once. I was dazed, almost numb with the shock. A picture of my life spread out before me. It seemed that I could see all of the people before me whom I had injured, or who had fancied that I had injured them, or to whom I had given offense, and all the small petty things of my life. I sensed immediately my inability and limitations and I cried back, "Not me, Brother Clark! You can't mean that!" I was virtually speechless. My heart pounded fiercely.

I recall two or three years ago, when Brother Harold B. Lee was giving his maiden address as an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ from this stand, he told us of his experience through the night after he had been notified of his call. I think I now know something about the experience he had. I have been going through it for twelve weeks. I believe the Brethren were very kind to me in announcing my appointment when they did so that I might make the necessary adjustments in my business affairs, but perhaps they were more inspired to give me the time that I needed for a long period of purification, for in those long days and weeks I did a great deal of thinking and praying, and fasting and praying. There were conflicting thoughts that surged through my mind—seeming voices saying: "You can't do the work. You are not worthy. You have not the ability"—and always finally came the triumphant thought: "You must do the work assigned—you must make yourself able, worthy and qualified." And the battle raged on.

I remember reading that Jacob wrestled all night, "until the breaking of the day," for a blessing; and I want to tell you that for eighty-five nights I have gone through that experience, wrestling for a blessing. Eighty-five times the breaking of the day has found me on my knees praying to the Lord to help me and strengthen me and make me equal to this great responsibility that has come to me. I have not sought positions nor have I been ambitious. Promotions have continued to come faster than I felt I was prepared for them.

I remember when I was called to be a counselor in the stake presidency. I was in my twenties. President Grant came down to help to bury my father, who was the former stake president, and reorganize the stake. I was the stake clerk. I recall that some of my relatives came to President Grant, unknown to me after I had been chosen, and said, "President Grant, it's a mistake to call a young man like that to a position of responsibility and make an old man of him and tie him down." Finally, after some discussion, President Grant said very calmly, but firmly, "Well, Spencer has been called to this work, and he can do as he pleases about it," and, of course, when the call came, I accepted it gladly, and I have received great blessings therefrom.

A few days ago one of my well-to-do clients came to me and said, "Spencer, you're going away from us?"

"Yes," I said.

"Well, this is going to ruin you financially," he continued. "You are just getting started well; your business is prospering. You are making a lot of money now and the future looks bright yet. I don't know how you can do this. You don't have to accept the call, do you?"

And I said, "Brother, we do not have to accept any call, but if you understand the Mormon way of life, those of us who have been reared in the Church and understand the discipline of the Church, we just always do accept such calls." And I further said to him: "Do you remember what Luke said; '. . . for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth' (Luke 12:15), and all the bonds, lands, houses, and livestock are just things that mean so little in a person's abundant life."

It is strange how many things can go through one's mind in such a very short period when he is under strain and stress. I have heard of how people, when they were drowning, could see everything that had ever happened to them—especially the errors of their lives—and I have gone through that experience many times during these eighty-five endless days of emotional stress. Each dawn I seemed to expect this—which seemed such an impossible dream—to dissipate into vague nothingness, as my other dreams have, but reassurance came that it was real.

There are a few things that came to my attention recently that strengthen me and in which you might be interested—particularly with reference to prophecy made by my father. This was made known to me only a week ago. In preface to his statements, I will read a line or two from his patriarchal blessing given to him by Patriarch John Smith back in 1898. He said to my father: "Andrew Kimball, . . . thou shalt have the spirit of discernment to foretell future events and thy name shall be handed down with thy posterity in honorable remembrance from generation to generation." And then Brother Hatch, another patriarch, said: '. . . for thou art a prophet and came upon earth in this dispensation to be a great leader."

Just the other day Orville Allen came into the office to talk to me intimately and confidentially. After closing the door, he said, "Spencer, your father was a prophet. He made a prediction that has literally come to pass, and I want to tell you about it." He continued, "Your father talked with me at the corral, one evening. I had brought a load of pumpkins for his pigs. You were just a little boy and you were sitting there, milking the cows, and singing to them as you milked. Your father turned to me and said, 'Brother, that boy, Spencer, is an exceptional boy. He always tries to mind me, whatever I ask him to do. I have dedicated him to be one of the mouthpieces of the Lord—the Lord willing. You will see him some day as a great leader. I have dedicated him to the service of God, and he will become a mighty man in the Church."'

I say this, not in the sense of boasting, but in humility and appreciation. It came to me as a great surprise when first I heard of it the other day.

In these long weeks since July 8 I can tell you that I have been overwhelmed and have felt that I was unable to carry on this great work; that I was unworthy; that I was incapable because of my weaknesses and my limitations. I have felt many times that I was up against a blank wall. And in that interim I have been out in the desert and in high mountains alone, apart, and have poured out my soul to God. I have taken courage from one or two scriptures that constantly came to my mind and of which people continued to remind me. One was from Paul, and as I felt so foolish, small, and weak, I remembered that he said: "Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men. For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty. That no flesh should glory in his presence." (1 Corinthians 1:25-27, 29.)

When my feeling of incompetence wholly overwhelmed me, I remember the words of Nephi when he said: "I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them." (1 Nephi 3:7.) I want to tell you that I lean heavily on these promises, that the Lord will strengthen and give me growth and fit and qualify me for this great work. I have seen the Lord qualify men. I shall do my utmost to show my appreciation to my Lord and my brethren by being a faithful servant. I am grateful for the opportunity of working with these honored and great men of the Authorities toward whom I have always had almost a worshipful devotion.

I know that this is the church and kingdom of God. It has been a part of me. Whenever it has prospered, I have gloried in it. When it was criticized, it has hurt me, for it seemed a part of my very being. Every fibre in my body bears witness that this is the gospel of Jesus Christ in its fullness. I testify to you that this is the work of God, that Jesus is the Christ, our Redeemer, our Master, our Lord, and I bear testimony to you in all sincerity and in deepest humility, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen. * * * * *

From the beginning of his service as a General Authority, he has worked tirelessly in his assignments. For most of his nearly thirty years in the apostleship he has made up the schedules of conference assignments for action by the president of the quorum; he has been chairman of the Budget Committee, which has responsibility for allocating the financial resources of the Church among the programs; he has headed the Church Missionary Committee with responsibility for assigning missionaries and suggesting mission presidents; he headed the Church Indian Committee for twenty-five years. Perhaps no aspect of Church work is so uniquely identified with his name as the Indian student placement program. He has been an advocate of the Indian peoples and the indefatigable promoter of Church programs designed to hasten the day when the promises to the Lamanites are wholly fulfilled.

He has not seen his role as author. As a General Authority he has devoted nearly all his time and talent to the tasks of preaching, counseling, and administering the programs of the Church. But those very tasks have in some measure compelled him to become an author.

In his responsibility to preach the gospel he has been conscientious in preparation and painstaking in formulation of his messages to the Church and to the world. As a counselor to thousands who have been burdened with sin and sorrow, he has gained an understanding of the myriad problems with which even striving Saints become burdened and has formulated responses to their earnest questions concerning the way of repentance and forgiveness. This experience led him finally to publish in book form The Miracle of Forgiveness.

Publication of that book was intended primarily to give him a convenient place to which to send troubled people for the answers he had thought through prayerfully and over the course of many years. The book's reception left him frankly amazed but deeply gratified that his work was responsive to a widespread interest in the overcoming of sin and the obtaining of divine forgiveness.

Even after the enthusiastic response to his book he was dubious about the wisdom of the proposal that he add one more book of sermons to those available in the stores and libraries. There was no new message he had to give the people; it was simply the gospel of Christ as explained in his words, with liberal reference to the scriptures. But the same could have been said of The Miracle of Forgiveness, which apparently filled a real need. He was finally persuaded that, just as he had been surprised at the number who found help in his first book, so there could be many people who would be helped by the messages in his sermons.

But having decided to make a book of sermons, it was still not enough simply to string together what had been said over the past thirty years. He decided rather to use the sermon as a resource from which to draw heavily, yet to attempt to mold them into a contemporary statement. Thus, an effort has been made to style the sermons for reading, while preserving the highly personal mode of expression.

In the many sermons he has delivered over the years there are several repeated strains. One is the Church Indian program. Another reflects his feeling of responsibility to speak forthrightly to members of the Church about sexual sins, warning of the approaches to them, emphasizing the seriousness of succumbing to the near-universal temptations, and pointing out the road back for those who have erred and yearn for reconciliation with the Lord. This is a difficult and unpleasant task, but one he has not shirked. His objective has not been to be popular, or to please the ear, but to preach repentance. It is true, however, that his directness, his earnestness, his careful statement of the problem and solution, and his obvious love and concern for those to whom he speaks have made him one of the most respected speakers of his generation. What he says is not intended to be entertaining, but almost always is worth hearing and rehearing.

This book is an effort to preserve for the benefit of those who read it the substance of his efforts to communicate to the Latter-day Saints his understanding of the gospel, his concern for the welfare of the people, and his love for the Savior. It is his hope that these efforts may help guide men to that faith in Christ which leads to the miracle of spiritual rebirth.

Edward L. Kimball
