Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Chapter Three

Revelation: Continuing Communication with God

I received a letter of inquiry from a missionary in Germany, in which he said: "We speak continually . . . of the necessity of living prophets upon the earth and base our case on the testimony of a young man who saw and spoke with the Father and the Son, and recorded his experiences. . . . However, . . . we have no record of a continuation of revelation."

My first reaction was shock—shock to think that a young person twenty years old could be conscientious in making the statement that "we have no record of a continuation of revelation."

Millions feel that what is written in the Bible is the total of the revelations of the Lord, in spite of John's statement that if all that Jesus did were recorded, there would be numerous books. Some Latter-day Saints also make a similar error and feel that what is written in the standard works constitutes the sum total of the revelations in this dispensation. To this error George Q. Cannon, a member of the First Presidency, speaks:

Some have deceived themselves with the idea that because revelations have not been written and published, therefore, there has been a lessening of power in the Church of Christ. This is a very great mistake.

. . . the servants of the Lord do receive revelations, and they are as binding upon the people as though they were printed and published throughout all the Stakes of Zion. The oracles of God are here, and He speaks through His servant whom He has chosen to hold the keys. . . . We have been blessed as a people with an abundance of revelation.

Have this people ever seen the day when the counsel of God's servants has not been sufficient to guide them in the midst of difficulties? No. We never have. There has not been a single minute that this people has been left without the voice of God; there has not been a single minute since this church was founded to this time that the power of God has not been plainly manifested in our midst. . . . (Gospel Truth, p. 332.)

The day of revelation has never passed; the Lord continues to communicate with his servants in our own day as always.

If revelations cease, either men are unresponsive and in the darkness of apostasy or God is dead. Since we know positively that God lives and is the same "yesterday, today and forever," we can gauge the faithfulness and spirituality of men by the degree and intensity of the communication between them and God.

Revelation is the process whereby God makes himself known to men. . . . Revelation presupposes on the part of men a capacity of response. . . . Response calls for faith. . . . The scriptures are the record of God's self-revelation and its results. . . . Revelation is therefore inseparable from faith, and unless a faith response is evoked, there is no proper revelation. (Harper's Bible Dictionary, p. 614.)

If the gifts are rejected, that does not end the existence of the gift. If the diamond ring offered is not accepted, the ring itself is not destroyed. President George Q. Cannon says:

Their reception or non-reception [of revelations] would not affect in the least the divine authenticity. But it would be for the people to accept them after God had revealed them. In this way, they have been submitted to the Church to see whether the members would accept them as binding upon them or not. Joseph himself had too high a sense of his prophetic office and the authority he had received from the Lord to ever submit the revelations which he had received from the Lord to any individual or to any body, however numerous, to have them pronounce upon their validity. (Gospel Truth, p. 332.)

It is worth emphasizing that there are many kinds of revelations; some are awesome and world-transforming while others are less spectacular, involving inspiration in carrying out the details of the Lord's work. The vision in which the Prophet Joseph Smith saw the Father and Son is one of the greatest of all revelations, ancient or modern. It is not inferior even to the vision to Peter, James, and John, the Presidency of the early church on the Mount of Transfiguration. They followed Jesus into the high mountain, where "his face did shine as the sun and his raiment was white as the light." Here they saw Moses and Elias, long since dead, and were with the transfigured Christ and heard the voice of Elohim introducing his Beloved Son, Jehovah.

Another spectacular vision was that of Saul of Tarsus, who saw and heard the resurrected Lord, Jesus Christ. Apparently he did not see Elohim at this time.

Enoch's vision was awesome. He says:

. . . I stood upon the mount, I beheld the heavens open, and I was clothed upon with glory;

And I saw the Lord; and he stood before my face, and he talked with me, even as a man talketh one with another, face to face; and he said unto me: Look, and I will show unto thee the world for the space of many generations. (Moses 7:3-4.)

Abraham was known as "the friend of God" and he said:

. . . I, Abraham, talked with the Lord, face to face, as one man talketh with another; and he told me of the works which his hands had made. (Abraham 3:11.)

And through Aaron and Miriam the Lord described his revelations to Moses:

If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream.

My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house.

With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses. (Numbers 12:6-8.)

These tremendously important experiences are so uncommon that in all of recorded history there is only a small number that are comparable. Few revelations, whether to Moses or Abraham or Joseph Smith, were so spectacular.

I would not minimize the importance of any of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, but only a few of the 136 sections reveal the appearance of heavenly beings. Most of the revelations came as did the countless revelations to the prophets throughout the centuries: by vision, by dream, and by deep impressions. This is illustrated by the words of Enos:

And while I was thus struggling in the spirit, behold, the voice of the Lord came into my mind again, saying: I will visit thy brethren according to their diligence in keeping my commandments. . . . (Enos 10.)

It must be remembered, too, that not all the revelations that came to the Prophet are printed in the Doctrine and Covenants. These he chose as being more helpful and more greatly needed by the people. Many of his revelations applied only to the moment and to the problem at hand.

There were others of our brethren in the days past who had spectacular visions or spiritual experiences. There were Adam, Lehi, Nephi, the brother of Jared, and many others.

Revelations often come in dreams, also, and who is there to say when a dream ends and a vision begins? President Wilford Woodruff made this statement in the general conference, October 10, 1900:

After the death of Joseph Smith, I saw and conversed with him many times in my dreams in the night season. On one occasion he and his brother Hyrum met me when on the sea going on a mission to England. I had Dan Jones with me. He received his mission from Joseph Smith before his death; and the Prophet talked freely to me about the mission I was then going to perform. And he also talked to me with regard to the mission of the Twelve Apostles in the flesh, and he laid before me the work they had to perform; and he also spoke of the reward they would receive after death. And there were many other things he laid before me in his interview on that occasion. And when I awoke many of the things he had told me were taken from me, I could not comprehend them. I have had many interviews with Brother Joseph until the last fifteen or twenty years of my life; I have not seen him for that length of time. But during my travels in the southern country last winter I had many interviews with President Young, and with Heber C. Kimball, and George A. Smith, and Jedediah M. Grant, and many others who are dead. They attended our conference, they attended our meetings. And on one occasion, I saw Brother Brigham and Brother Heber ride in a carriage ahead of the carriage in which I rode when I was on my way to attend conference; and they were dressed in most priestly robes. When we arrived at our destination I asked President Young if he would preach to us. He said, "No, I have finished my testimony in the flesh, I shall not talk to this people any more. But (said he) I have come to see you; I have come to watch over you, and to see what the people are doing. Then (said he) I want you to teach the people—and I want you to follow this counsel yourself—that they must labor and so live as to obtain the Holy Spirit, for without this you cannot build up the kingdom: without the spirit of God you are in danger of walking in the dark, and in danger of failing to accomplish your calling as apostles and as elders in the Church and Kingdom of God. And, said he, Brother Joseph taught me this principle." And I will here say, that I have heard him refer to that while he was living. But what I was going to say is this: The thought came to me that Brother Joseph had left the work of watching over this Church and Kingdom to others, and that he had gone ahead, and that he had left this work to men who have lived and labored with us since he left us. This idea manifested itself to me, that such men advance in the spirit world. And I believe myself that these men who have died and gone into the spirit world had this mission left with them, that is, a certain portion of them, to watch over the Latter-day Saints. (Journal of Discourses, volume 21, pp. 317-18.)

Would not these modern visions and dreams rate fully with the dreams of Joseph, son of Jacob, when the sheaf of Joseph stood upright in the field surrounded by the sheaves of his brethren, all of which bent toward his and made obeisance to Joseph's sheaf? (See Genesis 37:7.)

And his dream in prison revealing the seven years of plenty and the seven years of famine? (See Genesis 41:26-30.)

Are not the visions of President Woodruff and President Joseph F. Smith on the redemption of the dead on a par with the vision of Lehi of the tree of life; and that of Nephi with his similar dream; and that of Jacob when he saw the ladder set up on the earth and angels of God ascending and descending on it?

Again, you will recall the vision of the Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon, when they saw the Redeemer on the right hand of the Father. Would those visions not be comparable to the experience of Daniel when he also saw the great vision and described the heavenly being who came to him? And also like the vision of John the Revelator who similarly described the person and being of Jesus Christ whom he saw and heard?

There must be innumerable experiences that the Brethren have had which are considered too sacred to relate or publish. But we have the published experience of Orson F. Whitney. Though serving on a mission he was spending much of his time as a correspondent for the Salt Lake Herald.

Then came a marvelous manifestation, an admonition from a higher source, one impossible to ignore. It was a dream, or a vision in a dream, as I lay upon my bed in the little town of Columbia, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. I seemed to be in the Garden of Gethsemane, a witness of the Savior's agony. I saw Him as plainly as ever I have seen anyone. Standing behind a tree in the foreground, I beheld Jesus, with Peter, James and John, as they came through a little wicket gate at my right, leaving the three Apostles there, after telling them to kneel and pray, the Son of God passed over to the other side, where He also knelt and prayed. It was the same prayer with which all Bible readers are familiar: "Oh my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me; nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt."

As He prayed the tears streamed down his face, which was toward me. I was so moved at the sight that I also wept, out of pure sympathy. My whole heart went out to him; I loved him with all my soul, and longed to be with him as I longed for nothing else.

Presently He arose and walked to where those Apostles were kneeling—fast asleep! He shook them gently, awoke them, and in a tone of tender reproach, untinctured by the least show of anger or impatience, asked them plaintively if they could not watch with him one hour. There He was, with the awful weight of the world's sin upon his shoulders, with the pangs of every man, woman and child shooting through his sensitive soul—and they could not watch with him one poor hour! . . .

All at once the circumstances seemed to change, the scene remaining just the same. Instead of before, it was after the crucifixion, and the Savior, with the three Apostles, now stood together in a group at my left. They were about to depart and ascend into Heaven. I could endure it no longer. I ran from behind the tree, fell at his feet, clasped Him around the knees, and begged Him to take me with Him.

I shall never forget the kind and gentle manner in which He stopped, raised me up, and embraced me. It was so vivid, so real. I felt the very warmth of his body, as He held me in His arms and said in tenderest tones: "No, my son; those have finished their work; they can go with me; but you must stay and finish yours." Still I clung to Him. Gazing up into His face—for He was taller than I—I besought him fervently: "Well, promise me that I will come to you at the last." Smiling sweetly, He said: "That will depend entirely upon yourself." I awoke with a sob in my throat, and it was morning.

"That's from God," said Elder Musser, when I related to him what I had seen and heard. "I do not need to be told that," was my reply. I saw the moral clearly. I had never thought of being an Apostle, nor of holding any other office in the Church, and it did not occur to me even then. Yet I know that those sleeping Apostles meant me. I was asleep at my post—as any man is who, having been divinely appointed to do one thing, does another.

But from that hour, all was changed. I was never the same man again. I did not give up writing; for President Young, having noticed some of my contributions to the home papers, advised me to cultivate what he called my "gift for writing." "So that you can use it," said he, "for the establishment of truth and righteousness." I therefore continued to write but not to the neglect of the Lord's work. I held that first and foremost; all else was secondary. (Through Memory's Halls, Life Story of Orson F. Whitney, pp. 81-83.)

Why are we mortals so prone to garnish the sepulchers of the dead and stone the living, or give great credence to the past and deny the present, or to assume that only what is written has happened?

Let us consider for a moment some revealed movements and colonization programs, ancient and modern.

Since Adam there have been many exoduses and promised lands: Abraham, Jared, Moses, Lehi, and others led groups. How easy it is to accept those distant in time as directed by the Lord, yet the ones near at hand as human calculations and decisions. Let us consider for a moment the great trek of the Mormon refugees from Illinois to Salt Lake Valley. Few, if any, great movements equal it. We frequently hear that Brigham Young led the people to make new tracks in a desert and to climb over mountains seldom scaled and to ford and wade unbridged rivers and to traverse a hostile Indian country; and while Brigham Young was the instrument of the Lord, it was not he but the Lord of heaven who led modern Israel across the plains to their promised land.

Again, the numerous colonization efforts in Nevada, on the Muddy River, in Idaho, in the Indian Territory, at Moab, in Canada, in Mexico, in Arizona, and in Colorado. These minor treks must have seemed to those who made them quite equal to the trek of Lehi across the deserts.

How easy it would be for a thoughtless person to say that all these later exoduses were human calculations but that similar movements in earlier history were inspired and directed of the Lord. The motion picture Brigham Young pictured President Young wondering if he were called of God. The picture showed him vacillating, unsure, and questioning his calling. In the climax of the play he is shown wavering, ready to admit to his people that he had no divine calling, that he had not been inspired, that he had lied to them and had misled them. The movie showed him about to make a sweeping admission of his guilt and misrepresentation when the seagulls came to save the day for him. But there was nothing vacillating or weak or wavering about Brigham Young. He knew he was God's leader; he knew that the Lord was revealing to him the things to do. And he went vigorously and courageously into his program of bringing the Saints west and then colonizing the valleys of the mountain. Listen to Brigham Young:

I know that there are those in our midst who will seek the lives of the Twelve as they did the lives of Joseph and Hyrum. We shall ordain others and give the fulness of the Priesthood so that if we are killed, the fulness of the Priesthood may remain.

Joseph conferred on our heads all the keys and powers belonging to the Apostleship which he himself held before he was taken away and no man or set of men can get between Joseph and the Twelve in this world or in the world to come.

How often has Joseph said to the Twelve, "I have laid the foundation and you must build thereon. For upon your shoulders, the Kingdom rests."

I have the keys and the means of obtaining the word of God on the subject.

Brigham Young knew the Lord was the leader of the exodus across the plains:

I do not wish men to understand I had anything to do with our being moved here, that was the providence of the Almighty; it was the power of God that wrought out salvation for this people, I never could have devised such a plan. . . .

We came to these mountains by faith. . . .

There never has been a land, from the days of Adam until now that has been blessed more than this land has been blessed by our Father in Heaven; and it will still be blessed more and more, if we are faithful and humble, and thankful to God. . . .

Most recorded revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants and in the Bible were deep feelings and an impressive consciousness of direction from above. This is the sort of revelation individuals often have for their own needs. I have in mind the experience of a young soldier who died in Europe and who, prior to his death, was led to make friends with a family in England who gave to him great quantities of family history and genealogy. I believe this was no coincidence.

I have often told the story of a young man who was promised safe return from World War II but who found himself in a terrifying and hazardous situation on the beach-heads of Italy. After three strong impressions came to him, he moved from the spot where he was looking at his map to deploy his soldiers, and immediately after his moving, a bomb came from the skies and blew up everything in the area where he had stood.

Wilford Woodruff tells of an unusual experience.

While on the road there, I drove my carriage one evening into the yard of Brother Williams. Brother Orson Hyde drove a wagon by the side of mine. I had my wife and children in the carriage. I had not been there but a few minutes when the spirit said to me, "Get up and move that carriage." I told my wife I had to get up and move the carriage. She said, "What for?" and I said, "I don't know." That's all she asked me on such occasions. When I told her I did not know, that was enough. I got up and moved my carriage four or five rods and put the off fore wheel against the corner of the house. I then looked around me and went to bed. The same spirit said, "Go and move your animals from that oak tree." They were two hundred yards from where my carriage was. I went and moved my horses and put them in a little hickory grove. I again went to bed.

In thirty minutes a whirlwind came up and broke that oak tree off within two feet from the ground. It swept over three or four fences and fell square in that dooryard near Brother Orson Hyde's wagon and right where mine had stood. What would have been the consequences if I had not listened to that spirit? Why, myself, wife and children doubtless would have been killed. That was the still small voice to me. No earthquake, no thunder, no lightning but the still small voice of the Spirit of God. It saved my life. It was a spirit of revelation to me. (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, pp. 295-96.)

He could never have become President of the Church, his destiny, if he had not been responsive.

I suspect there are people in the Church today who believe in the written revelations but think calls to missionary work are a result solely of deliberation and cold calculation and that the opening of missions and the calling of mission presidents and the assignment of missionaries are just a matter of routine. That same person might believe in the words recorded in Alma 17:11 wherein the Lord said to the missionaries:

Go forth among the Lamanites, thy brethren, and establish my word; yet ye shall be patient in long-suffering and afflictions, that ye may show forth good examples unto them in me, and I will make an instrument of thee in my hands unto the salvation of many souls.

Or he might believe in the call of Enoch to preach repentance to the antediluvians. After he heard a voice, Enoch bowed himself to the earth and said:

Why is it that I have found favor in thy sight, and am but a lad, and all the people hate me; for I am slow of speech; wherefore am I thy servant? (Moses 6:31.)

We find a great similarity between the work of modern missionaries and those of ancient days.

Is there any difference between Paul's giving leadership to the missionary work in Asia Minor, Greece, Rome, and Spain and the many mission presidents now who give leadership to the proselyting program all over the world?

Is there a difference between the call of over a hundred missionaries a week and their being assigned to places all over the world to preach to all nations and the call through the Prophet Joseph in 1830 to Ziba Peterson, Oliver Cowdery, Peter Whitmer, and Parley P. Pratt to proselyte the Indians? The Lord said:

. . . and I myself will go with them and be in their midst; and I am their advocate with the Father, and nothing shall prevail against them. (D&C 32:3.)

Let us speak of structures, edifices, temples, and tabernacles.

Moses built a tabernacle in the wilderness for the children of Israel. Solomon built a most magnificent temple in Jerusalem, and after that plan the Nephites built their temples. Joseph Smith built houses of the Lord in Kirtland and Nauvoo; Brigham Young built temples in Salt Lake City, St. George, Logan, and Manti; President Joseph F. Smith built temples in Hawaii and Canada; President Heber J. Grant built a temple in Arizona; President George Albert Smith built a temple in Idaho Falls; President David O. McKay built temples in Switzerland, New Zealand, England, Los Angeles, and Oakland; President Joseph Fielding Smith completed temples in Ogden and Provo.

These have been initiated and built under the same spirit and from the same revelation from the same God. Remember, he is the same today, tomorrow, and forever. Or do the people feel that the temples built in our own day might be the mere planning calculation of human beings? Having been fairly close to all of them since the Arizona Temple in 1927, I personally regard all of the houses of the Lord as the work of Jehovah, initiated by him, built by him, designed by him, and dedicated to him and his program.

In our own day, the Lord said:

. . . how shall your washings be acceptable unto me, except ye perform them in a house which you have built to my name?

For, for this cause I commanded Moses that he should build a tabernacle, that they should bear it with them in the wilderness, and to build a house in the land of promise, that those ordinances might be revealed which had been hid from before the world was. (D&C 124:37-38.)

And then, in Kirtland, the Lord in our own day commanded:

Verily I say unto you, that it is my will that a house should be built unto me in the land of Zion, like unto the pattern which I have given you. Yea, let it be built speedily. . . . (D&C 97:10-11.)

Again, in Nauvoo came the command from the Lord to gather together the gold and silver and precious stones and other valuables and "come . . . and build a house to my name, for the Most High to dwell therein." (D&C 124:26-27.)

Is it so different when, on July 28, 1847, the Prophet Brigham Young in the new unbroken land of Salt Lake Valley, "walking over the ground with associates, suddenly stopped and striking the point of his cane into the parched soil exclaimed: 'Here we will build the temple of our God.'" Wilford Woodruff drove a stake into the small hole made. That day the temple block was selected in the center of the city.

Is there a difference between those early commands and the later ones when the several Presidents of the Church set apart land, planned buildings, constructed these holy edifices, and dedicated them unto the Lord? Will there be any difference between those of the past and those of today, and those hundreds of temples that are yet to be located and built?

President Joseph F. Smith, on August 19, 1906, said:

But the time will come, perhaps not in my days nor in this generation, when temples of God, which are dedicated to the holy ordinances of the Gospel, and not to the worship of idols, will be erected in the divers countries of the earth. For this Gospel must be spread over all the world, until the knowledge of God covers the earth as the waters.

Is there a difference between the organization of the Church today and anciently?

Since I was ordained an apostle on October 7, 1943, I have participated and assisted in the call of a great many General Authorities. How were they called? May I assure you that every one of those men was called by God, by prophecy and by revelation. There was a process of elimination through much fasting and prayer. Many people may have been considered, but finally, one man from the entire Church was nominated by the Prophet of the Lord, approved by his counselors and by the members of the Council of the Twelve, sustained by the people, and ordained by the Prophet of the Lord. This is comparable to the same operation in the days of Peter following the ascension of the Christ, when the remaining apostles, with Peter presiding as the prophet of God, combed the area for great men and by the process of elimination brought it down to two: Joseph called Barsabas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias. Peter took leadership and explained the qualifications necessary, stating that the appointee must have been associated with them during the entire ministry of the Christ from his baptism to his ascension, thus being a special witness of the Christ.

And they prayed, and said, Thou, Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men, shew whether of these two thou hast chosen. (Acts 1:24.)

And Matthias was called and was numbered with the eleven apostles.

John Taylor recorded a revelation calling George Teasdale and Heber J. Grant to the apostleship:

Thus saith the Lord, to the Twelve, and to the Priesthood and people of my Church: Let my servant George Teasdale and Heber J. Grant be appointed to fill the vacancies in the Twelve . . . and then proceed to fill up the presiding Quorum of Seventies . . . you may appoint Seymour B. Young to fill up the vacancy.

It has likewise been my privilege, through twenty-nine years, to assist in calling many scores of men to positions of responsibility in stake presidencies and ordaining many hundreds of bishops, and I am convinced that the calls of these hundreds of stake presidents and bishops and other leaders, as well as the General Authorities, come as they came in the beginning of the early-day church when

as they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them.

And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. (Acts 13:2-3.)

Section 124 of the Doctrine and Covenants describes the quorum and ecclesiastical organization of the Church as outlined by the Lord.

The Lord was setting up an organization among men who were not acquainted with his great church, and he gave explicit details how to organize the Presidency, the Twelve, the Seventies, the Patriarch, the stake leaders, the ward leaders, and the quorum leaders, even down to the deacons quorum. It was necessary for this to come by revelation, since no one on the earth at that time knew the perfect plan. But once having delivered the program, it will never be necessary for the Lord to reveal again those details.

I suppose there are those who think of the organization of a stake presidency as a matter of mere human calculations. George Q. Cannon said:

Brother Brigham Young used to say—and I always have appreciated his remark—that he did not want to write revelations because the people would be held to stricter accountability than they were.

What written revelation is there concerning the organization of these stakes as we see them? Here is this Davis stake with a Presidency and High Council; what is there written in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants to sustain this? In the 102 Section, we find a plan given for the organization of the High Council and over that High Council the Presidency of the Church presided. But as we are now organized there is nothing specially written concerning it. How then have these stakes been organized? Did President Young organize them out of his own mind? or did he organize these stakes according to the revelation of God? He organized them by revelation just as much so as if he had written the revelation. God did not require him to write it, and yet the stakes are organized. And Zion is now as perfectly organized as circumstances will admit.

We have our ward organizations and our stake organizations, and they extend throughout the length and breadth of Zion, and everybody is brought within their compass. These ward organizations have become quite perfect. How has this been done? Has it been done by written revelation to the Church? Has it been done by anything that is written in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants? No. There is scarcely anything in that book that gives any clear idea of the ward organizations that at the present exist. How have they been organized? By the spirit of revelation in and through the man whom God chose to hold the keys. (Gospel Truth, pp. 325-26.)

Those people who ask "Why do not we have revelations today?" are in the same category with the numerous who ask "Why do we not have spiritual gifts and manifestations?"

I have often said that if all of the spectacular manifestations and visions and pertinent dreams and healings and other miracles were written in books, it would take a great library to hold them. Let me give a few examples to illustrate that the Lord is actively working with his faithful followers as much today as ever.

President Wilford Woodruff tells of dreams or visions, including the experience of my grandfather, Heber C. Kimball, Brother Russell, and Brother Hyde when evil spirits tried hard to destroy Heber C. Kimball who "held the Priesthood and held the keys of the Priesthood so far as England was concerned. Those spirits had not therefore the power to destroy them." He tells of an experience that Heber C. Kimball, George A. Smith, and he had in London when the powers of darkness would have destroyed their lives. Three holy messengers, dressed in temple clothing, came into the room and filled the room with light. They laid their hands upon the heads of the brethren and they were delivered from that terrible power which would have destroyed them. He tells of the visit of Joseph Smith and Hyrum Smith after their death when they visited him on a ship at sea. The ship had been traveling backwards three days and nights in a heavy gale. After the brethren had a special prayer, they stepped on the deck and in less than a minute,

it was as though a man had taken a sword and cut that gale through, and you might have thrown a muslin handkerchief out and it would not have moved it.

The night following this, Joseph and Hyrum visited me and the Prophet laid before me a great many things.

President Woodruff tells of another experience when the Prophet Joseph came to him and explained why they were always in such a hurry in heaven. Joseph said:

I will tell you, Brother Woodruff, every dispensation that has had the Priesthood on the earth and has gone into the celestial kingdom has had a certain amount of work to do to prepare to go to the earth with the Savior when he goes to reign on the earth. Each dispensation has had ample time to do this work. We have not. We are the last dispensation and so much work has to be done and we need to be in a hurry in order to accomplish it. (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, p. 289.)

Leaders of our day, including George Q. Cannon, saw heavenly beings. Wilford Woodruff said:

I have had the administration of angels in my day and time, though I never prayed for an angel. I have had, in several instances, the administration of holy messengers. (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, p. 286.)

There is the notable experience of the young apostle, Heber J. Grant, when in Arizona he had a dream or vision of councils in heaven explaining his call to the Twelve.

There are two spirits striving with us always, one telling us to continue our labor for good, and one telling us that with the faults and failings of our nature we are unworthy. I can truthfully say that from October, 1882, until February, 1883, that spirit followed me day and night telling me that I was unworthy to be an Apostle of the Church, and that I ought to resign. When I would testify of my knowledge that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God, the Redeemer of mankind, it seemed as though a voice would say to me: "You lie! You lie! You have never seen Him."

While on the Navajo Indian reservation with Brigham Young, Jr., and a number of others, six or eight, on horseback, and several others in "white tops"—riding along with Lot Smith at the rear of that procession, suddenly the road veered to the left almost straight, but there was a well beaten path leading ahead. I said: "Stop, Lot, stop. Where does this trail lead? There are plenty of foot marks and plenty of horses' hoof marks here." He said, "It leads to an immense gulley just a short distance ahead, that it is impossible to cross with a wagon. We have made a regular 'Muleshoe' of miles here to get on the other side of the gulley."

I had visited the day before the spot where a Navajo Indian had asked George A. Smith, Jr., to let him look at his pistol. George A. handed it to him, and the Navajo shot him.

I said, "Lot, is there any danger from Indians?"

"None at all."

"I want to be all alone. Go ahead and follow the crowd." I first asked him if I allowed the animal I was riding to walk if I would reach the road on the other side of the gulley before the horsemen and the wagons, and he said, "Yes."

As I was riding along to meet them on the other side I seemed to see, and I seemed to hear, what to me is one of the most real things in all my life, I seemed to see a Council in Heaven. I seemed to hear the words that were spoken. I listened to the discussion with a great deal of interest. The First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve Apostles had not been able to agree on two men to fill the vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve. There had been a vacancy of one for two years, and a vacancy of two for one year, and the Conference had adjourned without the vacancies being filled. In this Council the Savior was present, my father was there, and the Prophet Joseph Smith was there. They discussed the question that a mistake had been made in not filling those two vacancies and that in all probability it would be another six months before the Quorum would be completed, and they discussed as to whom they wanted to occupy those positions, and decided that the way to remedy the mistake that had been made in not filling these vacancies was to send a revelation. It was given to me that I had done nothing to entitle me to that exalted position, except that I had lived a clean, sweet life. It was given to me that because of my father having practically sacrificed his life in what was known as the great Reformation, so to speak, of the people in early days, having been practically a martyr, that the Prophet Joseph and my father desired me to have that position, and it was because of their faithful labors that I was called, and not because of anything I had done of myself or any great thing that I had accomplished. It was also given to me that that was all these men, the Prophet and my father, could do for me; from that day it depended upon me and upon me alone as to whether I made a success of my life or a failure. . . .

It was given to me, as I say, that it now depended upon me. No man could have been more unhappy than I was from October 1882, until February, 1883, but from that day I have never been bothered, night or day, with the idea that I was not worthy to stand as an Apostle, and I have not been worried since the last words uttered by Joseph F. Smith to me: "The Lord bless you, my boy, the Lord bless you; you have got a great responsibility. Always remember this is the Lord's work and not man's. The Lord is greater than any man. He knows whom He wants to lead His Church, and never makes any mistake. The Lord bless you."

I have been happy during the twenty years that it has fallen my lot to stand at the head of this Church. I have felt the inspiration of the Living God directing me in my labors. From the day that I chose a comparative stranger to be one of the Apostles, instead of my lifelong and dearest living friend, I have known as I know that I live, that I am entitled to the light and the inspiration and the guidance of God in directing his work here upon this earth; and I know, as I know that I live, that it is God's work, and that Jesus Christ is the Son of the Living God, the Redeemer of the world, and that he came to this earth with a divine mission to die upon the cross as the Redeemer of mankind, atoning for the sins of the world. (Conference Report, April 1941, pp. 4-6.)

We have the remarkable experience when Bishop Wells' son, who had been killed by a train, returned to his unconsoled mother to assure her that all was well and that she should not mourn longer.

We have the unusual experience told by President David O. McKay in Hawaii when a native Hawaiian brother reported that while the prayer was being offered at the spot where the first baptism had occurred, he saw George Q. Cannon and President Joseph F. Smith stand in the circle. They had long been dead.

There are so many such heavenly manifestations in our own modern days that we have neither time nor space to mention them all.

President George F. Richards had a heavenly experience that was printed in the Church News:

More than forty years ago I had a dream, which I am sure was from the Lord. In this dream I was in the presence of my Savior as he stood in mid-air. He spoke no word to me, but my love for him was such that I have not words to explain. I know that no mortal man can love the Lord as I experienced that love for the Savior unless God reveals it to him. I would have remained in His presence but there was a power drawing me away from him, and as a result of that dream I had this feeling, that no matter what might be required at my hands, what the Gospel might entail unto me, I would do what I should be asked to do, even to the laying down of my life.

And so when we read in the scriptures what the Savior said to his disciples:

"In my Father's house are many mansions. . . . I go to prepare a place for you . . . that where I am, there ye may be also. (John 14:2-3.)" I think that is where I want to be. If only I can be with my Savior and have that same sense of love that I had in that dream, it will be the goal of my existence, the desire of my life.

Elder Melvin J. Ballard wrote of a manifestation to himself. He said:

I lost a son six years of age and I saw him a man in the spirit world after his death, and I saw how he had exercised his own freedom of choice and would obtain of his own will and volition a companionship, and in due time to him and all those who are worthy of it, shall come all of the blessings and sealing privileges of the House of the Lord. (Three Degrees of Glory, p. 31.)

Another experience described by Brother Ballard indicates that the heavens and the earth are close and there has continued to be spiritual manifestations.

I recall an incident in my own father's experience. How we looked forward to the completion of the Logan Temple. It was about to be dedicated. My father had labored on that house from its very beginning and my earliest recollection was carrying his dinner each day as he brought the rock down from the quarry. How we looked forward to that great event! I remember how in the meantime, father made every effort to obtain all the data and information he could concerning his relatives. It was the theme of his prayer night and morning that the Lord would open up the way whereby he could get information concerning his dead.

The day before the dedication while writing recommends to the members of his ward who were to be present at the first service, two elderly gentlemen walked down the streets of Logan, approached my two young sisters, and, coming to the older one of the two placed in her hands a newspaper and said:

"Take this to your father. Give it to no one else. Go quickly. Don't lose it."

The child responded and when she met her mother, her mother wanted the paper. The child said, "No. I must give it to father and to no one else." She was admitted into the room and told her story. We looked in vain for these travelers. They were not to be seen. No one else saw them. Then we turned to the paper.

The newspaper, The Newbury Weekly News, was printed in my father's old English home, Thursday, May 15, 1884, and reached our hands May 18, 1884, three days after its publication. We were astonished, for by no earthly means could it have reached us, so that our curiosity increased as we examined it. Then we noticed one page devoted to the writings of a reporter of the paper, who had gone on his vacation, and among other places had visited an old cemetery. The curious inscriptions led him to write what he found on the tombstones, including the verses. He also added the names, date of birth, death, etc., filling nearly an entire page.

It was the old cemetery where the Ballard family had been buried for generations and very many of my father's immediate relatives and other intimate friends were mentioned.

When the matter was presented to President Merrill of the Logan Temple he said, "You are authorized to do the work for those because you received it through messengers of the Lord."

There is no doubt that the dead who had received the Gospel in the spirit world had put it into the heart of the reporter to write these things and thus the way was prepared for my father to obtain the information he sought. (Three Degrees of Glory, pp. 21-22.)

A statement of basic importance on the subject of revelation is a sermon by Wilford Woodruff in 1890:

Read the life of Brigham Young and you can hardly find a revelation that he had wherein he said, "Thus saith the Lord." But the Holy Ghost was with him; he taught by inspiration and revelation; but with one exception, he did not give those revelations in the form that Joseph did; for they were not written and given as revelations and commandments to the Church in the words and name of the Savior. Joseph said, "Thus saith the Lord" almost every day of his life, in laying the foundation of this work. But those who followed him have not deemed it always necessary to say, "Thus saith the Lord." Yet they have led the people by the power of the Holy Ghost and if you want to know what that is, read the first six verses of the 68th Section of the Book of the Doctrine and Covenants where the Lord told Orson Hyde, Luke Johnson, Lyman Johnson and William E. McClellan to go out and preach the gospel to people as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost. "And whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord and the power of God unto salvation."

It is by that power that we have led Israel; by that power President Young presided over and led the Church. By the same power, President John Taylor presided over and led the Church. And that is the way I have acted according to the best of my ability in that capacity. I do not want the Latter-day Saints to understand that the Lord is not with us, and that he is not giving revelations to us; for He is giving us revelation, and will give us revelation until the scene is wound up.

I have had some revelations of late and very important ones to me and I will tell you what the Lord has said to me. Let me bring your minds to what is termed the Manifesto. . . .

Since I received that revelation, I have heard of many who are tried in these things. . . . the Lord showed me by a vision and revelation exactly what would take place if we did not stop this practice. . . . the Lord is with him [Wilford Woodruff] and with this people. He has told me exactly what to do and what the result would be if we did not do it. . . . I went before the Lord, and I wrote what the Lord told me to write. I laid it before my brethren, such strong men as George Q. Cannon, Brother Joseph F. Smith and the Twelve Apostles . . . these men agreed with me and ten thousand Latter-day Saints agreed with me. Why? Because they were moved upon by the spirit of God and by the revelations of Jesus Christ to do it. . . . (Deseret News, November 7, 1891.)

No matter how important an individual, the time comes for him to turn over the reins to his successor. When Joshua succeeded Moses the Lord said:

There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life: as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee: I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. (Joshua 1:5.)

And likewise the mantle of Joseph Smith fell on Brigham Young. Some present when Brigham rose to speak in Nauvoo after the martyrdom seemed to hear the voice of Joseph and see the person of Joseph. It was a most remarkable miracle.

The mantle of leadership has fallen in turn on each successive President of the Church. And each successor has carried forth the work, and the revelations have continued unabated. Plural marriage was discontinued through revelation; tithing was given new power and brought the Church out of debt; temples have been erected and missionary work expanded; the welfare program has been reintroduced. And through and under these prophets, revelations have continued.

Elder Marriner W. Merrill was shown that his son passed through the veil of death in order to labor with his kindred dead:

On one occasion soon after the death of his son, as he was returning to his home, he was in his carriage so deeply lost in thought about his son that he was quite oblivious to things about him. He suddenly came into a state of awareness when his horse stopped in the road. As he looked up, his son stood in the road beside him. His son spoke to him and said, "Father, you are mourning my departure unduly. You are over concerned about my family (his son left a large family of small children) and their welfare. I have much work to do and your grieving gives me much concern. I am in a position to render effective service to my family. You should take comfort, for you know there is much work to be done here and it was necessary for me to be called. You know that the Lord doeth all things well." So saying, the son departed. (Bryant S. Hinckley, The Faith of Our Pioneer Fathers, pp. 182-83.)

During the years he was a member of the Council of the Twelve, President Heber J. Grant often recommended names of brethren to the First Presidency for consideration as apostles. Frequently he thought that if he ever were President of the Church he would appoint his life-long friend, General Richard W. Young, a grandson of President Brigham Young, to the apostleship. However, when he did become President he chose instead, under the inspiration of the Lord, a relative stranger to him, Elder Melvin J. Ballard.

In 1918 President Joseph F. Smith had a vision shortly before his death:

. . . the eyes of my understanding were opened, and the spirit of the Lord rested upon me and I saw the hosts of the dead. . . .

In the dramatic and comprehensive vision that followed, he saw multitudes of those who had lived faithful lives and was impressed by their joy and gladness as they anticipated their deliverance, as the Son of God was coming into the spirit world to redeem them. In the darkness were the hosts who had rejected him and his program. He went not to these unfaithful persons, but organized his forces who did go to the unfaithful to give them the gospel. This was the work of the Savior in the hours his body lay in the tomb at Jerusalem.

Among the faithful he saw were Adam and the great souls down through the centuries, in both hemispheres. Then he saw Joseph Smith and Brigham Young and many of the great ones of our dispensation. He saw that the faithful elders of this dispensation continue their work when they depart from this mortal life. President Smith later bore testimony that this vision was true.

Another revelation of great import to Latter-day Saints was the appearance of the signers of the Declaration of Independence and Presidents of the United States to President Wilford Woodruff in the St. George Temple. President Woodruff later reported in general conference, on April 10, 1898:

I am going to bear my testimony to this assembly, if I never do it again in my life, that those men who laid the foundation of this American Government and signed the Declaration of Independence were the best spirits the God of Heaven could find on the face of the earth. They were choice spirits, not wicked men. George Washington and all the men that labored for the purpose were inspired of the Lord. Another thing I am going to say here, because I have a right to say it. Every one of those men that signed the Declaration of Independence with General Washington called upon me, as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Temple at St. George two consecutive nights, and demanded at my hands that I should go forth and attend to the ordinances of the house of God for them. Men are here, I believe, that know of this—Brothers J. D. T. McAllister, David H. Cannon and James C. Bleak. Brother McAllister baptized me for all these men, and I then told these brethren that it was their duty to go into the Temple and labor until they got endowments for all of them. They did it. Would those spirits have called upon me, as an Elder in Israel, to perform that work if they had not been noble spirits before God? They would not. I bear this testimony because it is true. The spirit of God bore record to myself and the brethren while we were laboring in that way. (Temples of the Most High, p. 87.)

On September 16, 1877, President Woodruff reported the following in general conference:

We have labored in the St. George Temple since January, and we have done all we could there; and the Lord has stirred up our minds, and many things have been revealed to us concerning the dead. President Young has said to us, and it is verily so, if the dead could they would speak in language loud as ten thousand thunders, calling upon the servants of God to rise up and build Temples, magnify their calling and redeem their dead. This doubtless sounds strange to those present who believe not the faith and doctrine of the Latter-day Saints; but when we get to the spirit world we will find out that all that God has revealed is true. We will find, too, that everything there is reality, and that God has a body, parts and passions, and the erroneous ideas that exist now with regard to him will have passed away. I feel to say little else to the Latter-day Saints wherever and whenever I have the opportunity of speaking to them, than to call upon them to build these Temples now under way, to hurry them up to completion. The dead will be after you, they will seek after you as they have after us in St. George. They called upon us, knowing that we held the keys and power to redeem them.

I will here say, before closing, that two weeks before I left St. George, the spirits of the dead gathered around me, wanting to know why we did not redeem them. Said they: "You have had the use of the Endowment House for a number of years and yet nothing has ever been done for us. We laid the foundation of the government you now enjoy, and we never apostatized from it, but we remained true to it and were faithful to God." These were the signers of the Declaration of Independence, and they waited on me for two days and two nights. I thought it very singular that notwithstanding so much work had been done, and yet nothing had been done for them. The thought never entered my heart, from the fact, I suppose, that heretofore our minds were reaching after our more immediate friends and relatives. I straightway went into the baptismal font and called upon Brother McAllister to baptize me for the signers of the Declaration of Independence, and fifty other eminent men, making one hundred in all, including John Wesley, Columbus, and others; I then baptized him for every President of the United States except three; and when their cause is just, somebody will do the work for them. (Journal of Discourses vol. 19, p. 229.)

One of the many stories coming down from our forefathers relates this experience: Heber C. Kimball was taking a company through the Endowment House and felt a depressed spirit. He said to them, "There is someone in this group unworthy to participate in these sacred ordinances. They may be excused." No one moved. A second time he repeated that the unworthy ones could now be excused. No one moved. A third time he said, "There is a couple in this group who are adulterers, and if they do not leave immediately, I shall call out their names." A couple arose and left the room, and the company proceeded through the ordinances.

These and numerous experiences of the living authorities are all testimony that, as George Q. Cannon has said, there has never been a single minute since 1830 when the people were left without the revealed guidance of the Lord. As I hear the Prophet each week in the temple, making decisions that are heaven-inspired, developing new programs that are revealed, my testimony grows as to the inspired leadership and the divinity of this great work, which can never be stopped nor terminated.

When after deliberation and prayer on certain matters he says solemnly, "Brethren, the Lord has spoken," or "Brethren, that is right; that is the way the Lord wants it," or "We have expressed the will of the Lord here today," there is assurance in my heart that he speaks for the Lord.

I bear witness that the Church moves on through the revelations of God to its divinely called leaders. The Almighty is with this people. We shall have all the revelations we need if we will do our duty and keep the commandments of God.
