Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Chapter Five

Knowledge of God: The Weak Things of the World

A philosopher at one of our leading universities writes, "I do not understand God, nor the way in which he works. If occasionally I raise my heart in prayer, it is to no God I can see, or hear, or feel. It is to a God in as cold and obscure night as any nonbeliever has known." God seems to be to many people "everything from a celestial gas to a kind of invisible, honorary president 'out there' in space, well beyond range of the astronauts."

A scientist says, "God if anything is hydrogen and carbon or thermonuclear fission, since that is what makes life on this planet possible."

Another person says, "God is a ghost floating in space." And another, "God is an infantile fantasy which was necessary when men did not understand what lightning

was. . . ."

Another says, "God is like a fiery flame so white that it can blind you."

A seminary leader says, "God is all that I cannot understand."

Since time immemorial, man has sought for a God. It is difficult to erase from the heart of man this inborn yearning, this thirst, this hunger. It is natural for him to look for a personal Creator. This spiritual heritage of man seems to have come from the beginning. He may worship gods of wood and stone or trees or animals or earth or sky or sun, but man needs and must have a deity. In ancient Babylon, there were said to be at least 700 deities.

On a cold pre-dawn January morning my wife and I sat on the great rounded, bare rock hill under the Acropolis in Athens. This was Mars Hill. And as we sat waiting for the dawn, we could imagine on this Athenian Hyde Park the Apostle Paul discoursing to the bright minds surrounding him, arguing about the power of their many gods:

Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious.

For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an altar with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.

God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands;

Neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things. . . .

For in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also his offspring.

Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man's device.

And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men every where to repent. (Acts 17:22-25, 28-30.)

I believe with Paul that it is central to our salvation to accept and know the true God. The diversity of views about God and the frank doubts about his very existence remind us of the prophecy of Amos:

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord:

And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it.

In that day shall the fair virgins and the young men faint for thirst. (Amos 8:11-13.)

"That day" is our day, when man-made institutions and human philosophies leave unsatisfied spiritual hungers and choking thirsts. It is no wonder men's spirits are faint.

The present struggles and meanderings of the learned, trying to find God in a laboratory of their own making, take us back to the days of the ferment of the long-ago out of which came the unthinkable creed that was supposed to clarify religious thought but left it in darkest chaos. The records reveal that many mental giants struggled long with the same incomprehensibles and came forth with a confusion that has carried over to our day. This confusion causes brilliant men now to doubt and to try with their puny powers to unravel the mystery, always getting it more and more tangled.

All of the diverse and negative and mystical concepts could not bring any fullness of peace or hope or joy to anyone. They are but sand, and structures built upon them are in danger.

But now, behold they are led about by Satan, even as chaff is driven before the wind, or as a vessel is tossed about upon the waves, without sail or anchor, or without anything wherewith to steer her; and even as she is, so are they. (Mormon 5:18.)

One prominent theologian says there is a growing despair over the possibility of knowing God. He says, "Now despair is found to be deepening as science and technology create a growing mountain of questions that cannot be answered scientifically. . . . Historians point out that individual men, even Saints, have felt such despair ever since men first began asking basic questions: Who are we? Where do we come from? What is the central meaning in our lives? Even so most theologians, including radical ones, say that the concept of God, personal or otherwise, is what contributes order and meaning to human existence." It is when men lose their concept of God that they say, "Let us eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we may die," and proceed to do just that.

Another has said, "While modern men have rejected God as a solution to life, they cannot evade the questioning anxiety about its meaning. The apparent eclipse of God is merely a sign that the world is experiencing what Rahner calls the 'the anonymous presence' of God whose word comes to man not on tablets of stone, but in the inner murmurings of the heart."

Again and again these basic questions arise: "Why am I?" "What should I become and be?" "What is the meaning of my life?"

The Apostle Paul gave the answer, but the moderns seem reluctant to accept the direction from an ancient. Paul found among the Ephesians men like children, "tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive," and he prescribed the cure. He would put men at the wheel who had communication with the Lord, in an organization with apostles, evangelists, pastors, and teachers. This organization had power to perfect the Saints and to develop the ministry and edify the people; it had as its ultimate result a unity of the faith, a knowledge of the Son of God, and perfection of men until they should reach the stature of Christ. (See Ephesians 4:11-14.)

In the early centuries of the Christian era, the apostasy came not through persecution, but by relinquishment of faith caused by the superimposing of a man-made structure upon and over the divine program. Many men with no pretense nor claim to revelation, speaking without divine authority or revelation, men depending only upon their own brilliant and inquisitive minds but claiming to represent the congregations of the Christians, in long conference and erudite council sought to make a God that all could accept.

The brilliant and educated minds with their exaggerated and developed philosophies, knowing much about the Christian traditions and the pagan philosophies, seemed to find it well to combine all these elements in an effort to please everybody. In course of time they replaced the simple ways and program of the Christ with spectacular rituals, colorful display, and impressive pageantry and dispensed it as the program of Christ and called it Christianity. At last, the prophecy had been literally fulfilled wherein Isaiah said they would have "changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant." (Isaiah 24:5.) They had replaced the glorious divine plan of exaltation of Christ with an elaborate, colorful man-made system to attract the imagination of unsuspecting souls. In those days, they seemed to have little idea of totally dethroning the Christ or terminating the life of God the Father, as in our own day, but they seemed to fill the need of putting together something that would preserve the God idea but not run counter to their rational concepts.

As a result of these long and brilliant discussions, combinations of ideas, and reconciliations of concepts, they reached the point of an incomprehensible formula called "the mystery of mysteries." The creed finally decided upon ran something like this: "We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of all things, both visible and invisible: and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son (Word) of God, begotten of the Father, only-begotten, that is of the essence (substance) of the Father, God from God, Light from Light (Life from Life), very God from very God, begotten not made, of one essence (substance) with the Father . . . through whom all things come to be, both things in heaven and things on earth; Who for the sake of us men and for our salvation came down, and was made flesh, and became man, suffered, and rose on the third day, ascended into the heavens (to the Father), is coming to judge living and dead; and in one Holy Spirit." (James L. Barker, The Divine Church, vol. 2, p. 55.)

From this incomprehensible mystery came mystification. After centuries the Christians are still mystified, and this has led in no small measure to the "death of God" theorists, for as one modern thinker said, "It is easier to think of a dead God than one who is so mystified, disembodied, inactivated, powerless, unimpressive. . . . It is easier for me to think of a world without a Creator than a Creator loaded with all the contradiction of the world."

No wonder Paul says, "The wisdom of the world is foolishness with God."

Paul spoke of arrogant Romans who worshiped their own minds rather than Him who gave them their brains, saying:

Because that, when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened.

Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools,

And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things.

Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonour their own bodies between themselves:

Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen. (Romans 1:21-25.)

And the Savior asks in parabolic terms which is greater, the Creature or his Creator?

Ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifieth the gold?

And, Whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever sweareth by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty.

Ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifieth the gift? (Matthew 23:17-19.)

He chose Peter and the other apostles for their humility, responsiveness, and childlike faith and devotion, not for their intellectual attainments. Though Paul was not an untrained man, he was pliable and teachable, and this seemed to be his theme:

Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you seemeth to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is written, He taketh the wise in their own craftiness.

And again, The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they are vain.

Therefore let no man glory in men. For all things are yours;

Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; all are yours;

And ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's. (1 Corinthians 3:18-23.)

Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. (Colossians 2:8.)

Why will men spend their time, energies, and life on a drifting selfmade raft in the great ocean of uncertainties, storms, waves, thirst, and sunstroke, especially when there is available a great powerful ship, equipped, safe, and sure?

The traditional Christian churches have failed.

These are wells without water, clouds that are carried with a tempest; to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever.

For when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them who live in error.

While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption: for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage. (2 Peter 2:17-19.)

Someone has said that we live in a day in which God, if there be a God, chooses to be silent, but The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints proclaims to the world that neither the Father nor the Son is silent. They are vocal and commune as proper and necessary, and constantly express a willingness, indeed an eagerness, to maintain communication with men and to become well acquainted enough that men may know positively of the existence, personality, purposes, and work of God, all of which narrows down to one dual objective, as is said: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

One of the theologians above quoted indicated it was impossible for man to find God or know God. This is like saying: I have never climbed Mt. Ararat—no one can climb Ararat; or, I have never bathed in the clear warm waters of the Adriatic—there is no Adriatic Sea; or, I have never hunted in Kreuger Park, nor have I seen the wild-life therein—there is no Kreuger Park; or, because I've never seen on the slopes of the Rockies or the Andes Mountains a burning bush, there was no burning bush; or, I have always had health—therefore, the pain that people claim to suffer is a figment of their imaginations. I have never rocketed into space—therefore, it is impossible. I have never heard or seen God—therefore, no man has ever seen or heard God or walked with him. How presumptuous and arrogant for any man to say God is unapproachable, unknowable, unseeable, unhearable because one himself has not prepared himself for the experience.

In his funeral sermon for King Follett, our modern prophet made some positive statements:

There are but very few beings in the world who understand rightly the character of God. . . .

If men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not comprehend themselves. . . .

God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted Man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens! . . .

[I]f you were to see Him today, you would see Him like a man in form—like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a man; for Adam was created in the very fashion, image and likeness of God, and received instruction from, and walked, talked and conversed with Him, as one man talks and communes with another.

And this is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent. (John 17:3.)

No amount of human study can find out God, but he has revealed himself to his servants the prophets, and they have taught us of his nature. We can each have a confirmation of the truth through our own fasting and prayer. The theological storms around us find us calm in the center of tempest with a simple, sure knowledge of the Father and the Son derived from the ancient and modern scriptures and affirmed by the Spirit. In this knowledge we have hope of eternal life.
