Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Chapter Six

Testimony of Christ: My Redeemer Lives Eternally

And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God.

For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. (1 Corinthians 2:1-2.)

The pastor of a church in Illinois said that he felt the same reverence for Santa Claus as he did for Jesus Christ:

I consider both of them to be folk-tales, but in different categories. The story of Santa Claus is not so deeply tinged with religious feeling or so implanted in the culture of the people.

He finds one difference, however, in that "a man named Jesus" did exist, while Santa Claus is a "figure of the imagination."

In Time, a noted professor emeritus in one of our largest universities was quoted at length in his conception of Jesus and his works. He gives him human warmth, a great capacity for love, astounding understanding. He explains that Lazarus was not dead, but was merely "brought 'back to health' by Jesus, the power of mind and learning, and by the 'therapy of his own abundant vitality.'"

Many in the world share this view of Jesus of Nazareth, but I bear testimony that Jesus is not only a great teacher, a great humanist, and a great dramatist, but is in very deed the Son of the living God, the Redeemer of the world, the Savior of mankind. I want to further testify that he not only lived in the meridian of time for approximately thirty-three years, but that he lived eternities before this, and will live eternities beyond it; and I bear testimony that he was not only the organizer of the kingdom of God upon the earth, but the Creator of this world, the Redeemer of mankind.

He first comes into our knowledge when with a host of spirits he stood before his Father in solemn assembly. The vision of this primeval gathering is recorded as follows:

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

. . . and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born.

And there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell;

And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them. (Abraham 3:22-25.)

Another of the number offered to go down to the earth and, by compulsion, save all men, but the one "like unto God" came forward to support a plan of free agency by which redemption, salvation, and exaltation would be offered to the people of the earth but not forced upon them. This latter plan, urged by Jehovah, or Jesus Christ, was accepted.

The time finally came when the earth was to be created.

And then the Lord said: Let us go down. And they went down at the beginning, and they, that is the Gods, organized and formed the heavens and the earth. (Abraham 4:1.)

And Jesus the Christ, or Jehovah, was one of the Gods who created the earth and gave it light and established upon it the plant and animal life and finally man, created in the image of God. He said long centuries later to the Nephites:

Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. . . . (3 Nephi 9:15.)

The Redeemer bore witness again to Adam and Eve, who were given dominion over this earth. They lived in the Garden of Eden from which they were expelled after partaking of the forbidden fruit. Adam and Eve, with their large family, scattered out upon the land and tilled it and tended their flocks. Having been commanded by the voice of God to offer sacrifices of the firstlings of their flocks, Adam obeyed.

And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me.

And then the angel spake, saying, This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth.

And in that day the Holy Ghost fell upon Adam, which beareth record of the Father and the Son, saying: I am the Only Begotten of the Father from the beginning, henceforth and forever, that as thou hast fallen thou mayest be redeemed, and all mankind, even as many as will. (Moses 5:6-7, 9.)

The gospel of repentance and redemption was made clear to these ancestors by the Savior himself.

After some generations the Redeemer came again to earth to visit his choice servant and mighty leader Enoch, who, because of his righteousness, was permitted to hear the voice of Jehovah, who commanded him to preach repentance to a wicked people. First he heard the voice of God calling people to repentance. Enoch bowed himself to the earth before the Lord and spake:

Why is it that I have found favor in thy sight, and am but a lad, and all the people hate me; for I am slow of speech; wherefore am I thy servant?

And the Lord spake unto Enoch, and said unto him: Anoint thine eyes with clay, and wash them, and thou shalt see. And he did so. (Moses 6:31, 35.)

And he beheld the spirit world and all creations not visible to the natural eye.

. . . thenceforth came the saying abroad in the land: A seer hath the Lord raised up unto his people. (Moses 6:36.)

From hills and high places, Enoch testified against them for sin. In concluding his preaching to his people, he bore testimony:

. . . I stood upon the mount, I beheld the heavens open, and I was clothed upon with glory;

And I saw the Lord; and he stood before my face, and he talked with me, even as a man talketh one with another, face to face. . . . (Moses 7:3-4.)

The transgressions of the people of the generation of Enoch seem to have continued unabated, for Noah comes forth to continue throughout the long years of his ministry a vigorous warning and preachment against the sins of the world. The world had become ripe in iniquity. The people had attempted to take the life of the prophet Noah.

And thus Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord; for Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generation; and he walked with God. . . . (Moses 8:27.)

Again, at the time of the tower of Babel when the Jaredites prepared to cross the ocean for the promised land, now known as America, they went into the mountains and "did molten out of the rock, sixteen small stones" (Ether 3:1), and the prophet entreated the Lord to touch these stones that they might shine forth in the darkness of the enclosed vessels to give light while they crossed the sea. And as the Lord touched each stone,

—the veil was taken from off the eyes of the brother of Jared, and he saw the finger of the Lord; and it was as the finger of a man, like unto flesh and blood. . . .

And the Lord said unto him: Because of thy faith thou hast seen that I shall take upon me flesh and blood; and never has man come before me with such exceeding faith as thou hast; for were it not so ye could not have seen my finger. . . .

And when he had said these words, behold, the Lord showed himself unto him, and said: . . .

Behold, I am he who was prepared from the foundation of the world to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ. . . .

. . . Seest thou that ye are created after mine own image . . . ?

Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh. (Ether 3:6, 9, 13-16.)

Some centuries later in what is known as the meridian of time, the people on the American continent were watching for the signs of the coming of the Messiah in fulfillment of prophecy. The wicked figured that the day had passed and issued ominous warnings to the believers of Samuel's prophecies concerning the birth of Christ. Nephi, being greatly concerned, prayed devoutly unto the Lord all day, at the end of which there came to him the voice of the Lord, saying:

Lift up your head and be of good cheer; for behold, the time is at hand, and on this night shall the sign be given, and on the morrow come I into the world, to show unto the world that I will fulfill all that which I have caused to be spoken by the mouth of my holy prophets. (3 Nephi 1:13.)

That night the darkness did not come, and two days and a night were as one day, and the righteous people knew that that day would see the birth of the Savior of the world. And a new star appeared as further evidence that the Christ was born.

Far across the ocean in the land of Judea this same star shone forth and led the three wise men from the East to a stable out of Bethlehem. Here they found, according to the many prophetic scriptures, "a babe wrapped in swaddling clothes and lying in a manger." Mary, a virgin, became the mother of the Son of God. Her husband, Joseph, the carpenter of Nazareth, had brought her to the city of David at tax time, and here the predictions of many centuries were fulfilled in the mortal birth of Jesus the Christ. The shepherds as well as the wise men called and paid homage, the angels sang hosannas, and the Savior came into his flesh and blood tabernacle.

Little is told of the childhood of Jesus, but it is related in Luke:

And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom: and the grace of God was upon him. (Luke 2:40.)

And when Jesus was a man and came up out of the waters of baptism—

. . . the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon him:

And lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. (Matthew 3:16-17.)

In the wilderness the devil came to tempt the Savior, but Jesus withstood and rebuked him.

We follow our Savior down the dusty roads of Judea; over the rocky paths of the highlands and the sandy beaches of the seas; into the synagogues to reprove and rebuke the sinner; in the byways to call to repentance.

We find the Redeemer at the marriage at Cana turning water into wine; at the temple at Jerusalem where, with his handmade scourge of small cords, he drove from the temple the desecrating traders and money-changers, saying, ". . . make not my Father's house an house of merchandise." (John 2:16.)

He declared to the woman of Samaria:

Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst. . . . (John 4:14.)

The mortal life of the Lord was a hard one judged by the standards of the world. He said:

Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head. (Luke 9:58.)

He was a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief. He walked the dusty roads of Judea followed by great multitudes of interested disciples, curious sign seekers, and critical annoyers, with always some vicious men lurking in the background, seeking his very life.

Even in his old home town he was not appreciated. At his first visit home he was thrust out of the synagogue, out of the city, and led to the brow of the hill to be killed, but he escaped. Many of his disciples "went back and walked no more with him." Though a price was on his head, his disciples urged him to make a display of his miracles, "For neither did his brethren believe in him." (John 7:5.) The hypocritical Pharisees and the chief priests took counsel to trap him that he might be put to death.

Constantly under strain from the throngs of demanding people, he frequently retired "into a mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer to God." (Luke 6:12.)

And Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren . . . fishers.

And he saith unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men. And they straightway left their nets, and followed him. (Matthew 4:18-20.)

And he saw James and John mending their nets and likewise called them and subsequently called other eight from all walks of life to lead his church, and he "named them apostles."

The numerous miracles of the Redeemer brought him early attention. The curious followed with wonder, the believers looked on with awe, and because of his increasing popularity, his enemies followed to catch him in law-breaking that they might dispose of him.

Beginning at Cana he astounded his followers. He blessed the loaves and fishes and fed many thousands of hungry people. He placed his fingers in the ears of a deaf person, saying, "Be opened," and the man heard clearly. He "spit and touched" the tongue of one with an impediment in his speech, "and he spake plain." He touched the eyes of the blind, saying, "According to your faith be it unto you. And their eyes were opened." (Matthew 9:29-30.)

The multitudes marveled, saying, "It was never so seen in Israel" as he cast out the devil. His accusers found him healing on the Sabbath and blamed him when they heard him say to the man with a withered hand: "Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched it forth; and it was restored whole, like as the other." (Matthew 12:13.)

"We never saw it on this fashion," the people said as they saw a sick man carry away his bed at the command: "Take up thy bed and go thy way."

He stopped a funeral procession and, touching the bier of the son of the widow of Nain, said: "Young man, I say unto thee, Arise. And he that was dead sat up and began to speak." (Luke 7:14-15.)

He astounded the people when he said to the dead daughter of Jairus, "Damsel, I say unto thee arise." (Mark 5:41.) They had laughed him to scorn, but now they were shocked when the damsel arose and walked.

The woman who for twelve years of affliction had "spent all her living upon physicians, neither could be healed of any, came behind him, and touched the border of his garment" (Luke 8:43-44) and immediately was healed. Again, he forgave the sinner, stilled the tempest, cleansed the lepers, and raised the dead, even his friend Lazarus, who was four days dead when the voice of Jehovah commanded, "Lazarus, come forth." (John 11:43.)

And toward the end of his ministry,

Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart,

And was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light.

And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him.

. . . behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. (Matthew 17:1-3, 4.)

Knowing that his hour had come, he repaired to the room that had been prepared, and there he gave to his disciples the Last Supper, after which he retired into the Garden of Gethsemane, where he poured out his soul to his Father:

O my Father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done. (Matthew 26:42.)

Then came a mob headed by the betrayer, Judas. They stripped Jesus and put on a scarlet robe. They pushed down upon his head a crown of thorns and placed a reed in his right hand and bowed the knee and mocked and spit upon him and smote him on the head. Then they led him to Calvary to be crucified. Between thieves he was nailed to the cross, and the executioners divided his garments among them.

Those who loved him crouched about his feet and wept in their helplessness. As his life ebbed he called:

Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do. (Luke 23:34.)

And he cried with a loud voice,

Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: and . . . he gave up the ghost. (Luke 23:46.)

Then they took his body carefully down, wrapped it in linen, and laid it in a sepulchre that was hewn in stone wherein never man before was laid. And the women prepared spices and ointments for the body. The three days were ended and Jesus came forth as he had promised. His disciples, both men and women, had been to the tomb and found it empty. They were surprised, still not comprehending the fact of the resurrection. He said to Mary:

Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God. (John 20:17.)

The same day he appeared in the locked room with his apostles and revealed himself to them, assuring them that he lived again. Many hundred were similarly convinced.

Now his church was organized, the program clarified, and leaders developed. And when his followers were gathered together in Jerusalem,

. . . he was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their sight.

And while they looked stedfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel;

Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven. (Acts 1:9-11.)

On the Western Hemisphere also, there was at the death of Jesus darkness and destruction, cities burned, mountains leveled, and seas raised, and in the suffering and lamentations of the people a voice was heard among the inhabitants, explaining the disasters and saying:

Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. . . .

I came unto my own, and my own received me not. . . .

I am the light and the life of the world. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end.

Behold, I have come unto the world to bring redemption unto the world, to save the world from sin. (3 Nephi 9:15-16, 18, 21.)

Again the Nephites were conversing about Jesus Christ, the sign of whose death had been given to them, and a small, penetrating voice came out of heaven, which pierced them to the very soul and caused their hearts to burn. The voice uttered these words:

Behold my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him.

And . . . they cast their eyes up again towards heaven; and behold, they saw a Man descending out of heaven; and he was clothed in a white robe; and he came down and stood in the midst of them. . . .

And . . . he stretched forth his hand and spake unto the people, saying:

Behold, I am Jesus Christ whom the prophets testified shall come into the world.

. . . I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the sins of the world. . . .

. . . when Jesus had spoken these words the whole multitude fell to the earth; for they remembered that it had been prophesied among them that Christ should show himself unto them after his ascension into heaven.

And it came to pass that the Lord spake unto them saying:

Arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world. (3 Nephi 11:7-14.)

And all the people felt the prints of the nails and of the spear and

. . . did know of a surety and did bear record, that it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come. (3 Nephi 11:15.)

And he organized his church and called his twelve apostles and taught them the doctrines and blessed their children. He restored sight to the blind, strength to the infirm, and wholeness to those who were ill, and after his appearances among them,

. . . there came a cloud and overshadowed the multitude that they could not see Jesus.

And while they were overshadowed he departed from them, and ascended into heaven. And the disciples saw and did bear record that he ascended again into heaven. (3 Nephi 18:38-39.)

The time passed and apostasy displaced faithfulness. But eventually the darkness of centuries was beginning to be dissipated, the new world of America had been rediscovered, and honorable, God-fearing people had settled it. War had been waged and freedom gained and religious liberty granted, and the Lord Jesus Christ appeared again to restore and reestablish his work and kingdom upon the earth. A young boy with an open and unbiased mind knelt on a beautiful spring morning in a grove and prayed for light. Though the evil power attempted to destroy him, he was relieved by the appearance of a pillar of light "above the brightness of the sun."

It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!

. . . I asked the Personages, who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects was right—and which I should join. (Joseph Smith 2:17-18.)

Following this visit came numerous other visitations from heavenly beings in the restoration of the gospel and the establishing of the kingdom upon the earth.

The work went forward, the Church was organized, the Book of Mormon was printed, the revelations were given, twelve apostles were appointed, the temple in Kirtland was built, and during the dedication ceremonies after the administering of the sacrament on Sunday, April 3, 1836, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery retired to the pulpit, the veils being dropped, and there bowed in silent prayer. After arising from their knees, they saw the Savior appear to them, standing on the breastwork of the pulpit. He blessed them and accepted the building.

And so, having traced the scripturally recorded appearances of the Lord Jesus Christ from preexistence to date, we look forward now to his second coming, as he promised, which promise will literally be fulfilled as were his many other promises. In the meantime we praise his holy name and serve him and bear testimony of the divinity of his mission, along with the prophets through the generations. We testify with John the Baptist, who, as he saw the Lord approaching him, said: "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world." (John 1:29.)

We testify again with John the Beloved, who, after fishing all night without success, and seeing Jesus on the shore, said with conviction: "It is the Lord!"

And with Simon Peter, who, when asked by the Lord, "But whom say ye that I am?" answered: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." (Matthew 16:15-16.)

And finally we bear testimony with the Prophet Joseph Smith, who was willing to give his life for his testimony, which comes to us in his own words:

. . . I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two Personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision; and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation. (Joseph Smith 2:25.)

We too know and cannot deny that Jesus is the Christ, the Savior of all mankind, that he died for our sins, and that he lives and reigns today in the heavens, resurrected and perfect, awaiting the day of his second coming to glory.
