Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Chapter Seven

Manifestation of God: Spiritual Eyes Behold God

If I were to tell you in all seriousness that in your own backyard you could find an acre of diamonds, would you ignore the suggestion and take no trouble to search? Today, I am telling you with all the fervor of my soul that in easy reach there is a prize of inestimable worth. Diamonds can buy one food and shelter. Diamonds can embellish and decorate. But the prize that is within your grasp is more brilliant than jewels. It will not lose its sparkle, nor can it be stolen by thieves. I speak of the greatest gift—the gift of eternal life. It may not be obtained through mere asking; it cannot be purchased with money; hopeful wishing will not bring it; but it is available to men and women the world over who comply with the requirements.

There have been long periods of history when the total truth of how to obtain this prize was not immediately available to the inhabitants of the earth. But in our day, the whole eternal program is here and can carry men to exaltation and eternal life, all the way to godhood. Early in man's history the full gospel was known. But, as Amos predicted:

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord:

And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. (Amos 8:11-12.)

After the early Christian era there followed centuries of spiritual darkness, as described by Amos. But we solemnly announce to all the world that the spiritual famine is ended, the spiritual drought is spent, the word of the Lord in its purity and completeness is available to all men. One need no longer wander from sea to sea nor from the north to the east seeking the true gospel, for the everlasting truth is available, restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

To Joseph Smith the Master himself gave the basic truth: "This is eternal lives—to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent. I am he." And then his command: "Receive ye, therefore, my law." (D&C 132:24.)

In spite of all the gods that men make for themselves, and the confusion incident thereto, the living and true God is in his heaven and is available to his children. If there is estrangement, it is men who have cut themselves off from God.

The most important question one can ask himself is this: Do I really know God the Father and Jesus Christ, his Son? And in the answer is the difference between floundering through indecision and having sureness and certainty.

The Lord promised:

. . . every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am. (D&C 93:1.)

The beatitudes of Christ add: "Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God." (Matthew 5:8.)

Celestial life may be had by every soul who will fulfill the requirements. To know is not enough. One must do. Righteousness is vital and ordinances are necessary.

Jehovah proclaims: "But no man is possessor of all things except he be purified and cleansed from all sin." (D&C 50:28.)

And the Redeemer continues: "And surely every man must repent or suffer. . . ." (D&C 19:4.)

. . . I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent;

But if they would not repent they must suffer even as I;

Which suffering caused myself even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain. . . ." (D&C 19:16-18.)

There are three Gods: the Eternal Father, Elohim, to whom we pray; Christ or Jehovah; and the Holy Ghost, who testifies of the others and witnesses to us the truth of all things.

Many seem to delight in confusing the matter with their rationalizations and human calculations. The Father and the Son, in whose image we are created, separate and distinct beings, as like as any father and son, have identified themselves through the ages.

The Christ has declared himself to be the Lord God Almighty, Christ the Lord, the Beginning and the End, the Redeemer of the world, Jesus the Christ, the Mighty One of Israel, the Creator, the Son of the living God, Jehovah.

The Father Elohim declares Jesus to be "Mine Only Begotten Son," "the Word of my power." And twice, at least, at baptism and on the Mount of Transfiguration, the Father declared: "This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."

The Bible gives much secular and religious history and much in glorious teachings. But even with these scriptures, confusion continues in the Christian world.

To know God, one must be aware of the person and attributes, power and glory of God the Father and God the Christ. We learn much from the encounters prophets have had.

Moses declares "he saw God face to face, and he talked with him. . . ." (Moses 1:2.)

This experience of Moses is in harmony with the scripture that says:

For no man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the Spirit of God.

Neither can any natural man abide the presence of God, neither after the carnal mind. (D&C 67:11-12.)

It must be obvious, then, that to endure the glory of the Father or of the glorified Christ, a mortal being must be translated or otherwise fortified.

Grease on the swimmer's body or a heavy rubber skin-diver's suit may protect one from cold and wet; an asbestos suit might protect a firefighter from flames; a bullet-proof vest may save one from assassin's bullets; one's heated home may protect from winter's chilling blasts; deep shade or smoked glass can modify the withering heat and burning rays of the midday sun. There is a protective force that God brings into play when he exposes his human servants to the glories of his person and his works.

Moses, a prophet of God, held the protecting holy priesthood:

. . . and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence. (Moses 1:2.)

In heavenly glorious vision, Moses "beheld the world . . . and all the children of men. . . ." (Moses 1:8.) He was protected then, but when the protection from such transcendent glory was relaxed, Moses was left near-helpless.

And the presence of God withdrew from Moses, that his glory was not upon Moses; and Moses was left unto himself. And . . . he fell unto the earth. (Moses 1:9.)

Many hours elapsed before he could regain his natural strength. He exclaimed:

. . . mine own eyes have beheld God . . . my spiritual eyes, for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in his presence; but his glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him. (Moses 1:11.)

There is another power in this world, forceful and vicious. In the wilderness of Judea, on the temple's pinnacle and on the high mountain, a momentous contest took place between two brothers, Jehovah and Lucifer, sons of Elohim. When physically weak from fasting, Christ was tempted by Lucifer: "If thou be the Son of God, command this stone that it be made bread." (Luke 4:3.)

On the temple's pinnacles, the evil one taunted again, suggesting the unwarranted use of power. Christ replied: "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." (Luke 4:12.)

On a high mountain, the devil tantalized the Christ, offering kingdoms, thrones, powers, dominions; satisfactions of urges, desires, passions; the glory of wealth, ease, comfort—all this to possess on condition that he worship Lucifer.

Jesus, in his mortality, was tempted but resisted: "Get thee hence, Satan. . . ." (Matthew 4:10.)

Similarly Satan had contended for the subservience of Moses. Satan, also a son of God, had rebelled and had been cast out of heaven and not permitted an earthly body as had his brother Jehovah. Much depended upon the outcome of this spectacular duel. Could Lucifer control and dominate this prophet Moses, who had learned so much directly from his Lord?

"Moses, son of man, worship me," the devil tempted, with promise of worlds and luxuries and power. But Moses looked upon Satan and said: "Who art thou? For behold, I am a son of God, in the similitude of his Only Begotten. . . ." (Moses 1:13.)

Moses knew well his role and was prepared for this temptation:

. . . where is thy glory, that I should worship thee?

For behold, I could not look upon God, except his glory should come upon me, and I were strengthened before him. But I can look upon thee in the natural man. Is it not so, surely?

Blessed be the name of my God, for his Spirit hath not altogether withdrawn from me, or else where is thy glory, for it is darkness unto me? And I can judge between thee and God. . . . (Moses 1:13-15.)

The contrast was compelling. Moses the priesthood bearer must be protected to see Jehovah but could face this imposter with his natural eyes and without discomfort. What a contrast!

And with full knowledge now the prophet demanded: "Get thee hence, Satan. . . ." (Moses 1:16.) The liar, the tempter, the devil unwilling to give up this possible victim, now in rage and fury "cried with a loud voice, and rent upon the earth, and commanded, saying: I am the Only Begotten, worship me." (Moses 1:19.)

Moses recognized the deception and saw the power of darkness and the "bitterness of hell." Here was a force not easily reckoned with nor evicted. Terrified, he called upon God, then commanded with new power:

I will not cease to call upon God . . . for his glory has been upon me, wherefore I can judge between him and thee. . . . In the name of the Only Begotten, depart hence, Satan. (Moses 1:18, 21.)

Not even Lucifer, the star of the morning, the arch-enemy of mankind, can withstand the power of the priesthood of God. Trembling, quaking, cursing, weeping, wailing, gnashing his teeth, he departed from the victorious Moses.

When properly protected with the glory of God, and when sufficiently perfected, man can see God.

Again the glory of the Lord was upon Moses and he heard the promise:

. . . thou shalt deliver my people from bondage.

. . . and thou shalt be made stronger than many waters; for they shall obey thy command as if thou wert God. (Moses 1:26, 25.)

What a promise! What power! As one hears this promise from the God of heaven, one can envision water coming from the rock, manna from the sky, quails from the bushes, and waters of the sea rolling back to provide dry crossing for the refugee children of Israel.

A heavenly visitor identified himself to Abraham:

I am the Lord thy God; I dwell in heaven. . . . My name is Jehovah. . . . (Abraham 2:7-8.)

And Abraham—

talked with the Lord, face to face, as one man talketh with another. . . . And he said unto me: My son, my son. . . . And he put his hand upon mine eyes, and I saw those things which his hands had made . . . and I could not see the end thereof. (Abraham 3:11-12.)

Abraham was protected so that he could withstand the brilliance of the Lord and so that he could see and comprehend. The visions that Abraham saw at this time before his sojourn in Egypt were beyond all description. Perhaps no soul even with the strongest telescopes has ever seen the thousandth part of what Abraham saw as to this universe with all its limitless parts and functions. He also saw the creation of this earth, and the Father is quoted as telling him:

And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten. (Moses 1:33.)

How great the power of God, the majesty of God, the glory of God!

Again, as, Jehovah came to call Saul of Tarsus to his mission, the vision was given to him only.

And the men which journeyed with him stood speechless, hearing a voice, but seeing no man. (Acts 9:7.)

But Saul of Tarsus saw Jehovah, the glorified Christ, and heard his voice and conversed with him. Even partially protected as he was from the brilliance of light from heaven greater than the noonday sun, Paul collapsed to the earth trembling, shocked. The voice said: "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. . . ." (Acts 9:5.) So intense was the light that even with protection he was blinded. He said: "And when I could not see for the glory of that light, being led by the hand of them that were with me, I came into Damascus." (Acts 22:11.) A priesthood miracle restored sight to Paul after three days of total darkness.

The glory of the Lord! How great and magnificent!

Paul told Timothy:

. . . Christ . . . is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and the Lord of lords;

Who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see. . . . (1 Timothy 6:14-16.)

Enoch also needed protection, for the Lord speaking to Enoch said:

Anoint thine eyes with clay, and wash them, and thou shalt see. . . .

And he beheld the spirits that God had created; and he beheld also things which were not visible to the natural eye. . . . (Moses 6:35-36.)

The godless dared not touch him "for fear came on all of them that heard him; for he walked with God."

Daniel was worried so much that he mourned for three weeks and took no pleasant bread nor meat nor wine. Then came his vision, which he alone saw:

. . . there remained no strength in me . . . Yet heard I the voice of his words . . . then was I in a deep sleep on my face, and my face toward the ground.

And, behold, an hand touched me, which set me upon my knees and upon the palms of my hands.

And when he had spoken such words unto me, I set my face toward the ground, and I became dumb. (Daniel 10:8-10, 15.)

There is another world with which we mortals are little acquainted. It may not be far from us.

Peter, James, and John, the Presidency of the Church, came to know the power of God.

These three central figures climbed the high mountain with the Lord, Jehovah, while he was yet in the mortal world before his crucifixion. In the high mountain was solitude, apartness, privacy.

What a glorious experience! The Son of God, their Master, "was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light." Heavenly beings, Moses and Elias, appeared to them, and "a bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him." (Matthew 17:2-3, 5.) The glory of the contact was more than they could bear and they collapsed, falling on their faces. While they were in this state, indescribable things were said and done.

The three mortals thus protected survived even this withering fiery experience.

Realizing that death by martyrdom was imminent, that a verbal witness could be forgotten, and that his important knowledge must be perpetuated down through the ages, Peter bore his solemn witness in writing. No fable was this, no conjuring of the imagination, no imagination of human minds—it was real and certain:

[We] . . . were eyewitnesses of his majesty.

For he [Christ] received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount. . . . (2 Peter 1:16-18.)

The pattern was established, the chart made, the blueprint drawn. Under special need, at special times, under proper circumstances, God reveals himself to men who are prepared for such manifestations. And since God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, the heavens cannot be closed except as men lock them against themselves with disbelief.

In our own dispensation came another similar grand experience. The need was imperative; an apostasy had covered the earth and gross darkness the people, and the minds of men were clouded and light had been obscured in darkness. The time had come. Religious liberty would protect the seed until it could germinate and grow. And the individual was prepared in the person of a youth, clean and open minded, who had such implicit faith in the response of God that the heavens could not remain as iron and the earth as brass as they had been for many centuries.

This budding prophet had no preconceived false notions and beliefs. He was not steeped in the traditions and legends and superstitions and fables of the centuries. He had nothing to unlearn. He prayed for knowledge and direction. The powers of darkness preceded the light. When he knelt in solitude in the silent forest, his earnest prayer brought on a battle royal that threatened his destruction. For centuries, Lucifer with unlimited dominion had fettered men's minds and could ill-afford to lose his satanic hold. This threatened his unlimited dominion. Let Joseph Smith tell his own story:

. . . I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me to bind my tongue. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction.

. . . at the very moment when I was ready to . . . abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head above the brightness of the sun. . . .

. . . I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is my Beloved Son. Hear Him! (Joseph Smith 2:15-17.)

Young Joseph finally recovered his voice and asked the pertinent questions for which he had come and a conversation ensued, most of which he was forbidden to write. He continues:

. . . When I came to myself again, I found myself lying on my back, looking up into heaven. . . . (Joseph Smith 2:20.)

Joseph had had the same general experience as Abraham and Moses and Enoch, who had seen the Lord and heard his voice. In addition, he heard the Father, bearing witness of the Son, as had Peter, James, and John on Transfiguration's mount. He had seen the person of Elohim. He had fought a desperate battle with the powers of darkness as had Moses and Abraham. And like them all, he was protected by the glory of the Lord. This young man gave a new concept to the world. Now, at least one person living knew God without question, for he had seen and heard.

And eternal life again was made available to men in the earth, for as the scripture says:

And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent. (John 17:3.)

In light of the testimony of Joseph Smith, the ancient scriptures take on new meaning, their literal verity confirmed by the experience of modern man who, quickened and protected by the Spirit, actually saw the Father and the Son. How great a blessing to see God and commune directly with him while yet in mortality! Though few of us will have that blessing, we can, through understanding the scriptures and by humble prayer, come in impressive measure to know God. We have the promise that if we sufficiently purify our hearts we shall surely see God and know him as he is!
