Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Section Two

Marriage and the Family

Chapter Nine

Parental Responsibility: Reservoirs of Righteousness

I grew up in a dry country. It seemed to me that hardly ever was there enough rain spread over the crop-growing period to carry us through the season—not enough water in the river to distribute among the many hungry canals and the tens of thousands of thirsty acres, not enough to irrigate all the crops.

We learned to pray for rain—we always prayed for rain.

When I was still very small, I knew that plants could not survive in a dry country more than about two or three weeks without water. I knew how to harness up the old mare to a lizard—forked log on which a barrel was placed—and I drove her to the "big ditch," the Union Canal, which was a block below our home. With a bucket, I scooped up water from the small stream or the puddles and filled the barrel, and the horse dragged it back so I could pour buckets full of the precious liquid on the roses, the violets, and other flowers, and the small shrubs and hedges and new trees. Water was like liquid gold, so reservoirs became the warp and woof of the fabric of my life. Around the table we talked of water, irrigation, crops, floods, hot dry weeks, and cloudless skies.

We used to look for clouds somewhat as did Elijah and his people after the three-year drought.

Through the long, dry summers, we always seemed to be looking for dark, heavy clouds. And every year the clouds did gather, and the thunderstorms did come, and the dry washes did run for a few hours, and the river roared down its channel.

But the canals were often still empty, for the brush and rock dams were washed down the river by the first raging torrent. Then came the call for the able-bodied men to rush to the heads of the canals to build new dams, to get the canals full before the river water had all run down to the sea. And when working in the flood, hauling brush and trees, rocks and dirt, horses floundered and were sometimes drowned and men had narrow escapes.

Later I learned that even dependable diversion dams were not enough. A reservoir was needed—a high dam that would impound the fall, winter, and spring rains and keep them stored for the later need.

There are in our lives reservoirs of many kinds. Some reservoirs are to store water. Some are to store food, as we do in our family welfare program and as Joseph did in the land of Egypt during the seven years of plenty. There should also be reservoirs of knowledge to meet the future needs; reservoirs of courage to overcome the floods of fear that put uncertainty in lives; reservoirs of physical strength to help us meet the frequent burdens of work and illness; reservoirs of goodness; reservoirs of stamina; reservoirs of faith. Yes, especially reservoirs of faith so that when the world presses in upon us, we stand firm and strong; when the temptations of a decaying world about us draw on our energies, sap our spiritual vitality, and seek to pull us down, we need a storage of faith that can carry youth and later adults over the dull, the difficult, the terrifying moments, disappointments, disillusionments, and years of adversity, want, confusion, and frustration.

And who is to build these reservoirs? Is this not the reason that God gave to every child two parents?

Who else but the forebears would clear the forests, plow the land, carve out the futures? Who else would set up the businesses, dig the canals, survey the territory? Who else would plant the orchards, start the vineyards, erect the homes?

It is those parents who sired them and bore them who are expected to lay foundations for their children and to build the barns and tanks and bins and reservoirs.

I am grateful to my parents, for they made reservoirs for my brothers, my sisters, and me. The reservoirs were filled with prayer habits, study, activities, positive services, and truth and righteousness. Every morning and every night we knelt at our chairs by the table and prayed, taking turns. When I was married, the habit persisted, and our new family continued the practice.

Lehi and Sariah built and filled reservoirs for their children. One son said:

I, Nephi, having been born of goodly parents, therefore I was taught somewhat in all the learning of my father . . . having had a great knowledge of the goodness and the mysteries of God. (1 Nephi 1:1.)

Though two of the brothers ignored those teachings, using their own free agency, yet Nephi and others of his family were strongly fortified and all their lives could draw heavily on the reservoir built and filled by worthy parents.

Jacob, another of the sons of Lehi, drew heavily from the storage inherited from his father, and he passed the same to his son Enos, who bore testimony of it:

. . . I, Enos, knowing my father that he was a just man—for he taught me . . . in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. . . .

. . . went to hunt . . . and the words which I had often heard my father speak concerning eternal life, and the joy of the saints, sunk deep into my heart.

And my soul hungered; and I kneeled down before my Maker. . . . (Enos 1, 3-4.)

Enos obtained forgiveness by drawing heavily on the reservoir of faith his parents had set up for their children.

One day I met a delightful couple—faithful Latter-day Saints with a splendid family and a successful life. They told me of their family history. The husband was one of seven children of a family of active Church members, where the Lord was central in their lives. All but one of the seven had remained faithful, filled honorable missions, married in the temple, and had successful, happy families, as had their parents before them. The one had strayed and had marital and other serious problems.

On the other hand, the wife was one of seven children in a family where the Church meant little and they had bypassed tithing, prayers, and all church activities, and had ignored the spiritual part of their lives. All seven of the children had been reared in the same household, subject to the same conditions, and all but this one daughter ignored their spiritual obligations, as their parents had done before them.

Both families had the same community backgrounds. The first parents had built and filled a high, strong reservoir of habits and qualities of faith for their children. The second family built no reservoir of spiritual strength but depended on the runoff. Their uncertain little diversion dams, like our brush and rock ones, had washed away when the torrents came.

The Lord has inspired his church to place increased emphasis on building family unity and faith. Every family is urged to engage in regular morning and night family prayers and to devote at least one evening a week at home in the sweet family togetherness undisturbed by the world or any of its allurements. They will plan to turn off the TV and radio, leave the telephone unanswered, cancel all calls or appointments, and spend a warm, homey evening together.

While one objective is reached by merely being together, yet the additional and greater value can come from the lessons of life. The father will teach the children. Here they can learn integrity, honor, dependability, sacrifice, and faith in God. Life's experiences and the scriptures are the basis of the teaching, and this, wrapped up in filial and parental love, makes an impact nothing else can make. Thus, reservoirs of righteousness are filled to carry children through the dark days of temptation and desire, of drought and skepticism. As they grow up, the children cooperate in building this storage for themselves and the family. And so we have as a basic part of the Lord's programs the home evening and the family prayers and the teaching of gospel principles in our homes.

Some years ago we visited a country where strange ideologies were taught and "pernicious doctrines" were promulgated every day in the schools and in the captive press. Every day the children listened to the doctrines, philosophies, and ideals their teachers related.

Someone said that "constant dripping will wear away the hardest stone." This I knew, so I asked about the children: "Do they retain their faith? Are they not overcome by the constant pressure of their teachers? How can you be sure they will not leave the simple faith in God?"

The answer amounted to saying "We mend the damaged reservoir each night. We teach our children positive righteousness so that the false philosophies do not take hold. Our children are growing up in faith and righteousness in spite of the almost overwhelming pressures from outside."

Even cracked dams can be mended and saved, and sandbags can hold back the flood. And reiterated truth, renewed prayer, gospel teachings, expression of love, and parental interest can save the child and keep him on the right path.
