Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Chapter Twelve

Loyalty: Lines of Communication

We were riding far out in the northwest of Argentina. It was cattle country. The road was straight and narrow for miles, and on either side was a four-wire barbed fence. Parallel to the fence was a series of telephone poles. Upon each pole was a crossbar, and strung from crossbar to crossbar were the communication lines.

As we traveled along where the heavy grass had recently been burned, we saw that some of the telephone poles were burned off near the ground.

Nearly all the poles for a distance were scorched or burned, but some had been burned completely off the first few feet from the ground and were hanging from the wires they were intended to support. Dangling in the air, these poles touched the ground as they were swinging in the wind on sagging wires, each time creating static on the line.

The poles had been set to hold up the lines, but they were dragging them down.

Many a time during the three years that I was in charge of the work in South America I tried to get long-distance calls through to distant places. When the connection was made, almost invariably there would be static, and the words were cut in two and grating sounds were heard. In my mind's eye I could see the telephone poles on the Salta Road swaying in the breeze, hitting the ground and occasionally breaking connection.

Telephone lines and telephone poles are a little like people. They have one purpose but sometimes serve another. They are designed to be firm and stout and to give support; but in many cases they are leaning and swaying and sagging until communications are greatly impaired, if not actually cut off.

In my experience I find that in a large number of marital cases, the problem is lack of communication; the wires are down, the poles are burned, husbands and wives are jangling, and there is static where there should be peace. There is growing disgust and hate where there should be love and harmony.

A typical young couple, only a few hectic years into their eternal marriage—only two children away from the eternal vows they had made in the holy temple of God—were each going a separate way. Their ideas of life were different as to spiritual matters (as well as many others)—one wishing to move along in a way that the other thought was fanaticism and the other moving along in a path that the first spouse thought to be almost apostasy; and both were mistaken.

They talked about it and lost their tempers and drew further and further away from their common goal. Both were good people basically, but their telephone poles were burned and the wires of communication were now sagging. Their inability to communicate in reasonableness led to anger, hard words, misunderstandings.

In time, each found another person and set up different communication lines for sympathy and understanding and comfort; and this disloyalty led to physical adventures that resulted in adulteries and two broken homes and disillusioned spouses and crushed hopes and injured children.

And all this because two basically good people let their supporting principles get down and permitted effective communication to be dragged to the ground. This is not one couple; it is tens of thousands of couples who started out in a blaze of glory, sweet felicity, and an inter-responsibility and with the highest of hopes.

In another instance two young couples from the Northwest came, bowed in sorrow. The husband of one and the wife of the other had lost themselves, disloyally finding comfort where no association should have been tolerated. The two young people, unfaithful to their spouses, had conversed and confided too much; then secret meetings followed, with disloyal disclosures concerning the spouse of each. And finally, that which at the outset surely could not have been dreamed of the transgression.

Both couples had reduced their activity, had become casual in their churchgoing. They had joined a social group who were also turning to spiritual casualness. Their new way of living was beyond their means, and debts crowded out tithing.

They were too busy for home evenings and too rushed for family prayer, and when the great temptation came, they were not prepared. The burning grass had consumed their poles and the dangling charred stubs were hanging from the sagging wires.

Sin comes when communication lines are down—it always does, sooner or later.

We are living in a corrupt world. There has been sin since Cain yielded to Satan, but perhaps never before has the world accepted sin so completely as a way of life. We shall continue to cry repentance from thousands of pulpits. We shall continue to warn the people who are all too ready to accept the world as it pushes in upon them.

Let us fight the fire of temptation, replace the sin-damaged supports to righteous living, and maintain the clear communication that will keep us in harmony with one another and with our Lord and Savior.
