Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Chapter Thirteen

Fidelity: "Spouses . . . and None Else"

Satan's threat to take all those who will follow him is no idle boast. He may be depended on to engulf and capture all who will listen to him. Often we direct our warning to the young, who lack experience to know where danger lies. But Satan works not only on youth; he seeks us all. The world is ripening in iniquity, and crime and sin are rampant.

We are not unmindful of those numerous good people to whom the home life and the commands of God are still their magnificent obsession. They have their reward. But all too many are following the path of evil, and our voices must sound a warning.

The revelations say:

Wherefore the decree hath gone forth from the Father. . . .

For the hour is nigh and the day soon at hand when the earth is ripe; and all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, that wickedness shall not be upon the earth. (D&C 29:8-9.)

Infidelity is one of the great sins of our generation. The movies, the books, the magazine stories all seem to glamorize the faithlessness of husbands and wives. To the world nothing is holy, not even marriage vows. The unfaithful woman is the heroine and is justified, and the hero is so built up that he can do no wrong; or the antihero is portrayed as having no control over his destiny. It reminds us of Isaiah, who said: "Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil. . . ." (Isaiah 5:20.)

We make no apology, then, for raising our voices loud.

The adversary is subtle; he is cunning. He knows that he cannot induce good men and women immediately to do major evils, so he moves slyly, whispering half truths until he has his intended victims following him; finally he clamps his chains upon them and fetters them tight, and then he laughs at their discomfiture and their misery.

Sins cannot be forever hidden. Jacob stated:

. . . by the help of the all-powerful Creator of heaven and earth I can tell you concerning your thoughts, how that ye are beginning to labor in sin, which sin appeareth very abominable unto me, yea, and abominable unto God. (Jacob 2:5.)

Some folks hide their guilt and will not confess, and this is what Lucifer desires. He has a greater hold on them.

In our own day the Lord promised his bishops and other appointees—

. . . to have it given unto them to discern all those gifts lest there shall be any among you professing and yet be not of God. (D&C 46:27.)

There are those married people who permit their eyes to wander and their hearts to become vagrant, who think it is not improper to flirt a little, to share their hearts and have desire for someone other than the wife or the husband. The Lord says in no uncertain terms: "Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else." (D&C 42:22.)

And, when the Lord says all thy heart, it allows for no sharing nor dividing nor depriving. And, to the woman it is paraphrased: "Thou shalt love thy husband with all thy heart and shalt cleave unto him and none else."

The words none else eliminate everyone and everything. The spouse then becomes preeminent in the life of the husband or wife, and neither social life nor occupational life nor political life nor any other interest nor person nor thing shall ever take precedence over the companion spouse. We sometimes find women who absorb and hover over the children at the expense of the husband, sometimes even estranging them from him.

The Lord says to them: "Thou shalt cleave unto him and none else."

Marriage presupposes total allegiance and total fidelity. Each spouse takes the partner with the understanding that he or she gives totally to the spouse all the heart, strength, loyalty, honor, and affection, with all dignity. Any divergence is sin; any sharing of the heart is transgression. As we should have "an eye single to the glory of God," so should we have an eye, an ear, a heart single to the marriage and the spouse and family.

Modern revelation tells us:

Thou shalt not commit adultery; and he that committeth adultery, and repenteth not, shall be cast out [or excommunicated]. (D&C 42:24.)

Many acknowledge the vice of physical adultery but still rationalize that anything short of that heinous sin may not be condemned too harshly. The Lord has said many times:

Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery:

But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. (Matthew 5:27-28.)

The commands of the Lord apply to women with equal force, for he has but a single standard of morality. It is not always the man who is the aggressor; often it is the pursuing, coveting woman. Note that for both, all is lost if there is not true, sustained, and real repentance.

Home-breaking is sin, and any thought, act or association that will tend to destroy another's home is a grievous transgression. A certain young woman was single and therefore free to properly seek a mate, but she gave attention to and received attention from a married man. She was in transgression. She argued that his marriage was "already on the rocks" and that the wife of her new boy friend did not understand him and that he was most unhappy at home and did not love his wife. Regardless of the state of the married man, the young woman was in serious error to comfort him, listen to his disloyal castigation of his wife, and entertain him. The man was in deep sin. He was disloyal and unfaithful. So long as he is married to a woman, he is duty bound to protect her and defend her, and the same responsibility is with his wife. Numerous cases have come to us, such as the following one:

A husband and wife were quarreling and had reached such a degree of incompatibility that they had flung at one another the threat of divorce and had already seen attorneys. Both of them, embittered, had found companionship with other parties. This was sin. No matter how bitter were their differences, neither had any right to begin courting or looking about for friends. Any dating or such association by wedded people outside the marriage is iniquitous. Even though they proceeded with the divorce suit, to be moral and honorable they must wait until the divorce is final before either is justified in developing new romances.

So long as the marriage covenant has not been legally severed, neither spouse morally may seek new romance or open the heart to other people. After the divorce becomes final, both freed individuals may engage in proper courting activities.

There are those who look with longing eyes, who want and desire and crave these romantic associations. To so desire to possess, to inordinately want and yearn for such, is to covet, and the Lord in powerful terms condemns it: "And again I command thee that thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife; nor seek thy neighbor's life." (D&C 19:25.)

How powerful!

The seventh and tenth commandments are interwoven into one great command that is awesome in its warning.

To covet that which belongs to another is sin, and that sin begins when hearts begin to entertain a romantic interest in anyone else.

There are many tragedies affecting spouses, children, and loved ones. Even though these "affairs" begin near-innocently, like an octopus the tentacles move gradually to strangle.

When dates or dinners or rides or other contacts begin, the abyss of tragedy opens wide its mouth. And it has reached deep iniquity when physical contacts of any nature have been indulged in.

Man's desires are fed and nurtured by the food-thoughts, be they degenerate or holy.

For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he. (Proverbs 23:7.)

Amulek, the prophet, reminded us:

For our words will condemn us, yea, all our works will condemn us; we shall not be found spotless; and our thoughts will also condemn us; and in this awful state we shall not dare to look up to our God; and we would fain be glad if we could command the rocks and the mountains to fall upon us to hide us from his presence. (Alma 12:14.)

Nothing justifies evil. Two wrongs do not make one right. Spouses are sometimes inconsiderate, unkind, and difficult, and they must share the blame for broken homes, but this never justifies the other spouse's covetousness and unfaithfulness and infidelity.

James Allen gives us this: "The outer world of circumstance shapes itself to the inner world of thoughts."

Many super-selfish folks think only of themselves when they begin to cross the lines of propriety in their romanticizing outside their home; to them who ignore the innocent parents, the innocent spouse, and the innocent children, the scriptures are replete with warnings.

. . . I must do according to the strict commands of God, and tell you concerning your wickedness and abominations, in the presence of the pure in heart, and the broken heart, and under the glance of the piercing eye of the Almighty God. (Jacob 2:10.)

Little do most of those who deviate think of the innocent bystanders until the heaviness of final guilt weighs down upon them. The Lord speaks again:

For behold, I, the Lord, have seen the sorrow, and heard the mourning of the daughters of my people . . . because of the wickedness and abominations of their husbands.

. . . Ye have broken the hearts of your tender wives, and lost the confidence of your children, because of your bad examples before them; and the sobbings of their hearts ascend up to God against you. . . . many hearts died, pierced with deep wounds. (Jacob 2:31, 35.)

Many women also justify themselves in irregularities; they often invite men to sensual desire by their immodest clothes, loose actions and mannerisms, their coy glances, their extreme make-up, and by their flattery.

Paul also called to repentance: "Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord." (Ephesians 5:22.)

And to the husbands comes the command: "Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it." (Ephesians 5:25.)

Some who marry never cut themselves loose from the apron strings of the parents. The Lord says through his prophets: "For this cause shall a man [or a woman] leave his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife [or husband], and they two shall be one flesh." (Ephesians 5:31.)

Parents who hold, direct, and dictate to their married children and draw them away from their spouses are likely to regret the possible tragedy. Accordingly, when two people marry, the spouse should become the confidant, the friend, the sharer of responsibility, and they two become independent. No one should come between the husband and wife, not even parents. And Paul concludes: "Nevertheless let every one of you in particular so love his wife even as himself; and the wife see that she reverence her husband." (Ephesians 5:33.)

To those who claim their love is dead, let them return home with all their loyalty, fidelity, honor, and cleanness, and the love that has become but embers will flare up with scintillating flame again. If love wanes or dies, it is often infidelity of thought or act that gave the lethal potion.

To those who belittle marriage and its vows and responsibilities, to wives and husbands who joke with one another about possible infidelities, Paul decries jesting and joking about sacred things.

But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as becometh saints;

Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting. . . . (Ephesians 5:3-4.)

To jest with one's spouse about "affairs" could be the planting of seeds that might grow to destroy the marriage. Marriage is too holy and sacred for this.

In a restaurant four men sitting behind me were drinking. They were joking about their wives' boy friends and their own girl friends. I do not know whether they in fact were adulterers and adulteresses, but certainly no good could come from such foolish jesting, and it is an unholy way to speak of the glorious relationship of marriage.

Such light regard for marriage and becoming too familiar with someone other than one's marriage partner are dangerous waystations on the road to disaffection and infidelity.

Those who have slipped into the ugly approaches may have already silenced the still, small, pleading voice so many times that he hesitates to return, an unwelcome guest. He leaves the iniquitous one "on his own."

The Lord says: ". . . my Spirit shall not always strive with man, saith the Lord of Hosts." (D&C 1:33.)

I plead with all those bound by marriage vows and covenants to make that marriage holy, keep it fresh, express affection meaningfully and sincerely and often.

Husbands, come home—body, spirit, mind, loyalties, interests, and affections—and love your companion in an holy and unbreakable relationship.

Wives, come home with all your interests, fidelity, yearnings, loyalties, and affections—working together to make your home a blessed heaven. Thus would you greatly please your Lord and Master and guarantee yourselves happiness supreme.
