Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Chapter Sixteen

Repentance: "Be Ye Clean"

This is a true story. The characters are real.

It was a long-distance call; that was quite apparent, for as I picked up the receiver I could hear the coins dropping in a faraway coin box, then a voice asking, "Brother Kimball?"

I answered, "Yes."

It was a young man's voice. "I have a serious personal problem. Could I bring my girl friend and come to see you?"

"Of course," I said, and a time was arranged.

It was not long until the young couple was announced. The deep, pleasant voice was just what one might expect from the tall, athletic youth who possessed it. He was well-proportioned and, like King David, "ruddy, and withal of a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to." (1 Samuel 16:12.)

With him at his side was a lovely girl, slight of frame and beautiful of face and form. They were both dressed well, and it was evident that they were from cultured homes. It was obvious that they loved one another, for as they sat together across the desk from me he reached quietly for her hand and there were meaningful glances.

The melodious voice was hesitant and a bit choked with emotion as he introduced his girl friend, and there was pleading in their eyes. "We are in difficulty, Brother Kimball," he said. "We have broken the law of chastity. We prayed and fasted and agonized and finally came to the conclusion that we must try to make adjustments."

I asked them a few questions. It was evident they had been treading deep waters. The girl took over the conversation. "I had convinced myself that I was able to take care of myself, that this was one sin I would never commit. I have always been told that necking was dangerous and petting was sinful in its own right, but I rationalized and would not let myself believe that I was in any danger."

I let them tell the story without interruption, feeling it would enable them partially to unload the heavy burden they were carrying.

The boy was now speaking. He was self-accusing. "That Junior Prom date was a turning point. It started out a very special one. But as I see it now it turned out to be a tragic one, the beginning of our troubles. When I saw her coming downstairs that night, I thought no girl was ever so beautiful and so sweet. We danced through the evening; and then when we sat in the car, long and silently afterward, my thoughts became unruly as we became more and more intimate.

"Neither of us dreamed what was happening to us," he continued, "but all the elements were there to break down resistance. We did not notice time—the hours passed. The simple kisses we had often exchanged gradually developed into petting. We stopped at that. But there were other nights—the bars were down. We loved each other so much that we convinced ourselves that it was not so wrong merely to pet since we sort of belonged to one another anyway. Where we ended one night became the starting point for the next night, and we continued on and on, until finally it happened—almost as though we could not control ourselves—we had intercourse. We had even talked about it and agreed that whatever else we did we would not go that far. And then when it was late—so late—so everlastingly late—we woke up to the meaning of what we had done.

"We hated ourselves. We almost hated one another, wanting to become someone else. She suggested we pray, but I told her I felt too unworthy. I wanted to hide from the Lord, from everybody. Oh, Brother Kimball, what can we do? Can things ever be the same? Is there any way we can gain forgiveness?"

His voice broke, and there was a heavy silence.

I sat deep in thought, praying fervently that the Lord would inspire me to assist them.

They seemed to want to talk. It was as though a great flood of emotions and feelings needed release.

"I am so ashamed," she said. "It was as much my responsibility as his. When we reached home, he turned off the engine. It was dark and the street was deserted. We became quiet; the conversation lagged; and the thing began to happen against which we had been warned and rewarned. The kisses became warm, passionate, and long-sustained, and as we lingered longer, we seemed drawn into more intimacy. When I knelt at my bed that night, I asked the Lord to forgive me, and at that moment I honestly intended never to repeat what I had done.

"I felt I loved him as no girl ever loved a man before. That made things between us seem acceptable that I would have criticized in someone else. He was good, but he was human. The necking evolved into petting sooner each night, and a new pattern was being established. I felt unclean when I went to my room. I didn't feel much like praying. Why should I? What use was it to pray when I would likely continue? I wasn't so sure I wanted to quit. I didn't feel it was so bad anyway. We hadn't committed fornication and wouldn't—certainly we wouldn't. That we were sure of.

"We didn't fully realize that each time there were new excesses. Or at least we didn't acknowledge it. And suddenly we awakened to the fact that we had lost our virtue totally—had lost something we had always believed was very important—and that we had committed one of the most serious of all sins. I hated myself. Why hadn't I listened? How could I be so stupid as to trade self-respect for a moment's pleasure? I wanted to scream.

"There was no sleep for me that night. I was unclean. I bathed, scrubbed, washed my hair, put on fresh clothes—and I still felt filthy. I thought about the lepers in the Bible days—how they stood far off and cried to an approaching person, 'Unclean, unclean.' I felt like a leper, like hiding, like avoiding everyone. My soul cried out in agony. Could I keep others from hearing the sobbing of my heart?

"In the nights since then I've often had horrible nightmares. Sometimes I am angry. Other young people had done this same thing and it did not seem to wreck them. Some seemed to pass it off with a shrug of the shoulders, but wanting to live the gospel has always been important to me. I believe the gospel is true, and I get terribly depressed at the big difference between what I've done and what the Lord has wanted me to do.

"Hell? Yes, I think this is what hell is. I always thought of hell as a faraway, mythical, and abstract thing, but we've found it—we've tasted it and it is bitter. We could not say we had not been warned all our lives. Why did we stay in the car late at night after we should have said goodnight?"

She could not stop. It was like a flood of waters escaping from a broken reservoir. "A thousand thoughts ran through my mind," she said, "ugly accusing thoughts—when I ate, when I walked, when I prayed. The memory haunted me. We talked it over and decided we had to talk to someone to find out where we stand. We still love one another, but this is eating away at us and at our relationship, too."

And now they sat very still, very close, waiting almost breathlessly. "Children of disobedience," I thought. My heart was sobbing for them, "Please, Father, bless me that I may help them."

"Can we be forgiven, Brother Kimball?" they asked plaintively.

"Yes," I replied, "the Lord and his church can and will forgive, but not easily. The way of the transgressor is hard. It always has been and it always will be. The Lord said: 'I tell thee, thou shalt not depart thence, till thou hast paid the very last mite.' " (Luke 12:59.)

But I went on to tell them that in his goodness he provided for us a way to forgiveness. One may do as he pleases, but he cannot evade responsibility. He may break laws, but he cannot avoid penalties. One gets by with nothing. God is just. Paul said: "Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Galatians 6:7.)

Serious as is the sin of fornication, there is forgiveness upon condition of total repentance. The Prophet Amulek quoted the Lord:

. . . and he hath said that no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of heaven; therefore, how can ye be saved, except ye inherit the kingdom of heaven? Therefore, ye cannot be saved in your sins. (Alma 11:37.)

And Isaiah:

Let the wicked forsake his way . . . and let him return unto the Lord . . . for he will abundantly pardon. (Isaiah 55:7.)

Yes, the Lord will forgive. How grateful we all must be for this saving principle!

Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more. (D&C 58:42.)

How glorious this promise!

. . . though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. (Isaiah 1:18.)

The young couple seemed to relax a bit. Hope was returning. "We want to do what is right," said the young man. "Will you tell us what we should do to obtain forgiveness?"

I explained: It is not easy. One must come to a realization of the seriousness of his sin. Since the beginning there has been in the world a wide range of sins. Many of them involve harm to others, but every sin is against ourselves and God, for sins limit our progress, curtail our development, and estrange us from good people, good influences, and from our Lord.

The early apostles and prophets mention numerous sins that were reprehensible to them. Many of them were sexual sins—adultery, being without natural affection, lustfulness, infidelity, incontinence, filthy communications, impurity, inordinate affection, fornication. They included all sexual relations outside of marriage—petting, sex perversion, masturbation, and preoccupation with sex in one's thoughts and talking. Included are every hidden and secret sin and all unholy and impure thoughts and practices.

Conscience tells the individual when he is entering forbidden worlds, and it continues to prick until silenced by the will or by sin's repetition.

Can anyone truthfully say he did not know such things were wrong? These unholy practices, whatever may be their unmentionable names with all their approaches and numerous manifestations, are condemned by the Lord and his church. Some may be more heinous than others, but all are sin, in spite of statements to the contrary of those who falsely pretend to know. The Lord's prophets declare they are not right.

The world may have its norm; the Church has a different one. It may be considered normal by the people of the world to use tobacco; the Church's standard is a higher plane where smoking is not done. The world's norm may permit men and women social drinking; the Lord's church lifts its people to a norm of total abstinence. The world may countenance premarital sex experiences, but the Lord and his church condemn in no uncertain terms any and every sex relationship outside of marriage, and even indecent and uncontrolled ones within marriage. And so, though many self-styled authorities justify these practices as a normal release, the Church condemns them and could not knowingly send such people, unrepentant, into the mission field or give them places of trust or positions of responsibility or temple privileges. Such unholy practices were condemned by ancient prophets and are today condemned by the Church.

Paul lashed out against these unholy evidences of the vulgar mind and of uncontrolled passion and desire:

Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonour their own bodies between themselves. (Romans 1:24.)

There are those who with vicious tendencies or weak wills say, "The Lord made me this way, gave me these desires and passions, and he will not condemn me." This is untrue.

James said:

Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man. (James 1:13.)

Let him who has evil tendencies be honest and acknowledge his weakness. I tell you the Lord places no sin in our lives. He has made no man wicked. We are sons and daughters of God, possessing seeds of godhood. We are not limited by instinct as are the beasts. We have godly power to grow and to overcome and become perfect. Sin was permitted in the world, and Satan was permitted to tempt us, but we have our free agency. We may sin or live righteously, but we cannot escape responsibility. To blame our sins upon the Lord, saying they are inherent and cannot be controlled, is cheap and cowardly. To blame our sins upon our parents and our upbringing is the way of the escapist. One's parents may have failed; our own backgrounds may have been frustrating, but as sons and daughters of a living God we have within ourselves the power to rise above our circumstances, to change our lives. Man can change human nature. Man must transform his life. We will be punished for our sins. We must accept responsibility for our sins. We can overcome. We must control and master ourselves.

The lovely girl now said, "While we knew our intimacies were wrong, we did not fully realize the implications."

"I am sure of that," I said. "That is why I elaborate on them."

Since courtship is prelude to marriage and encourages close associations, many have convinced themselves that intimacies are legitimate—a part of the courting process. Many have cast off bridle and harness and have relaxed the restraints. Instead of remaining in the field of simple expressions of affection, some have turned themselves loose to fondling, often called "necking," with its intimate contacts and its passionate kissing. It is an insidious practice leading to other vices. Necking is the younger member of this unholy family. Its bigger sister is called "petting." When the intimacies have reached this stage, they are surely the sins condemned by the Savior:

Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery:

But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. (Matthew 5:27-28.)

Who would say that he or she who pets has not become lustful, has not become passionate? Who would say that there has not been mental adultery? Is it not this most abominable practice that God rebuked in his modern reiteration of the Ten Commandments: "Thou shalt not steal; neither commit adultery, nor kill, nor do anything like unto it."

What, may I ask you, is like unto adultery if it is not petting? Did not the Lord recognize that this heinous sin is but the devil's softening process for the final acts of adultery or fornication? Can a person in the light of the Lord's scriptures pursue the path of petting with clear conscience? Can anyone convince himself that this is not deep sin?

The youthful pair now had many questions that carried me on into further explanation. "Are fornication and adultery the same?" they asked.

An older sister in this unholy family, most destructive in her diabolical effects and requiring severe condemnation, is sexual intercourse that is called fornication when committed by the unmarried and adultery when one or both of the couple are married to someone else. The two terms are often interchanged in scripture. Another vicious sister, hiding behind expediency, is the ugly one of illegal abortion. One crime seems to demand another, and sometimes cowardly people, because of possible scandal and social ostracism and not having the courage to meet and solve problems, add to their sexual sin that crime of destroying an unborn child. These twin crimes rate very high in the category of horrible ones, next to murder, according to the scriptures.

When we say that the sexual sins are forgivable, this does not mean they are easily overcome or that forgiveness is to be had simply for the asking. Paul said:

. . . no whoremonger, nor unclean person . . . hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.

Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.

Be not ye therefore partakers with them. (Ephesians 5:5-7.)

And Nephi writes:

. . . the kingdom of God is not filthy, and there cannot any unclean thing enter into the kingdom of God; wherefore there must needs be a place of filthiness prepared for that which is filthy. (1 Nephi 15:34.)

The Lord commands:

Thou shalt not commit adultery; and he that committeth adultery, and repenteth not, shall be cast out. (D&C 42:24.)

The young man was agitated now and asked, "Does 'cast out' mean excommunication? And do we have to suffer that penalty?"

And I answered:

The Lord has indicated that the bandage must be the size of the sore; if one has offended many, he must be chastised before many, and if the offense is known to few, then the adjustment involves few. Every unrepentant transgressor should be handled and, if he continues rebellious, should be disfellowshiped or excommunicated. One disfellowshiped is usually forbidden to exercise his priesthood and is denied the blessings of the Church, such as participation in the sacrament, temple privileges, and church activity. Excommunication is a complete severing of all ties. One loses membership, the Holy Ghost, priesthood, sealings, and all church privileges. If the transgression is generally and widely known and is a public scandal, the individual is sometimes permitted to make a public adjustment "not to the members but to the elders" so that all who have heard of the sin may also know of the repentance. This is a clearing privilege that those involved in a publicly known scandal should grasp gladly.

The young woman asked: "Then repentance and publicity are controlling factors?"

"Yes, a transgressor whose sin is secret and has voluntarily confessed and whose repentance is without reservation can be forgiven in secret by proper authorities. But even the Lord could not forgive one without sincere repentance."

And I say unto you again that he cannot save them in their sins; for I cannot deny his word, and he hath said that no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of heaven; therefore, how can ye be saved, except ye inherit the kingdom of heaven? Therefore, ye cannot be saved in your sins. (Alma 11:37.)

For our words will condemn us, yea, all our works will condemn us; we shall not be found spotless; and our thoughts will also condemn us; and in this awful state we shall not dare to look up to our God; and we would fain be glad if we could command the rocks and the mountains to fall upon us to hide us from his presence. (Alma 12:14.)

"That is just the way I feel now," the boy whispered.

Christ said:

And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end. (3 Nephi 27:19.)

The young couple were listening intently, but with growing apprehension, and she finally asked, "How then can we, being so unclean, ever get into the kingdom of heaven?"

I answered, "It is true—no unclean thing can enter the kingdom, but a totally repentant person is no longer unclean; a fully purged and forgiven adulterer is no longer an adulterer. He who has truly 'washed his garments' is free from filth."

This young couple had made their decision. They were ready to comply with any requirements no matter how severe. They drew a little closer to each other and asked, "Brother Kimball, what must we do?"

I continued: "You must repent."

Repentance could well fall into five steps:

To be sorry for our sin, we must know something of its serious implications. When fully convicted, we condition our minds to follow such processes as will rid us of the effects of the sin. We are sorry. We are willing to make amends, pay penalties, to suffer even excommunication, if necessary. Paul wrote:

For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of; but the sorrow of the world worketh death. (2 Corinthians 7:10.)

If one is sorry only because his sin was uncovered, his repentance is not complete. Godly sorrow causes one to harness desire and to determine to do right regardless of consequences; this kind of sorrow brings righteousness and will work toward forgiveness.

One discontinues his error when he has a full realization of the gravity of his sin and when he is willing to comply with the laws of God. The thief may abandon his evil in prison, but true repentance would have him forsake it before his arrest and return his booty without enforcement. The sex offender as well as any other transgressor who voluntarily ceases his unholy practices is headed toward forgiveness. Alma said:

. . . blessed are they who humble themselves without being compelled to be humble. . . . (Alma 32:16.)

And the Lord in our dispensation said:

By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will . . . forsake them. (D&C 58:43.)

The discontinuance must be a permanent one. True repentance does not permit repetition. Peter said:

For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world . . . they are again entangled therein. . . . it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment. . . . [as the] dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire. (2 Peter 2:20-22.)

Forgiveness is not assured if one reverts to early sins. The Lord said:

. . . go your ways and sin no more; but unto that soul who sinneth shall the former sins return. . . . (D&C 82:7.)

The confession of sin is an important element in repentance. Many offenders have seemed to feel that a few prayers to the Lord were sufficient and they have thus justified themselves in hiding their sins. The Proverbs tell us:

He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy. (Proverbs 28:13.)

By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them and forsake them. (D&C 58:43.)

Especially grave errors such as sexual sins shall be confessed to the bishop as well as to the Lord. There are two remissions that one might wish to have: first, the forgiveness from the Lord, and second, the forgiveness of the Lord's church through its leaders. As soon as one has an inner conviction of his sins, he should go to the Lord in "mighty prayer," as did Enos, and never cease his supplications until he shall, like Enos, receive the assurance that his sins have been forgiven by the Lord. It is unthinkable that God absolves serious sins upon a few requests. He is likely to wait until there has been long-sustained repentance as evidenced by a willingness to comply with all his other requirements. So far as the Church is concerned, no priest nor elder is authorized by virtue of that calling to perform this act for the Church. The Lord has a consistent, orderly plan. Every soul in the organized stakes is given a bishop who, by the very nature of his calling and his ordination, is a "judge in Israel." In the missions a branch president fills that responsibility. The bishop may be one's best earthly friend. He will hear the problems, judge the seriousness thereof, determine the degree of adjustment, and decide if it warrants an eventual forgiveness. He does this as the earthly representative of God, who is the master physician, the master psychologist, the master psychiatrist. If repentance is sufficient, he may waive penalties, which is tantamount to forgiveness so far as the church organization is concerned. The bishop claims no authority to absolve sins, but he does share the burden, waive penalties, relieve tension and strain, and he may assure a continuation of church activity. He will keep the whole matter most confidential.

Some missionaries have foolishly carried with them their secret, unadjusted guilt into the field and have suffered seriously in the effort to get and retain the spirit of the mission. The conflict in the soul is most frustrating. But he who totally repents, voluntarily confesses, and clears his difficulty so far as possible, triumphs in his work and enjoys sweet peace.

When one is humble in sorrow, has unconditionally abandoned the evil, and confesses to those assigned by the Lord, he should next restore insofar as possible that which was damaged. If he burglarized, he should return to the rightful owner that which was stolen. Perhaps one reason murder is unforgivable is that having taken a life, the murderer cannot restore it. Restitution in full is not always possible. Virginity is impossible to give back.

However, the truly repentant soul will usually find things that can be done to restore to some extent. The true spirit of repentance demands this. Ezekiel taught:

If the wicked . . . give again that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall surely live. . . . (Ezekiel 33:15.)

Moses taught:

If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep . . . he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep. (Exodus 22:1.)

A pleading sinner must also forgive all people of all offenses committed against himself. The Lord is under no obligation to forgive us unless our hearts are fully purged of all hate, bitterness, and accusations against others.

The Lord in his preface to modern revelations gave us the fifth and one of the most difficult requirements to forgiveness. He says:

For I the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance;

Nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven. (D&C 1:31-32.)

Under the humiliation of a guilty conscience, with the possibility of detection and consequent scandal and shame, with a striving spirit urging toward adjustment, the first steps of sorrow, abandonment, confession, and restitution must now be followed by the never-ending requirement of doing the commandments. Obviously this can hardly be done in a day, a week, a month, or a year. This is an effort extending through the balance of life. "Unto the end" is an often-used phrase in the scriptures.

If thou wilt do good, yea, and hold out faithful to the end, thou shalt be saved in the kingdom of God. . . . (D&C 6:13.)

. . . he only is saved who endureth unto the end. . . . (D&C 53:7.)

Good works are the evidences and the fruits of repentance. The Redeemer expresses this thought:

Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?

A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.

Wherefore by their fruits shall ye know them. (Matthew 7:16, 18, 20.)

The Lord said:

But he that has committed adultery and repents with all his heart, and forsaketh it, and doeth it no more, thou shalt forgive. (D&C 42:25.)

Now the phrase "with all his heart" is vital. There can be no reservations. It must be an all-out unconditional surrender. The mere abandonment of the specific sin and even the confession of it are not sufficient to save. The Lord knows, as does the individual, the degree of contrition, and the reward will be according to desserts, for God is just. Feigning repentance or bluffing is futile, for both the transgressor and the Lord can evaluate and recognize insincerity and hypocrisy. One may fool his fellowmen sometimes, but himself and his Lord never. Yet the devout, repenting soul has claim upon the mercy of the Lord.

Doing the commandments includes many activities. General good works and constructive attitudes are supplemented by the bearing of testimony and the saving of souls. The Lord says:

For I will forgive you of your sins with this commandment—that you remain steadfast in your minds in solemnity and the spirit of prayer, in bearing testimony to all the world. . . . (D&C 84:61.)

Nevertheless ye are blessed, for the testimony which ye have borne is recorded in heaven for the angels to look upon . . . and your sins are forgiven you. (D&C 62:3.)

And James indicated that each good deed, each testimony, each proselyting effort, each safeguard thrown about others is like a blanket over one's own sins, or like a deposit against an overdraft in the bank.

Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him;

Let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. (James 5:19-20.)

I gave the young couple a copy of the citations to the scriptures I had read to them, and I encouraged them to study the gospel. I recommended particularly the short book of Enos, which records in inspiring detail how a transgressor, after long strugglings and continuous crying mightily unto the Lord through the long hours of the day and then extending into the night, finally obtains forgiveness from the Lord.

And so, my beloved young couple, as you leave my office, do not fail to obtain forgiveness from the Lord and his church and retain for yourselves the blessings. Remember, one must be convicted of sin, bow the knee in monumental humility, forsake the sin, and fortify himself against repetition. He must confess the error to his bishop or other church authority, cleansing and purging himself of all that was vile. He must make restitution by restoring so far as possible that which was damaged and must forgive all who have given him offense. And finally he must live all of the commandments of the Lord, bringing forth fruits meet for repentance. And when he has fasted enough, prayed enough, and suffered enough, and when his heart is right, he may expect that forgiveness will come and with it that glorious peace which passeth understanding.

We knelt and each prayed fervently. The young couple—mellowed, repentant, and determined—thanked me and departed hand in hand.
