Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Chapter Seventeen

Forgiveness: "Except Ye Repent . . ."

It is my pleasure to go into the homes of the leaders in the missions, wards, and stakes of Zion, and I am deeply appreciative of the fact that most of our people are trying to live the commandments of the Lord. I find in this church many people who amaze me with their close approach toward perfection, but I do find, as I go about the Church, some who need repentance. I thank the Lord for this glorious principle.

I find parents who have lost the natural affection for their children. I find children who disown and disclaim their parents and evade responsibility concerning them. I find husbands who desert their wives and their children and who use almost every pretext to justify such action. I find wives who are demanding, unworthy, quarrelsome, and who are uncooperative, selfish and worldly, provoking such action. I find those who gossip and bear false witness against their neighbors. I find brethren who hail each other into the courts on trivial matters that could have been settled by themselves. I find blood brothers and sisters who fight over inheritances and bring each other into the courts of the land, dragging before the public the most intimate and personal family secrets, bringing the skeletons out of the closets, leaving nothing sacred, having little regard for one another, but interested only in that which they might acquire by such action.

I saw one family split wide apart, half of the brothers and sisters on one side and half on the other, in a most disgraceful feud. At the funeral half of them sat on one side of the aisle and half on the other. They would not speak to one another. The property involved was worth only a few thousand dollars, and yet they are avowed enemies.

I have seen people in wards and branches who impugn the motives of others and make them "offender for a word." I have seen branches broken wide apart, with the members saying unkind things about one another. They bring into their meetings the spirit of the evil one instead of the spirit of the Christ.

I have seen husbands and wives, living under the same roof, who are selfish, unbending, and unforgiving, who with their misunderstandings have hardened their hearts and poisoned their minds. Then I have seen many people who have become offended at church authorities, their ward, stake, mission, auxiliary, and priesthood leaders, for things that have been said or were imagined to have been said or thought.

To the children who are unkind to their parents the Lord has said: "He that curseth father or mother, let him die the death." (Matthew 15:4.) To the intolerant God has said: "What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common." (Acts 11:9.) To the gossip he has said from Sinai: "Thou shalt not bear false witness. . . ." (Exodus 20:16.) To those who would impugn motives he said: "Judge not, that ye be not judged." (Matthew 7:1.) And to those who would criticize the authorities and use them as stumbling blocks, who would absent themselves from their meetings, who would fail to pay their tithes and other obligations because of fancied offenses, I should like to read the word of the Lord:

Cursed are all those that shall lift up the heel against mine anointed, saith the Lord, and cry they have sinned when they have not sinned before me, saith the Lord. . . .

But those who cry transgression do it because they are the servants of sin, and are the children of disobedience themselves.

And those who swear falsely against my servants. . . .

Their basket shall not be full, their houses and their barns shall perish, and they themselves shall be despised by those that flattered them.

They shall not have right to the priesthood, nor their posterity after them from generation to generation. (D&C 121:16-18, 20-21.)

As I read the scriptures, I find that all the various sins are condemned, and all sinners are called to repentance.

Wherefore, I will that all men shall repent, for all are under sin, except those which I have reserved unto myself, holy men that ye know not of. (D&C 49:8.)

And surely every man must repent or suffer, for I, God, am endless. (D&C 19:4.)

Repentance is a kind and merciful law. It is so far-reaching and all-inclusive. It has many elements and includes a sorrow for sin, a confession of sin, an abandonment of sin, a restitution for sin, and then the living of the commandments of the Lord, and this includes the forgiveness of others, even the forgiving of those who sin against us.

The sinner should make restitution. It is obvious that the murderer cannot give back a life he has taken; the libertine cannot restore the virtue he has violated; the gossip may be unable to nullify and overcome the evils done by a loose tongue; but, so far as is possible, one must restore and make good the damage done.

One of the most important elements in repentance and forgiveness, and really the proof of repentance, is in the living of the commandments of the Lord, or in the continuance of repentance, for certainly one is under a strong condemnation who continues to return to his sin, as a "dog is turned to his own vomit again." (2 Peter 2:

22.)

Now the "doing the commandments" includes many good works, but one of its very important aspects is the purging of our own hearts and forgiving others their trespasses against us.

To obtain forgiveness of our sins we must forgive. Read the scriptures given us on that point: "And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you." (Ephesians 4:32.) Then in the Lord's prayer to the people in Jerusalem, he said: "Our Father which art in heaven, . . . forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors." (See Matthew 6:9-12.) He made it very clear also to the Nephites:

For, if ye forgive men their trespasses your heavenly Father will also forgive you;

But if ye forgive not men their trespasses neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. (3 Nephi 13:14-15.)

And again in the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord says:

My disciples, in days of old, sought occasion against one another and forgave not one another in their hearts; and for this evil they were afflicted and sorely chastened.

Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin. (D&C 64:8-9.)

The Savior recalled to his people the old Mosaic law and then the new and higher law:

Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth:

But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.

And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloke also.

And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.

Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour and hate thine enemy.

But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you. (Matthew 5:38-41, 43-44.)

Why does the Lord ask you to love your enemies and to return good for evil? That you might have the benefit of it. It does not injure the one you hate so much when you hate a person, especially if he is far removed and does not come in contact with you, but the hate and the bitterness canker your unforgiving heart.

One great blessing that comes to those who will forgive, and who love their neighbors and enemies also, is:

That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven. . . .

For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same?

Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. (Matthew 5:45-46, 48.)

Perhaps Peter had met people who continued to trespass against him, and he asked:

Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? . . .

And the Lord said:

I say not unto thee, Until seven times: but, Until seventy times seven. (Matthew 18:21-22.)

. . . and as oft as thine enemy repenteth of the trespass wherewith he has trespassed against thee, thou shalt forgive him, until seventy times seven. (D&C 98:40.)

That seems very difficult indeed for us mortals, and yet there are still harder things to do. When they have repented and come on their knees to ask forgiveness, most of us can forgive, but the Lord has required that we shall forgive even if they do not repent nor ask forgiveness of us.

In our own dispensation the Lord said:

And if he trespass against thee and repent not the first time, nevertheless thou shalt forgive him.

And if he trespass against thee the second time, and repent not, nevertheless thou shalt forgive him.

And if he trespass against thee the third time, and repent not, thou shalt also forgive him.

But if he trespass against thee the fourth time thou shalt not forgive him, but shall bring these testimonies before the Lord; and they shall not be blotted out until he repent and reward thee four-fold in all things wherewith he has trespassed against thee.

And if he do this, thou shalt forgive him with all thine heart. . . . (D&C 98:41-45.)

It must be very clear to us, then, that we must still forgive without retaliation or vengeance, for the Lord will do for us such as is necessary. ". . . Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord." (Romans 12:19.) Bitterness injures the one who carries it; it hardens and shrivels and cankers.

Judge not, that ye be not judged.

For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.

And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?

Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold a beam is in thine own eye?

Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye. (Matthew 7:1-5.)

Another impressive example of unholy judging comes to us in the Lord's parable of the Unmerciful Servant, who owed to his lord ten thousand talents; since he was unable to pay, his lord commanded that he be sold, and his wife and children and all that he had, and that payment be made. The servant fell down and begged for a moratorium. When the compassionate lord had loosed him and forgiven his debt, this conscienceless person straightway found one of his fellowservants who owed him a hundred pence. Taking him by the throat, he demanded payment in full; and upon failure of the debtor, he cast him into prison. When the lord heard of this rank injustice, he chastised the unmerciful servant:

O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me:

Shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow-servant, even as I had pity on thee?

And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him.

So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses. (Matthew 18:32-35.)

According to the notes in my Bible, the Roman penny is an eighth of an ounce of silver, while the talent is 750 ounces. This would mean that the talent was equivalent to 6000 pence, and 10,000 talents would be to 100 pence as 600,000 is to one. The unmerciful servant, then, was forgiven 600,000 units, but he would not forgive a single one.

I met a woman once who was demanding and critical. She accused her stake president of harshness and would have displaced him if she could. She had committed adultery, and yet with her comparative debt of sixty million pence, she had the temerity to criticize her leader with a hundred-pence debt. I also knew a young man who complained at his bishop and took offense at the leader's inefficiency and his grammatical errors, yet he himself had in his life sins comparable to the debt of talents and had the effrontery to accuse his bishop of weaknesses comparable only to the pence.

Those of us who have sins, heinous or less serious, would do well to sing frequently the beautiful hymns: "Should You Feel Inclined to Censure," by George H. Durham; "School Thy Feelings, O My Brother," by President Charles W. Penrose; and "Let Each Man Learn to Know Himself," so much sung and loved by President Heber J. Grant.

Remember that we must forgive even if our offender did not repent and ask forgiveness. Stephen, yet in his young life, had mastered this principle. His accusers, unable to find anything against him other than fancied blasphemy, stoned him to death. Not waiting for them to repent, Stephen displayed his saintliness by using his last breath to forgive them, saying: "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. . . ." (Acts 7:60.) They had taken his very life, and yet he forgave them. The Prophet Joseph moved to his certain death with the same spirit of forgiveness.

The Lord Jesus Christ also gave to us the lesson. Without their asking for forgiveness and without any sign of repentance, and while they were still in their murderous passion, he found it in his heart to forgive them: "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." He did not wait till his crucifiers should have a change of heart; but he forgave them while they were yet crimson with his life's blood.

It frequently happens that offenses are committed when the offender is not aware of it. Something he has said or done is misconstrued or misunderstood. The offended one treasures in his heart the offense, adding to it such other things as might give fuel to the fire and justify his conclusions. Perhaps this is one of the reasons why the Lord requires that the offended one should make the overtures toward peace.

And if thy brother or sister offend thee, thou shalt take him or her between him or her and thee alone; and if he or she confess thou shalt be reconciled. (D&C 42:88.)

He says the same thing to us of this dispensation, to the Nephites on this continent, and to the disciples in Judea:

. . . if . . . thy brother hath aught against thee—Go thy way unto thy brother, and first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come unto me with full purpose of heart, and I will receive you. (3 Nephi 12:23-24.)

Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee;

Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. (Matthew 5:23-24.)

Do we follow that command or do we sulk in our bitterness, waiting for our offender to learn of it and to kneel to us in remorse?

And this reconciliation suggests also forgetting. Unless you forget, have you forgiven? A woman in a branch in the mission field where there had been friction finally capitulated and said, "Yes, I will forgive the others, but I have an eternal memory." Certainly she had not fulfilled the law of forgiving. She was meeting the letter but not the spirit. Frequently we say we forgive, then permit the grievance to continue to poison and embitter us.

The Lord forgets when he has forgiven, and certainly must we. He inspired Isaiah to say: "I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins." (Isaiah 43:25.)

No bitterness of past frictions can be held in memory if we forgive with all our hearts. So long as we are bitter, hold grudges, and are unrepentant ourselves and unforgiving to others, how can we partake of the sacrament? Read again what God said in the matter:

Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the lord, unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.

For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself. . . . (1 Corinthians 11:27-29.)

If we would sue for peace, taking the initiative in settling differences—if we would forgive and forget with all our hearts—if we would cleanse our own souls of sin, bitterness, and guilt before we cast a stone or accusation at others—if we would forgive all real or fancied offenses before we asked forgiveness for our own sins—if we would pay our own debts, large or small, before we pressed our debtors—if we would manage to clear our own eyes of the blinding beams before we magnified the motes in the eyes of others—what a glorious world this would be! Divorce would be reduced to a minimum; courts would be freed from disgusting routines; family life would be heavenly; the building of the kingdom would go forward at an accelerated pace; and that peace which passeth understanding would bring to us all a joy and happiness that has hardly "entered into the heart of man."
