Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Chapter Nineteen

Resisting Evil: "Put on the Whole Armour of God"

Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.

Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.

For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.

Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand.

Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness;

And your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace;

Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.

And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God:

Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all saints. (Ephesians 6:10-18.)

The stake conference was over and a returned missionary whom I had known came up to see me. It was apparent that he was unhappy. After our greeting, I asked him if all was well. His reply was not surprising. He said: "I am miserable and unhappy. I do not feel like I used to feel. I am not sure like I used to be sure. I do not believe as I used to believe. I have no testimony. I guess what I used to bear witness to in the mission was not true after all."

"What are you doing?" I asked.

He answered, "I am attending the university."

"What are you studying?"

He named his courses.

I asked him to name the books he had been reading aside from his assigned work.

He named a number of books that related to religion and philosophy. All of them were to some degree atheistic, critical, or apostate, and he explained that he thought he should know all sides of religious thought.

I asked, "How many times have you read the Book of Mormon since your mission?"

He shook his head. "Not many times."

"Have you read it once through?"

He shook his head negatively.

"Have you read a single verse?"

He admitted he had not.

"Have you read the New Testament?"

His answer was still negative. No church commentary, no scripture in two or three years. He was dieting. He was more than dieting; he was starving his spirit, and it was in the throes of death.

I asked him about his activity.

He didn't attend church much. He had come to the conference especially to see me.

There was no tithing any more. He used his funds for other needs.

I asked him about his prayers, but I knew what his answer would be. Why should he pray? He had lost his faith. He had removed his helmet of salvation; he had hung up on the wall his sword of the Spirit, he had shuffled off his shoes and was no longer shod with the gospel of peace; he had loosed the girdle with which his loins had been girt with truth; he had removed and stored away his breastplate of positive righteousness and had discarded his whole armor, hidden it away in dark places; and he stood naked to the fiery darts of the enemy. He had forgotten what Paul said about the prevalence of evil, the fiery darts of the enemy, the constant temptations of the devil. He was not prepared to fight—he was being rapidly vanquished. He had fallen. He had done little or nothing, whereas Paul had said, "And having done all, to stand."

In my office sat a young college boy who was in the mission home en route to his mission. He had felt unequal to the spirituality of others about him in the mission home and was led to come to my office to express doubt about the wisdom of his going into the mission field.

He said, "I do not have a testimony."

As we visited I became sure he did have a testimony, though a bit weak. I learned that he had been vigorously pursuing his secular studies at the university for three years, but he had been too busy, he said, to attend the institute of religion. He had found time to belong to and follow the activities of a fraternity. Upon further inquiry, I found that he had given up much of his activity in the Church, attending his Sabbath meetings only rarely. He had done a prodigious amount of reading but none of that reading in the Holy Scriptures. In fact, when I asked about prayer, he confessed he rarely prayed. But, on a sudden spurt of interest or curiosity or for some other reason, he had asked his bishop for a mission.

After our talk I encouraged him to fulfill the calling he had accepted, assuring him that, if he put wholeheartedly into his mission the energies he had devoted to secular education, his testimony would soon grow to match that of others about him.

The powers of darkness to which Paul referred are not dissipated. They are marshaling their forces; they are ready to fight; they have more effective weapons to destroy the souls of men than guns or bombs. In every field of endeavor, in every interest of man, the powers of darkness find their entrenchments and battle against us.

The question rises always, Are we prepared to stand? Have we done all in our power to fortify, immunize, and protect ourselves? Are we on our guard against the enemy's propaganda, his seductive use of words?

The word new often attracts our attention and seems to imply that if it is new, it is better, and that it should take the place of the outmoded, the old-fashioned. For example, there is a "new morality" which rationalizes disregard of God's eternal laws of chastity.

There is a "new family life" which makes the bearing and rearing of children unimportant.

There is a "new journalism" which abandons effort at objective reporting and approves an effort to interpret events to fit preconceived views.

Perhaps never in any period of time has it been so necessary to resist as today. Never was it so important to analyze and weigh and measure every supposed new truth and accept only that which stands the test of time, of scripture, of faith, of heart.

Shakespeare in Macbeth wrote:

And ofttimes, to win us to our harm, The instruments of darkness tell us truths, Win us with honest trifles, to betray us In deepest consequence. (Act I, sc. 3, line 123.)

In the name of "freedom," many offenses occur. It is forgotten that "freedom" for some means deprivations for others. When a riot or insurrection is not only winked at but even justified, and homes are destroyed and innocent people killed, then fetters are placed on some to give "freedom" to others. In the plane and the train and public places, the smoker must have his freedom. He blows his foul smoke into the faces of others without a second thought or apology. And we ask, freedom for whom?

The drunken driver is often handled with a reprimand only and continues to drink and drive and endanger the lives of many innocent ones.

Should people be free to infect society with obscene pictures and vulgar articles and to flaunt corruption before children and others? Why should a few be granted freedom from restraint when many are fettered by the ugliness to which they are exposed?

There is the new freedom of divorce. Some say: "We can try this marriage and if it doesn't work, we can divorce." In the study of a certain area in Utah, the average marriage lasted seven years; and the average age of persons divorced was thirty-two years, and there was an average of nearly two children involved in each case. In the period of this particular survey, there were forty divorces for one hundred marriages. And we ask: freedom for whom? Certainly not for the numerous children whose lives are fettered, whose deprivations are severe. The delinquency quotient, the mental hospitals, the detention homes—these are not so much the product of poverty as of instability.

When I was a boy in Arizona, the big mines in Clifton and Morenci dumped their tailings in the San Francisco River above us. The hard clay came in our irrigation water below and coated our farmlands, our productive acres, with a hard layer of clay almost like cement so that crops could not push their blades out through it. Freedom for whom?

A prominent speaker recently advocated free sex. He said, "The revolution has been won. The new order has come into being. Sex is no longer a case of Shall I? but Can I? And the New Morality has codified the change."

He speaks of the "erotic revolution." Such sex revolutionists would make their own rules and would require acceptance of their erroneous way of life by society, without interference or controls. He leads a school of thought that would give contraceptive devices or birth control pills to everyone who asked for them regardless of age, and would offer free abortions. It is advocated that there be a "switching of wives on weekend parties." He is quoted as saying that the young people are the most deprived, deprived of the right to build their own sexual lives. He says: "Tell your students for me, if they want freedom they are going to have to get it the same way the Negroes get it, by taking it and defying the law by civil disobedience. And every time they go out on a date and have sexual intercourse they are practicing civil disobedience."

There is a defiance today in certain quarters of all that is holy—of all that the Lord has been teaching his offspring for these millennia.

Alexander Pope gave us these oft-quoted words:

Vice is a monster of so frightful mien, As to be hated needs but to be seen; Yet seen too oft, familiar with her face, We first endure, then pity, then embrace.

They talk of freedom, but it is of freedom to exploit, freedom to deprive others. Freedom, poor freedom, thou seduced and prostituted word! Let us beware of such misuse of words; let us live so that we have power of discernment.

In my experience, few people have ever lost their peace, their spirituality, their testimony when they kept close to the Lord in their prayers, to the Church in their activities, to the people of the Church in their fellowship. Seldom does one become seriously doubtful or faithless who continues to read the Holy Scriptures and keep his life clean.

"Put on the whole armour of God," as Paul admonished. With this divine influence and protection, we may be able to discern the adversary's deceptions in whatever appealing words and rationalizations and we may be "able to withstand the evil day, and having done all, to stand."
