Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Chapter Twenty-one

Self-Restraint: The Mistletoe

This world is full of temptations and snares and booby-traps for youth. They are the same rebellions and temptations of ages past, but today they manifest themselves in new forms. The car with its privacy and mobility has multiplied the possibilities of evil. The revolution on the campus has unleashed new demands for freedom from traditional moral restraint and limitation.

Many youths have exhausted the pleasures that seemed to satisfy their predecessors and now, in their boredom, they demand new experiences, new "kicks," which often involve hazardous, immoral, indecent activities, bringing destruction to body and mind and soul.

The so-called "new morality" is but the old immorality in a new setting, except perhaps less secretive, less restrained, less inhibited. Freedom of sex, freedom to drink and smoke, and freedom to rebel and destroy—all come into the picture. Such evils as psychedelic drugs are taking their toll, and narcotics are introduced by dope pushers to unsuspecting youth. Mugging, brutality, and many other aberrations—all come in turn supposedly to relieve boredom as new "kicks." All these and more first fasten themselves like a leech and later become the tyrannical master. The simple experiment becomes a complex habit, the embryo becomes a giant, the little innovation becomes a dictator, and the person becomes the slave with a ring in his nose. The so-called freedom becomes abject serfdom.

The great majority of our youth are stalwart and splendid, but evil is everywhere present and the devil eager to tempt our finest youth. We are obligated to broadcast a warning to those who will listen.

As an example of the increasing pressures on youth to fall prey to the sins of the world, Wallace Sterling, president of Leland Stanford University, said a few years ago:

A five-year study of student development at Stanford has shown that for more than three out of four students, drinking is well established . . . even at the time they enter Stanford and is apparently sanctioned by their peers, their parents, and society. (School and Society, October 29, 1966.)

Many fine young persons have been trapped by evil, little realizing that they are in danger—like standing on a crumbling ledge.

My good friend, Jim Smith, told me a story something like this:

Long years ago when I was a little boy and rode the range with the men, tending the cattle and helping with the round-up, I used to look forward to the "rest stop" under the wide spreading branches of a most beautiful tree on Ash Creek.

How we used to enjoy it and admire it with its uniform shape and its thick green foliage! How we came to look forward to it, depend on it, and almost love it as we came to think of it as our very own, having been planted there for our comfort and to satisfy our needs.

Its green coolness was a haven of protection for the birds that made their nests in its branches and perched on the outer twigs for their chorus rehearsals.

The cattle sought out its cool shade and the soft pulverized ground under it for their afternoon relaxation.

And we thirsty cowboys always made a stop to get a cool drink from the canteen and to stretch our tired, cramped limbs for a few moments as we rested from the hot summer Arizona sun.

As we lay on the soft cool earth on our backs and looked up into the tree, we saw high in one of the limbs a little sprig of mistletoe. It stood out in contrast from the grayer leafage of the tree and was not unattractive in its dark green dress with its little whitish berries.

I imagined I could hear the gigantic tree saying to the little mistletoe, "Ha, little friend, you are welcome to stay with me. In my strength, I can easily spare you a little of my sap, which I create from the sun and air and the water under the creek bed. There is plenty for all, and you in your smallness can do me no harm!"

Years later when I was a man, I again came up Ash Creek, again driving cattle. Imagine my consternation and sadness to find the beautiful tree dry and dead, its long jagged branches reaching high like the bony fingers of a skeleton. Not even an uninhabited bird nest graced its forks, no cattle lazed under its branches, no foliage covered its grim nakedness, and no welcome was extended to traveler or cowboy to take shelter under its nude wretchedness; already its limbs were being hacked away by woodcutters.

The infinitely beautiful tree of my youth was now the ugliest tree on Ash Creek.

In seeking for the cause of such devastation, I saw hanging from the limbs of the tree great clusters of mistletoe—the parasite of the tree. The translucent, glutinous berries perhaps had been carried by a bird or the wind. The stickiness of the berry served to attach it to the tree limb or host plant until germination was complete, the little sprout always turning toward the point of attachment.

And as I pondered this story, this thought came to me: How like the little mistletoe is the first cigarette or first drink! How like this predatory plant is the first lie or dishonest act! How like this parasitic growth is the first crime—the first immoral act!

Who would ever dream that a sticky little white mistletoe berry would overpower and kill a huge beautiful tree, a thousand times its size?

A group of youth little dreamed that an insignificant bottle had the power finally to cripple or destroy the soul. It was for "kicks," they said, that they took the liquor with them to the party. The sensations were not all pleasant the first time, but they felt they had proved they were mature and not "chicken." Future parties and associations seemed to be weak without it. It came to be a regular thing, a lift from boredom, an escape from depressions, a hideout from problems.

How could these young people know except through advice and counsel from others that the bottle was a demon; that it would become master; that, like the mistletoe, it would take over and bleed its host and make some of them alcoholics and would convince others that it was constantly needed.

How could these youth know with their first drink that it would become a habit, a part of them? How could they believe the parasite would waste their much-needed money, break up their homes, rob themselves of self-respect, cause accidental deaths, create worlds of unhappiness, and even destroy the mighty soul?

Neither the tree nor the little carrier bird could possibly know the waxy, sticky little mistletoe seed would kill the mighty ash tree. But the youth who begins to drink can know, if he listens, that eventual destruction and eternal loss face him if he lets this drinking become a habit that thwarts his spiritual development, for he is a child of God, created in his image, born of royal blood, and an heir to the kingdom if he is able to continue clean and worthy.

I worked with such a person who in his youth laughed at the thought he might become involved beyond his powers. He scoffed at the suggestion that he was losing his power of resistance—was almost insulted at the suggestion that he was fast becoming a slave to a merciless, tyrannical master; but I heard him one day in sober moments curse himself and cry out, "What a waste of everything good! How senseless! How stupid!"

I pondered again: How like the little mistletoe is the abominable practice of cheating, the first little dishonest act! I think of a young man who died in the gas chamber. He had stood tall like the tree on Ash Creek. He had been clean, honorable, and loved but had become barren, desolate, and a menace to society, untrusted, unloved. It had begun with cheating, a little seductive vice no bigger than a mistletoe branch, no stickier than a mistletoe berry. Cheating was done in games and in school lessons. There were little inconsequential misappropriations followed by thefts, small and then larger, which finally ran into armed robberies, to deliberate killing, and to the gas chamber.

Whoever said that sin was not fun? Whoever claimed that Lucifer was not handsome, persuasive, easy, friendly? Sin is attractive and desirable. Transgression wears elegant gowns and sparkling apparel. It is highly perfumed; it has attractive features, a soft voice. It is found in educated circles and sophisticated groups. It provides sweet and comfortable luxuries. Sin is easy and has a big company of pleasant companions. It promises immunity from restrictions, temporary freedoms. It can momentarily satisfy hunger, thirst, desire, urges, passions, wants without immediately paying the price. But, it begins tiny and grows to monumental proportions—drop by drop, inch by inch.

It is doubtful if Cain had murder in his heart when the first jealous thought crossed his mind, when the first hate began to develop, but ounce by ounce, moment by moment, the little parasite developed to rob him of his strength, his balance, and his peace. The evil took over and Cain, like the tree, changed his appearance, his attitudes, his life, and became a world wanderer, vicious and desolate.

How like the first cigarette is the predatory mistletoe plant. Just on a sneaking dare or to avoid a momentary embarrassment, or to be smart or to be accepted by others, or for nebulous other foolish reasons, the first cigarette is often taken.

Certainly the novice has no idea of becoming a chain smoker or dying of lung cancer. Surely he can maintain control. There can be no habit—he assures himself he is master; but time and habit and repetition take a terrible toll.

A bird or the wind or other carrier transports the tiny berry to a tree. It sticks to the limb and grows to suck the life fluid from the tree; and eventually it leaves the giant dead and dry.

The single cigarette multiplies from one to a dozen, to a hundred, yes, to a thousand, to an almost uncontrollable habit.

"Can you quit?" I asked a tobacco addict. "Can you abandon the weed before you are 'hooked'?"

The big man laughed. "Of course," he replied and said, as did the great tree on Ash Creek figuratively say, "Ah, little weed! I am not afraid of you. You are insignificant. I am strong."

And then years after, I heard him say in disgust, "I cannot break the habit. It does me much harm. I am its slave. How stupid of me!"

How like the mistletoe is immorality. The killer plant starts with a sticky, sweet berry. Once rooted, it sticks and grows—a leaf, a branch, a plant. It never starts mature and full grown. It is always transplanted an infant. Nor does immorality begin in adultery or perversion. Those are full grown plants. Little indiscretions are the berries—indiscretions like sex thoughts, sex discussions, passionate kissing. The leaves and little twigs are masturbation and petting and such, growing with every exercise.

The full-grown plant is sex looseness—it confounds, frustrates, and destroys like the parasite if it is not cut out and destroyed, for in time it robs the tree, bleeds its life, and leaves it barren and dry and, strangely enough, the parasite dies with its host.

The small indiscretion seems powerless compared to the sturdy body, the strong mind, the sweet spirit of the youth who gives way to the first temptation. But years later I see him once again and what a change! The strong has become weak; the master, the slave. His spiritual growth curtailed, he has isolated himself from the Church with all its uplifting influences. Has he not suffered a kind of spiritual death, leaving him like the tree, a mere skeleton of what he might have been?

If the first unrighteous act is never given root and the mistletoe never permitted to lodge, the tree will grow to beautiful maturity and the youthful life will grow toward God, our Father.

May our youth and their forebears fortify themselves against the very inception of those insidious evils of the world that can overpower and destroy the soul.
