Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Chapter Twenty-two

Integrity: "Temptation and a Snare"

As I read the papers and follow the doings of people in high and low places, and as I read of the graft in federal, state, and local governments and dishonesty in athletics, colleges, and businesses, I find myself crying out almost in despair for integrity, honesty, and righteousness.

When we speak of righteousness, the image of it varies. To one person, righteousness may be kindness and tolerance; to another, the Word of Wisdom; and to still another, the payment of tithing or attendance at church or observing the Golden Rule.

There are those who would not commit adultery, yet would be unkind to spouse and children. Only recently a well-to-do man was in my office. He lives all the conventional commandments but had struck his faithful wife in his sudden anger and in the presence of some of their children.

The Savior found religionists who would never fail to wash their hands before a meal but who came to the table with their "inward part . . . full of ravening and wickedness." (Luke 11:39.)

Some people are like the Pharisees of whom the Lord said:

. . . ye tithe mint and rue and all manner of herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of God: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. (Luke 11:42.)

Self-justification is the enemy of repentance. God's Spirit continues with the honest in heart to strengthen, to help, and to save, but invariably the Spirit of God ceases to strive with the man who excuses himself in his wrong doing.

Practically all dishonesty owes its existence and growth to this inward distortion we call self-justification. It is the first, the worst, and the most insidious and damaging form of cheating—to cheat oneself.

There is the man who would not drink a cup of coffee but every night would take coal from the open railroad cars. There is the girl who, while attending to all her church duties, stole five hundred dollars from her employer. There was the young man who administered the sacrament on Sunday but on the Saturday night before was involved in sinful petting.

There are numerous ways to falsify and deceive and defraud. There are those who rob homes and banks and businesses; employers untrue to their trusts and employees who soldier on the job, misappropriate money, and waste time. There are the purse snatchers, the meter robbers, the tax evaders, and those who mislabel and misrepresent the products they are selling.

Brigham Young reacted to this subject by saying:

Be honest. Woe to those who profess to be Saints and are not honest.

Honest hearts produce honest actions—holy desires produce corresponding outward works. Fulfill your contracts and sacredly keep your word.

Some borrow beyond their ability to pay. Others purchase on time and let time run into eternity; some make promises and solemn covenants and disregard and ignore them. There are those who have taken towels from motels and those who have kept overpayment of change. Some succeed in business by sharp practices and close dealing. Then there is the downright pilfering and stealing.

J. P. Senne has said: "Money dishonestly acquired is never worth its cost, while a good conscience never costs as much as it is worth."

Gandhi is reputed to have once said that there are 999 who believe in honesty for every one who practices it. It might be difficult to find one man who did not believe in honesty. We are told that poor old Diogenes went around Athens with a lighted lantern in the middle of the daytime trying to find just one honest man.

Huge quantities of merchandise disappear through shoplifters, enough to build libraries, schools, and churches, and it is sad that allegedly honorable people are sometimes included in the shoplifting.

Sometimes the supposed "best" people boast of traffic violations and outsmarting the police and of crossing international borders with concealed merchandise without paying duty. Often youths pilfer such things as sweaters, ties, jewelry, scarfs, and film, seeing it as a game.

Some businessmen take "all the traffic will bear" in interest or profit, and advertise sales that are fictitious with heavy mark-up so there can be an impressive mark-down, and there are those who overcharge and overweigh and underpay.

At a meeting I held with a group of bishops, I had occasion to read to them that scripture of Paul: "For a bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God . . . not given to filthy lucre." (Titus 1:7.)

I went to the dictionary to see just what Webster would say and found there that lucre itself had a bad connotation, and filthy lucre was even worse. Not all money is lucre; not all money is filthy. There is clean money—clean money with which to buy food, clothes, and shelter, and with which to make contributions. It is that reasonable pay for faithful service. It is that fair profit from sale of goods, commodities, or services. It is that income received from transactions where all parties profit.

In Proverbs we read: "Better is the poor that walketh in his uprightness, than he that is perverse in his ways, though he be rich." (Proverbs 28:6.)

Filthy lucre is blood money—it is that which is obtained by stealing. Filthy lucre is that which comes through robbery or through gambling. It is that which might be had through sin or sinful operations. Filthy lucre is that which might come from the sale of liquor, wines, and beer. It is that which comes from bribery or from exploitation. I believe that unearned money or compromise money is filthy. Graft money is tainted and that which comes through deceptions, excessive charges, oppression to the poor. Men who accept wages, salaries, or fees who do not give commensurate time, energy, devotion, or service collect money that is not as clean as it should be.

Money is unclean when it is obtained through oppression or misrepresentation. You will remember the prophet Samuel came to his people when the elders of Israel demanded a king, and "he made his sons judges over Israel. And his sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre, and took bribes, and perverted judgment." (1 Samuel 8:1, 3.)

But Samuel the prophet was clean. He asked:

Behold, here I am . . . whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? . . .

And they said, Thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither hast thou taken ought of any man's hand. (1 Samuel 12:3-4.)

Moses said of bribes:

And thou shalt take no gift: for the gift blindeth the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous. (Exodus 23:8.)

Much is said about the employer and the employee:

Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl. . . .

Behold, the hire of the labourers who have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth . . . into the ears of the Lord. . . . (James 5:1, 4.)

The prophet Malachi lists together the sorcerers, the adulterers, the false swearers and those that oppress the hireling in his wages. (See Malachi 3:5.)

Farm help, domestics, unorganized and unprotected people sometimes are oppressed when economic conditions place them in such a position that they must accept what is offered or remain unemployed. And we sometimes justify ourselves in underpaying and even boast about it.

On the other side there are those who accept excessive compensation for services and who fail to give value received and who give no loyalty with their insufficient and inefficient service.

I had an acquaintance, John, who was writing articles for sale. Much of the time he was supposed to be at his regular job he hid away in the furnace room to write and read. And when I asked him about it, he shrugged his shoulders and said, "They all do it." I shamed him out. Now he smiles and gives full service for his wage.

As we look about, we see many who seem greedy for excessive wealth. Paul said:

For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out.

And having food and raiment let us be therewith content.

But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition.

For the love of money is the root of all evil: which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. (1 Timothy 6:7-10.)

And this from Proverbs struck me: ". . . he that maketh haste to be rich shall not be innocent." (Proverbs 28:20.)

Are there not many who are hasting to be rich? Is money taken in on the Sabbath, when it is unnecessary, unclean money? Some must work on the Sabbath. If it is not their fault, then of course there is no blame. But men and women who deliberately develop Sunday business programs to increase their holdings, I feel sorry for them. Sometimes consciences are salved over, saying, "We make more so we can do more good with it for worthy causes." Few give more than a small part of the extra income to those worthy causes. Most is spent on themselves. There are those who work primarily for the time and a half or the double pay. It is enticing. But in a stake I visited recently a man whom I interviewed told me he closed his service station on Sunday. I asked him, "Do you not have competition? Can you survive?" He said he lost a little business to his competitor, but the Lord had blessed him and he was doing well.

The Savior knew that the ox falls in the mire, but he knew also that no ox deliberately goes into the mire every week.

In my travels I find faithful people who forgo Sabbath day profits and the handling of forbidden things. I have found cattlemen who have no roundup on the Sabbath; fruit stands along the roadside, generally open day and night through fruit season, closed on the Sabbath; drug stores, eating houses, and wayside stands closed on the Lord's day and the owners seem to get along and at the same time take genuine satisfaction in abiding by the law. And every time I see good folk forgoing these kinds of earnings, I rejoice and feel within my heart to bless them for their faith and steadfastness.

There have been dishonest queen contests and TV quiz frauds, college student cheating, the "fixing" of ball games, the win-at-any-cost attitudes of sports participants and audiences. There are "Robin Hood" thieves who are publicly acclaimed because part of their loot is given to the poor.

A woman embezzled two million dollars from the depositors of a building and loan association, but because she had helped the poor, paid some back rent, and given emergency help with her stolen money, the community would hardly let her be convicted and imprisoned. They were willing to condone the crime and sin of dishonesty.

Many will defraud a corporation or the state or even the Church but would recoil from stealing a dime from a neighbor. Many rob the insurance companies and policyholders with their fraudulent, unconscionable claims; some are "get-rich-quick" people; some are "get-something-for-nothing" folks.

There are gangsters, extortioners, and other disreputable characters who, through bribery and gifts and contributions, get in high places and influence legislation and court actions.

There are police who assault those they are pledged to protect or appropriate property they are sworn to watch, and there are high officials who rob the public of great amounts.

Some dishonesty is a good deal more subtle. John Ruskin warns to "avoid deception by word or silence."

. . . the essence of lying is in deception, not in words: a lie may be told by silence, by equivocation, by the accent of a syllable, by a glance of the eye attaching a peculiar significance to a sentence; and all these kinds of lies are worse and baser by many degrees than a lie plainly worded; so that no form of blinded conscience is so far sunk as that which comforts itself for having deceived, because the deception was by gesture or silence, instead of utterance. . . .

There is the person who, seeking a temple recommend, colors the facts, minimizes the errors, exaggerates the virtues; there is the prospective missionary who fails to reveal the whole truth; there is the person who partakes of the sacrament unworthily rather than stir curiosity. Whom do they deceive?

A prayer of a Dallas, Texas, Rotarian is refreshing:

Teach me that 60 minutes make an hour, 16 ounces one pound, and 100 cents one dollar.

Help me to live so that I can lie down at night with a clear conscience, without a gun under my pillow and unhaunted by the faces of those to whom I have brought pain.

Grant, I beseech thee, that I may earn my meal ticket on the square, and in doing thereof that I may not stick the gaff where it does not belong.

Deafen me to the jingle of tainted money and the rustle of unholy skirts.

Blind me to the faults of the other fellow, but reveal to me my own.

Guide me so that each night when I look across the dinner table at my wife, who has been a blessing to me, I shall have nothing to conceal.

Keep me young enough to laugh with my children and to lose myself in their play.

And then, when comes the smell of flowers, and the tread of soft steps, and the crunching of the hearse's wheels in the gravel out in front of my place, make the ceremony short and the epitaph simple: "Here Lies a Man." (J. Hugh Campbell, Dallas, Texas, "A Prayer and an Epitaph.")

But not all people are disappointing and dishonorable. For example, in Los Angeles, Douglas William Johnson returned $240,000 that was lost on a street from a Brink's armored car. Ironically, the fickle public condemned him, called him a fool, telephoned him, harassed him, and made life unpleasant for him and for his children at school.

On the train from New York to Baltimore we sat in the dining car opposite a businessman and commented, "It seldom rains like this in Salt Lake City."

The conversation soon led naturally into the golden question: "How much do you know about the Church?"

"I know little about the Church," he said, "but I know one of its people." He was developing subdivisions in New York. "There is a sub-contractor working for me," he continued. "He is so honest and full of integrity that I never ask him to bid on a job. He is the soul of honor. If the Mormon people are like this man, I'd like to know about a church that produces such honorable men." We left him literature and sent the missionaries to teach him.

A magazine article told of a Connecticut grandmother, Hannie Dickinson, who built on the roadside near her home a building a little larger than a child's playhouse on which was the sign "Self-service—Open," and in which were eggs, vegetables, fruits, and flowers. A glass jar was the cash register. She would bring the produce in the early morning and collect at night after her farm operations of the day. She had operated this unusual merchandising business for three summers and reported that not a single person had taken goods without pay nor had they shortchanged her. "It seems that when you trust people, they generally respond with honor," she said.

Alma told the people that a man of integrity "cannot walk in crooked paths; neither doth he vary from that which he hath said; neither hath he a shadow of turning from the right to the left, or from that which is right to that which is wrong. . . ." (Alma 7:20.)

The young Prophet Joseph Smith said: "Be virtuous and pure; be men of integrity and truth; keep the commandments of God."

Sometimes it is easier to explain what integrity is by showing what it is not. I stepped into the Hotel Utah Coffee Shop in Salt Lake City to buy some hard rolls, and as I placed my order with the waitress, a middle-aged woman I knew was sitting at the counter with a cup of coffee at her plate. I am sure she saw me, though she tried not to show it. I could see her physical discomfort as she turned her face from me at a right angle, and there it remained until I had made my purchase and had gone to the cash register. She had her free agency—she could drink coffee if she wanted to, but what a wallop her character had taken because she was unwilling to face a friend! How she shriveled! At the waters of baptism, in sacrament meetings, and in the temple, she had promised that she would have a broken heart and contrite spirit, repent of all her sins, take upon herself the name of Jesus Christ, and serve him unto the end, manifesting it by her works.

Probably she was certain that I had not seen or recognized her, but the ten stories of the building above her were not enough to keep the angels in heaven from photographing her movements and recording her thoughts of deception. It was a petty thing, but for her it was withering—a weak, mean, cheap, little tricky thing that sent her honor skidding down the incline toward bankruptcy of self-esteem.

John the Revelator "saw the dead, small and great stand before God; and the books were opened; and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works." (Revelation 20:12.)

Did that woman think she was hiding from God? How wrong she was! No one can conceal thoughts or acts from God, for the photographic cameras are running night and day. So sensitive are they that they record not only sights and sounds but also thought and inclinations. Remember, we are not talking about a cup of coffee; we are talking about the principle of integrity.

Moses failed to realize that the recorder was turned on when he said to the continually complaining children of Israel, crying for the fleshpots of Egypt: "Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock?" He was reprimanded: "Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have given them." (Numbers 20:10, 12.)

Moses had integrity in great measure, but in that unguarded moment he had presumptuously taken credit for the Lord's miracle and was forbidden to enter the Promised Land.

When Cain's great sin was conceived in his heart and the propitious moment had arrived for the foul deed, undoubtedly he looked to the right and to the left and behind him and was certain there was no eye and no ear; he perpetrated his heinous crime and left his righteous brother lying in his blood. The Lord perceived it all—the sights and sounds and thinking and malice and intents and desires and urges.

Cain was reminded soon, for there came the voice of Majesty saying, "Where is Abel thy brother?" And as though he could hide from Omniscience and Omnipresence, he tried to conceal by saying, "I know not. Am I my brother's keeper?" (Genesis 4:9.)

And the voice of Omnipotence asked in stentorian tones: "What hast thou done? the voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from the ground. . . . the earth . . . hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand." (Genesis 4:10-11.)

Integrity is not only to be truthful, but it also involves reliability. Periodically every one should review A Message to Garcia by Elbert Hubbard:

In all this Cuban business, there is one man who stands out on the horizon of my memory like Mars at Perihelion.

When war broke out between Spain and the United States, it was very necessary to communicate quickly with the leader of the insurgents. Garcia was somewhere in the fastness of Cuba—no one knew where. No mail or telegraph message could reach him. The President must secure his cooperation quickly.

What to do!

Someone said to the President: "There is a fellow by the name of Rowan who will find Garcia for you if anybody can."

Rowan was sent for and given a letter to be delivered to Garcia. How the fellow by the name of Rowan took the letter, sealed it up in an oilskin pouch, wrapped it over his heart, in four days landed by night off the coast of Cuba from an open boat, disappeared into the jungle, and in three weeks came out on the other side of the island, having traversed a hostile country on foot, and delivered his letter to Garcia—are things I have no special desire now to tell in detail. The point I wish to make is this: McKinley gave Rowan a letter to be delivered to Garcia. Rowan took the letter and did not ask: "Where is he?" By the eternal! There is a man whose form should be cast in deathless bronze and the statue placed in every college of the land.

General Garcia is now dead, but there are other Garcias. No man has endeavored to carry out an enterprise where many hands were needed but has been well nigh appalled at times at the imbecility of the average man—the inability or unwillingness to concentrate on a thing and do it.

How one's admiration soars for Peter, the number one man in all the world, as he is seen standing at full height and with boldness and strength before those magistrates and rulers who could imprison him, flog him, and perhaps even take his life. We seem to hear those fearless words as he faced his foes and said: "We ought to obey God rather than men." (Acts 5:29.)

Peter looked into the eyes of the crowd and bore his testimony to them of the God they had crucified:

. . . whom ye delivered up, and denied him in the presence of Pilate, when he was determined to let him go.

But ye denied the Holy One and the Just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you;

And killed the Prince of life, whom God hath raised from the dead; whereof we are witnesses. (Acts 3:13-15.)

Of those who heard this testimony and charge, 5,000 men saw this courage superior and integrity supreme! And 5,000 men believed.

Turn back to Daniel, a captive and slave but also a prophet of God who was willing to die for his convictions. Was integrity ever placed on a higher plane? The gospel was Daniel's life. The Word of Wisdom was vital to him. In the king's court, he could be little criticized, but even for a ruler he would not drink the king's wine nor gorge himself with meat and rich foods. His moderation and his purity of faith brought him health and wisdom and knowledge and skill and understanding, and his faith linked him closely to his Father in heaven, and revelations came to him as often as required. His revealing of the dreams of the king and the interpretations thereof brought him honor and acclaim and gifts and high position such as many men would sell their souls to get. But when the choice was put to him of ceasing to pray or of being cast into a den of lions, he prayed openly and submitted to the punishment.

We remind ourselves of the integrity of the three Hebrews, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who like Daniel defied men and rulers, to be true to themselves and to keep faith with their faith. They were required by decree of the emperor to kneel down and worship a monumental image of gold that the king had set up. In addition to losing caste, losing position, and angering the king, they faced the fiery furnace rather than deny their God.

The dedication must have been exciting. Had there ever been such an image? such a spectacle? Ninety feet of gold in the form of a man—what could be more scintillating, more sparkling? There must have been countless people milling in the streets and in the area where the gigantic image stood when the herald announced the procedure and the decree that all must kneel at the sound of the music and all must worship the image. Neither fear of the king nor what he could do to them dissuaded the three courageous young men from their true path of rightness. When the prearranged sounds of the cornet, flute, harp, and other instruments reverberated through the area and the masses of men and women everywhere filled their homes and the streets with kneeling worshipers of the huge golden image, three men refused to insult their true God. They prayed to God, and when confronted by the raging and furious emperor king, they courageously answered in the face of what could be certain death:

If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O king.

But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up. (Daniel 3:17-18.)

Integrity! The promises of eternal life from God supersede all promises of men to greatness, comfort, immunities. These men of courage and integrity were saying, "We do not have to live, but we must be true to ourselves and God." This reminds us of Abraham Lincoln's saying: "I am not bound to win, but I am bound to be true; I am not bound to succeed, but I am bound to live by the light that I have."

There comes from Shakespeare's pen: "There is no terror in your threats: for I am armed so strong in honesty, that they pass by me as the idle wind, which I respect not.

Integrity in man should bring inner peace, sureness of purpose, and security in action. Lack of integrity brings disunity, fear, sorrow, unsureness.

Since the Lord said, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect" (Matthew 5:48), it would be well if all of us would take frequent inventory to see if hidden away under the rugs and in the corners of our lives there might be some vestige of hypocrisy and ugliness or error. Or could there be hidden under the blankets of personal excuse and rationalization some small eccentricities and dishonesties? Are there any cobwebs in ceilings and corners that we think will not be noticed? Are we trying to cover up the small pettinesses and the gratifications we secretly allow ourselves—rationalizing all the while that they are insignificant and inconsequential? Are there areas in our thoughts and actions and attitudes that we would like to hide from those we respect most? Are we certain that all of our innermost secrets are kept confidential? The Lord revealed in 1831: "And the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow; for their iniquities shall be spoken upon the housetops, and their secret acts shall be revealed." (D&C 1:3.)

Would a frequent housecleaning be in order for all of us?

I may not be able to eliminate pornographic trash, but my family and I need not buy or view it.

I may not be able to close disreputable businesses, but I can stay away from areas of questioned honor and ill repute.

I may not be able to greatly reduce the divorces of the land or save all broken homes and frustrated children, but I can keep my own home a congenial one, my marriage happy, my home a heaven, and my children well adjusted.

I may not be able to stop the growing claims to freedom from laws based on morals, or change all opinions regarding looseness in sex and growing perversions, but I can guarantee devotion to all high ideals and standards in my own home, and I can work toward giving my own family a happy, interdependent spiritual life.

I may not be able to stop all graft and dishonesty in high places, but I myself can be honest and upright, full of integrity and true honor, and my family will be trained likewise.

I may not be able to insure family prayers, home evening, meeting attendance, and spiritual, well-integrated lives in all my neighbors, but I can be certain that my children will be happy at home. They will grow strong and tall and realize their freedom is found at home, in their faith, in clean living, and in opportunity to serve. As Christ said, "And the truth shall make you free."

No virtues in the perfection we strive for are more important than integrity and honesty. Let us then be complete, unbroken, pure, and sincere, to develop in ourselves that quality of soul we prize so highly in others.
