Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Chapter Twenty-seven

Tithing: "Render . . . unto God"

The Pharisees, ever trying to entangle and trick the Savior, again set their traps:

. . . Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar? . . .

But Jesus perceived their wickedness. . . .

. . . Then saith he unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's. (Matthew 22:17-18, 21.)

One day a friend wanted me to go with him to his ranch. He opened the door of a new automobile, slid under the wheel, and said, "How do you like my new car?" We rode in luxurious air-conditioned comfort out through the countryside to an elegant landscaped home, and he said with no little pride, "This is my home."

He drove on to a grassy knoll. The sun was retiring behind the distant hills. Pointing to the north, he asked, "Do you see that clump of trees?" I could plainly discern them in the fading day.

He pointed to the east, "Do you see the lake?" It too was visible shimmering in the sunset.

"Now, the bluff that's on the south." We turned about to scan the distance southward. Then he pointed out the barns, silos, the ranch house to the west. With a wide sweeping gesture, he boasted, "From the clump of trees, to the lake, to the bluff, and to the ranch buildings and all between—all this is mine. And the herd of cattle in the meadow—those are mine, too."

I knew this was a man with great ability as an organizer, intelligent and resourceful, yet he lived in many ways a narrow life. His possessions seemed to own him. He turned away opportunities to serve in the Church because his ranch kept him "too busy," and he contributed little financially because he was always "short of cash because everything is tied up in the ranch."

I could not help thinking of one of the parables of Christ:

The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully:

And he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits?

And he said, This will I do: I will pull down my barns, and build greater; and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods.

And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.

But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be, which thou hast provided?

So is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God. (Luke 12:16-21.)

The Psalmist said:

The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.

For he hath founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods. (Psalms 24:1-2.)

My friend was proud that he had developed his ranch from the desert with his own strength and toil, but where had he obtained that strength and where had he obtained the land and the water with which to make it productive, if not from the Lord?

Thou, O God, didst send a plentiful rain, whereby thou didst confirm thine inheritance, when it was weary. (Psalms 68:9.)

If the earth is the Lord's, then we are merely tenants and owe our landlord an accounting. The scripture says: "Render unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and to God that which is God's." What percentage of our increase do we pay Caesar? And what percent to God?

The command of the Lord through the prophet Malachi reads:

Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings.

Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse . . . and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it. (Malachi 3:8, 10.)

And in the latter days, the Lord said again:

And if ye seek the riches which it is the will of the Father to give unto you, ye shall be the richest of all people, for ye shall have the riches of eternity; and it must needs be that the riches of the earth are mine to give. . . . (D&C 38:39.)

There is no place in holy writ where God has said, "I give you title to this land unconditionally." It is not ours to give, to have, to hold, to sell, despoil, exploit as we see fit.

Modern scripture says that if you live the commandments,

the fulness of the earth is yours, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, . . .

Yea, all things which come of the earth . . . are made for the benefit and the use of man. . . . (D&C 59:16, 18.)

This promise does not seem to convey the earth but only the use and contents that are given to men on condition that they live all of the commandments of God.

That was long years ago. I later saw my friend lying in death among luxurious furnishings in his palatial home. And I folded his arms upon his breast and drew down the little curtains over his eyes. I spoke at his funeral, and I followed the cortege from the good piece of earth he had claimed to his grave, a tiny, oblong area the length of a tall man, the width of a heavy one.

Recently I saw that same estate, yellow in grain, green in lucerne, white in cotton, seemingly unmindful of him who had claimed it.

Oh, puny man, thou art the busy ant moving the sands of the sea.

It is not only the rancher who is a tenant of the Lord's. I stopped on the highway to buy some fruit from a man I knew. The fruit stand was on the edge of the orchard. And I asked him, "Are these trees yours?"

He said, "From the highway to the hill—all these are mine, and all the fruit we pick and sell."

And I thought to say, "Do you have no partner? You bought the land and the seedlings. But who put chemicals into the soil to make them grow? Who sent the living sap climbing all the limbs? Who made them bloom and scent the air with sweet perfume? Did you make the rain? Can you command the sun? Do you put instructions in the trees to produce buds and blossoms, fruit in ripeness, taste and food value? He who made the land, the trees, and the elements has land-lien on it all. Have you settled your lease payment?

"I am sure you pay to Caesar his full portion, never failing. But do you calculate and pay the part to God?

"Are these trees yours and yours alone? Is there no partner's claim upon the fruit?

"Have you integrity? Would you rob God, your partner, remembering that the earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof?

"When God had created man and woman he placed them upon the earth to 'dress it and to keep it and subdue it.' (See Genesis 2:15.) It seems this landlord-tenant relationship is fair—the Lord, the owner, furnishes the land, the air, the water, the sunshine, and all the elements to make it fruitful. The tenant gives his labor."

The Lord promised after the deluge:

While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease. (Genesis 8:22.)

And the psalmist sang again:

Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it; thou greatly enrichest it with the river of God, . . .

Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly: thou settlest the furrows thereof: thou makest it soft with showers. . . .

The pastures are clothed with flocks; . . . they shout for joy, they also sing. (Psalms 65:9-10, 13.)

. . . the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. (Psalms 33:5.)

A month later, a car accident took the life of this horticulturist. He had not paid his keep, nor did he take his orchard with him. Each spring its trees still bloom; each fall the luscious fruit is picked.

I saw a lovely house upon a beach. The occupant boastfully pointed to it as a thing of beauty, built solid enough to withstand the storms.

One day a warning came. A tidal wave rushed in to shore. All occupants were saved, but as the great sea hurried back to its place, only a concrete floor marked the place where his prized possession had stood. The stones were out at sea, the lumber ground to toothpicks, floating in the water. And I remembered how often the psalmist criticized man for his vanity.

Another day I accompanied a friend to his bank. He checked the contents of his safety deposit box, and, lifting out a handful of stocks and bonds and deeds, he proudly said to me, "All these are mine. These represent the labor of a lifetime."

And I pondered: "How you have prospered! How did you do so well? Where did you get your talents, your abilities? Did you create your sight and voice and memory and ability to think?

"Do you pay tithes? Do you render unto God that which already was his own? I'm sure that Caesar never fails to get his portion. What of God? You accepted your earthly opportunities on condition. You rented his land, his equipment, used his elements, you know.

"Does puny man possess, appropriate, bequeath, and give as though he made the earth and heaven? And this without report or settling accounts?"

I met a man upon the campus of a great university, well-trained and brilliant, holding high degrees. We talked of income. Though his was very large, he felt it all too small to meet his needs.

"Do you pay tithes?"

Why should he pay? He earned it—every cent. I told him of the psalmist's theme:

"The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein."

And he countered, "I claim no earth. I use no elements—I train the minds of men. I owe no debts to anyone. I earn my income."

And then I asked, "By what great power do you earn?"

"My brains," he said.

And then I asked: "Where did your brains find birth? Did you create them? build them in a factory? buy them in a store? Did you add element to element, fashioning them so intricately and giving them such power? Where did you get your strength, your vision, power, and health? Where did you get your breath, your continuity? Do you make brains, build bodies, create souls?"

This man was arrogant and proud. Like the others he needed the admonition given the rebellious Israelites:

Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God . . . his commandments . . . and his statutes. . . .

And when thy herds and thy flocks . . . thy silver and thy gold . . . and all that thou hast is multiplied;

Then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, . . .

Who led thee through . . . drought, where there was no water; who brought thee forth water out of the rock of flint; . . .

And thou say in thine heart, My power and the might of mine hand hath gotten me this wealth.

But thou shalt remember the Lord thy God: for it is he that giveth thee power to get wealth. . . . (Deuteronomy 8:11, 13-15, 17-18.)

For long years he had been misusing funds—appropriating the tenth which belonged to his Creator. What right had he to use without permission the Lord's lease funds, and without accounting and without the commensurate worthiness and faithfulness on which his nine-tenths were promised? He had forgotten Malachi's question: "Will a man rob God?" (Malachi 3:8.)

I outlived this man, too. It was a sad affair when his time came. The strong was weak, the powerful inanimate. His brains still encased in his cranium would work no more. He breathed no air; he taught no youth, commanded no more hearers, no more salary; he occupied no apartment but did occupy a little plot of earth on a grassy hillside. But now, I hope he knows that "the earth is the Lord's, and all that therein is."

I asked another man if he paid tithes. He answered with a blush, "We cannot afford to tithe." "What? Cannot afford integrity? Cannot afford to return to the Great Provider's program that which was already his?"

He said, "My schooling was expensive. Our little ones have cost us much, and there is still another one to come. The doctor and the hospital will take their toll. Our car was wrecked and cost us that much more. Vacation, illness, living costs go up and leave us none to give the Church."

"Do you believe in God?"

"Of course," he said.

"You do?" I asked, "Would God make promises he would not fulfill? You have no confidence in God, else why do you doubt his glorious Promises? Your faith is in yourself God Promised he would open heaven's windows and pour you out rich gifts beyond your comprehension, Premised on your faithfulness. Do you not need those blessings? For that one-tenth, he'll compensate with blessings little dreamed of. He said: 'Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath Prepared for them that love him.' (1 Corinthians 2:9.)

"And again:

"'. . . seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you.' (Matthew 6:33.)

"You don't believe that God will measure up? No, you do not trust your Lord. You keep all the funds you have collected and use them according to your own judgment. You fear he would not make good his promises.

"Your very debts, your many troubles show incompetence to handle your affairs. You've partly failed in your rich stewardship. Can you control your business better than the Lord? Would you do well to use this manager in whom you have no trust? We know he will not fail."

Tithing is not for God. It is we who clip the coupons and collect the dividends.

A salaried man complained: "My neighbor has a farm. His family lives upon it. We buy our living from a store with cash. They kill a beef, a pork, and feed themselves from their deep freeze. Their garden loads the table with vegetables; the field feeds the cows that furnish milk products; their farm grows wheat for the poultry for the table; and the hens furnish meat and eggs. Shouldn't he pay tithes on his farm land production?"

The answer is: Of course, he should pay if he is true to his commitments. No honest man would rob his Lord of tithes and offerings.

We ask again: Do you feel generous when you pay your tithes? Boastful when the amount is large? Has the child been generous to his parents when he washes the car, makes his bed? Are you liberal when you pay your rent, or pay off notes at banks? You are not generous or liberal but merely honest when you pay your tithes.

"I have made the earth, and created man upon it," says the Lord. "I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I commanded." (Isaiah 45:12.)

Perhaps your attitudes are the product of your misconceptions.

Would you steal a dollar from your friend? a tire from your neighbor's car? Would you borrow a widow's insurance money with no intent to pay? Do you rob banks? You are shocked at such suggestions. Then, would you rob your God, your Lord, who has made such generous arrangements with you?

Do you have a right to appropriate the funds of your employer with which to pay your debts, to buy a car, to clothe your family, to feed your children, to build your home?

Would you take from your neighbor's funds to send your children to college or on a mission? Would you help relatives or friends with funds not your own? Some people get their standards mixed, their ideals out of line. Would you take tithes to pay your building fund or ward maintenance contribution? Would you supply gifts to the poor with someone else's money? The Lord's money?

The Lord continues to ask: "Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me." (Malachi 3:8.)

And he has said that "today . . . is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my people." (D&C 64:23.)

Does not the law of tithing apply to all the children of men, regardless of church or creed? All who believe the Bible really must believe that this is a law of God.

There echo again and again the words of the Master: "Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's." The Lord will bless all those who love and live this law.
