Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Chapter Twenty-nine

Compliance: "To Kick Against the Pricks"

On the road to Damascus the Lord appeared to Saul of Tarsus and said, "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks." (Acts 9:5.)

In this figure of speech is captured the essence of rebellion against God; we can only hurt ourselves. If one is pricked by a goad and angered by the pain, he may foolishly strike out at the source of irritation, only to suffer even more.

In my youth a neighbor moved about for many days on crutches. He was a bit evasive when asked the cause of his misfortune, but an ear witness chuckled as he told me, "John stubbed his toe on a rocking chair in the night, and in his quick anger he kicked the chair and broke his toe."

Another Saul, the first king of Israel, kicked against the pricks, to his eternal sorrow. He disobeyed the commands of God and rebelled against the limitations imposed by his Lord. His stubbornness cost him his kingdom and brought forth the caustic denunciation from the prophet Samuel:

For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, he hath also rejected thee from being king.

. . . When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel, and the Lord anointed thee king over Israel? (1 Samuel 15:23, 17.)

O foolish king! Given power, wealth, and opportunity, you threw them all away because of your arrogance, self-will, and conceit.

There was a man who rebelled against the call of Brigham Young to go to southern valleys, saying, "Nobody can tell me what I must do." Through his personal rebellion he took his entire family out of the Church. How little he retarded the Church in its great colonization program! The valleys were settled in spite of him. How little his disaffection injured the Church! It has grown steadily without him. But how he has suffered in his eternal progression! In contrast, there are those who pulled up stakes, obeyed the call, colonized new areas, established themselves, and reared families of faith and devotion.

To satisfy his own egotism, to feed his pride, to justify vain ambition, a man took a stand against the authorities of the Church. He followed the usual pattern—no apostasy at first, only superiority of knowledge with mild criticism of the brethren. He loved the brethren, he said, but they had failed to see things he saw. He was sure his interpretation was correct. He would still love the Church, he maintained, but his criticism grew and developed into ever-widening areas. He could not yield in good conscience; he had his pride. He spoke of it among his associates; he talked of it at home. His children did not accept his philosophy wholly, but their confidence was shaken in the brethren and the Church. They were frustrated and became inactive. They married out of the Church and he lost them. He later realized the folly of his position and returned to humbleness and activity, but he had lost his children.

There is a man who, released from high position in the Church, resisted his release. He knew positions were temporary trusts, but he turned his venom to the presiding leader who had released him, complaining of the way it had been done. Proper recognition had not been given, the time had not been propitious, it was a reflection upon his effectiveness. He built up a case for himself, became bitter, absented himself from his meetings, justified himself in his deficiencies, and estranged himself from the work of the Lord. His children came along and partook of his frustrations. His grandchildren grew up without spirituality. In later life he "came to himself," and on the brink of the grave he made an "about face." But he found his family would not effect the transformation that now he would give his life to have them make.

Often children suffer for their parents' errors. I know a man and woman who became angry at the bishop when he denied them a recommend to the temple. Eight lovely children had blessed their temple marriage. They would not be so dealt with by this young bishop. Who should they be deprived and humiliated? Were they less worthy than others? Surely this boy-bishop was too strict, over-orthodox. Never would they be active nor put their foot inside the door of that church so long as that bishop presided. They would show him! This family history is tragic. The four younger children were never baptized. The four older ones were never ordained, endowed, or sealed. No missions were filled by this family. The parents are today ill at ease, still defiant. They had covered themselves with a cloud, and righteous prayers could not pass through.

The individual who fights the designs and purposes of the Lord finds disillusionment, disappointment, and misery. The Lord says: "And the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow. . . ." (D&C 1:3.) He outlines the fate of those who kick against the pricks, who fight against him, who decry his program.

. . . As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints.

Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen?

Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson—

That the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness.

That they may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man.

Behold, ere he is aware, he is left unto himself, to kick against the pricks, to persecute the saints and to fight against God. (D&C 121:33-38.)

The Caesars burned the early saints as torches, subjected them to the claws of wild beasts in the coliseums, drove them underground into the catacombs, confiscated their property, and snuffed out their lives to destroy the program of the Lord, but all to no avail, for the fires of devotion and sacrifice were only intensified thereby.

The persecutors decapitated John the Baptist and martyred the apostles, all to destroy the works of God. They failed. Where relatively few contemporaries ever heard them, hundreds of millions have since been enlightened by their doctrines, lifted by their example, and inspired by their testimonies.

"Mormonism will fail if we dispose of their prophet," persecutors of the Church said a century ago as they murdered Joseph Smith in cold blood. Undoubtedly their fiendish grins of satisfaction at such a foul deed changed to perturbed grimaces when they came to realize that they had been but kicking against prickly points, injuring only themselves. Mormonism was not destroyed by the cruel martyrdom. Rather the bullet-torn flesh seeded the soil, the blood they shed moistened the seed, and the spirit they sent heavenward will testify against them throughout eternities. The cause they sought to destroy persists and grows.

Gamaliel, the noted Pharisee doctor of the law and teacher of Saul of Tarsus, understood the futility of fighting against God. When the chief priests would have slain the apostles, this wise man warned them:

. . . take heed to yourselves what ye intend to do as touching these men.

. . . Refrain from these men, and let them alone; for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to nought:

But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it: lest haply ye be found even to fight against God. (Acts 5:35, 38-39.)

This thing of which we speak is not a vice of strangers; rebellion is a sin of those who belong to us.

The antediluvians were a law unto themselves and locked doors against themselves. Jonah, in his egotism, took offense when the repentance of Ninevah rendered unnecessary the fulfillment of his prophecy. Judas fought against God and suffered the buffetings of Satan. Sherem, with his learning, his eloquence, and his flattery, sought to turn away people from the simple faith, and he died in remorse and humiliation. Nehor tried to advance his own cause, increase his popularity, and lead a following with his criticisms and flatteries, and he came to an ignominious death. Korihor, with his teachings of intellectual liberty and his rationalizations, followed his temporary popularity with begging in the streets. Paul and Saul and Alma, and many another in our day, have undertaken to cover their sins, gratify their pride and vain ambition, grieve the Spirit of the Lord, withdraw from holy places and righteous influences. In the words of the Savior:

Behold, ere he is aware, he is left unto himself, to kick against the pricks, to persecute the saints, and to fight against God. (D&C 121:38.)

A page in the journal of the Prophet Joseph Smith records:

Write to Oliver Cowdery and ask him if he has not eaten husks long enough? If he is not almost ready to return, be clothed with robes of righteousness, and go up to Jerusalem? Orson Hyde hath need of him. (History of the Church, vol. 5, p. 366.)

This alludes to the Prodigal Son whose sad fate brought him low to the eating of husks with the swine after he had wasted his inheritance. Like him, Oliver Cowdery, man of rare opportunity, fought against his conscience, stifled his best impulses; and finally when the earthly powers were nearly at an end, his influence in the world largely terminated, he came to himself and came back to the program he had resisted. His brother-in-law, David Whitmer, said of him as he was restored to the Church late in life: "Oliver died the happiest man I ever saw. After shaking hands with his family and kissing his wife and daughter, he said: 'Now I lay me down for the last time!' . . . and he died with a smile on his face." Peace, sweet peace finally comes to men when they humbly yield to the gentle pressure of the Spirit.

Alma the younger was also to learn what it meant to kick against the pricks. The story of his transformation is not unlike that of Paul. With his companions, he set about to "steady the ark," to set straight the leaders of the church, and to take over the minds of people. These were brilliant young men, eloquent, impressive. And like Saul of Tarsus, they went about to destroy the church. Wicked they were, and idolatrous, and their power and influence lay in their erudition and "great swelling words" and flattery.

The angel of the Lord appeared unto them in a cloud. His voice was as it were with a voice of thunder which caused the earth to shake." The astonished men fell to the earth, Alma becoming dumb and lifeless. Carried helpless to his father, he recovered after long fasting and prayers by those who loved him.

It took great courage to admit they were wrong, but these young men did so and went about "zealously striving to repair all the injuries which they had done to the church." They had kicked against the pricks as did Paul, but once convinced of errors, they returned to battle for the Lord all the balance of their days.

And be it said here to their everlasting glory that numerous good people have tasted of and recovered from offense, having come to realize that so long as we live upon the earth, we shall live and work with imperfect people and there will be misunderstandings, offenses, and injuries to sensitive feelings. The best of motives are often misunderstood. It is gratifying to find numbers of good people who, in their bigness of soul, have straightened out their thinking, swallowed their pride, forgiven what they felt were personal slights and who have returned to good feeling for the sakes of themselves and their posterity. Numerous others who have walked critical, lonely, thorny paths in abject misery have accepted correction, acknowledged errors, cleansed their hearts of bitterness, and come again to peace, that coveted peace which is so conspicuous in its absence.

It is best of all if we so conform our lives to the Lord's commandments that we never feel the pricks, but if we do suffer the pains of conscience and just rebuke, let us follow the example of Paul and after our repentance be as energetic in the works of righteousness as we were in opposition. So will we hope, too, for the commendation that the Lord has for his worthy children.
