Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Chapter Thirty

Succession in the Presidency of the Church: The Need for a Prophet

It is Sunday morning, January 18, 1970. A great heart stops beating and an aged body relaxes and slumbers. Like an earthquake sends a tidal wave around the earth, communications now cover the earth and millions of serious-minded people in even faraway places stop to pay saddened tribute to a mighty man of God who has passed from mortality.

For days, long lines of loving followers inch their way along the street, even in the rain, to see once more the visage of their departed leader.

The Tabernacle is crowded with those who loved him, and sweet tributes are paid.

The earthly body of the prophet, David O. McKay, is laid to rest in dignified reverence.

In our feeling of emptiness, it hardly seems that we could go on without him; but as one star sinks behind the horizon, another rises in the sky, and death spawns life.

The work of the Lord is endless. Even when a powerful leader dies, not for a single instant is the Church without leadership, thanks to the kind Providence who gave his kingdom continuity and perpetuity. As it already had happened eight times before in this dispensation, a people reverently close a grave, dry their tears, and turn their faces to the future.

The moment life passes from a President of the Church, a body of men become the composite leader—these men already seasoned with experience and training. The appointments have long been made, the authority given, the keys delivered. For five days, the kingdom moves forward under this already authorized council. No "running" for position, no electioneering, no stump speeches. What a divine plan! How wise our Lord, to organize so perfectly beyond the weakness of frail, grasping humans!

Then dawns a notable day (January 23, 1970), and fourteen serious men walk reverently into the temple of God—this, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, the governing body of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, several of whom have experienced this solemn change before.

When these fourteen men emerge from the holy edifice later in the morning, a transcendently vital event has occurred—a short interregnum ends, and the government of the kingdom shifts back again from the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles to a new prophet, an individual leader, the Lord's earthly representative, who has unostentatiously been moving toward this lofty calling for sixty years. The man is Joseph Fielding Smith.

Not because of his name, however, did he ascend to this high place, but because when he was a very young man he was called of the Lord, through the then-living prophet, to be an apostle—a member of the Quorum—and was given the precious, vital keys to hold in suspension pending a time when he might become the senior apostle and the President.

In that eventful temple meeting, when he has been "ordained and set apart" as the President of the Church by his brethren, the Twelve, he chooses his counselors—two mighty men of valor: Elder Harold B. Lee and Elder Nathan Eldon Tanner, with their rich background as teachers, businessmen, public officials, and especially Church leaders.

And a presidency of three and a newly constituted Council of Twelve walk humbly to their offices without fanfare or ostentation, and a new administration moves into a new period with promise of great development and unprecedented growth.

Two years pass. Again it is a Sunday, now July 2, 1972, and another prophet goes to his rest. For a second time in three years the faithful acknowledge their debt to a great man for his leadership and to the Lord for giving guidance through such a man. The decision as to succession is repeated as each time before. Again the Quorum of the Twelve under inspiration designate their senior member as the man called of God to be President of the Church. President Harold B. Lee takes his place at the head as prophet.

It was a very young man who introduced the restored program to this new world. Joseph Smith (December 23, 1805—June 27, 1844) was but 24 years of age when the Church was organized.

When he was martyred at 38, the second President, Brigham Young (June 1, 1801—August 28, 1877), became senior apostle and then the President of the Church (December 27, 1847) at 46 years of age. He presided thirty years (until he was 76).

John Taylor (November 1, 1808—July 25 1887) was 71 when he became President of the Church (October 10, 1880); when he died at 78, Wilford Woodruff (March 1, 1807—September 2, 1898) became the senior apostle (July 25, 1887). Two years later (April 7, 1889), he was sustained President of the Church at 82 years of age. He died at 91, whereupon President Lorenzo Snow (April 3, 1814—October 10, 1901) became the senior apostle. He was 84 years of age when eleven days later (September 13, 1898) he became the President of the Church. His presidency was short-lived. He served three years (until October 10, 1901).

President Joseph F. Smith (November 13, 1838—November 19, 1918) was senior apostle seven days; he became the President of the Church October 17, 1901, at 62 years of age; he died at 80.

President Heber J. Grant (November 22, 1856—May 14, 1945) was senior apostle less than a week when he became the President of the Church (on November 23, 1918) at 62; he died at 88.

President George Albert Smith (April 4, 1870—April 4, 1951) was the senior apostle for seven days and became President of the Church (May 21, 1945) at 75; he died at the age of 81.

President David O. McKay, the ninth President (September 8, 1873—January 18, 1970) was senior apostle five days and was sustained as President of the Church (April 9, 1951) at 77; he died at the age of 96.

President Joseph Fielding Smith (July 19, 1876—July 2, 1972) became the senior apostle January 18, 1970, and President of the Church five days later, at the age of 93. He died at 95

President Harold B. Lee, born March 28, 1899, was senior apostle five days and became President on July 7, 1972, at age 73.

The Presidents from John Taylor to Joseph Fielding Smith, inclusive, became President at ages ranging from 62 to 92 and died at ages from 79 to 96.

It is interesting to note that these eight Church Presidents assumed their presiding responsibility at an average of 76 years and relinquished it by death at 87 years. They served an average of eleven years; consequently, after Brigham Young the average age of the living President of the Church has been about 81 years.

We may expect the Church President will always be an older man: young men have action, vigor, initiative; older men have stability and strength and wisdom through experience and long communion with God.

In President McKay's declining days, speculation ran high among the curious and the concerned and the less knowledgeable and continued as a major topic of discussion through the interregnum.

More than a million members had never known any other President than David O. McKay; consequently, it was natural for some to be confused.

They talked about age. The old patriarchs were not young. Adam was very old as he presided over his posterity, which spread over many generations. Abraham, Isaac, Joseph, and Moses presided over the people, dying at 175, 180, 110, and 120 years, respectively. They were old in years, but from their accumulated experience came massive wisdom and security.

The precedent of succession by the senior apostle has been repeated from the beginning. Brigham Young was the senior apostle, holding all the keys and authorities, and in each case, the President has been the senior apostle. This is the pattern the Lord has followed and he retains the leadership in his divine hands.

When the first succession took place, the restored church was an infant only fourteen years old. There had been no prophet nor "open vision" for numerous centuries. Little wonder, then, that the people should be full of questions when the bullets at Carthage terminated the life of the one in whom all these priceless blessings—the church, revelation, prophecy—seemed to be centered. When the apostles had returned from their missions, buried their dead prophet, and considered the future, all doubt was dissipated when the senior apostle, already holding all the keys, stood forth like Moses and led the way.

The editorial in Times and Seasons of September 2, 1844, on the succession said:

Great excitement prevails throughout to know "who shall be the successor of Joseph Smith!"

In reply we say, be patient, be patient a little till the proper time comes, and we will tell you all. "Great wheels move slow." At present, we can say that a special conference of the church was held in Nauvoo on the 8th, ult., and it was carried without a dissenting voice, that the "Twelve" should preside over the whole church, and when any alteration in the presidency shall be required, seasonable notice will be given; and the elders abroad, will best exhibit their wisdom to all men, by remaining silent on those things they are ignorant of. . . . (Times and Seasons, vol. 5, September 2, 1844, p. 632.)

As we tighten our tugs and strain our weight against the collar, with each change we move forward on a new journey with a strong will under our inspired leaders, led by our prophet.

President Joseph Fielding Smith was venerable and worthy of respect by reason of his character, dignity, age, position. He was one who had "clean hands and a pure heart, who has not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully." He was a true son of his Maker and a clean and holy man of God. He carried for sixty years the keys of the kingdom, gradually moving toward the day of his presidency. For six decades he was sustained by the Church as a prophet. Finally he was sustained as the prophet, the one who alone holds the keys in total use under the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the chief cornerstone and head of the Church.

President Lee is the youngest President in more than forty years. He brings to the position rich experience, life-long dedication, and personal integrity beyond question. Longer than any man living he has served as an apostle of the Lord, faithfully and spiritually.

To be a prophet of the Lord, one does not need to "be everything to all men." He does not need to be youthful and athletic, an industrialist, a financier, or an agriculturist; he does not need to be a musician, a poet, an entertainer, a banker, a physician, a college president, a military general, or a scientist.

He does not need to be a linguist and speak French and Japanese, German and Spanish, but he must understand the divine language and be able to receive messages from heaven.

He need not be an orator, for God can make his own. The Lord can present his divine messages through weak men made strong. He substituted a strong voice for the quiet, timid one of Moses, and he gave to the young man Enoch power that made men tremble in his presence, for Enoch walked with God as Moses walked with God.

The Lord said: ". . . whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same." (D&C 1:38.)

What the world needs is a prophet-leader who gives example—clean, full of faith, godlike in his attributes with an untarnished name, a beloved husband, a true father.

A prophet needs to be more than a priest or a minister or an elder. His voice becomes the voice of God to reveal new programs, new truths, new solutions. I make no claim of personal infallibility for him, but he does need to be recognized of God, to be an authoritative person. He is no pretender, as numerous persons are who presumptuously assume position without appointment and authority. He must speak like his Lord: "as one having authority, and not as the scribes." (Matthew 7:29.)

He must be bold enough to speak truth even against popular clamor for lessening restrictions. He must be certain of his divine appointment, of his celestial ordination, and of his authority to call to service, to ordain, to pass keys that fit eternal locks.

He must have commanding power like prophets of old: ". . . to seal both on earth and in heaven, the unbelieving and rebellious . . . unto the day when the wrath of God shall be poured out upon the wicked without measure" (D&C 1:8-9), and rare powers: ". . . that whatsoever you seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever you bind on earth, in my name and by my word, saith the Lord, it shall be eternally bound in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you remit on earth shall be remitted eternally in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you retain on earth shall be retained in heaven" (D&C 132:46).

What is needed is more a Moses than a Pharaoh; an Elijah than a Belshazzar; a Paul than a Pontius Pilate.

He need not be an architect to construct houses and schools and high-rise buildings, but he will be one who builds structures to span time and eternity and to bridge the gap between man and his Maker.

When the world has followed prophets, it has moved forward; when it has ignored them, the results have been stagnation, servitude, death.

Every moment of every day, there are numerous programs on the air. We hear very few, relatively, for we are engrossed in our day's duties, but with powerful-beaming broadcasting stations, we could hear any of the programs if we were tuned in.

For thousands of years there have been constant broadcasts from heaven of vital messages of guidance and timely warnings, and there has been a certain constancy in the broadcasts from the most powerful station. Throughout all those centuries there have been times when there were prophets who tuned in and rebroadcast to the people. The messages have never ceased.

One such message came to Daniel in the presence of others, and he who was on the proper frequency said: "And I Daniel alone saw the vision: for the men that were with me saw not the vision. . . ." (Daniel 10:7.)

On the road to Damascus, a company of men traveled together. A spectacular event came from the heavens, but only one man was in tune to receive it. That which was but static to all the other ears was an awesome call to duty to Saul of Tarsus; it changed his life and contributed toward the transformation of millions of lives, but he was the only one who was attuned.

It is said that certain Russian fliers reported that as they penetrated the far outer space, they saw no God or angels. Our prediction to any unbelieving, godless spacemen is that though they could go a thousand times farther and a thousand times higher, they will be still far from God and eternal things, for the spiritual is not understood by the finite.

Abraham found God on a tower in Mesopotamia, on a mount in Palestine, and in royal quarters in Egypt. Moses found him on a backside desert, at the Red Sea, on a mount called Sinai, and in a "burning bush." Joseph Smith found him in the cool freshness of a primeval forest. Peter found him at the Sea of Galilee and on the Mount of Transfiguration.

May the Lord our God sustain each newly appointed prophet that he may continue to serve the Lord's "bread of life" and "living water" to us, and that he will "light the lamps of Israel" and verily become the mouthpiece of God. Our prayer is that the Lord will speak to him as he did to Joshua:

This day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that, as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee. (Joshua 3:7.)

And may the Lord bless us, his servants, who have raised our hands in sustaining vote, that from this time forth we may, like the children of Israel, uphold the prophet's hands and shout as did the children of Israel in one voice:

All that thou commandest us we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go.

According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee: only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses. (Joshua 1:16-17.)

"To your tents, O Israel," stand firm and loyal and immovable in support of the prophets of God.
