Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Chapter Thirty-two

Book of Mormon: A Book of Vital Messages

There is a book I have read many times, yet each time I read it I find it engages my interest the more.

It is a story of courage, faith, and fortitude; of perseverance, sacrifice, and super-human accomplishments; of intrigue, of revenge, of disaster, of war, murder, and rapine; of idolatry and of cannibalism; of miracles, visions, and manifestations; of prophecies and their fulfillment.

Across the stage of this drama of life through the ages marched actors in exotic, colorful costumes, from the blood-painted nudity of the warrior to the lavish, ornamented pageantry of royal courts—some actors loathsome and degraded, others so near perfection that they conversed with angels and with God. There are the sowers and reapers, the artisans, the engineers, the traders, the toilers; the rake in his debauchery; the alcoholic with his liquor; the pervert rotting in his sex; the warrior in his armor; the missionary on his knees.

It is a fast-moving story of total life; of opposing ideologies; of monarchies and judgeships and mobocracies. Its scenes carry the reader across oceans and continents. It promises to tell of the "last days of God," but instead it records the last days of whole peoples and the triumph of God. Class distinction is there with its ugliness; race prejudice with its hatefulness; multiplicity of creeds with their bitter conflicts.

Since this "best seller" left its first press, it has been printed in nearly two dozen languages, more than a half-million copies a year; millions of copies are in libraries, public and private, and in numerous hotels and motels along with the Bible. Even the blind may read it in three thick books of braille. Can anyone be considered to be well-read who is not familiar with this book?

Its story has a vital message to all people. The gentiles will find the history of their past and the potential of their destiny. The Jewish people will find the blueprint of their future. The covenants of God to the Jews are unfolded, as are the promises regarding Jerusalem, their ancient city, and their lands. And it reveals how the Jews, so long persecuted, scattered, and tortured since their dispersion, may come into their own. The gentiles are warned that they must "no longer hiss, nor spurn nor make game of the Jews, nor any of the remnant of the House of Israel," for the Lord will remember his covenant to them when they respond. The book is also the story of the ancestors of the American Indians and accounts for their dark skins.

Archeologists may be excited as they read of ruins of ancient cities, highways, and buildings, and there may yet be hidden buried art treasures and priceless records.

Those interested in exploration and travel will learn of unprecedented land treks and ocean crossings fraught with all the dangers of storms, hidden reefs, hurricanes, and even mutiny. The first recorded ocean crossing was about forty centuries ago, made in eight seaworthy barges as long as a tree and tight as a dish, peaked at the end like a gravy boat, corked at top and bottom, illuminated by luminous stones. This fleet of barges was driven by winds and ocean currents, landing at a common point in the Americas, probably on the west shores.

There were other crossings of the ocean. One great migration and voyage, perhaps the greatest in all of history, involved a group of people who abandoned Jerusalem on the eve of its destruction by Nebuchadnezzar. They probably landed on the west coast of South America, where the ocean currents drove them. They traveled in a ship constructed by a young builder who may never have seen an ocean-going vessel.

This remarkable book tells again of movement of 5,400 people in one group, sailing northward on the Pacific coast in very large ships, seeking for new worlds to conquer; some of them were likely drawn into the strong westward ocean currents to find the isles of the sea and to become the progenitors of the Polynesians.

The student of society will find in this unusual book the disintegration of nations through pride, soft living, and luxuries, terminating finally in hunger and fetters. He will see unified peoples fighting for liberty and then internecine wars destroying those freedoms. He will see the land waving with ripening grain, the silkworm spinning, flocks and herds grazing, vineyards and orchards bearing, and a people wearing rich adornments. He will see stone quarries and lumber mills and mines and craftshops; and then devastated landscapes, burned homes, parched earth, warring antagonists, and deserted lands. He will see towers and temples and kingly courts and palaces of the rich and their luxury, and dissipation, immorality, and debauchery, comparable to that in Babylon, Jerusalem, and Rome.

He will see people sometimes thriving in communal living; he will see them taxed fifty percent or more and see them again in slavery and bondage. He will see power-greedy, paternalistic, centralized governments move toward the inevitable revolution that finally impoverishes but frees the people to begin again from ashes.

The astronomer and geologist herein may see signs in the heavens and new stars come into focus; night without darkness, bright "as the midday sun"; three days without sun or any reflected light, and a vapor of darkness so impenetrable that no candles, nor torches, nor fire could give any light. "There arose a great storm, such an one as never had been known in all the land," and terrible tempests, thunder and sharp lightnings, whirlwinds of tornadic and hurricane proportions—swift enough to carry away people never to be heard of again—twistings, foldings, whirlings, slidings, and faultings, causing great landslides and burying great cities. Tidal waves swallow entire communities, and fire consumes many cities and human bodies. The labors of centuries are broken, burned, buried, and washed away; and earth convulsions of such intensity and prolongation occur that "the face of the whole earth" is deformed, these earth spasms being a revolt by the created earth against the crucifixion of its Creator.

Engineers will learn from this great book that those many centuries ago men erected buildings, temples, and highways with cement; that paved roads connected city to city and land to land; that when forests had been denuded, a reforestation program was initiated for the future.

The psychologists may find studies in human behavior, the workings of the human mind, and the rationalizing processes by which men convince themselves that "good is bad, and that bad is good." Here they will watch history unfold for thousands of years and see not only episodes in the lives of individuals, but also causes and effects in a total history of races.

This comprehensive book should be studied by politicians and government leaders to see the rise and fall of empires and the differences between statesmanship and demogoguery. They will see nations born in war, live in war, deteriorate in war, and die in war through the centuries. They may find answers to problems of capital and labor, of dishonesty, confiscatory taxes, graft, and fraud; of dissensions, internal rupture, and civil wars. They will see a chief judge, frustrated by growing corruption, resign from the judgment seat to proselyte for righteousness; princes who prefer to teach men rather than to rule over them; a king who tilled the earth to provide his own living rather than become burdensome to the people he served.

Scientists will read of stones that provided light; at least 1500 years before Columbus this people knew that the earth was round and revolved about the sun; they had a special instrument like a round ball, made of brass, curious in workmanship, with two spindles, so sensitive that it would give guidance regardless of direction and would record the feelings, emotions, and inner rebellions of men so much that it would not function properly where there was discord. This instrument, which would point the way to wild game, was operated by faith, and on it from time to time writing would appear, plain to be read, increasing the understanding of those who read it.

Military men may learn much in strategy and intrigue, in movements, in morale. Guerrilla warfare, sieges, and the scorched-earth policy were not originated in Civil War days nor in Russia, but were programs of survival long centuries before Columbus.

They will learn that great cultures stagnate in war shadows and cease to survive when continuous wars make people migrants and when fields are abandoned and livestock is appropriated for nonproducing soldiers; when in wartime forests are destroyed without replanting and farmers and builders become warriors. Men cannot plant, cultivate, and harvest when in camps, nor build when on the run. Long and bloody wars mean sacked, burned, ruined cities, confiscatory taxes, degenerated peoples, and decayed cultures.

Victory and defeat alike leave countries devastated and the conqueror and the conquered reduced. Wickedness brings war and war vomits destruction and suffering, hate, and bloodshed upon the guilty and the innocent alike.

This book should convince of the futility of war and the hazards of unrighteousness. A few prophets swimming in a sea of barbarism find it difficult to prevent the crumbling and final collapse of corrupt peoples. There is a great but conditional promise:

And this land shall be a land of liberty unto the Gentiles, and there shall be no kings upon the land. . . .

And I will fortify this land against all other nations.

. . . I, the Lord, the king of heaven, will be their king, and I will be a light unto them forever, that hear my words. (2 Nephi 10:11-12, 14.)

In this book ministers and priests can find texts for sermons and men generally can find final and authoritative answers to difficult questions. Is there life after death? Will the body be literally resurrected? Where do the spirits of men go between death and the resurrection? Can one be saved in unchastity? What is the correct organization of Christ's church? Can one be saved without baptism? Is it wrong to baptize infants? Is specific authority essential to administer ordinances? Is continuous revelation necessary and a reality? Is Jesus the actual Son of God?

Here is recorded the glorious coming of the Savior to his temple in America. He blessed the little children and wept as angels descended out of heaven and encircled them. He organized his church with twelve apostles, called disciples, to whom were given the same priesthood, authority, and keys that their contemporaries, Peter, James, and John held in the other land.

The coming of the resurrected Redeemer to this land was spectacular—the small piercing voice from heaven heard at Jordan and Transfiguration's Mount awed them as it announced: "Behold, my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him." (3 Nephi 11:7.)

And then they saw a man descending out of heaven in white robes and he stood in their midst, saying: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ. . . . I am the God of Israel and the God of the whole earth and have been slain for the sins of the world." And the multitude thrust their hands into his side and felt the prints of the nails and knew of a surety that this was the very Christ so recently crucified across the sea, and so recently ascended into heaven, and now among them to teach them his saving gospel.

This historical book tells of three men who, like John the Revelator, are still on earth though it is nearly two thousand years since their mortal birth—men who have not suffered the pains of death, but who have control over the elements, who make themselves known at will and go any place on the globe when needed, and who cannot be imprisoned, burned in the furnace, buried in pits, or destroyed by beasts.

This narrative tells of one group of people with such faith they buried their weapons and died victims of their enemies rather than take their enemies' lives; of a group of boys who had inherited great faith from their mothers and were trained to trust that God would protect them. It tells of the fulfillment of that faith when 2,060 of them fought in battles. Men all around them died and many of them were sorely wounded, but because of the faith of these young men and their mothers, not one of the 2,060 suffered death.

But after all, the interest for archeologists, historians, political scientists, and so on is not the book's major value to man. Rather, it is the book's power to transform men into Christ-like beings worthy of exaltation.

It is the word of God. It is a powerful second witness of Christ. And, certainly, all true believers who love the Redeemer will welcome additional evidence of his divinity.

This inspiring book was never tampered with by unauthorized translators or biased theologians, but comes to the world pure from the historians and authorized abridgers through an inspired translation. The book is not on trial—its readers are.

Here is a scripture as old as creation and as new and vibrant as tomorrow; it bridges time and eternity; it is a book of revelations and is a companion to the Bible brought from Europe by immigrants. It agrees closely with that Bible in tradition, history, doctrine, and prophecy even though the two were written simultaneously on two hemispheres under diverse conditions. It even foretells the reaction of people to be expected when this hidden record should be presented to them:

A Bible! A Bible! We have got a Bible, and there cannot be any more Bible.

But thus saith the Lord God: O fools, they shall have a Bible; and it shall proceed forth from the Jews. . . .

Thou fool, that shall say: A Bible, we have got a Bible, and we need no more Bible. . . .

Know ye not that . . . I rule in the heavens above and in the earth beneath; and I bring forth my word unto the children of men, yea, even upon all the nations of the earth?

Wherefore murmur ye, because that ye shall receive more of my word? Know ye not that the testimony of two nations is a witness unto you that I am God, that I remember one nation like unto another? . . .

And I do this that I may prove unto many that I am the same yesterday, today, and forever. . . . And because that I have spoken one word ye need not suppose that I cannot speak another; for my work is not yet finished. . . . (2 Nephi 29:3-4, 6-9.)

Then he says he will eventually gather the scattered faithful into one fold and he will be their shepherd. And the records of the Ten Tribes are still to be recovered.

And it shall come to pass that the Jews shall have the words of the Nephites, and the Nephites shall have the words of the Jews; and the Nephites and the Jews shall have the words of the lost tribes of Israel; and the lost tribes of Israel shall have the words of the Nephites and the Jews. (2 Nephi 29:13.)

We seem to hear Almighty warn: "Fools mock and they shall mourn," and "Woe be unto him that rejecteth the word of God." One prophet wrote: "And if ye shall believe in Christ, ye shall believe in these words for they are the words of Christ."

In the final chapter of the book is the never-failing promise that every person who will read the book with a sincere, prayerful desire to know of its divinity shall have the assurance. Aside from all other interest that the Book of Mormon holds, this reason for our prayerfully studying it remains prominent: through it we can obtain true knowledge of God and what he wishes of us.
