Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle ( 1972)

Chapter Thirty-four

Lamanite Future: A Changing World for Barry Begay

There he is, running like the wind, barefoot, hatless, long hair in flight, worn overalls and ragged shirt, his face brown from the Arizona sun and wind and from his brown-skinned parents. Barry and his little brothers and sisters are a lively group, playing around the rock, pole, and dirt hogan.

The Begays, sitting on the dirt floor, are eating their meal. There is a leg of mutton. There is fry bread. There are no spoons, no forks. There is no milk. They have no cow. There is no salad. They have no garden. The fare is scant.

Barry is seven. His youngest brother has no clothes on his little brown body. The sisters have long full skirts, like their mother's, with some silver coins sewn to their blouses.

The mother's worn purple velveteen skirt reaches near her ankles; her waist is of greenish hue, her shoes high laced, her hair in a bob at the back of her neck and tied with white wool yarn. The father is thin and tall. He wears his curled-up hat even while he eats. They are not demonstrative but it is evident that pride and affection are in these humble quarters.

A few days pass. It is bright and summery. In Navajo land Barry Begay is herding sheep. The pasture, overgrazed, is dry and dusty. The scraggly dog also shows malnutrition. But as he barks and bites hind legs, the woolly animals heed direction. The little boy has a man's responsibility, for there are coyotes and other predatory animals also starving in this barren valley, and the sheep are precious. The sheep furnish meat for the table; the pelts cover the cold ground in their hogan, being at once rug, chair, bed, cover. The fleece is sold at the trading post or saved to card and spin and weave into rugs to exchange for flour and cloth and food.

Under the shade of the lone cedar tree, Mother Begay, an expert weaver, sits on the ground and laboriously works into an intricate design the yarns she has dyed in brilliant colors.

Two years have passed. Nine-year-old Barry may now go to the new government school only three miles away. Little Susie can herd the sheep and drive away the predators. For Barry it will be a long walk, and at times, the wind will be merciless; the sun will beat down like a blow torch, and the snow will be wet and freezing; but loving parents, anxious to give their children what they themselves never had, are determined that he make the effort.

Another summer day and the wind in whirling cones picks up tumbleweeds and dances across the valley. Two fair and well-groomed young men approach the hogan. Father Begay is fixing his wagon, and Mother Begay sits under the gnarled, weathered cedar weaving her blanket.

"Yatehee," they say in greeting as they wipe the sweat from their brows and introduce themselves as missionaries for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Begays have heard about the elders. In spite of the language barrier, John and Mary Begay seem to understand that the book about which the elders speak is a history of their "old people" back for ages. It seems that the spirit that accompanies the strange mixture of words and signs is that of a "familiar spirit." Genuine interest in the message and attraction to the pleasing personality of the teenage ministers brings about many hours of learning, and then one day the Begays are baptized in the little pond some distance away. They are now members of the faraway Salt Lake City church in which they have confidence and a warm feeling of belonging.

Barry is ten years old now, husky, laughing, running, and joking. He is summer-herding the sheep. The missionaries who have taught Barry in the trailer house Indian seminary now announce a fantastic new program. Barry may go to a far-away city and live in a good home, attend a superior school, and be given other advantages not afforded on the reservation. Unthinkable, they feel at first, to send their little boy so far away for so long a time. But, convinced it is for Barry's good, the parents agree.

All the family goes in the wagon to the point of assembly, a day's journey away, and with few tears but pounding hearts place their loved boy on the big bus with about thirty other little Indians. Stoically they stand like statues until the bus disappears over the horizon. The hogan is a little empty without Barry, but opportunity will come to him.

A few days later, the Begays receive a fat letter from the Smiths, the foster family where Barry has become a loved member, telling how the bus has been met by interested case workers who love the Indian people, how Barry has had a haircut by a kindly volunteer barber, has been bathed and shampooed by other friendly volunteer men, and then has been examined by dentists and doctors and nurses, all of whom freely give of their time without compensation. The letter also tells of Barry's timidity and silence at first and then of his blossoming out when he feels the warmth in his new home and family.

In summers Barry is back with the sheep—back in the hogan where there are now beds and a table and chairs. He is helping the Begay family to get into the regular habit of family prayers on their knees, "the Lord's way." They are speaking better English now that Barry teaches them. On Sundays the Begays drive to the distant branch and Barry helps with the sacrament and speaks in the meeting, telling about his experiences in the northern land.

Another summer is over. Again, the family is at the gathering point and three instead of one climb out of the Begay wagon and board the big bus for the north. The two sisters have mixed feelings of fear and eagerness. With near-empty arms and hearts, the Begay parents return with their smaller ones to the hogan. Their personal sacrifices for their children are calculated ones.

Arriving in Utah, there are happy renewals of friendships. Barry is enrolled in seminary and in MIA. He takes part in dramatic skits, music groups, and athletics. Now he is a priest. He may teach, baptize with authority, bless the sacrament emblems. No privilege available to any boy is denied this fast-growing young brave.

Eventful years have passed. It is graduation night, and Barry in cap and gown receives his high school diploma. Barry has been president of his class. He was swift and strong and accurate on the ward basketball team.

At home, the faithful lives of his parents have brought them prosperity. They spend nothing on tobacco or liquor. All goes into their progressive living. Barry is surprised to find this time a two-room frame house out in front of the hogan. There are curtains at the windows and rugs on the lumber floors, and a cupboard with dishes and pots and pans. The gospel and the church associations are working miracles with the Begay family.

Another year is history. Two young nineteen-year-olds, one brown and one white, are driving a Rambler and approach a cluster of hogans. Barry, the Indian elder, takes the lead, for he can speak two languages fluently. He knows the people's thinking processes, their idioms and expressions, their reactions. Other families are converted. Coffee is thrown away and milk substituted. No more liquor for these good people—that money will go into fixing up the home. At the river, twenty men and women and children are baptized into the fold of Christ's church. A little branch is organized and Elder Begay is its first president, soon to be replaced by the Indian converts as they are trained. He speaks feelingly to his people: "I am proud to be a Mormon. I am proud to be an Indian. I will attend BYU and obtain training through which to serve my people."

The two years of his mission have flown as if by magic. Elder Begay says farewell to his fellow missionaries, stops a few days at the Begay home to ruffle his hair, put on his old overalls, run with the dog, tend the sheep, and tell his loved folks more about the glorious message he has learned. He also tells them of the beautiful, talented Indian girl he met at the university and of his growing romantic interest in her. As he returns to college, the wise and generous tribe gives him a scholarship, making his further education a certainty.

"Time flies on wings of lightning." We are now in the beautiful temple dedicated in "Holiness to the Lord." The room is large, and the furnishings exquisite. The tan rug helps keep a sacred quietness. Many Indian and non-Indian people are here, including the four parents: the real parents and the foster parents, so kind and gracious and generous. The years and the associations have made some changes in John and Mary Begay. His long bobbed hair of years ago is short now. He wears a suit; his shoes have been shined and his clothes pressed. There he sits today, tall and dark and handsome in his white temple clothes. Mary still loves her beads and turquoise, her silver and her velveteen, but she now modernizes and stylizes her hair and dresses. Happy beyond expression, she wants to be sealed for all eternity to this stalwart husband with whom she has shared joy and pain, hardship and privilege, wind and weather.

What a beautiful couple they are as Barry and his bright-eyed sweetheart, Gladys, stand admiring one another, then kneel and are sealed for all eternity! She wipes a tear and his eyes are glistening.

And now, John and Mary kneel across the altar. The faces, which were near expressionless that first time we saw them, are now beaming. There is a new light in those eyes. In their white temple clothing they look heavenly. And through the impressive priesthood ceremony, Mary becomes the wife of John for all eternity. There are, you know, tears of ecstasy and joy, and these are of that holy kind.

Today is gone. Tomorrow dawns. On the university campus, the organ is playing a staccato march. The graduates in dark gowns and tasseled caps march from the gathering field to the auditorium. Yes, there they are on the sixth row, and the Begay parents are beaming, as is Gladys with two little ones by her side and a baby in her arms. In the marching lines are many Indian graduates. And there is Barry. How handsome and poised he is! And now the president of the university is awarding the doctoral degrees. When the name Barry Begay is spoken, my heart leaps. Barry Begay with a doctor's degree! Our Barry Begay with a Ph.D! Our Barry Begay! All our efforts, our disappointments, our worries, our battles with contending forces; all our waiting and striving and praying seem nothing. Our dreams are coming true! John, Mary, and Gladys modestly wait their turn to express pride and affection to their Dr. Barry Begay.

The scene changes to Windowrock. Several years have passed. At his desk in a most vital position as tribal councilman, Barry Begay wields a powerful influence among his people. Because of him and his fellow workers, the Indians now ride in better cars on safer highways to better homes. There are lights and water and telephones and radio and TV. Their sick are treated in modern, well-equipped hospitals, and Indian nurses attend the patients for whom Indian doctors prescribe and on whom they operate. Tribal funds derived from gas, oil, coal, and timber guarantee every Indian child schooling through college. The Indians are experts on the farm, on the grazing lands, in the silversmith shop. Indian teachers train the little ones; Indian lawyers look after legal matters. Drained Indians are prominent in office, industry, business, government, and on college faculties. There are Indian governors, senators, and impressive and influential laymen.

The scene changes and more years pass. It is the Sabbath. This stake conference congregation is mostly Indian. The one-hundred-voice choir is a dark-skinned folk, though they are now much lighter. They have long been delightsome. General Authorities from Salt Lake City are here. The high council and bishoprics, largely Indian, sit on the stand of the newly completed stake and ward building. Here is dignity. Three thousand eyes and ears are focused on the impressive man who rises to the pulpit. It is President Barry Begay, former bishop, who preaches such a profound sermon to his people. His children are all being well trained. His son, Barry, Jr., serves on a mission in Bolivia.

It is President Begay, Doctor Begay, Brother Begay, Elder Begay who administers to the sick in the hospital, preaches funeral sermons, assists people with their marital, moral, financial problems. It is our Barry Begay, the little boy who is now a great man.

There are thousands of Barrys in all stages of that life story. They are of many tribes from New York to Santiago, from Anchorage to Montevideo and the isles of the sea. They talk many languages and dialects. They are coming from Cardston and Bemidji, from Blackfoot and Hopi land, from South America and Mexico. Great numbers are coming to training in schools and church, growing in wisdom and stature, learning the best of the white man's culture and retaining the best of their own.

The Lord chose to call them Lamanites. They are fulfilling prophecies. They are a chosen people with noble blood in their veins. They are casting off the fetters of superstition, fear, ignorance, prejudice, and are clothing themselves with knowledge, good works, and righteousness.

Yesterday they were deprived, weak, and vanishing; today thousands are benefitting in the Indian seminaries, in regular ones, and in college institutes of religion as they become involved in the placement program and in church work within the stakes and missions. Many are receiving secular as well as spiritual training in Mexico, South America, and Hawaii, and the isles of the sea. Many are now in college and large numbers in full-time mission service. Tens of thousands are in church organizations in all the Americas and in the Pacific. Lamanite-Nephite leaders are now standing forth to direct and inspire their people.

The day of the Lamanite is here and the gospel brings opportunity. Millions farm the steep hillsides of Andean ranges and market their produce with llamas and burros. They must have the emancipating gospel. Millions in Ecuador, Chile, and Bolivia serve in menial labor, eking out bare subsistence from soil and toil. They must hear the compelling truths. Millions through North America are deprived, untrained, and achieving less than their potential. They must have the enlightening gospel. It will break their fetters, stir their ambition, increase their vision, and open new worlds of opportunity to them. Their captivity will be at an end—the captivity of misconceptions, illiteracy, superstition, fear. "The clouds of error disappear before the rays of truth divine."
