Rex E. Lee, Janet Lee, Jim Bell, Marathon of Faith ( 1996)

Preface

In 1987, at a time when our lives were filled with richness and joy, we learned early one morning that Rex had cancer. There had been some indications that something was wrong—most of which we had overlooked—but nothing, it seemed at the time, could have prepared us for this news.

Over the next several months, Rex and I joined together in battling this illness, and for a time it appeared we had won. Then in 1990, just six months after Rex became president of Brigham Young University, a second cancer was diagnosed, which was followed by several other medical challenges.

A few weeks before the discovery of Rex's second cancer, we had given a devotional talk at BYU in which we shared some of the details of Rex's battle with cancer, as well as some of the lessons we had drawn from that experience. Soon after, it was suggested that we ought to share our experiences more fully in the form of a book, and at different times after that talk similar suggestions were made.

Rex, in particular, felt that perhaps sharing our experiences might have some value to others, and in July 1995 we finally began in earnest to prepare our story for publication. Had we known then what was ahead for us, we might have been hesitant to commit to writing this book. But as the manuscript neared completion and as Rex's health deteriorated, he, in particular, felt a strong desire to complete the project.

This book, however, is not a book about cancer, although our particular challenges came in that form. Rather, it is a book about the joy that can be found in all of life, whether we are living amidst the pains or the pleasures of mortality. Our experiences suggest that joy exists not around the edges of our challenges—where we may find a temporary release—but at the very core and center of adversity.

Our desire in sharing our story has been to convey something of the universality of suffering, which binds together all of humanity in ways that our individual pleasures cannot. Of course, we have been well aware that countless individuals and families have faced and will yet face challenges far more severe and shattering than ours. Our hope has been that there might be some value in sharing with broader circles something of what we all experience in uniquely individual ways and that such sharing is one way of helping lift one another's burdens.

This book makes no attempt to serve as a biography. Much more could have been said about Rex's service in government, for example, or his years at BYU, but we have left out many, many details and experiences in order to focus primarily on the challenges we have faced.

During the writing of the manuscript, we often found it difficult to decide what events to include, but more of a challenge was deciding whom to include. Throughout the nine years of our challenges, our lives literally were blessed daily by the thoughtful acts of countless individuals. Yet each time we named a doctor who had gone to great lengths to help Rex, we would think of five more who had rendered similar compassion and service. And each time we mentioned an act of kindness performed by a family member or friend, we would remember dozens more whose concern was manifested in equally significant ways. At different points in our writing, we discussed the possibility of leaving out all names, thus avoiding the appearance that one person's thoughtfulness meant more to us than another's, but in the end we realized that some names were needed to carry the story forward.

So to our many friends and associates who were, indeed, a part of this story but whose names do not appear in print—neighbors, ward members, professional colleagues, doctors, nurses, therapists, technicians, hospital staff, university students, friends, and family members who helped us see more clearly the blessings of our eternal connectedness—we would simply say that we have thanked our Heavenly Father countless times for your never-ending kindnesses and hope you will understand this acknowledgement of your generous service.

In preparing this book, we have likewise appreciated the help of individuals too numerous to mention, but we do feel a need to recognize the efforts of at least a few, including Sheri Dew, vice president of publishing at Deseret Book, who persisted over several years in trying to convince us that ours is a story worth telling; Jim Bell, who helped us arrange the journals, talks, interviews, random notes, and discussions that helped to form this book; Janet Calder and Jan Nelson, Rex's secretaries at BYU, who helped in countless ways as we prepared this manuscript; Linda Gundry and Michelle Eckersley of Deseret Book, who, respectively, edited and designed the book, with sensitivity and insight; and our children and children-in-law, who refreshed our memories, offered editorial suggestions, and supported us during the preparation of the manuscript, as well as through all that we have undergone.

—Janet Lee

March 1996
