Rex E. Lee, Janet Lee, Jim Bell, Marathon of Faith ( 1996)

INTRODUCTION

Rex Lee is by any standard a remarkable man—founding dean of a law school, United States assistant attorney general and then solicitor general, and president of Brigham Young University, to name some of the titles that suggest the broad scope of his success. And, like many men and women of accomplishment, he grew up in a small town.

Born February 27, 1935, he grew up in St. Johns, Arizona. Rex recalls that there was only one paved road through town until his late high school years and that open irrigation ditches lined with poplar trees and green grass flowed along the streets, providing a grazing area for the cows that freely roamed the streets prior to the town's incorporation.

The town's schools were small and the teachers few, but each was personally acquainted with the students and their families—and took a personal interest in each pupil's progress. Young Rex showed considerable potential, and the teachers pushed him to excel. (His mother recalls having to push him to set aside his schoolwork and go out to play). He also learned much from his family, who owned one of the town's grocery stores as well as a sawmill business in which he spent his summers from the time he was eight years old until he was in law school.

Working in the sawmills, which were located in Arizona and New Mexico, provided Rex with a variety of learning experiences and helped him see the caliber of men his father and other relatives were. He remembers well one summer when the ward in a neighboring town was building a chapel and ordered a shipment of boards twenty-four feet in length, rather than the standard sixteen-foot lengths the mill normally produced. This change in specifications added to the expense of the lumber, and when Rex's father and grandfather attempted to negotiate a higher price, the bishop refused to pay. The matter was then submitted for arbitration to the Church building department, which decided in favor of the sawmill. But when the transaction was over, Rex later learned, his father and grandfather sent a contribution to the ward exceeding the difference the mill had been paid.

Throughout his life, Rex has joked that the local Baskin-Robbins ice cream store only had two flavors and that he was sixteen before he discovered that the name of his town was not "Resume Speed." But he also knows, in his words, that "a very large part of what I am I owe to that little nineteenth-century Mormon settlement in which I was raised."

Half a world away, as Rex was learning to read, Janet Griffin was born to Marian and Ben Griffin in Paris, France, where Ben was an entry-level clerk with the American embassy. Soon after Janet's birth, as the first rumblings of war were being heard across Europe, the family was evacuated from Paris aboard the last commercial ship to leave France before the outbreak of World War II. When Ben was later drafted and sent back to Europe, Marian and her three small children moved to Ogden, Utah, near both her and Ben's family.

When Marian, together with her children and parents-in-law, returned home after taking Ben to the train station, Marian remembers that "Ben's mother broke down under the pressure of sending her son off to war. I had been trying to be courageous, especially in front of Janet and her brother, Glen, but when my mother-in-law began crying, I went into my room to get my own emotions under control. Soon after, Janet came in and held my hand to help me feel better, but I was still overcome with emotion. After a few minutes she said, 'Mom, we can't let Grandmother see us cry. Daddy used to be her little boy, and we need to be brave for her.'"

Janet's father returned safely, and when the family finally was reunited, they moved to New Jersey, where Ben resumed his work with the United States Treasury Department in New York City.

During the summer after second grade, Janet began to feel unusually tired and was plagued with a constant cough. Soon she became so weak that she sometimes asked her father to carry her on family outings. Her condition grew worse, and soon the family's doctor had Janet's parents take her to a nearby hospital for tests. As the seven-year-old girl stood waiting to be X-rayed, she noticed that the woman in front of her was crying. Thinking the tears were caused by fear for what was about to happen and wanting very much to help, Janet took her hand and said, "Don't worry, the machine won't hurt you." When her illness was finally diagnosed as tuberculosis, the doctors wanted to admit her to a tuberculosis sanitarium in New York, but her parents felt she was too young to be that far away from her family. So for the next six months, Janet was confined to her bed at home, where her mother cared for her.

Not long after Janet's recovery, her mother became very ill with asthma and one day lapsed into a state of unconsciousness. Janet watched as Marian was taken away in an ambulance and then went for weeks without being able to visit her mother because children weren't allowed in the hospital. Marian's condition necessitated a move to a climate more conducive to her health, and soon Janet, together with her brother and three-year-old sister, went to the airport to see her off and then waited while her father sold their house and made the arrangements to move to El Paso, Texas.

Even though the family had moved several times before Janet was a teenager, there was a constancy in the Griffin home as the family ate breakfast and dinner together each day and engaged in thoughtful discussions on world events, the children's education, and spiritual concerns. The family also camped and attended operas and symphonies together, and Janet was able to travel with her father on short business trips, where they would talk as they traveled, ate together, and attended to Ben's responsibilities with the U.S. Treasury Department. From a very young age, Janet enjoyed an interesting mix of family fun coupled with the world of politics, diplomacy, and formal entertaining.

Meanwhile, Rex grew up riding horses and going to rodeos in the rural world of St. Johns. As he looked toward his future, he thought fleetingly, as boys often do, of becoming a pilot or a cowboy, but by his sophomore year in high school, he had set his sights on becoming a lawyer.

When the time came for him to go away to college—and being from St. Johns, he had no choice but to go away to college—his science and English teachers counseled him to attend the University of Arizona and suggested that he could likely receive the prestigious Phelps Dodge Scholarship if he would apply. Rex's parents, on the other hand, wanted him to attend Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah. The family finally reached an agreement that he would try BYU for one year and then transfer to the University of Arizona if he didn't like it. So in the fall of 1953, he and three friends loaded their belongings into a 1943 Chevrolet and made the 600-mile trip to Provo, Utah, driving at a top speed of fifty miles per hour.

They arrived in Provo late at night, where they had signed up to live in one of the D-Dorms—seven army barracks that had been converted to student housing. But the supply office for their dormitory was closed, so while they were able to get into their rooms, they had no mattresses, no sheets, no blankets, no pillows, and no electricity. Rex later recalled:

Though they made my situation a bit more bleak, those slight inconveniences were not at the heart of the discouragement I felt. My world seemed to be closing in around me, and my outlook was as dark as the room I occupied. Here I was, 600 miles away from home, and about to become a member of a freshman class three and a half times the size of the total population of my hometown, and full of misgivings about whether a boy from St. Johns could make it at a big university.

Instinctively, I got down on my knees, put my elbows on the wire mesh that served as the springs for my unmattressed bed, and began some of the most earnest pleading with my Heavenly Father that I had ever undertaken.

It helped. I felt that I was not alone, that I had a partner who was interested in me and willing to help. Though my earthly parents were located hundreds of miles to the south, my Heavenly Father was very much there with me. And while my misgivings did not completely disappear, the stifling discouragement gave way to a healthy anxiety.

Rex decided after one quarter that BYU was where he wanted to complete his undergraduate education. After finishing his first two years of college, he accepted a calling to serve as a missionary in what was then known as the Mexican Mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. His mission president, Claudius Bowman, took note of the young missionary and called him as one of his counselors in the mission presidency.

Elder Lee was serving in this capacity when President and Sister Bowman's friends Ben and Marian Griffin moved to Mexico City, where Ben was treasury attachÃ© at the United States embassy. As it was Christmastime, their daughter Janet, who was in her first term at BYU, accompanied them. Her boyfriend from El Paso, Texas, was with them. President Bowman offered to drive the Griffins around the city as they looked for a place to stay, and the Griffin family divided into two groups riding in two separate cars—one driven by President Bowman, the other by his counselor, Elder Lee.

Quite by chance, Janet and her boyfriend ended up in the second car, and while she paid no particular attention to the elder driving, he certainly noticed her. In fact, he adjusted his rearview mirror so that he could keep an eye on her as they drove through the streets of residential Mexico City. Janet returned to BYU, but as her parents got to know Elder Lee during their months in Mexico, they sometimes mentioned him in their calls and letters to her.

Janet had mixed emotions about this missionary she scarcely knew. On the one hand, she found her parents' attempts to pique her interest in Elder Lee a bit annoying. Once, while visiting in Mexico, she responded to someone's suggestion that Elder Lee might look her up at BYU by declaring, "I have heard enough about this 'paragon of virtue,' and I am going to make a public statement. I am not interested in Rex Lee; I will never be interested in Rex Lee; in fact, I don't even know Rex Lee. But I don't think I like him at all."

At another time, however, she attended a district conference with her father, who was a branch president, where Elder Lee spoke. In Janet's words:

It was a small, crowded chapel where we all sat—almost sticking together in the heat of the afternoon. As the meeting got underway, my attention was averted to a young mother trying to manage her restless children. When she tried to feed them tortillas to quiet them, I was amused at the sameness of children everywhere.

Given my limited Spanish, I knew listening to the meeting and understanding would be an effort, as well as a good exercise, but when Elder Lee spoke, I found myself comprehending most of his flowing and flawless Spanish. As I watched and listened, I felt a unity with his spiritual convictions. The goodness of his character and the simple sincerity of his dedication to what he believed—and what I, too, believed—was evident in every word he spoke. I was momentarily mesmerized, forgetting my dislike for him. For a split second, I thought he was speaking directly to me, and I wondered if we would meet again.

The first day Rex was back at BYU after his mission was a rainy March morning in 1958, and as he ran across the campus he bumped into a young girl who was partially hidden by her umbrella. The two students looked at each other with a vague sense of familiarity, but neither spoke a word. That night it occurred to Rex that this girl might be Brother Griffin's daughter Janet. He called her and asked if she was the person he had run into earlier that day. When she answered yes, he asked her out for Friday night, but she told him she already had a date. When he asked her out for Saturday, he received the same response. There was a long pause, during which Janet recalled both her previous experience and a letter from her mother, extolling Elder Lee's virtues and indicating that she hoped he would call Janet. She also remembered these words from the letter: "You don't have to marry the guy, but I love him. So at least be nice if he calls."

As Rex remembers the story, Janet finally broke the silence by doing something she had never done before—she encouraged her caller to ask again, telling him that she didn't have a date for Sunday. His first thought was to say, "Well, let me know how you come out on getting one." But he swallowed his pride and asked her to go with him to church.

Janet and Rex's first date was rocky, at best. She remembers that he spent a good part of the evening telling her why the person she was then dating was all wrong for her—and then he followed up by encouraging her to change her major.

The romance of Rex and Janet may have had an uneasy beginning, but Janet recognized very early that Rex had great spiritual and intellectual depth. She was always aware of Rex's unusual enthusiasm and began to be captivated by his very contagious personality. She knew after very few encounters with Rex that he was a leader and a steadfast member of the Church. His charm, integrity, and confidence was intriguing and invigorating. She enjoyed the way Rex loved live, worked hard, and knew how to have a good time. Janet remembers being at a college dance, surrounded by Rex's friends from Arizona. She noted that the young man she could picture still as a missionary in Mexico, wearing a slightly wrinkled suit, was now wearing Levi's and seemed to effortlessly capture the attention of the entire crowd. In a few short, simple moments, she knew she was falling in love with Rex Lee.

In Janet's eyes their relationship blended the best of Camelot and the Garden of Eden. "I am so very, very much in love," she wrote to her younger sister, Lois, during her engagement, "and every day I learn new things about Rex that make me love him more and more. I can just imagine the kind of life we will have together. We will have a perfect marriage, perfect children, and a perfect life. Our hearts will know eternal joy."

She was the romantic in this relationship, with idealistic views about how their life would unfold. At one point in their engagement she suggested that they should decide how many children they would have—and what their names would be. Although Rex had his own kind of drive and determination, his feeling was that they should take at least that part of their life one step at a time.

Rex and Janet were married on July 7, 1959, in the Mesa Arizona Temple, and Rex's matter-of-fact practicality immediately surfaced as, on the third day of their honeymoon, he awoke Janet with the romantic reminder that she needed to complete three correspondence courses before September and that she ought to get up and get going.

Janet finished her degree in three years, knowing that they would soon be leaving Provo so Rex could attend law school. When both of them graduated from BYU in 1960, the Lees moved to Chicago, where he attended the University of Chicago Law School and she taught elementary school for one year in a Chicago suburb and the next two years at the University of Chicago Laboratory School.

During his first year of law school, Rex faced what he viewed as a very difficult situation: It seemed that no matter how hard he studied, he would sit through class amazed at the brilliant insights of his classmates. He often found himself thinking, I wish I had thought of that when someone made an insightful comment, and he also contemplated the difficulty of making it through law school. He eased his worries somewhat when he came to the simple conclusion that if he was good enough to get into law school, he was good enough to get out.

After three years of hard work, he did get out—with the number-one ranking in his graduating class and a one-year appointment as a law clerk for Justice Byron R. White of the United States Supreme Court.

Rex enjoyed learning of the inner workings of the nation's highest court, and Rex and Janet both enjoyed the excitement of Washington, D.C., where Janet's parents had also moved at about the same time. When Rex's appointment with the Supreme Court ended in 1964, they were both ready to settle down in Arizona, where he had been hired by the Phoenix law firm of Jennings, Strouss, Salmon & Trask. Rex was excited to get back "home" to Arizona, and Janet was thrilled at the prospect of planting lasting roots for the first time in her life. Although she had enjoyed many things about living all over the world with her parents, she wanted her young family—which consisted of their eighteen-month-old daughter, Diana, and another child on the way—to know the stability of a permanent home.

Janet remembers their years in Tempe as near-perfect. She and Rex raised their young family, built a home, and shared in Church service and community activities. Days full of Arizona's sunshine, happy children, and the completeness of a joyful marriage transformed Janet's life into her Camelot.

Rex was made a partner in his law firm three years after joining, and there was talk in some circles that he might have a political career ahead of him. And while he worked hard at the law, he also worked hard at being a good father and husband. Once, when he took a harsh tone with his daughter Diana, then two and a half years old, she responded by telling him, "Daddy, you shouldn't talk like that to wittle childwens." He took that to heart and tried all the harder to treat his children with respect.

When he came home from work each day, he would lie down in the yet-to-be-furnished living room and, rather than insist on silence, encourage his children to play a game he had invented called "Run around Daddy," the object of which was to circle Rex without getting tripped and then tickled by their father. He notes that by playing this game, he could get a bit of rest while he entertained his children.

Janet particularly enjoyed the almost eight years she and Rex lived in Tempe—which was longer than she had ever lived in one place. In Tempe she found the sense of security and stability she had always hoped for.

When the Lees heard in the spring of 1971 that BYU's board of trustees had announced that the university was going to establish a law school, they found the news to be an interesting topic of conversation, but nothing more than that. Soon, however, Rex was visited by Ernest L. Wilkinson, who was stepping down as president of BYU and was helping establish the law school. The two talked about various LDS lawyers who could serve on the law school faculty, and President Wilkinson asked Rex if he would be willing to come to Salt Lake City to meet with the committee who would select a dean for the school. The committee consisted of Elders Marion G. Romney, Howard W. Hunter, Boyd K. Packer, and Marion D. Hanks; Neal A. Maxwell, who was at that time the Church's commissioner of education; President Wilkinson; and Dallin H. Oaks, who had just been appointed to succeed President Wilkinson as president of BYU.

Rex made the trip in August, discussing with the committee some possible candidates for the faculty and the school's dean. In October, Rex was invited back to Salt Lake City to meet with the committee. Several weeks later, while Rex was in a meeting with several clients, his secretary called in over the intercom, "Do you want to talk to some guy named Harold Lee from Salt Lake City?" Rex wanted to suggest that she speak that name with a good deal more reverence, but instead he quickly concluded his meeting and returned President Lee's call. Within days he and Janet were flying to Salt Lake City to meet with President Lee, who was a counselor in the First Presidency at the time.

When President Lee asked Rex to serve as the founding dean of the BYU law school, Rex and Janet accepted. Then President Lee gave them some wise counsel they have never forgotten. In their private discussions before meeting with President Lee, Janet and Rex had been concerned about the effect this position, if offered, might have on their family financially. In fact, they had decided they would need to know the salary offered before they could make a decision. But after they had accepted—without even discussing salary with President Lee—the wise counselor said, "Janet, you and Rex are still very young, and you will have many decisions to make in your life together. I just want you to know that, from my perspective at least, it is important never to put a monetary stamp on your decisions. Rex will have many opportunities to serve and to grow, but just remember not to base your choices on monetary issues."

Not long after that meeting, Rex and Janet moved to Provo. The two of them worked together to make a new home for their family as well as to establish, from the ground up, the J. Reuben Clark Law School—curriculum, faculty, students, library, building, and all. It was an undertaking that was later characterized by President Oaks as "roughly comparable to Rex's competing in a 100-yard dash where, as the starting gun sounded, every other runner was already running full tilt while Rex was lying flat on his back at the starting line. He had to get up, pursue the other runners, and make it a competitive race. And that's what Rex Lee did" (BYU Today, July 1989, pp. 24-25).

But before the first class of the law school graduated in 1976, Rex was asked by Edward H. Levi (then the U.S. attorney general and formerly dean of the University of Chicago Law School when Rex had been a student there) to move back to Washington, D.C., to serve as assistant attorney general over the Civil Division of the United States Department of Justice. Rex accepted and served in that position from May 1975 through January 1977, having been granted a leave of absence by the university. His division, made up of some 300 lawyers, handled all the civil suits brought either by or against the United States.

The move to Washington was a challenging one for Janet, in particular, as she longed for the roots she had planted in Tempe and then transplanted to Provo. Even with the challenges, though, she was experiencing what she had sensed when she had first started dating Rex years earlier—that life with him was always going to be an adventure.

With the presidential election of 1976 came a new administration, and immediately after Jimmy Carter moved into the White House, the Lees moved back to their home in Provo, where Rex resumed his responsibilities as dean of the law school.

He was only forty-two at the time, and Janet felt that he had done more in those years than most people do in a lifetime. She knew, however, that his accomplishments were not the result of any master plan or list of goals that he had drawn up as a college student. Rather, his one underlying objective was to work as hard as he could at whatever he was doing—and to enjoy what he was doing to the fullest extent possible.

Often, as he tried to get done in a day all the things he felt he needed to, he would end up doing three or four things at once—reviewing a legal brief while he talked on the phone with a faculty member while one of his children hit him up for lunch money. Janet would sometimes try to convince him that even when he covered the phone with his hand, the other party could hear him say, "Good grief, Wendy, I gave you five dollars yesterday!" But it was hard for him to set one thing aside to attend to another, because he knew he could accomplish more by doing both simultaneously.

Janet sometimes tried to convince him to take a little more time off than he was inclined to, but he resisted. Instead of taking the leisurely vacations Janet envisioned, the family would often accompany Rex across the country during the summer months as he taught bar review courses, and he and Janet would take the children to amusement parks when Rex's schedule permitted.

The fall of 1980 brought another shift in the nation's leadership, as Ronald Reagan defeated Jimmy Carter to become the fortieth president of the United States. Not long after, there was talk in some circles that Rex was a likely candidate for the office of solicitor general of the United States, and at about the same time Janet felt strongly that the family was headed back to Washington. The issue, for her, wasn't what position he would be asked to assume but rather how a move would affect the family. She felt strongly enough about her premonition that she started suggesting to the children that they not make any long-term commitments at the schools they were then attending.

Rex's nomination came in May 1981, and he immediately came under attack by congressional Democrats, the National Organization for Women, and other lobbying groups for his opposition to the Equal Rights Amendment, which many groups were struggling to have ratified as part of the United States Constitution. Although the Senate confirmation hearings on solicitors general rarely get noticed beyond the Washington beltway, Rex's hearings made more than the average splash in national headlines as opponents attempted to defeat his nomination to the office that argues all government cases before the United States Supreme Court. Rex stood his ground before the Senate Judiciary Committee, however, and was confirmed in July by the full Senate.

Six of the Lee's children—Tom, Wendy, Michael, Stephanie, Melissa, and Christie—made the move to McLean, Virginia, while their oldest daughter, Diana, stayed in Provo to begin her studies at BYU. Knowing that Tom would soon be starting college too, Janet felt the need to work full-time. She found a job teaching kindergarten at the school Melissa attended. Christie attended preschool there, and Stephanie and Michael rode the bus from their school to Janet's on early-release day so they could help clean chalkboards and start their own homework, all under Janet's supervision. Tom and Wendy drove over to help Janet when their school day was over, too. This system worked well for the Lees, who found that the principal of the private school where Janet taught was both intrigued by and patient with Janet and Rex's large family.

The children had time to play and take piano or dance lessons after they returned home with Janet. Everyone then helped with dinner, dishes, laundry, and homework. Family members were blessed with excellent health; Janet recalls that she left school only twice during those five years to pick up a child who was ill and needed to check out of school. Weekends were usually family time, with Sundays being reserved entirely for Church and family.

On Friday nights the family generally would gather on the couch and play games or watch a movie together, often with the children watching intently while Rex and Janet dozed off behind them. On Saturdays, Rex and Janet had time alone together as they ran along the Potomac River and talked about his cases, her teaching, and each of their children. They would return home from their run for a day of shopping and housecleaning. (Janet always enjoyed the shocked looks on neighbors' faces as the United States solicitor general opened the door with one hand, while holding the vacuum cleaner in the other.) Then, in the evenings, they would cook out and entertain themselves with a variety of games and activities.

In August 1981, not long after the family's move to Virginia, Rex and Janet received a telephone call from their oldest daughter, Diana, who had stayed behind in Provo to attend BYU. Diana announced her engagement and her plans for a December wedding. Janet, in particular, was stunned. She could not conceive of putting together a wedding reception on top of teaching, taking care of the other six children, and supporting a very busy husband. But more than those considerations, she could not imagine having reached that stage in life at which she would have a married daughter, not to mention a son-in-law.

But as always, Janet managed beautifully. On December 29, Diana married Steven Allred, and the Lees hosted a reception in Provo. Rex and Janet enjoyed seeing all their friends from Provo at the reception, many of whom stayed late into the evening to talk. One, in particular, stayed longer than most—the Lees' family doctor, Lyman Moody. Lyman and Rex were close friends and running partners, and Lyman thought he ought to let Janet know, before she and Rex returned to Washington, that after having run blood tests while the Lees were in town, he continued to feel concern about Rex's low count of white blood cells, which help the body fight off infections. There was no cause for alarm, Lyman explained to Janet, but knowing that she often worried about Rex more than he worried about himself, Lyman thought she ought to be kept current on the situation.

A low white count notwithstanding, Rex returned to Washington and to the frenetic pace he had pursued his whole life. The vagueness of his doctor's suggestion that they watch his white count didn't fit with his mindset that if there's something you can do about a problem, you do it; if there isn't, you don't waste a lot of time worrying about it. Besides, he was in peak physical health, having run twelve marathons in the preceding three years.

In 1982, as Rex was nearing the end of his first year as solicitor general, he was working to bring his old friend Terry Crapo back to Washington as his chief deputy. The two had first known each other as freshmen at BYU, and their lives had followed parallel courses ever since. They both pursued the same major, they took the same classes, they served together in student government (Rex as student body president, with Terry as his executive assistant), they went to law school at the same time (although Terry went to Harvard), and their children were very close in age. Now, for the first time, it appeared that they would have the opportunity to work together professionally.

Then in July, Rex talked with Terry for the last time. Rex's old friend had called to say that he had just found out he had leukemia and that he was going to be admitted to LDS Hospital in Salt Lake City for treatment. When Rex asked how serious his condition was, Terry told him that the doctors were hoping they could get him to the point where they could perform a bone marrow transplant. Rex knew then that his friend's condition was very serious indeed.

Each day for the next several days, Rex called the hospital to get an update on Terry's condition. And each day the news got worse. When Rex called on the tenth day, he learned that Terry had died five minutes earlier.

Rex had dealt several times with the deaths of people close to him, but Terry's passing hit him harder than any other he had ever experienced. Terry, one of his best friends, had been taken in the prime of his life. With Terry's death, Rex realized just how completely unpredictable life can be—and how quickly it can be lost.

Rex's work as solicitor general gave him the opportunity to argue thirty-one cases before the Supreme Court, and his office's win record of almost 80 percent earned it a reputation in legal circles as "the winningest little law firm in Washington." At home, he enjoyed being involved in his children's lives and helped them with homework, projects, problems, and anything else that he could. And he and Janet were moving comfortably toward the twenty-five-year mark in their marriage.

By 1985, Rex and Janet had decided that four years was about as long as he wished to serve as solicitor general. Upon announcing his resignation, he was besieged with offers from law firms who sought his services, and he ultimately accepted an offer from the large national firm of Sidley & Austin. On July 1, 1985, he became a partner in the Washington office, with his primary focus being appellate cases. That decision was difficult in at least one sense: it meant he would be giving up his longtime association with BYU's law faculty. Feeling that Rex owed his longtime colleagues and the university administration an explanation of the course he had chosen, he and Janet traveled to Provo and met with President Jeffrey R. Holland; the university's provost, Jae R. Ballif; and Carl S. Hawkins, dean of the law school. The three listened politely as Rex explained why he would not be returning to BYU for several years, but then President Ballif surprised Rex by telling him that the university would have no problem with his splitting his time between the BYU law school and his private practice, as long as the Lees would live in Provo. It was ultimately determined that Rex and Janet would spend one more year with their family in Washington as Rex established his relationship with Sidley & Austin, after which time they would move back to Provo. There Rex would rejoin the BYU law faculty and at the same time practice law with his new firm—with the aid of telephones, faxes, and airplanes.

By 1986, when Rex and Janet moved back to Provo, they had come a long way together. He had never imagined, as a boy growing up in St. Johns, that he would one day walk the corridors of power in his country's capital as a regular advocate before its highest court. And while Janet knew full well just how bright and capable her husband was, she had not imagined all that their life together would entail, particularly since she had enthusiastically embraced his original plan of settling in Arizona and practicing law there for the rest of his life. Without question, their journey together had taken some unexpected detours, yet there was a certain constancy amid all the change.

During their first two summers together, Rex had worked in his family's sawmills to earn money for college. One day, half in jest, he asked Janet if she would still love him if he were going to spend the rest of his life in the sawmill camps. Instinctively, she said yes and explained that the work he did had nothing to do with how she felt about him.

A quarter of a century later, Janet was accustomed to the periodic and unpredictable upheavals in the Lee family's lives, and she admired all that he had accomplished as one of the nation's leading lawyers. But as they anticipated settling back into life in Provo, she did so knowing that all Rex had done professionally had nothing to do with the love they shared so personally.
