Rex E. Lee, Janet Lee, Jim Bell, Marathon of Faith ( 1996)

Chapter 1

A Run along the Potomac

Rex: Following my term as the United States solicitor general, I embarked on what was probably the most challenging, exciting, and stressful period of my life. In June 1985 I joined the law firm of Sidley & Austin and began to rebuild a full-time, private legal practice—an arena in which I had not worked since coming to BYU as founding dean of the law school in 1971.

Much of my work involved arguing cases before the United States Supreme Court, the first step of which involves submitting a writ of certiorari—a written brief outlining the reasons why a given case should be considered by the Court. The second step—and this part of the process is not taught in law school—is waiting for the Court's answer. In general, the Court accepts only about 2 percent of the cases presented at this first stage; and those odds, combined with the weeks of waiting, created within me some anxiety each time I waited for the Court's listing of the cases it would hear.

For at least a couple of days before the Court's announcement, I would be filled with anticipation. It was amazing what a disparity in my level of happiness could result from one of two simple words, spoken by a Supreme Court clerk over the telephone: "granted" or "denied."

During the spring of 1986, as I awaited notification on one particular case, I was also filled with anticipation over another significant moment in my life: the return of our oldest son, Tom, from his mission in Mexico. I rehearsed over and over in my mind the upcoming event as I pictured my family waiting at the airport gate and then imagined my son stepping into view. I wondered how he would look—heavier, thinner, older? And, more important, I wondered what changes I would come to see inside of my son.

It was my good fortune that, within a ten-day period, the Supreme Court agreed to hear our case—and my son arrived home as scheduled. All of our children except Diana were with Janet and me at the Washington National Airport, and when Tom finally emerged from the plane, I felt a surge of joy upon seeing him after his two-year absence. I was immediately struck by his physical maturity, and in the following weeks I discovered that he had matured spiritually and intellectually as well.

That weekend, Diana came for Tom's homecoming talk, which was the first time in two years that all of our children had been together at the same time. Watching them reminded me of the friendship Janet and I share with each of our children and of the fact that, with the exception of minor skirmishes here and there, they are really quite good friends with each other.

During these months—and as I looked toward the coming year—I had a feeling of complete well-being and contentment. My life at that time was as good as it had ever been. I was running regularly and in excellent health. I was becoming a specialist in Supreme Court cases to an extent that I had never envisioned when I returned to private practice. My relationship with Janet was growing stronger and stronger. And each of our seven children was bringing us great joy as they grew and matured.

Janet: As our last year in the Washington, D.C., area came to a close and we anticipated our return to Utah, our lives were as full and good as they had ever been. When Rex returned to private practice, I had been called almost immediately as the Young Women president in our McLean, Virginia, ward. With our daughters Wendy and Stephanie in that age group, I was excited about the chance to be with my girls and their friends. I have always found that closeness comes from interacting at various levels with my children, and my work in Young Women brought another dimension to our lives as we camped, rehearsed for plays, and shared spiritual experiences.

When we were finally ready to move back to Provo, we felt a wide range of emotions. During our five years in Washington, our family had changed; instead of ranging in age from toddler through teenagers, our children now ranged from grade-schoolers through a returned missionary and a college graduate (who was also a wife and mother). Rex and I had become grandparents, and we had all established strong ties in the Virginia area. We savored the lush Virginia countryside, and we thrived on living so near to the hub of political activity in the nation's capital.

But within days after arriving back in Provo, everyone in the family felt comfortable—as if we were slipping our feet, which were exhausted after a cross-country move, into old bedroom slippers.

As school started in the fall of 1986, all of our children were back in Provo. Tom and Wendy were living in apartments near campus while they attended BYU, but they found countless reasons to drop by for visits—to eat, write papers, watch videos with friends, and talk to us about their lives. On Sundays we always had dinner together, and our children who attended BYU often brought roommates. Diana, our married daughter, was expecting her second child, and her husband, Steve, was attending law school at BYU. Diana and I would often run together, and more than once I said to her that life seemed almost too perfect and that I worried that it couldn't remain that way forever. She cringed the first time I made the comment, but we later discussed my feeling at length, leaving us both uneasy with the premonition that something was going to happen that would change the course of our lives.

This ominous feeling didn't come very often, and I would completely forget about it soon after it did. Life was so good that I, too, was nearly convinced that nothing could stand in the way of our total happiness.

Rex: As the beginning of the school year approached, I had some fears about how well I would handle teaching in the law school and maintaining a law practice, but it didn't take long before I had settled into a routine that seemed to work fine. I made heavy use of the telephone, overnight delivery services, and my fax machine. Working as an appellate specialist, I could do most of my work in my office and schedule courtroom appearances well in advance. This arrangement provided me with enough flexibility that I was able to be a part of the very large Sidley & Austin firm from my one-man office in Provo, Utah.

I also found returning to the classroom to be very gratifying, and in general I enjoyed the excitement that always, at least for me, accompanies the newness and freshness of a change, no matter what it is.

My busyness has both positive and negative aspects but is part of my general nature. I have always tried to use my time for what I view as productive purposes. When I traveled in connection with my law practice, I brought work to do on the plane or in hotel rooms, and I spent my free time doing whatever would keep my professional ball moving down the field. And when I went home at night, my thoughts automatically turned to whether I should be mowing the lawn, washing the dishes, helping children with homework, or running to the store.

I have never liked using the word compulsive to describe my nature, but I suppose it does. Relaxing has never come easy to me. Only rarely during those hectic days would I give in to the urge to relax. When I did take time to contemplate, however, I felt good about Janet's and my life in general. As the school year progressed, life couldn't have been better. Our third child, Wendy, was dating her high school boyfriend, Tom Jacobson, who had returned home from his mission not long after our Tom did. My fatherly supposition was that they would be married before long. In addition, Wendy had introduced her brother Tom to her roommate, Kimberly Johnson. I began to be sobered by the thought that within a year we could have not one but three married children. Our younger four children—Michael, Stephanie, Melissa, and Christie—still lived at home, adding vitality and variety to our lives.

In October 1986, I went to Washington again to argue another case before the Supreme Court. This was of particular significance to me because it had been twenty years, almost to the week, since I, as a young Phoenix lawyer, had argued my first case before the nation's highest court. And even though I had been around the track forty times, the night before I presented my argument was the same as all the rest, as I worried whether I should reread the briefs or the pertinent cases themselves or my outline. I agonized over what questions I would be asked, and by which justices. As I sat in my hotel room, I rehearsed the answers I had prepared. After scores of hours of work—sometimes even hundreds—my professional life always came down to this one half-hour oral argument, which begins in each case with "Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court," and ends with "Unless the Court has questions, I have nothing further."

I felt wonderful after arguing the case the next afternoon, even though I would have to wait for several months for the Court's decision. The argument had gone as well as could be expected, and I was also looking forward to what I knew would be a very pleasant vacation with Janet and her family.

Janet: As my sister, brother, and I looked ahead to our parents' fifty-third wedding anniversary, we thought it would be nice for us, our spouses, and our parents to spend a few days together—a rather rare occurrence, given our hectic lives. So we arranged to meet in Carlsbad, California, a quiet coastal town near San Diego. This was the first time in my memory that the eight of us had been together for a vacation without our children, and it led to many interesting discussions and thoughtful moments as we spent five days together enjoying sun, surf, and solitude.

Late one afternoon, my sister, Lois, and I were walking together on the beach, and before long our conversation took a serious turn as we began discussing life, its challenges, and what we perceived as our growing ability to handle whatever came our way.

"I think I have lived long enough now that I could handle any challenge given me," I naively stated to Lois, and she replied, "I think I could too."

Then my sister asked me this question: "Janet, what would be the most difficult challenge you could imagine having to face?"

I didn't even need to think about my answer. I already knew. "I can't imagine life without Rex," I began. "The hardest thing for me would be to lose Rex to a horrible illness."

Lois thought for a minute and then said, "That would be hard, but I think divorce would be even more difficult for me."

We both were immediately struck by the preposterousness of our fears. Rex, after all, was the picture of health. He had run thirteen marathons over the preceding eight years, and he rarely even caught a cold. My sister was entering the twenty-second year of a marriage that seemed intact, and the seriousness of our discussion soon gave way to laughter as we considered suggestions that couldn't possibly become realities.

Rex: As always happens, vacations come to an end. When Janet and I returned to Provo, our lives were as busy as ever. My two jobs were more demanding than I had anticipated, and Janet had commented before we left for Carlsbad that when we got back we were going to need to make some changes so we could slow life down a little.

Well, the change we made was that the very next Sunday I was sustained as bishop of Provo's Oak Hills Third Ward. Interestingly, I had served in the same position in 1978—for a full week, after which time I had been called as president of the BYU Seventh Stake. The only thing I could think of that qualified me for the position was that I had not sought it; in fact, this calling was the very last thing in the world I would have asked for.

Janet put the calling into perspective for us, as is her tendency, by comparing the commitment we were making to the paying of tithing. Sometimes, she pointed out, some of us could conclude that with all our financial obligations, there is no way we can give the Lord 10 percent; but if we do, there will always be enough. So I concluded that while it appeared I had no time, I would find a way to give the Lord what little he was asking for.

At about the time I was called, our fourth child, Michael, developed acute appendicitis, which required surgery. But I immediately found that serving as bishop helped me keep my own small problems in perspective, and I was able to view my concerns as nothing more than passing inconveniences. The calling also helped me focus more of my energy on my family and my friendship with Janet, knowing as I did that if our relationship remained strong, everything else in my life had a way of falling into place.

Janet: By November 1986, our daughter Wendy was engaged, and our son Tom's relationship with Kimberly was getting serious. On Thanksgiving and Christmas, our house was filled with family and friends. Rex and I couldn't help but rejoice in the four-generation span, from our parents down to our granddaughter. These were the first holidays we had all shared together in years, and they were delightful. Unfortunately, on December 28 my sister's daughter Amy called to tell me that her father had left home. This announcement came as a complete surprise and caused me to reflect on Lois's and my talk as we had walked along the beach two months earlier.

Not long after, I began to have thoughts similar to those I had shared with Diana some months before—premonitions that some challenge lay ahead for me. My prayers increasingly included the plea that my family and I would be strengthened and be able to handle whatever we might face. One day in March, as I was in my bedroom praying, I was overwhelmed with the feeling that my praying for strength had more meaning than my rote recitation suggested. I didn't like this feeling, which tied my stomach in a knot, so I quickly ended my prayer and started in on the daily laundry. Still feeling unsettled, I began sorting the clothes. But when I was unable to concentrate on even this simple task, I knew I needed to return to my bedroom and resume my prayer.

I promised the Lord that I would do whatever was required of me. Then I ended my long and fervent prayer with what I knew was a selfish request. I pled for a two-month postponement of whatever change was going to take place. I wanted with all my heart to peacefully enjoy the two upcoming weddings of our children, to be able to celebrate unhampered with challenges.

Rex: Being the thoughtful, sensitive husband that I am, I had no idea Janet was experiencing such feelings. My primary focus was on what were without question the busiest three months of my life. In addition to serving as bishop, playing a minor role in our children's wedding plans, and dealing with the separation of Janet's only sister from her husband, I was scheduled to argue five cases between February and April 1987—two before appellate courts and three before the Supreme Court.

As I moved toward the most hectic three weeks of these months, I learned the outcome of the three cases I had argued before the Supreme Court earlier in the term. The results could hardly have been worse, as we lost two of the three. But I knew that I would live to fight another day—and that those three outcomes could not affect my efforts in the cases left to be argued.

Besides, I knew that despite the Court's mistakes, I would find great joy in upcoming family events: within days I was going to become grandfather of a second grandchild, and soon after arguing my final case for the term, I would head home for Wendy's wedding on April 25. My life was hectic but happy.

Janet: Being married to Rex, I had learned that timing is everything, especially in regard to important family events. Five days after Rex argued his final case of that term, we sat in the Salt Lake Temple as our daughter Wendy was married to Tom Jacobson.

The simple sacredness of the ceremony touched me deeply, and as I gazed at our beautiful children dressed in white, gratitude for their goodness prompted predictable mother's tears. I again felt as I had at Diana's wedding. I also recognized that our family ties would gain increasing significance as our family circle continued to grow. Through Wendy's marriage we had gained a new son, and when our son Tom was married in a few short weeks, we would be adding a delightful new daughter to our family. How wonderful they all were. I marveled at their righteousness and my good fortune.

We hosted a reception in our home that evening, complete with apple blossoms on the trees lining our driveway. Late that evening, after we had said goodbye to the newlyweds and the last of our guests, Rex and I looked at our kitchen—and at the task of restoring order to the entire house.

As busy as Rex has always been professionally, he often helps when there is work to be done, especially after big events. So I was more than a little surprised when, after we had surveyed the damage, he apologized for being so tired and asked if I would excuse him so he could get into bed. I reminded myself that given all he had been doing, his exhaustion was understandable, but I was disturbed by his out-of-character request. I knew that if he didn't have enough energy to help me, his fatigue must be extraordinary.

The next week, we all gathered in Virginia for an open house hosted by Tom Jacobson's parents. As is usually the case, the trip included meetings Rex had scheduled with his law firm, so we arrived a few days early and I had some free time. One morning as I drove to McLean to visit friends, my earlier feelings of concern returned with a vengeance, and I somehow realized that my challenge would involve Rex. This sense of foreboding was strong, and I was frightened.

I had absolutely no idea what that challenge would be, but on that warm, still evening in May, as the two of us drove along the George Washington Parkway to meet friends for dinner, I poured out my heart to Rex, although I said nothing specific about the impressions I had received. I told him how perfect our life was, how much I loved him, and how much I appreciated the years we had shared. Then, as my eyes filled with tears, I told him that I knew life wouldn't always be this perfect and that I wanted him to know our life together had nevertheless been everything I had ever wanted or dared dream of.

Not knowing quite what to make of all this, Rex tried to soothe my emotions as we drove along the parkway. It was obvious that he was a little perplexed by my outpouring.

The next morning, Rex and I drove to a familiar jogging path and ran along the banks of the Potomac River as we had so many other Saturday mornings. We talked and laughed like children, and even though we were in Virginia to celebrate the marriage of our third child, we were filled with a sense of youth—and invincibility.

After reminiscing about our Washington years, which had ended only ten months earlier with our move back to Provo, we talked about each of our seven children and the richness of our family life. I suddenly felt a bit somber as we neared our starting point, and I said to Rex, "What if something happened to one of us—an accident or illness—and we couldn't run together? I wonder what it would feel like to have one of us go off on a morning run while the other had to stay at home."

Rex, never fond of the hypothetical, listened and then gave me both a boyish grin and his answer: "Oh, I would tell you all about the run when I got home, and you could share the fun vicariously."

Then he added, "I'll race you to the car," and, having given himself a head start, he of course won.

That would be our last run together for well over a year.
