Rex E. Lee, Janet Lee, Jim Bell, Marathon of Faith ( 1996)

Chapter 2

"Can I Cry Now?"

Rex: In mid-May, as I reflected back on Wendy's wedding and looked ahead to Tom's, I saw myself living as interesting and fulfilling a life as anyone could hope for. Between being Janet's husband, sharing with her our seven wonderful children, serving as bishop, practicing law, and teaching at BYU, I could not imagine any combination of activities that could have made me any happier.

Tom, Michael, and I had just gone on our last fathers and sons' outing together before Tom's wedding. We enjoyed an outstanding meal together Friday evening—steak, onions and potatoes cooked in a dutch oven. (We fancied ourselves great cooks, but the deliciousness of the meal was actually attributable to two things—Janet's choices at the grocery store, and our dire hunger.) On Saturday we shared the adventure of wild water as we rafted on the Green River. A week later, I spent an evening in Washington, D.C., with Wendy and her husband, Tom, who had been married for just over a month and who demonstrated during our visit the early signs of a great life together. (His only real problem is that his first name causes no end of confusion at family gatherings.)

During the last week of May, I traveled to Oregon to speak at the commencement exercises of the Lewis and Clark Northwestern School of Law. While I was there, a good friend who practiced law in Portland asked if I would like to go running with an appellate specialist in his firm who was also an outstanding long-distance runner. This was a winning combination in my mind, so off the two of us went one morning. We were running up and down some pretty good hills, and before long I was huffing and puffing as if this were my first time running. Frankly, I was a little embarrassed; after all, we have much steeper hills in Provo, which is a good four thousand feet higher than Portland. But I kept up as best I could, mystified by my lack of energy.

Partway through our run, we heard a moaning sound from the side of the road, so we stopped and discovered a wheelchair athlete who had gone off the road and couldn't get back up. My running partner and I made our way down a rather steep embankment and pulled this fellow and his wheelchair up the hill. As we continued on our run, I became aware of a pain in my back—which didn't particularly surprise me, given what we had just done.

That evening, I attended a reception for the law school graduates, and after about twenty minutes, I was just too tired to stand. So I asked for a chair and sat for the rest of the event, during which I began to wonder why I was experiencing this decrease in energy.

The next morning, I delivered the commencement address and then headed straight for the airport, where I found that I was facing a four-hour delay before my flight would leave for Salt Lake City. In general, nothing frustrates me quite as much as schedules that aren't met; but my lack of energy, which I figured was the result of some sort of virus, put me in a reflective mood. So I set my briefcase aside and thought about the significance of the day—May 30, 1987—the fiftieth anniversary of my parents' marriage.

My biological father had been killed in a hunting accident about four months before I was born, and just after I turned two my mother married Wilford Shumway, the only father I have ever known. He couldn't have been a better father. My parents' anniversary, which we would celebrate together the following week, brought to my mind how important families are, both temporally and eternally. As I thought about my parents' marriage, I projected ahead twenty-two years to Janet's and my fiftieth anniversary and wondered what life would be like for us at that point. I wondered if I would still be running and practicing law at the age of seventy-four, and I thought about each of our children, the youngest of whom would be thirty.

But mostly I thought about Janet. For the past several months, we had been watching her sister go through a painful separation that had taken us all by surprise, and Janet and I had watched several other couples we knew go through similar ordeals. Although I'm not certain a twenty-four-year-old ever knows all he should about picking the right eternal partner, I knew when I married Janet that I was making the right decision, and I had grown increasingly convinced of my youthful "wisdom" over the subsequent twenty-eight years.

I had also figured out early on in our marriage that I was happiest when Janet was happy. This reality had nothing to do with demands she placed upon me; rather, I had learned that in pursuing my professional interests, I could not afford to lose sight of my wife and our children. They were the most important part of my life. In my reflective mood, I realized that I needed to direct increased focus toward enriching our relationship, as Janet had always done.

As the time finally came for my flight to leave, I called my father and mother to wish them a happy anniversary and then decided I could forgive the airline for the delay—as long as Janet hadn't become completely frustrated while waiting for me on the other end.

After my trip to Portland, I continued to feel run-down and tired, which cut into my running and my ability to work as hard as I was used to. But I also found that this condition had a rather pleasant tranquilizing effect on me, and I received comments after a couple of speeches indicating that my slower, more deliberate manner was viewed by some as an improvement on my sometimes rather hurried manner of speaking.

As we neared Tom's wedding day, I was reaching the point of exhaustion, and my back was still bothering me. I described my fatigue to a physician in our ward, who said he thought I was probably just suffering from a virus, and my back pain was attributable to my experience in Portland.

At this point, the thought of cancer never really entered my mind, although it had some months earlier. For years I've had a soft spot on the back of my head, which has been diagnosed as a harmless subaceous cyst. But in February I had noticed a lump under my right arm. This was at such a busy time that I knew I couldn't afford to be sick or even take time off for tests, so I had rather informally asked about the lump and had been told that it was probably just another subaceous cyst. That was exactly the answer I wanted, so I did not pursue the matter any further.

Janet: A few days after Wendy's wedding, my mother had emergency open-heart surgery, followed by a mild stroke. I helped her as best I could in the midst of preparing for Tom and Kimberly's wedding. With all that was going on, I was not as aware as I should have been of Rex's fatigue. And while I knew his back was hurting, I attributed it to his experience in Portland. My suggestion was that if his back continued to bother him, he probably should have it checked—after the wedding and luncheon on Thursday, June 18, and the reception in Boise on Monday, June 22.

Rex and I attended the beautiful wedding ceremony in the Salt Lake Temple. Once again my soul rejoiced as I witnessed the sacred marriage of another child. We had all loved Kimberly instantly. She was as perfect for Tom as Steve Allred and Tom Jacobson had been for Diana and Wendy. We hosted a wedding luncheon, at which Rex served as master of ceremonies as we welcomed and visited with Kimberly's family, our family, and other guests.

After the luncheon, my sister, Lois, asked me if Rex was all right. "He doesn't look well," she remarked, and I was momentarily alarmed at her comment. I felt Rex was a very young fifty-two. He had been energetic and healthy his whole life, and the thought of him being sick enough that someone would notice made me shudder.

I left early the next morning to take care of my mother, who was recovering in nearby Summit Park. As I drove through Provo Canyon on my way to my parents' home, I was concerned about Rex, but my experience told me that whatever he had would pass quickly and that he would soon be back to his normal, healthy self. Our newlyweds were on a brief honeymoon to Sun Valley, and Rex wanted to be feeling well by Monday, when we would attend their wedding reception in Boise.

Rex: I spent all day Friday working on a motion that needed to be filed in the United States Supreme Court, and by the end of the day I had faxed copies to the other lawyers working on the case, who were in Chicago, Washington, and Mississippi.

On Saturday, I spent the day at a ward outing in American Fork Canyon. Because I was the bishop, I wanted very much to set the example of having a good time, but it was apparent to the ward members that I was in pain, despite my best efforts to act otherwise. When asked, I reluctantly acknowledged that I was having some back trouble. One friend tried to relieve it by picking me up by the chest and bouncing me up and down in his arms. That didn't work. Another gave me an over-the-counter pain reliever. That didn't work either. Then one of the ward members, a physician, gave me a prescription muscle relaxant. That at least took some of the edge off the pain.

I appreciated all of the efforts people made to help me at the party, but I was especially touched by my son Michael, who showed a concern and compassion for me that I found quite remarkable. He had just turned sixteen a few weeks earlier, which placed him squarely on the frontier between childhood and adulthood. And that day he demonstrated the best traits of both: the love and worry of a child for his father, mingled with a grown-up willingness to assume responsibility for the care I needed so much. All day long, as the other teenagers engaged in activities that are attractive to the young, Michael joined with them. But I noticed that he never let me out of his sight, and he came over often to ask what he could do to help.

Of course, Michael was more than willing to drive us home late that afternoon. When we got home my pain was so intense that I could not walk without his assistance. Michael recognized the severity of the situation and began calling every doctor on our ward list. He had a hard time finding anyone home on a Saturday afternoon, but finally we reached Lyman Moody, who was just on his way to Salt Lake City. I told him the muscle relaxants had helped quite a bit but that I didn't want to take any more without his prescribing them. Lyman said he would phone in a stronger prescription, which Michael went to get.

With Janet at her mother's house, Michael did not want to leave my side, even though he had a date that night. I finally convinced him that the pain had sufficiently subsided and that it was all right for him to go. I then called Janet to let her know I wasn't doing very well. She returned home immediately, which made me feel guilty for having called: at that point I thought her mother really was sicker than I was.

I was a little worried about the pain, but against Janet's wishes, I went to church the next day, although the muscle relaxants made it difficult for me to stay awake during sacrament meeting. I did the best I could through my interviews after church and then went home to bed. That evening, Lyman came to our home, and after doing the usual thumping, listening, and poking around that doctors do, he told me that I needed to have some X rays taken of my back the next morning. I told him this presented a problem because we needed to leave very early for Tom and Kimberly's reception in Boise, so he scheduled the tests for 6:00 a.m.

On Monday morning, I drove myself to the Utah Valley Regional Medical Center, had the X rays taken, and waited as my friend Bruce McIff, a radiologist, analyzed the results. He pointed out that one of my vertebrae had diminished to about 40 percent of its normal size, and he immediately sent me for a CAT scan.

When I came out of that test, Lyman was talking on the phone to someone I assumed was another doctor, and I heard him make the statement I will never forget: "So they are definitely destructive lesions." When he received the confirmation, hung up the phone, and turned to face me, I asked him, before he had a chance to say anything, "Lyman, what are destructive lesions? Does this mean I have cancer?"

He responded, "Rex, I'm afraid it does."

There was simply no time to discuss my situation, and there were many more tests that would need to be done, so Lyman took me by the arm and walked with me to the hospital pharmacy, where he ordered for me two kinds of prescription pain pills. Then he walked me out to my car and told me to come back in the next day so they could run the tests needed to determine exactly what kind of cancer I had and how far advanced it was.

As I got into my car, I was acutely aware of my physical pain, but my mind had gone numb. The only thing I could think to do was to bow my head, close my eyes, and pray that Janet and I would both have the strength to endure whatever came—and more specifically that I could somehow get through the rest of that day without spoiling it for Tom, Kimberly, and the rest of my family.

Janet: On Sunday, three different doctors in our ward had commented to me about how sick Rex looked. His skin had taken on a sickly pallor, and I could no longer deny that there was something very wrong with him. But I could not have been prepared for what I was about to hear when the phone rang early Monday morning as we were packing to leave for our trip to Boise. It was Lyman, who wanted to tell me before Rex got home that he had cancer. He had spoken to me a few minutes earlier in vague, elusive terms, but he was calling again to let me know what Rex already knew.

In a state of shock, I managed to ask Lyman whether we should go to Boise or not. His response was simply, "Go, and take your family pictures. I really don't know what is ahead for you and Rex."

As I hung up the phone and tears welled up in my eyes, Rex walked in. We looked at each other, and he asked, "Do you know?" I answered yes, and we embraced. Before we could say another word, the room filled with children waiting to leave for Boise.

A friend in our ward, knowing of our trip and of Rex's severe back pains, had offered the use of his van so that Rex could lie down on a bed in the back of the van during the six-hour trip to Boise. We got Rex situated and as comfortable as possible, the children climbed in, I got into the driver's seat, and we headed off for a 7:00 p.m. reception.

We thought the children had no idea what was wrong with their father. We later found out that our youngest child, Christie, had heard my conversation with Lyman and had informed the others that "Dad has cancer," having only a vague idea of what that meant. Christie was prone to occasional overstatement and misconstrued facts, and her siblings viewed her as less than credible. But while no one wanted to believe Christie, their father's pain could not be concealed.

My first thoughts were that my husband was going to die. He had scarcely been sick in his life, but I surmised from what Lyman had said that Rex would not live for more than a few months. I thought of our two children who had just been married and contemplated the likelihood that their children would never know their grandfather. I rather irrationally concluded that they would not want to come to our house because I would be a widow, and I imagined they would want to spend their time in a home with both a grandma and grandpa. I realized that our granddaughter Ashley, who was only three, would have only the faintest recollection—if even that—of a grandfather who absolutely adored her, and that her baby sister, Chelsea, would not remember him at all. As my thoughts painted all these pictures of life without Rex, my mind began to go numb—as a shield, I suppose, against emotions I didn't know how to handle, particularly in light of what we had to get through that day.

Our daughter Wendy, who had come from Washington, D.C., for her brother's wedding, was sitting in the front of the van with me. After half an hour or so, she asked, "Are you okay?" I instinctively said yes, but then, knowing that I wasn't fooling her, I corrected my "yes" with a whispered "no." Although I gave no explanation as to what was wrong, Wendy volunteered to drive so that I could get in the back with Rex.

By this time, the tension in the car had eased a bit, and the children had started listening to music. I thought Rex and I could have a moment together to share our feelings about the terror we were both feeling inside. So as Wendy took over the driving, I climbed into the back. Rex was working on pages of figures he had been writing on a yellow legal pad, however, and instead of the tender moment I had anticipated, he said, "Okay, I want to go over our financial situation with you. This is what we've got in the bank, this is what little insurance we have, and this is what I think you can live on."

That was not what I wanted to hear. I wanted everything to stop. I wanted the car to stop, the day to stop, and Rex to stop talking that way. I had just been given the news that my husband had cancer and that the outlook was bleak, and instead of our sharing the feelings we had for each other or our fears of what was ahead, he was calculating our finances. I stared at the yellow pad, but the figures blurred. My mind played tapes of our lives together and then went blank altogether when I tried to imagine life without Rex. The emptiness and fear that was gripping me had nothing to do with numbers on a piece of yellow paper.

Rex: Since I had left the hospital that morning, my thoughts had revolved around two basic themes. The first was that I had cancer, and to me that meant I was going to die. The second was an overwhelming concern for Janet and our children; my initial means of dealing with that was figuring out how they could get by with me gone. Frankly, I had not done a very good job of preparing us for such a possibility, and the financial reality looked quite bleak. (Years later Janet commented to me that her financial well-being was the absolute furthest thing from her mind as she climbed into the back of the van. I still maintain that it would have become a very real issue very fast if I had died.)

There were also two subthemes that kept running through my mind. The first was my desire not to spoil Tom and Kimberly's wedding reception and honeymoon, which meant I needed to put on a very brave face that evening, even though I could not imagine how I was going to stand in a receiving line for two or three hours. The second was my almost immediate recollection of my dear friend Terry Crapo, who five years earlier had died ten days after his cancer was diagnosed. He had been as close to a brother as anyone I had known (in fact, when we were attending BYU people often mistook us for each other), and I took his death as a very real indication of what was in store for me.

The reception that night was an ordeal—there is no other way to describe it. I did my best to be pleasant and effervescent—in other words, to act in a way that was completely foreign to my feelings at the moment—but I couldn't fake it completely, and I spent a good part of the evening sitting on a stool rather than standing. It was obvious to Tom that I was not feeling well, and several times he got out of the reception line to ask Janet if I was all right. She simply told him that I wasn't feeling well and that I was going to have some tests done when we returned to Provo (which was the truth—up to a point).

After the reception, Kimberly's parents invited us to their home to watch the happy couple open their presents. This was absolutely the last thing in the world I wanted to do, but in keeping with our effort to preserve the evening for Tom and Kimberly, we went.

While Janet and I were there, I received a call from our home teacher, Rodger Galland. I have no idea how he tracked us down, but he informed me that he would be at the Boise airport the next morning to fly us back to Provo and that he would bring someone to drive the van back. I protested, seeing no need for him to go to this trouble and expense, but Rodger simply responded, "You don't understand. I am going to be at the Boise airport in the morning, and then I'm flying back to Provo. If you and your family would like to be there, that's up to you." Seeing no point in Rodger's flying back to Provo in an empty plane, I acquiesced and thanked him for his thoughtfulness.

Janet: By the time we finished opening presents and headed back to our hotel, it was almost midnight. Five of our seven children were staying with us, and the original plan had been that two would stay in Rex's and my room and three would stay next door. Wendy sensed that we needed a room for ourselves and suggested to her younger brother and sisters that they all stay in one room and have a little party together. So finally, some fifteen hours after we had been told of Rex's condition, he and I were alone together.

As I shut the door to our hotel room, I turned to Rex and said, "Can I cry now?" He was in such excruciating physical pain that I don't think he had the strength to deal with either of our emotions, and he quietly said, "No, please don't. Just help me out of this tuxedo."

The painkillers Lyman had given Rex made it possible for him to sleep at least fitfully through some of the night, but I had no such luxury. In the darkness, I struggled to absorb the news of Rex's illness. Once or twice I dozed briefly, and each time I awoke, my first thought was that this was all a bad dream. Then I would see that I wasn't in my bed in Provo and realize that the news of Rex's cancer was an unalterable reality. I prayed off and on throughout the night for strength and for the relief of Rex's pain. I wished desperately for two things: that I could be the one with cancer so that Rex would not have to endure whatever was ahead, and that morning would finally come so that I could find some relief from the night.

Before the sun even slipped through the crack in the drapery, I had showered and dressed, finding some relief in the familiarity of mindless tasks. But as I brushed my teeth, I could not brush away the bitter taste in my mouth; and as I looked at myself in the mirror, I could see a change on my face and in my eyes. I had seen the last of the carefree mother of seven and was now staring at the face of one who was terrified at what was in store for her husband and family.

As I looked at this stranger's face in the mirror, I heard Rex stir and then moan in pain, and I rushed in to help him. I was immediately struck by the absurdity of this change in roles. Through my seven pregnancies, he had been the one to take care of me. He had been the one with unlimited energy, and I wondered if I had the strength to become his caretaker. But as he awoke that morning, I knew what I must do—that there was no other choice.

Rex: Janet helped me get up and ready for the day, and she then got the children ready for the flight back to Provo. I knew the flight home would be a bit unnerving for her because she has a mild fear of private planes. As we walked up to Rodger's plane, she said to me, "Aren't you just a little afraid to fly in these small planes?" My answer was simply, "Who cares?"

My response pretty well summed up my feelings at that moment. I thought I was going to die, and I had concluded the previous day that I would not live to see another Christmas, which was just under six months away.

We were back in Provo before noon, and Janet and I went directly to the hospital for more tests. In particular, Lyman wanted to have the tumor under my right arm removed so that he could have it biopsied, and he had asked a mutual friend, Mark Fullmer, to do that surgery. Mark was reluctant because he had just worked through a full day of surgeries and wanted to be fresh before he cut into me, but Lyman persuaded him, telling him that the tumor was small and would be easy to remove. I was also anxious to have it removed so that we could get on with what needed to be done, and I used the plea of my friendship with Mark, who finally gave in.

Well, the tumor was quite large, actually—about the size of an egg—and Mark cursed Lyman through the entire operation, all of which I heard because he had used a local anesthetic. But the doctors finally held in their hands the key to diagnosing exactly what kind of cancer I had and then determining a course of treatment.

Janet: My mind was still numb as we went to the hospital, and while there were many things I was uncertain of, the one thing I did know was that I wanted to be with Rex through all the tests and procedures. I wanted to be a support to him, but I also wanted to know what was going on in my husband's body, mind, and heart.

The doctors were very gracious about informing me concerning everything that was done that week, including the surgery to remove the tumor. And when our friend Steve Freestone went into the lab to perform the biopsy, he invited me in to watch. I think he knew that the more involved I was, the easier it would be for me to deal with Rex's cancer—and that I would be more frightened sitting in halls and waiting than I would be looking with him at slides of the tissue.

As he was slicing the tumor and preparing the slides, he said to me, "Let's hope this is a lymphoma, because chemotherapy is very effective in treating that form of cancer." Never once did he suggest, as he conducted the biopsy, the hope that Rex didn't have cancer, nor did he leave me alone in silence to wring my hands and wonder while the doctors did their work. Rather, he took me step by step through the process of determining Rex's exact condition.

The final diagnosis was that Rex had a non-Hodgkins, T-cell immunoblastic lymphoma. The doctors had hoped they would find that the cancer was a B-cell lymphoma, which is not as serious as the T-cell form, but such was not the case. They also determined that this very fast-acting cancer was in its fourth and final stage and that even with Rex's depressed immune system (the result of his low white count), chemotherapy was the only option available to us.

As much as I wanted—and needed—to be with Rex during all of the initial testing, my good friend Margo Freestone, Steve's wife, came to the hospital on Wednesday to give me comfort and encourage me to leave for a while. I knew Rex would need something to rest in when he was home, so later that afternoon, after I had taken Rex home to rest, Margo and I went to look for a recliner that would be comfortable for him. I was not very good company, but Margo was helpful as I walked through the store in a daze.

The next day, Rex and I were alone in the house for a little while—he in the recliner and me on its arm—when we began to read together a letter we had received from our friend Richard Wilkins. Richard had been a student of Rex's and had later worked with him both in the solicitor general's office and then as a BYU law faculty colleague. Their relationship had initially been much like the relationship of a father and son and then like that of brothers. Richard's letter, which was most encouraging and on which we reflected frequently during the coming months, expressed some very deep sentiments about their friendship and also expressed his confidence in Rex's ability to battle this cancer. I am generally much quicker to express my emotions than is Rex, but at this moment, as we read Richard's letter together, tears flowed freely from both of us. I took my husband in my arms and said simply, "I had always wanted us to grow old together." Rex responded, "I did too."

For that brief moment, we set aside tests and treatments and shared in a very few words what we had each been feeling since Monday morning.

Rex: Most of my time from Tuesday through Thursday was taken up by blood tests, CT scans, a bone marrow biopsy, and other delightful experiences. During that time, I had quite a bit of time to think, and I began to realize two things. The first was that I might not die—that cancer was treatable and people did survive. Sometime during these days, I picked up the idea that I had about a 35 percent chance of recovering, and I decided that I might as well be one of that large number of individuals who made it. (Janet would later reinforce my view with a motto that came to have great meaning for us: "You are not a statistic.") The second realization was that there were three factors that were essential to my recovery: outstanding medical care, the faith and prayers of many people, and Janet.

Janet, I could tell immediately, would play a most important role in my recovery. She was with me constantly, providing support and encouragement, and she became an active part of the team that made decisions affecting my treatment and care.

Janet and I began the difficult task of explaining my illness to the children in terms they would understand. It was hard to convey to the youngest two how serious my condition was. Janet talked with Wendy and Diana by phone, and she discussed with Michael the medical terminology. Stephanie was on a school tour, and when Janet finally reached her by phone, she had just begun explaining the situation when an operator interrupted, saying their time was up. "This is an emergency and I'm talking to a child—please don't disconnect us," Janet said. "I'm sorry," the operator answered coldly. Then the phone went dead.

I spent a good part of Wednesday, June 24, telling my colleagues at the BYU law school and at Sidley & Austin the news of my cancer. Even with the return of my optimism, it was an ordeal to acknowledge to this wide circle of my associates that I might well be dying; the task of conveying the news of my cancer made this one of the lowest days in my life.

But the day began with my receiving a phone call that would convey perhaps the best news of my professional life. Three months earlier, in March, I had argued an important case before the Supreme Court, a case involving significant issues of religious freedom and employment law. I was stunned when one of the clerks of the Court called that morning to tell me that the outcome was 9-0 in our favor. I had thought we might win, but the last thing I expected was a clean sweep. Of course, the lows of that day were lower than the highs were high, but I was grateful for the lift to my spirits that this news brought.

Tom was the last of our children to learn of my condition. He and Kimberly had been on their honeymoon, and when they returned to Provo, Janet and I took them into our family room and explained to them the real source of my back pain.

Under most circumstances, Tom is very strong and not particularly emotional, but on this occasion his tears came quickly, and he ran upstairs to a bedroom. In about five minutes, he came back down, put his arms around me, and said, "Dad, I love you so much." These were essentially the same words each of our children had expressed upon learning of my condition. They were simple words, yet they meant everything in the world to me as I dealt with the week's events.

The first step in treating my cancer had been radiation therapy, which arrested the deterioration of my vertebra and provided significant relief from my back pain. The next step—chemotherapy—was scheduled to begin Friday morning.

The telephone rang as Janet and I headed out the door that morning. It was Ben Heineman, the managing partner of the Washington office of Sidley & Austin. Ben had become a close friend during the year I practiced out of that office. I am not one to be late for appointments, but I also felt I should take the call from my friend. Ben's wife, Chris, was the medical editor for the Washington Post; and he explained to me that the moment he had learned of my cancer, he and Chris had begun canvassing the country to determine the very best treatment available for T-cell immunoblastic lymphoma. Ben explained to me that with my particular circumstances—a depressed white count and cancer in its final stage—I needed the most experienced and skilled medical help possible and that, in his judgment, the best place for me was the National Cancer Institute, which is part of the federal government's National Institutes of Health (NIH) in Bethesda, Maryland.

I do not adjust well to sudden changes, and my initial reaction was that I wanted nothing to do with Ben's proposal. I had planned out my life for the next several months, and that plan involved staying in Provo with the support and companionship of my family. In addition, I had every confidence in the doctors and medical personnel at our local hospital, and I saw no need to travel to the East Coast for treatment. But Ben is not inclined to back down from a position once he is convinced he is right, so for the next several minutes, he was the irresistible force to my immovable object.

He explained to me that NIH, which is a research organization, was studying my type of cancer and that they had two protocols for my kind of lymphoma. He also explained that NIH had the finest infectious-disease center in the country and that I would need that support, given that chemotherapy suppresses a person's immune system and that I was therefore at high risk for infections, due to my low white count. Ben added that because NIH is a research hospital, it was critical that I not receive chemotherapy from another source, because if I did I would no longer be eligible for its program.

Finally he said, "You can certainly wait a day or two before you take your first chemotherapy treatment in Provo. So as a personal favor to me, do at least this much. Talk to a Dr. Longo at the National Cancer Institute before you make your decision."

Largely because I saw no other way of getting this tenacious lawyer off my back, I consented, and Janet and I called Dr. Longo. The things he said made a lot of sense, particularly the ability of NIH to provide extensive attention to my depressed immune system. For what Ben and Dr. Longo didn't know, but what Janet and I were painfully aware of, was that my dear friend Terry Crapo hadn't died of cancer. He had died from the pneumonia he had contracted while undergoing treatment for his leukemia.

By the time we finished our conversation with Dr. Longo, Janet and I had at least begun to accept the possibility that, for all its inconveniences, Ben's idea might be the best one. I pointed out to Janet that it would be quite difficult for me to be two thousand miles away without her and the children. She immediately responded that she would go with me. I really protested this notion, largely because I felt the children needed her far more than I did, but she told me there was no way she would let me undergo treatments without her there and that we could work out an arrangement for the children.

I could quickly see that Janet was tending to agree with Ben and Dr. Longo, and by the end of the day, after prayerful consideration, we had decided I would receive my treatments in Bethesda, Maryland. As I went to bed that night, I was deeply moved by the fact that our friends Ben and Chris would invest so much time and effort in my behalf—and I was very grateful for Ben's persistence.

Two days later, on Sunday, three significant events occurred. First, my parents had arrived on Saturday, and Sunday morning before church, my father gave me a special father's blessing. Having my father with me at this time meant a great deal to me, as did the optimistic tone of his blessing. That was immediately followed by an anointing and sealing, which was performed by my home teacher, Rodger Galland (who would succeed me as bishop two years later) and by my next-door neighbor and stake president, Merrill Bateman (who would succeed me as president of BYU eight and one-half years later).

The words in Merrill's sealing were direct, straightforward, and unequivocal. He told me without any qualification that this disease would not take my life at this time, and then he said, "The Lord yet has other things for you to do on this earth."

The final significant event of that Sunday was the sacrament meeting over which I presided. In a rather matter-of-fact manner, I informed the ward members of my disease, although most of them were already aware of the cancer. I explained that I would be taking my treatments at NIH over six five-week cycles and returning to Provo for about a month between each treatment. I then told the ward that President Bateman had graciously agreed not to release me and that he was allowing my counselors to take a larger role during my absences. During that sacrament meeting, I felt an outpouring of love and support from every one of our ward members, and the effect was comparable to the two blessings I had received that morning.

Janet: In Rex's mind, his talk may have been matter-of-fact, but for everyone there, it was heart-wrenching. Rex's mother was sitting next to me, and we were so emotional that neither of us could get through an entire hymn. Tears flowed from the congregation during his talk. It seemed to almost everyone there that this was Rex's good-bye to the ward and that he would not be coming back—at least not as bishop and possibly not at all.

In addition to Rex's family, my parents and sister had come to support us, and after sacrament meeting everyone came back to our house. I have no idea what we ate, but we did have a meal. Then we made our final plans before Rex and I left the next day for Maryland and the children left to spend several weeks in Arizona with Lois and Diana.

The next morning, Rex's friend Reese Hansen, who had been associate dean of the law school and Rex's counselor in the BYU Seventh Stake presidency, came to take us to the airport. As we backed out of the driveway on that bright June day, I remembered how beautiful the apple blossoms had been for Wendy's wedding just two months earlier. Now the trees were vivid green, and I wondered, as I looked at our home, what stage the trees would be in when we returned. My first thought was that they would be bare—and that the rest of my life would be bare as well, like trees in winter. What I knew for certain, even with the faith I was trying to sustain, was that life would never, ever be the same.
