Rex E. Lee, Janet Lee, Jim Bell, Marathon of Faith ( 1996)

Chapter 3

"Be of Good Cheer"

Janet: Rex slept during our flight to Washington, D.C., his system subdued as a result of the painkillers he was taking. I tried to sort out in my mind the events of the past week as well as to consider what was in store for us. When we arrived, we were greeted by Wendy and her husband, Tom, who were working in Washington that summer and would be returning to BYU in the fall. Wendy had been with us just a week before, during our trip to Tom's reception in Boise, but when she saw her father as we got off the plane, I could see in her face a sense of shock at his deteriorating condition.

Rex was so weak that we immediately got him into the car while we waited for the luggage. He asked for a drink of water, and Wendy volunteered to get him one; but when she finally got to the concession stand after waiting in a long line, she was told that they didn't sell water and couldn't give her a cup. She paid them the full price for a soft drink, told them to hold the ice and the soda, and filled the cup herself at the nearest water fountain.

Rex: While Wendy may have noticed a change in my physical condition and countenance, I noticed something in her countenance as well. As we greeted each other in the terminal, I did not see the slightest hint of shock. What I saw, instead, was a face filled with genuine care, compassion, and concern. Even more than that, however, I had the compelling impression that she wanted to do anything she could for me.

That moment at the airport typified something that would happen repeatedly as I was with my children off and on during these months. Even with the younger children—and certainly with the older ones—there was a maturity in how they interacted with and cared for me that brought joy to my heart each time we were together.

Janet: When Wendy finally returned with the drink of water, I was struck by how dependent on us Rex was—and sobered by thoughts of the challenges we were going to face in meeting even his most basic needs.

Fortunately, the staff at NIH was well equipped to help us, and it was something of a relief to bring Rex to a place where he would begin receiving the care he needed. During the first few days there, as tests were run and decisions about his treatment were made, Rex and I stayed in a nearby hotel although we spent nearly all our time at the hospital. Our intention was to find an apartment where we could both stay while Rex received his treatments, which we thought would give us some semblance of a life together, even with everything that would be going on at the hospital.

Rex: The treatment plan we had discussed with the doctors before coming to NIH involved six five-week cycles of chemo-therapy, with a four-week break between each of the cycles. Although being away from my children, our ward, and our friends for five weeks at a time did not appeal to me, I consoled myself with the idea that Janet and I could live together in a nearby apartment, which my law firm had graciously offered to pay for; that we could return to Provo after each cycle; and that because NIH is a research institution, I would be paid for being one of their guinea pigs—in the amount of twenty dollars per day. Aside from the cancer, life did not seem all that bad to me. (Some, I should mention, have assumed that I was able to receive treatment at NIH because of my work in the government. That was not the case. The only qualification I had to meet to be admitted was to be suffering from a form of cancer the NIH research teams were studying.)

Our plans changed on the Friday after our arrival, when the doctors became concerned that the incision from which the tumor had been removed the previous Tuesday was infected. The NIH surgeons reopened it, cleaned it out, and decided that due to my depressed immune system, I would have to be treated on an inpatient basis for the duration of my chemotherapy. That Friday—July 3, 1987—marked the beginning of a four-month stay at NIH until the end of October. Even in my weakened condition, I had really been looking forward to spending the Fourth of July weekend with Janet, Wendy and Tom, and Stephanie. (We had rerouted Stephanie through Washington, D.C., on the way home from her school trip so we could see her before she went on to Arizona to be with her brothers and sisters.) It struck me as ironic that as the country was preparing to celebrate its independence, I was giving up mine.

When Janet left my room after I was admitted, Tom Jacobson noticed she was crying and attempted to comfort her. She thanked him but explained, "I'm not crying because I'm sad; I'm crying because I'm relieved that he'll now receive the care he needs." Her comment to him, I think, was indicative of both her insight and the seriousness of my condition.

On the one hand, being at NIH was very depressing for me. Physically, it is a huge, stark facility; and even by hospital standards, it is a less-than-cheery environment. My room was very small, I could not move more than three or four feet away from my IV pole, and even though the hospital is situated in a beautiful part of Maryland, the view out my window was of another brick wall. Psychologically, I did not find it particularly uplifting that I was in an oncological ward that treats some of the most severe cancer cases in the country. I knew that many of the people in the rooms around me were dying, and even though I had recently felt renewed optimism and determination, the fact that I was surrounded by terminal illness weighed heavily upon me.

On the other hand, I was being treated by the most competent corps of nurses and doctors imaginable. Not only were they involved in cutting-edge research and treatments, which meant they had to be extremely competent professionally to be employed there; they were also concerned with me as a person. They were sensitive, compassionate, and easy to talk to, and they were willing to help Janet and me understand what we were going through. I knew that I had a good chance of recovering at NIH, and I was determined, as my status was changed from outpatient to inpatient that first day, that I was going to endure whatever it took to get better.

The plan on Friday was that if my infection cleared up, the chemotherapy would start on Monday. Frankly, if I was going to be stuck in the hospital over the weekend, I wanted to start that day. In my mind, there just was no point in waiting to begin the process of eradicating this deadly disease.

Janet: As we talked with the doctors at NIH about the procedures and possibilities in Rex's treatment, one of the first things we were told was, "Attitude is everything." And Rex's attitude couldn't have been better. After he was admitted, one of his nurses walked into the room, introduced herself, and said, "So, Mr. Lee, how are you doing today?" Rex immediately answered, "Well, aside from the fact that I've got cancer, I'm doing just great."

"We've got a live wire in there," the nurse reported as she pointed to Rex's room—and this was a pretty fair summation of his initial reaction to being at NIH. This was his chance to get better, so he was going to do exactly what the doctors told him and be the best patient he could be.

I, on the other hand, was still numb. From the moment I had learned of Rex's cancer, time had seemed to stand still, leaving me to go through the motions of life in an almost out-of-body state. I could barely eat, and sleep came fitfully in brief segments of the night when my exhaustion overcame my fear.

But that numbness gave way to reality as I pushed my husband in a wheelchair through the mazelike halls of NIH, going from room to room, test to test, and treatment to treatment. The first time I took Rex to the radiology treatment room, I encountered a woman who was pushing her husband in his wheelchair. They appeared to be in their late sixties, and he was so weak that he was bent over with his head nearly touching his knees. This very kind woman asked me what Rex's diagnosis was, and when I told her, she said, "Oh, I feel for you. We've been going through this for ten years now, and it's a lot to handle."

My first thought was elation that I might still have Rex with me in ten years. Then, as I looked down at my sick husband, I didn't know how I was going to find the strength I needed to deal with this unwelcomed intrusion in our lives.

On Saturday, several friends were getting together for a Fourth of July picnic. They prevailed upon me to go, even though I did not want to leave Rex alone. The picnic was held in a green meadow near McLean, Virginia, and everyone had brought their favorite food. At any other time, I would have enjoyed the visit with old friends, but that day I found it unnerving to listen to people laughing and having a good time. I just couldn't bring myself to join in the fun.

I also found it difficult to hear any of the less-than-kind words that are common to most couples. That evening such minor exchanges screamed at me in deafening decibels. I wanted to tell my friends that life is too short and precious—and certainly too fragile—to waste any of our time on petty differences.

Feeling more alone than I had ever felt before, I wandered away from the picnic tables, people, and party food and tried to find a place of solitude. I followed a tiny dirt road that seemed to lead nowhere in particular. As I walked, I longed to go home, to go back to a place I knew I could never be again—where there were no hospitals, no cancer, no fear of losing Rex.

Then, as I continued down the little road and saw the sun hanging heavy in the western sky, I began to feel the dirt and rocks through my sandals and I thought of the night that would soon come. Anticipating the loneliness I knew this darkness would bring, my mind turned to another who had walked the earth in sandaled feet, and I began to feel ashamed about feeling so alone. Then, as I recalled the Savior's promise to always be with us, I sat down on an old stump and contemplated that while the sun would set, it would also rise again—that there is an unerring dependability in these sequences of nature.

And then it occurred to me. My life was not out of control. The same God who set in motion the rising and the setting sun controls the universe, of which I am a part. And he had granted me my agency. So while I was faced with circumstances I did not understand and could not will away, I still had the ability to make choices in my life. The agency was mine, even if my ability to exercise it was limited to simply controlling my reaction to the events I was facing. No one, I knew, could take that away from me, and I prayed silently for strength.

As I walked back to the grassy clearing where the picnic was coming to an end, I knew there were sources of strength I had yet to find, and I also knew where they could be found.

That evening Wendy and Tom insisted that I come spend the night with them—and that I sleep in their bed while they took the couch. I found it slightly ironic that Wendy, for whom I had cared for since birth, and Tom, whom I had known since he was eleven years old, were now watching out for me. I accepted their kind offer, and for the first time in ten days I slept through the night. When I awoke the next morning, I began to feel that the numbness I had been experiencing was lifting a little, and I hoped that the Sabbath would bring relief to my aching soul.

When I attended fast and testimony meeting that day in our former ward, I shared my testimony and the news of Rex's illness. Many of the people there already knew and had joined together in a fast for Rex, as had our ward in Provo, the stake where Rex had grown up in St. Johns, Arizona, and, we later learned, other congregations around the country where we had friends and family.

After church, I went immediately to the hospital to see Rex. Before I went inside, I felt that I needed some time alone to pray. I went into a wooded area across the street from NIH and began, once again, to plead with my Heavenly Father in Rex's behalf.

I have known the fundamental elements of prayer from the time I was two or three. I prayed in my childhood, as so many children do, thanking Heavenly Father for my blessings and telling him what I felt I needed. As I grew older, I felt that my prayers had matured, and I learned to pray with a heart more open to God's will and to the guidance I know he gives his children.

For some reason, however, as I faced the frightening ordeal of Rex's cancer, I had forgotten much of what I had learned as an adult and had become a child again. In the first few days after the diagnosis, I must have sounded like a two-year-old, demanding and insisting that I have my way. "Please, Heavenly Father," I had begged over and over, "make him well." I had to pray. I knew nothing else to do. But these prayers did nothing to bring the healing balm I needed for my wounded spirit.

Soon, without even realizing it, I changed my prayers. I began to instruct, reason, even bargain with the Lord. "Surely," I would plead, "there are things on this earth for him to do. He is still useful here. Send him anywhere, ask him to do anything, and I will be at his side helping. Take away everything we own, but please leave him here." Again, I found no peace.

That Sunday as I bowed my head, my prayer was significantly different from my previous pleadings. "If it be thy will," I began, "let Rex recover from his cancer. Thou knowest the desires of my heart, but I recognize that I do not understand all things. Please strengthen me to meet the challenges ahead, and please calm my troubled heart." Finally peace came.

As I continued in prayer, I realized spiritually something I suppose I had known rationally—that changing circumstances isn't always an option, but that I could receive the strength I needed to deal with what Rex and I were facing. Scriptures I had known and loved for years came to my mind with new meaning. "Be of good cheer," I remembered from the Doctrine and Covenants, "for I am in your midst, and I have not forsaken you" (D&C 61:36).

Until that day, I had thought that faith in God came in the form of feeling certain that life would be as I wanted it to be. Coupled with that assumption was my fundamental outlook that I could find something good in whatever situation I faced. Now for the first time that premise didn't work. I could not see any element of good in the fact that my husband lay near death in a hospital bed across the street. But what I could see, as I concluded my prayer, was that my Heavenly Father was with me and would give me the strength I needed to get through this challenge.

The assurance that came to me that day was not that Rex's cancer would be cured forever, but that a loving and all-knowing God would be by my side. As I quietly arose to return to the hospital, I remembered the sentiment expressed somewhere in a biography of C. S. Lewis—that we do not pray to change God; we pray to change ourselves.
