Rex E. Lee, Janet Lee, Jim Bell, Marathon of Faith ( 1996)

Chapter 4

Sustained by Faith and Prayer

Rex: For fifty-two years, I had enjoyed nearly perfect health. I had been in the hospital only once, for a very short time, and would have much preferred the doctors' original plan of administering my chemotherapy on an outpatient basis. There was an immediate sameness about the food and routines that made me long for the freedom I would have had outside of the hospital. At the same time, I knew I had to maintain the perspective that my primary and really only objective was to get better. I concluded right away that if my getting better meant staying at NIH for several months, then that's what I would do—like it or not.

One of my first concerns was that the members of our ward deserved leadership from one who had the mantle of bishop, and because it was now clear that I would not be dividing my time between Maryland and Provo, I felt honor-bound to offer our stake president, Merrill Bateman, the option of releasing me. His answer was characteristically direct: "We're not changing bishops. You just concentrate on getting better."

Waiting from Friday until Monday, when the first chemotherapy was scheduled, was difficult. The radiation therapy that had been started in Provo was reintroduced at NIH on Friday, and it helped to relieve the pain in my back. I wanted to get going with the rest of the treatment plan, patience not exactly being my strong suit.

There were just too many things I wanted to do, and I didn't want to spend a day longer in the hospital than was necessary. I wanted to see Michael, Stephanie, Melissa, and Christie marry and graduate from college, and I wanted to see many more grandchildren come into our family. I wanted to see Tom go to law school and then be the one to move his admission to the Supreme Court. I wanted to see Michael go on his mission, and I wanted to complete my tenure as bishop. I wanted to see all of our children, together with their husbands and wives, get a good start on life.

But most of all, I wanted to grow old with Janet. I wanted the experience of sharing with my sweetheart the later phases of life, just as we had shared the earlier ones. As I lay in my hospital bed over that weekend, waiting for Monday to come, I spent considerable time thinking about how Janet had been the perfect wife for me during our twenty-eight years together. Her insistence on being with me at NIH was only the most recent manifestation of her commitment to our marriage—and to me.

Janet: My thoughts as we waited for Monday to come were considerably different from Rex's. His principal oncologist had described to us what Rex's intense chemotherapy would mean when he said, "What we are doing is killing both good and bad cells. Then we hope that the good cells will restore themselves and the cancer cells will not return. It's barbaric, but this is the only way we presently know of to destroy cancer cells."

When Monday came, Rex was so tired and in so much pain that he had to be taken for tests throughout the hospital on a gurney, and even then he was miserable. The thought of the nurses' putting what amounted to poison into my husband's veins was horrifying to me, and as we waited in the afternoon for the person to come in and administer the first dose, I was filled with anxiety. Rex in a sense, shared my anxiety, but his was the result of wishing the nurse would hurry and get there and start him on the chemotherapy so he could begin the process of getting better.

Rex: Before the chemotherapy was injected, I was told that this particular drug—the first in a five-drug cycle—could irritate the veins and therefore make it hard to administer. I had no difficulty at all tolerating it; in fact, about an hour after my first treatment, the extreme fatigue I had been experiencing began to lift, and I asked Janet for a yellow pad so that I could do some writing. This was the best I had felt in two and a half weeks, and I began to speculate as to the reason.

My first thought was that the chemotherapy was working wonders, but then Janet reminded me of the fact that literally thousands of people—from friends and family to total strangers—had been fasting for me the day before. But the timing was not right, I told her; the fast had occurred on Sunday and my feeling of almost sudden recovery was occurring on Monday. She then explained that these people weren't fasting that I wouldn't have cancer; that was already a given. Rather, they were fasting that the medical treatments I was to receive at NIH would be successful. The earliest those prayers could have been answered, she continued, was when the first chemotherapy was administered.

I began to cry as I contemplated the faith and prayers of so many in my behalf. I felt a mixture of gratitude for the efforts of friends and family and embarrassment that I hadn't immediately recognized the real reason for my rapid improvement. My renewed energy made me very emotional, very humble, and very grateful—both to my Heavenly Father and to so many people who cared about me. This was the first of many times during my four-month stay that I became aware of the effect of others' faith on my well-being.

I am accustomed to and appreciative of the Latter-day Saint practice of fasting in behalf of someone who is ill. But this concept was somewhat foreign to some of my non-LDS friends, including a colleague at the BYU law school, Jean Burns. Jean expressed her concern for me—often with a healthy dose of her wit—many times while I was at NIH. Her first note came days after the fast Sunday in July and said, in effect: "What's this business about a fast? In the first place, I don't understand how the word fast describes not eating. But even more mysterious is how my not eating can possibly cure your cancer. But on the off chance that you Mormons might have this one right, I want you to know that I'm doing my part and that during the entire month of July I will not eat any broccoli. Let me know if it works."

While Jean—probably purposely—misunderstood the fundamentals of the Latter-day Saint fast, her love and good humor (and, I believe, her faith) were an efficacious offering in my behalf as well.

Janet: When Rex asked me for a legal pad just after the first dose of chemotherapy was administered, I was somewhat startled—both because he had been so weak earlier that day and because this was not how I had anticipated us spending our time together in the hospital. When he was admitted to NIH, I imagined that I would sit at the side of his bed each day as we held hands, gazed into each other's eyes, and expressed our love for each other. And while we did share several such tender moments, I could also tell quite quickly that my scenario wasn't going to be what would sustain Rex through this ordeal.

With what little strength he had, Rex wanted to work. I was concerned that if he did, he wouldn't get the rest he needed, but a doctor finally explained to me that stress manifests itself differently in different people and that Rex was probably the type who would find resting in bed as unrelaxing and stressful as anything he could do.

Initially, I had a hard time accepting the idea that working would be beneficial for Rex, but an experience during our first week at NIH helped me see that he was not a typical patient. A young and obviously bright psychologist came into Rex's room one morning, offering to teach him biofeedback—training the mind to focus on certain images as a way of taking one's mind off of pain, illness, anxiety, etc. Rex looked puzzled for a moment and then, with no suggestion of disrespect, remarked, "I'll let you know if I need your help."

What Rex knew, at least intuitively, was that he didn't need help concentrating on something other than his cancer. That came very naturally to him as he turned his attention to work. And even though he was confined to a hospital bed, Rex needed to feel that he was a part of ongoing life. He needed to be productive, even with the limits the cancer placed upon him. So I somewhat reluctantly helped him set up an office at NIH; and then, rather than staring fondly into his eyes, I read legal briefs out loud to him when he was too sick to read them himself.

Rex: Though it was far from a full-time undertaking, I did carry on a fairly decent practice of law from my hospital bed. The Sidley & Austin office with which I was principally affiliated was just a few miles from Bethesda, and almost every day a messenger would bring briefs, letters, and memos from lawyers in the office and take back tapes I had dictated, briefs I had edited, and so forth.

I worked on about twelve different cases while I was at NIH, including two that I took on while I was in the hospital (one was later filed with the Supreme Court and another with the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit). After a few weeks, Janet brought some order to my somewhat chaotic stacks of materials by organizing each case in an accordion file, all of which were then stored in a corner of the room.

On most days, I was capable of working only three or four hours, but they were fairly productive hours. At first, it struck me as strange that Janet wanted to be with me all day at the hospital—and even more strange that she would be willing to read legal briefs to me and do whatever other boring things I needed. Then it finally occurred to me that this was really what she wanted to do, that she was concerned enough about me to spend virtually every waking minute of the day with me.

(When I later told the law faculty at BYU about our months at NIH and how Janet would sit by my bed reading legal briefs to me, my friend Cliff Fleming, who teaches tax law, commented, "Oh, yes, my wife and I have spent some of our most delightful moments reading to each other from the Federal Income Tax Code.")

In addition to the work I did on legal matters, I was also concerned during the first few weeks at NIH about a commitment I had made earlier that spring. On July 24, the St. Johns stake where I had grown up was going to celebrate its one hundredth anniversary, and I had been invited to be the keynote speaker. I regarded this invitation as one of the highest honors I had ever been given, and if there had been any way for me to leave my hospital bed and be there, I would have done so in a minute. Of course, I couldn't, so I did the next best thing. I persuaded the stake president to let me write the talk and then have my father deliver it. The only problem was that it took me until nearly the last minute to dictate the talk, I had no way to transcribe it in the hospital, and at the time there were no fax machines in St. Johns.

Fortunately, my good friend Bud Jones had come from Arizona to visit me, and he offered to take the tape back to his law office in Phoenix, have it transcribed, deliver it to St. Johns, and fax a copy to me. Then my father and I went over the manuscript on the telephone, making the last-minute editorial changes we felt were necessary.

I explained in the introduction that "if this speech turns out to be anything less than a total smashing success, I will conclude that it was not because of the quality of the prose, but simply because my father failed to read it with the conviction and passion that its content deserved." Later I was told that my father interjected, "I cannot rise above the script." I appreciated my father's help, and I was glad that I could have at least this long-distance connection with a community that had had such a profound effect on the way I have viewed and lived my life.

Janet: Rex is a very conscientious person, and he was determined to fulfill all the responsibilities he could. He also made a point of remembering those things wives hope their husbands won't forget. Tuesday, July 7, marked our anniversary, and as I sat in his room that morning, looking out his narrow window onto the wall of another wing, I couldn't help but think that this was an unusual way to celebrate the day we had been married twenty-eight years before. I had never even thought about a life without Rex; and that morning, as I tried to construct an image of what that life would look like, I could see only a brick wall.

Our circumstances afforded us more time than we had ever spent together on an anniversary, and as Rex and I talked off and on during the day, I felt an increasing sense of sweetness and peace. The culminating moment, however, came that evening as Tom and Wendy brought Chinese take-out food to Rex's room, together with a small, wrapped box, which Wendy slipped to Rex. "I think this is exactly what you specified," she said to her dad. Rex then gave the box to me, kissed me, and wished me a happy anniversary.

I was surprised that he had thought to ask Wendy to buy a gift for me and regretted that I had not left the hospital to get something for him (although he had always told me that the best gift I could give him was to save the money). I removed the bow and wrapping, with Rex watching me intently. When I opened the box to find a gold chain with a single, perfect pearl, I noticed his eyes filling with tears. "You remembered," I whispered, as I sat on his bed to hug him.

His gift to me that night was identical to a gift he had given me two months before our wedding, as I left Provo to visit my parents in Japan where my father was serving as treasury attachÃ©. "Think of me while you're gone," he had said. "Have fun but miss me, and remember to drink your milk." (His last instruction was his typical way of never letting a moment get too sentimental.) I had worn that necklace for years, until one of our babies had pulled it off and it had then disappeared.

The two gifts were alike, but the years had given this second gesture far more meaning than the first. And as Rex held my hand for the rest of the evening, I knew that, like me, he never wanted to let go.

Rex: Almost literally from the first day, my treatments had their intended effect on the cancer. The radiation therapy, which had immediately helped to alleviate the pain caused by my disintegrating vertebra, brought permanent relief; and with each dose of chemotherapy, my tumors receded in size.

The bad news was that the drugs also had the feared effect on my immune system. With each cycle, the pattern was the same. After the first three or four days of receiving the chemotherapy, I would begin to develop fevers and nausea. I had rarely experienced nausea in my fifty-two years—and then only in very short spurts—but now I constantly felt right on the verge of vomiting. Eating, which had always been such a pleasure, became a real chore. Within the first week, I had lost twelve pounds—and the weight loss didn't stop there. My doctors kept telling me I needed to gain as much back as possible because proper nutrition was an essential part of the total treatment, but the thought of ingesting food was absolutely repugnant to me. My ability to eat was further complicated when I developed, about two months into my stay, a hiatal hernia, which in its most severe episodes prevented me from swallowing at all for up to an hour or more at a time.

Not coincidentally, the nausea consistently and quickly followed the second drug to be administered in my protocol—nitrogen mustard. Chemically, it contains many of the same ingredients as the mustard gas used as a lethal weapon in World War I. As Janet and I asked about the various drugs I was being given, the doctors explained that the origins of chemotherapy could be traced to the autopsies done on victims of the war, which revealed that many of them had no lymph nodes. Researchers hypothesized, correctly, that something like mustard gas might be used to treat lymphoma patients. As I lay in my bed at NIH, I sometimes felt a little like a victim of war.

The nausea turned my body inside out and made my life a total misery, but even that was a relatively minor inconvenience when compared with the infections. They were caused by the depression of my white count below 500 and created quite a dilemma both for Janet and me and for the doctors. If we didn't continue the chemotherapy, I would almost certainly die of cancer. If we did, however, there was the very real risk that I would die of infections.

When the fevers came, they were first treated by potent intravenous antibiotics, which brought them down for a time. Then other fevers would occur, against which antibiotics were ineffective. Blood tests revealed the reason: these latter fevers were caused not by bacterial infections but by fungal infections in the blood. These infections were one additional complication stemming from my depressed white count, and antibiotics were ineffective in combating them.

In 1987, there was only one real antidote for fungal infections—amphotericin B (which is still by far the most effective for severe cases such as mine). This yellow liquid, administered intravenously, is known among members of the medical profession as "ampho-terrible," and the first time I received it, I learned why.

As the nurse attached a container of what appeared to be about a liter of this liquid to my IV lines, she told me the administration would take about an hour and a half and that I should let her know if I had any unusual side effects. I asked her what I might expect, and she said the most likely was chills. That certainly didn't scare me. I was a big boy and I'd had chills before. I figured I'd simply put on an extra blanket and tough it out.

I fell asleep soon after this stuff started dripping into my veins, and after about forty-five minutes, I woke up and felt a little cold. The chilly feeling rapidly increased, and I covered myself first with a sheet and then with a blanket—all to no avail. Rather quickly the chills progressed to a stage far beyond anything I had ever known, and within minutes I was shivering so violently that the bed was physically moving. At that point, I rang for a nurse.

As she put the demerol into my IV—while I was literally bouncing around on the bed—a doctor came in, sat by the side of my bed, put his hand on my shoulder, and said in a very calm, reassuring voice, "What is happening to you is, of course, frightening, but in no way life threatening. With the demerol being injected into your IV, your chills will be gone in a matter of seconds."

His calm, reassuring words, combined with his rather commanding presence, had a very soothing psychological effect on me, and within about ten seconds the chills went away immediately and completely.

A few days later, I was given amphotericin again, and this time I kept my finger on the call button and rang for the nurse the instant I began to feel a chill. And after that, the nurse simply administered the demerol before injecting what I now joined the medical community in calling ampho-terrible.

The prospect of my dying occurred to me frequently during my months at NIH, and I did ultimately come to reconcile myself to that possibility. I did not want to, of course, for at least two reasons. First, the thought of death scared me. I have absolute faith in the existence of God and a hereafter, but I was not at all comfortable with the prospect of leaving this mortal existence just yet. But my much stronger reason was my concern for Janet and our children. Eight-year-old Christie, our youngest, along with Melissa, Stephanie, and Michael, were still at home and, in my view, needed a father. None of our three married children had been married very long, and I felt I should be there for them as they moved through at least the early years of marriage. And I did not want to leave Janet alone at a relatively young age.

Each night when I would pray, the principal thing I would pray for was to live. There were many days and nights when that did not seem like much of a prospect, but when I would plead with the Lord for my life, I would inevitably hear the words of President Bateman's blessing—"The Lord yet has other things for you to do on this earth." And throughout my darkest days, when my body was so weak that I could barely move, and when I was wracked with fever and pain, those words would give me the confidence I needed, despite their seeming incongruence with my situation at the time.

Janet: During the first several days that Rex was in the hospital, there were very few positive signs. After the first two doses of chemotherapy, his white count was down to under 50 (which was a level unheard-of, even at NIH) and the infections had started. His health was on a downward course from mid-July through most of September, with minimal promising indicators along the way.

While Rex's inclination was to get the best doctors he could find and then let them treat him, my approach was to find out everything I could about his form of cancer and then be an active part of his care and treatment. The staff invited me to use the well-equipped NIH library, so when I wasn't with Rex, I studied everything I could about non-Hodgkins, T-cell immunoblastic lymphoma. Doing that enabled me to ask intelligent questions of the medical staff, and in time the doctors and nurses began to treat me as something of a colleague as we watched Rex and worked to make him well.

At the same time, I would sometimes become very frightened as I learned more about the severity of his cancer and as I studied the statistics that related to his chances of recovery. When I would finally leave him in the evening, I often would drive back to my little apartment contemplating a situation that seemed increasingly bleak.

On countless occasions, either as I was falling asleep or when I would wake up during the night, I would be overwhelmed with a sense of panic. My heart would pound wildly and I would experience a shortness of breath. I just couldn't face the thought of Rex dying, because without him, I could not see me. Our lives were just too inextricably intertwined. And yet, although Rex had been told in blessings that his time had not come, reality seemed to indicate otherwise.

Absorbed in all I seemed to be losing, I would sometimes feel a sensation that I was free-falling and desperate for something to grab onto, something strong enough to stop the fall.

What I would grab onto at these times when I could not shut out the doctors' diagnosis were my faith and my ability to pray. I offered many prayers in the middle of the night. They may have seemed repetitive to the Lord, but they gave me strength to move past the overwhelming fear I was facing. I realized more fully than ever before that changing the circumstances is not always an option, but being given the strength to deal with what we are facing is the greatest blessing of all. There were many instances when it was hard for me to hold onto my faith—especially as doctors would describe to me what appeared at times to be very grim prospects—but it was all that I had. I knew that if I let go of that faith, I would never break my fall.

Rex: The central figure in one of the most poignant examples of the power of faith to heal was neither of my race nor of my religion. Her name was Juildene Ford, and she is the only nurse I know who still wears the traditional highly starched white uniform and cap. And during the time I knew her, she was just as serious about her professionalism and her religious devotion as she was about her orthodox nurse's attire.

My most serious episode with infections occurred one night in the latter part of August, during the second cycle of chemotherapy. I have very little recollection of that awful night except that I felt terrible and that Ms. Ford seemed to be taking my temperature at unusually short intervals. Then I remember the great relief I felt when my fever broke and Ms. Ford, after having taken my temperature for the umpteenth time, said to me, "It's okay now, Mr. Lee. You're going to be all right."

It wasn't until sometime later that Janet told me the story of what happened that night. After Janet left the hospital, she continued to call back and check on my condition because she was worried about the severe infection I was battling. The news she got was not good, and as the night dragged on, it got worse.

But the final report from Ms. Ford that night was this: "He's all right now, Mrs. Lee. His fever has gone down; in fact, his temperature is almost normal. But let me tell you what happened. I knew that with that high a fever and in his condition, he could not last through the night. So I went next door to the nurses' station, bowed my head, and prayed, 'Lord, this is too good a man to let die. Make his fever go down, and let him live.' Then I went back and took his temperature again. It had started to subside, and it has continued to do so since then."

I don't know, and will not know in this life, just how these things work—and why it is that sometimes they work and sometimes they don't. But it just may be that Juildene Ford is one of several people who saved my life, with assistance, of course, from her Heavenly Father and mine.
