Rex E. Lee, Janet Lee, Jim Bell, Marathon of Faith ( 1996)

Chapter 5

Happiness in Small Doses

Janet: It would have been much easier for me if life outside of Rex's hospital room could have ceased and I could have focused every last ounce of my attention on helping him get well. But there were still bills to pay, four children at home two thousand miles away to attend to, housing and transportation arrangements to make, and constant work to be done as we took care of the details of our changing lives.

I did many of my routine tasks while I was at the hospital with Rex. I figured family finances and balanced the checkbook while I sat by his bed, and there was a small room at the end of the hall with a toll-free telephone that NIH provided for the use of patients and their families. From there, I could keep tabs on our children and orchestrate whatever arrangements I could make from that distance to provide for their care.

We were fortunate that my sister, who was still living in Arizona, was able to take Michael, Stephanie, Melissa, and Christie from June through late August. Our oldest daughter, Diana, her husband, Steve, and their two children were living in Mesa, and they added to the large family circle for our temporarily "orphaned" children. Diana spent nearly every day with her younger siblings. Then in August, she brought the children back to Provo and helped them get ready for the new school year.

Diana stayed as long as was possible in Utah to help with our children, but her two daughters, Ashley and Chelsea, were only five months old and three years old, and she needed to get back to Arizona to be with Steve, who was beginning a two-year clerkship with a judge in Phoenix. Again we were able to find a solution to what seemed initially to be an insurmountable challenge. Wendy and her husband, Tom, were working in Washington for the first two months of Rex's stay at NIH; in fact, when Rex's status was changed to inpatient, they moved into my little apartment and provided great support to both of us through July and August.

Then, when it was time for them to return to Provo, they insisted that they could live in our house, keep up with their full-time schooling at BYU, and take care of Michael, Stephanie, and Melissa. Rex and I could not see how they could manage so much and argued with them to let us find some other alternative, but they would have it no other way. (In retrospect, we saw great blessings in the fact that during the years we lived in Virginia, Tom had been acquainted with the children he was to help care for.)

Starting in September we would send a check each month for their expenses. Tom initially tried to ration it out to ensure that they would get through the month. He was met with some resistance, however, and the typical pattern that evolved was that most of the money would be spent in the first two or three weeks. Then they would try to rein in their bad fiscal habits during the next little while, and finally they would spend the last few days of the month looking under sofa cushions for every last nickel they could find and praying someone from the ward would bring in a meal.

Emotionally, they fared much better than they did fiscally. I would call home most days with news of Rex's condition, and I admit that I tended to look for the best news I could to pass along. So while they knew their father was very, very sick, I tried not to scare them when things were particularly rough. Even so, it was hard for the children, but when one of them would get frightened, Wendy and Tom were there to help. We learned the extent of the efforts of this newly married couple when Melissa told me one day that she had been awakened by a nightmare the night before. I was worried about this, and I asked her what she had done to get over it. "Oh," she said, "I just went and got into bed with Wendy and Tom. That's what we do when we get scared at night, and they help us feel better."

Tom and Wendy dealt expertly with late-night homework assignments, procrastinated posters, and everything else children remember only when bedtime comes. It helped that Tom and Kimberly lived nearby and could assist with homework and join in weekend activities.

There was also the matter of taking care of myself. There were many people—doctors, nurses, friends in the area—who were much more concerned about me than I was. They felt I should leave the hospital more often, that it wasn't healthy for me to be there day and night. I knew full well that there is plenty to do in the Washington, D.C., area, and I was often told, "Get out and do something you like to do." I understood the concern my friends felt, even when that concern was unspoken, that I needed to redefine my own identity and see myself as separate from Rex. But the truth is, I was miserable anywhere I went without him. While their advice was no doubt right for some people (and through this experience I learned in many ways that what works for one person doesn't always work for another), I chose to stay with Rex as much each day as I possibly could.

As I did so, I found myself becoming an essential part of his care. I made good use of the library at NIH, where I could check out books that helped me understand his cancer, the chemotherapy, his nutritional needs, and the emotional side effects with which both of us would likely have to deal. I read books that explained each drug he was taking, with its origins, uses, side effects, and so on. I talked to every doctor and nurse who entered the room, made notes and lists of questions for the doctors, recorded Rex's various reactions to medications, and asked doctors about possible drug interactions. At times antibiotics adversely affected him, and I was glad my notes were helpful in identifying those reactions. I felt I was part of the team, I found relief as I understood his condition, and I personally benefited from spending more time on his care and comfort than on my own pursuits.

Rex made valiant efforts to work on cases and be productive, but much of the time he was just too sick or too tired to do so. I was always glad when he could sleep during the day and thereby find some relief from the agony his body was experiencing. There were several such moments when I was paying bills or doing something I needed to do, and I would glance at him while he rested. Sometimes he looked so peaceful and healthy that it was almost like a mirage, and I would think for just a second that when he awoke we would be able to leave this dreary place together.

My plan had always been that we would raise our children, go on trips, talk, read, run, walk, sleep, live—all of it together. Even with my own interests, his life was so much a part of mine that I couldn't seem to separate the two in my mind. I wanted to return to the life we had known, and I was filled with appreciation as he did everything he could to cooperate in the process of getting well. Rex has always shown a remarkable degree of determination—as a father and husband, as a lawyer, as a runner—and here he was, with so little strength, still showing that same determination. Even though I knew we weren't going to walk out of NIH together just yet, his efforts sustained me in my hope that one day we would.

Rex: In addition to all that Janet did in my behalf, which was a constant source of amazement to me, many other people provided me with support during my four months at NIH. Because of the risk of infection, I wasn't able to have too many visitors, and I was a long way from many who might have otherwise come to visit.

But I did receive many, many letters from friends—ranging from humorous get-well cards to short notes of concern to longer reflections on my condition. I had sometimes experienced the feeling of not quite knowing what to say when someone was sick, but I now saw how valuable such expressions of concern could be. I appreciated and was lifted by even the most simple expressions of love and concern. I also received many, many telephone calls, some from people who were Church leaders and government officials and who could have justifiably considered themselves too busy to take the time.

The nurses at NIH made a fuss over the fact that some well- known individuals called or visited—mostly, I think, because they knew the relationship between how a patient feels emotionally and how likely it is that he or she will eventually recover.

Once, just minutes after I received a dose of one of the chemotherapy drugs that always wiped me out, my nurse put through a call from Justice Harry A. Blackmun of the United States Supreme Court. Later she told me that as I spoke on the phone, she had said to herself, "This guy's a performer." I wouldn't have thought of my reaction in quite those terms, although I realized that my professional life did involve, in a sense, performing before Justice Blackmun and his associates. I probably did perk up a little when he called. But more to the point was that I was grateful to hear from a friend who cared about me. His concern lifted my spirits, as did the concern of so many others.

After I had been at NIH for about a month, I received a telephone call from our friend and very conscientious home teacher, Rodger Galland. During the conversation, he asked when we would be coming back to Provo, and I responded that it might not be until the end of the year and it would certainly not happen for several months. He responded simply that that was too long to be away from my children, and then we moved on to other subjects. The next thing I knew, some of our children called and said that Rodger had asked them to identify a time when his pilot and plane could take them all back to Washington to visit Janet and me. And that is exactly what happened. All seven of them came, including Diana, who was still living in Arizona. Rodger's instructions to his pilot were to stay there as long as our children could stay.

Janet: Even though I called our children often, long-distance mothering was no substitute for exchanging warm hugs, helping with homework, and providing reminders to practice the piano and clean their rooms. And as the summer passed, I could see that Rex's hospitalization was going to go on for several more months and that he was just too sick for me to even attempt a weekend trip home to see our children. So when our children told us of Rodger's offer, I had something to be excited about for the first time in weeks.

When our seven children walked into Rex's room, they were a beautiful sight, and Rex and I both burst into tears. Then we hugged, exchanged greetings, hugged again, and all cried together. Rex's small room had never held so many people, and the nurses came in to see this spectacle.

After taking pictures, asking and answering a host of questions, and talking about the good times we had shared and planned to share again, I left our son Tom with Rex and took the other children to settle into my small apartment. Our family has always thought that more meant merrier, and for the next five nights we confirmed the truth of that old adage—in rather cramped quarters.

The children seemed to have two goals in mind—to make me laugh and to make me eat. The first proved easier than the second as they tried to get my mind off Rex for at least a few minutes at a time. Somehow I felt strange the few times they took me away from the hospital, with Rex so sick, but I enjoyed our outings to the extent that I could.

Of course we spent most of our time with Rex, and I found it fascinating to watch each child with him over these six days. Diana, who has always known the workings of my heart, tried hard to cheer me up. She took almost a parental interest in my welfare, and when she realized I wasn't running she encouraged me by going with me. She brought pictures of our two little grandchildren and entertained us with those stories of extraordinary abilities that only grandparents want to hear.

Tom seemed to have matured in just the few weeks since Rex and I had seen him. His loving concern for his father was apparent as he stayed close to Rex's bed during most of their visit, and I could see that the thought of losing his father weighed heavily upon him. His relatively few weeks of marriage had also made him more tender and protective of my feelings as he reacted with newfound intuitions.

Then there was Wendy, who had been my constant support ever since our traumatic arrival at the Dulles International Airport in June. Only a few months earlier, her dominant preoccupation had been with bridesmaids' dresses and wedding reception arrangements. As her mother, I had helped her plan for the realization of her lifelong dreams; now, she focused on helping me deal with the disruption of mine. She was amazingly good at it, which was an interesting paradox that I saw in our other children as well. Almost overnight, she had grown in her perceptiveness and ability to comfort me. My situation was one I desperately would have willed away, but watching Wendy in this new role was the beginning of my awareness that good things can accompany adversity.

Michael was fascinated by the workings of the hospital and wanted to know every detail of Rex's treatment. His curiosity covered everything from the chemotherapy to the experimental laboratories at NIH, and I thought he was never going to leave the hospital, even to eat. His empathy for his father was tender and genuine, but his attitude was positive and enthusiastic. As I watched this sixteen-year-old, I missed the long talks and philosophical discussions the three of us had shared and hoped he would still be comfortable talking with us when Rex and I eventually returned.

I had tried hard to protect the younger children, especially, from worry, remembering how I had felt as a nine-year-old when my mother was taken away in an ambulance one day and then spent three months in the hospital, where she nearly died from asthma. I wondered if Stephanie realized the seriousness of Rex's illness, but I soon saw her concern for her father, which she manifested by keeping him entertained with her quick wit and her feigned knowledge of German, Italian, and French—complete with the appropriate accents. Underneath her fourteen-year-old self-assurance, however, we could see how vulnerable she really was. I wondered if she would be all right without us when she returned to Utah—and if I would be all right without her.

During her first day with us, Melissa, at eleven, would hug us one minute, get Rex drinks of water the next, and then run out the door to push Christie down the hospital halls in a wheelchair. (At one point, some thoughtful nurses came in with crayons and paper and invited our two youngest to use an empty room nearby to play in.) The next day, Melissa sat quietly on Rex's bed, asking about how he felt and whether he liked it at NIH. I worried that by the time Rex and I returned to Provo, Melissa would no longer be our little girl—that with the circumstances we were all facing, she would turn the corner into adulthood before she was ready.

Christie, our youngest, would climb onto her daddy's bed, snuggle for a moment, tell him he smelled like medicine, and then ask him how long it would be before all of his hair would be gone—and whether it would ever grow back. "I hope so," he told her, "but if it doesn't, I'll just take some of yours." She was full of quick questions that brought quick answers, and then she would join in wheelchair races with Melissa. She was about the age I was when I was separated from my mother for three months, and we decided that for her sake she would stay behind with Rex and me when the others flew home.

Later, her staying would prove to be as much for my benefit as for hers, as she always found some way to make me smile. Sometimes it was something funny she said; other times, as I would drive us home after visiting with Rex, she would literally reach over and turn up the corners of my mouth. Somehow she sensed that it was her responsibility to keep my life in balance and to make me smile, and during many dark days she did what no one else could.

As the days went by, I began to realize the circle a family makes as we love and take care of each other. These seven children had been our babies, whom we would care for always; but now, in Rex's and my time of need, they were taking care of us and helping to fill our sad hearts with joy.

We shared a wonderful week, much of it spent in Rex's hospital room, and when the children's plane took off, I cried harder than I had ever cried before, not knowing when we would see each other again—or exactly what the future would hold for our family.

Rex: Those four or five days with my children were a great lift to me during a very difficult time. I have joked both in private and in public about how home teachers could learn a lesson from Rodger about doing a little bit extra for their families. But what touched me more than planes and pilots was Rodger's thoughtfulness in my behalf. As I define friendship, the ultimate expression comes when someone else's welfare becomes as important as one's own. I felt this from Janet, from our children and from the many friends whose concern for my welfare and happiness approached the ideal taught by our Savior.

Janet: For the first two months that Rex was at NIH, I lived close enough to walk to the hospital each morning. Those twenty minutes often afforded me the one opportunity in the day for uninterrupted reflection. Obviously, I would spend much of that time thinking about our immediate needs and concerns, but I would also try to use the time to nourish my soul as well.

A recurring thought had to do with something I had heard many years before—that the most important word in the gospel is remember. I found myself linking this concept with a song I had begun singing as a very young child: "Count your many blessings; name them one by one." I remembered that my father often asked me, as he tucked me into bed at night, to tell him all the things I was grateful for that day, and he suggested that I remember these things in my prayers. I also recalled that when I was a teenager and didn't think life was fair, my mother would remind me of the words to this song. I remembered times from my youth when I would finish singing it and literally begin to count my blessings. I would never quite reach the end of the list, but in the process of counting, I would realize how much I had been given.

These seemingly simple lessons that I often remembered took on great meaning as I tried to look beyond the crisis we were facing and see, instead, the countless blessings that could still be found in Rex's and my life. I found great blessings in the smallest improvements in Rex's condition and smiled with sublime satisfaction when his fever dropped to 101 after having hovered at 104 for several days.

When Rex and I were first married, we would often say to each other, "I like us," which signaled to the other the great joy we felt in being together. Once, after I had held Rex's head most of the day while he vomited, I helped him brush his teeth, change his pajamas, and get back into bed. As he laid his bald, pale head on an equally white pillow, he turned to me and said, "I like us." That moment had as much meaning for me as any we had ever shared.

Maintaining a sense of gratitude in the midst of adversity was not easy for me to do but is necessary, I found, in order to crowd out the periodic feelings of frustration and discouragement that were an inevitable part of this trial. My sister and I wrote to each other regularly while Rex was at NIH and Lois was simultaneously going through her divorce. One particular line that we shared was "Life doesn't have to be perfect to be perfectly wonderful."

We were both learning that adversity does not erase all that is good and rewarding in life. Furthermore, we began to understand that we didn't need to try so hard in these trying times to make the whole of life wonderful. We were finding, instead, that we could be happy—even in brief snatches—despite the surrounding challenges.

My sister helped me learn an important lesson when she shared this thought in a letter: "I've come to acquire a testimony about adversity: its absolute necessity, its potential to help us grow, and, most of all, its ability to draw us closer to our Heavenly Father. I have a different understanding of adversity now, viewed not with despair or anguish or regret but with confidence that my loving Heavenly Father is earnestly trying to allow me to learn something very important—so important that he is actually willing to let me suffer in order to learn the lesson."

Coupled with the thoughts my sister shared with me was a letter Rex and I received from our longtime friend, Larry Wimmer. Rex and Larry had known each other since 1954, during their first years at BYU, and Larry's wife, Louise, and I had become close friends when we lived in the same apartment building while Rex and Larry were students at the University of Chicago. In the early 1980s, Louise had battled cancer herself. The cancer had gone into remission, but then, after it recurred three years later, Louise had died in August 1985.

Although Rex and I had been living in Virginia at the time of her death, we had come to Provo and were able to visit with Louise and Larry shortly before she died. Louise's body had been ravaged by the cancer, but the beauty of her spirit shone through as we were with her for the last time, and I was struck by the artificiality of our worldly values as I saw eternity beckoning my friend. When I first walked into Louise's bedroom, I drew back in momentary horror before I was able to sit by her and talk. But as our visit continued, I was able to see and feel things beyond my mortal perceptions.

When we left the Wimmers' home after visiting that day, I was overcome with the impression that our being in Provo at this time was not by chance and that there were lessons I needed to learn from this visit with our friend. Now, two years later, Larry shared this thought with us: "Commonly, it is believed that there are winners and losers in the battle against cancer. Louise eventually died of her disease, but she did not lose. In life and in death, Louise was a winner who taught us how to live, how to suffer if that be our lot, and eventually how to die."

Reading Larry's words as my own husband struggled against cancer, I became all the more determined to fight our fight with the dignity and grace that I had seen in my friend Louise and that her husband later characterized with such eloquence.

Rex: Although I was unable to attend church during my first few months at NIH, I did benefit in very direct and meaningful ways from my ongoing associations with the Church. A very simple act that served as a great strength to me was partaking of the sacrament. Every Sunday afternoon, either the elders quorum from the nearby Bethesda ward or my former colleagues in the McLean ward high priests group would come to my room, close the door, and administer the sacrament to me.

I also had regular contact with my counselors in the Provo Oak Hills Third Ward, who called each Sunday morning to discuss ward business with me. I have no doubt that I was more of a bother to them than a help, although I was actively involved in calling a new Relief Society president and in reviewing all the other callings that needed to be decided. So whether I was of any real help or not, I found it very therapeutic to feel that I could still serve in the Church.

On one occasion, the ward recorded a sacrament meeting and sent the tape to Janet and me. One Sunday morning, Janet played the tape as I lay in bed, and before the opening song was finished, we were both wiping away tears. (In fact, to this day, I cannot hear that song without becoming quite emotional.) As we listened to the tape, I could envision myself sitting on the stand and looking out over the congregation, and that mental image became a great source of strength to me. The ongoing reminders that I was still the bishop gave me the hope that one day I could actually return to our ward and serve actively in that position.

The one significant involvement I had with the ward stemmed from a commitment I had made months earlier to speak in sacrament meeting. September 17, 1987, marked the two-hundredth anniversary of the ratification of the United States Constitution by the Constitutional Convention, and as a bishopric we had planned the previous spring to honor that occasion in a sacrament meeting. My counselors, George Bowie and Dave Jacobson, convinced me the ward was still expecting to hear from me, and we agreed that I would record a talk that could then be played in sacrament meeting.

Over several days, I recorded my talk on my little pocket recorder. But somehow I forgot I was dictating a talk rather than a letter, so I included each comma and period, as was my practice when dictating something that would then be transcribed. When George received the tape and heard what I had done, he didn't have the heart to send it back for me to redo. So somehow he had the tape doctored and removed each of the instances when I had said, "comma," "question mark," "semicolon," and "period."

Toward the end of my stay at NIH, I asked for permission to leave the hospital and accompany Janet to church one Sunday. My oncologist, Dr. Rosenberg, was not a religious person himself, but he was convinced that people's religious beliefs (or something similar in the case of those who entertain no such beliefs) are essential in the healing process. He could understand, therefore, my wanting to go, but he set the condition that I have a blood test first and then call from the chapel two hours later to see if I needed to return to the hospital for a platelet transfusion. I made the call and learned that my platelet count had more than tripled. The next Sunday, when I was given permission to leave for a while and asked for instructions, Dr. Rosenberg said, "I have only one: Go to church."

Janet: As we moved toward autumn, Rex was responding well to the chemotherapy but still suffering from the infections that inevitably followed. I had felt that Christie might be better off staying in Washington, D.C., with me. Yet as September approached, I wasn't at all sure where I could send her to school (since we were not official residents of the area) and how I would juggle both her needs and Rex's.

Almost from the first day we were at NIH, Rex and I had received cards and letters from a former neighbor in Virginia, Nikii Frank. She was a lovely Christian woman who had a son close to Christie's age and a three-year-old daughter. When she learned Christie was living with me, she offered to have us move in with her. I, of course, did not want to impose, but as we got closer to the beginning of the school year, Nikii's offer seemed more and more to be a blessing I could not refuse.

We agreed that Christie and I would move in with the Franks on Saturday, August 29. As it turned out, Rex was very sick that morning, but I really had no choice except to leave him by early afternoon, return to our apartment to pack, load up Christie and all our belongings, and make the trip from Maryland to Virginia.

Even on a Saturday afternoon, the traffic on the Washington Beltway can be quite heavy, and this day was typical, with bumper-to-bumper cars traveling at about sixty-five miles an hour. Suddenly, about three car lengths ahead of me, I saw a stalled semitrailer in my lane. What immediately flashed into my mind was a report I had heard of a driver who had been decapitated by crashing into a stopped truck. I could tell I didn't have time to stop, so I swerved first to one side and then the other, at which point the car behind me hit me. That threw me back into the right lane and in the path of another car, which also hit me and sent my car into the median between two three-lane highways going in opposite directions. By the time I came to a stop, there were at least six other cars involved in the accident. My car was crushed to such an extent that Christie and I had to be pried out. Fortunately, neither of us was seriously hurt, but we were badly shaken by what had happened.

As the police were filling out their reports, I wondered how Christie and I were going to get ourselves—and all our belongings—to Nikii's house. I asked an officer if he could give me a ride to the nearest bus stop or telephone booth. He said no, they weren't allowed to do that. So I asked if I could at least use his phone, and he said no, they weren't allowed to do that either. He then explained that there were telephones every mile or so along the highway and that I could walk to one of those to make a call.

As my car was being hooked up to the tow truck and I was scrambling to get a few things out, the tow truck driver, seeing my plight, told me that while he couldn't take me wherever I needed to go, he could take me to where he was going and that there would be a phone there. So Christie and I rode with him to a telephone booth just outside the wrecking yard, where he helped us unload all our things onto the sidewalk.

When I called Nikii, she wasn't home (which seemed right in line with how this day was going), but I was able to reach her at her mother's house, where Nikii's children were swimming. She told me she'd need a few minutes to change and about forty-five minutes to get to where we were, so Christie and I sat down on the curb just as it began to get dark. Nikii finally arrived, and as we loaded all of our belongings into her station wagon, I felt that she was the second angel of mercy to have helped us that day.

I didn't sleep well that night, but I got up early the next day because I wanted to see Rex before going to church. I put on my pink silk dress and high heels. Nikii loaned me her car, and I headed off for Maryland. About five miles out on the highway, I noticed yellow smoke billowing out of the car's hood, and then the car just died. Fortunately, the traffic was fairly light, and I was able to pull over to the side of the road without getting hit. From my experience the day before, I knew there was a phone no more than a mile away, so I took off down the highway to find it.

Before I had gotten very far, a man in his thirties, with two little children in the backseat, stopped and asked if I needed some help. He said, "I don't usually do this, but you don't look like someone who ought to be walking along the highway." And although I am generally not inclined to accept rides from strangers, at this point I was ready to make an exception to that rule. He took me to a gas station, where I arranged to have the car towed and repaired—and where I called one of those many friends who, through the entire four months Rex was in the hospital, had repeatedly come to our aid when we really needed it.

Within a few days, Christie and I had settled comfortably into the Frank home, where Nikii joined together with our longtime friends and former neighbors Margie and Jim Johnson in taking Christie into their families during the long hours that I was with Rex. Fortunately, I will never have to wonder how I would have managed without my friends' help.

Rex: The attitude I developed toward the hospital was an interesting mixture of feelings. By any standard, those four months were far from pleasant. My world consisted largely of one small room. On my periodic trips to nearby treatment rooms, I was always accompanied by my IV pole. The food initially tasted just like all other hospital food, but with the onset of my nausea I learned to dread even the sound of the food cart coming down the hall three times a day. The mere thought of food was positively repulsive to me.

Yet for all of the unattractive aspects of hospital life, I began to develop not only an attraction for the place, but almost a compulsive fear of being away from it. (I understand that this is not an uncommon reaction for people who spend extended periods in hospitals or in other institutions, including prisons.) After I had been at NIH for about two months, I was given permission to leave for a few hours one evening. Janet and I brought some Chinese food to her apartment and invited six of our good friends to have dinner with us and visit. This was my first time out, and there certainly were aspects of the experience that I enjoyed (except for the food, which I couldn't handle any better in Janet's apartment than I did in the hospital even though the quality was considerably better). But all the time I was there, and on subsequent occasions when I was given a pass to leave, I felt somewhat insecure and was actually relieved when I could return to my bed and my IV pole.

The one notable exception to this general feeling was when I left the hospital on October 6 to argue a case before the United States Supreme Court. Throughout my stay at NIH, Dr. Rosenberg and others were very pleased with the fact that I was working. In fact, the doctor soon began to include as one of his standard questions during our daily visits, "Were you able to do any work today?" My effectiveness varied from day to day, but I was still productive enough that I was asked, during my stay, to present the oral argument in a case involving the constitutionality of "moments of silence" or "silent prayer" in public school classrooms. Based on precedent, I was convinced that if we could persuade the Court to reach the merits of the case, we would win. But there was a serious question whether the Court would reach the merits, because the member of the New Jersey legislature who had taken the case to the Supreme Court no longer held his position in the legislature and therefore arguably lacked "standing" to be a party to the case. Even with that potential problem with the case, I was ecstatic when the New Jersey lawyer who had taken the case to the Supreme Court asked me to argue it.

When the issue of my leaving the hospital for something as strenuous as a Supreme Court argument came up, my doctors were not quite as thrilled as they were about my working a few hours a day. I presented my case to them with vigor, however, explaining that the oral argument would last only half an hour and that this would be a real lift to me emotionally. They finally agreed, on the condition that I arrange with the Court to allow a nurse to accompany me (complete with a bagful of hypodermic needles and drugs to be administered, if necessary) and that the Court provide me with a stool that I could sit on if I became weak during the argument. These requests were an unusual accommodation for the Court, whose officers normally do not like to depart from standard procedures. But they graciously agreed and also offered me the use of my former haunt, the solicitor general's office at the Court, where I could rest for a few minutes before the Court session began. The clerk also scheduled me for the first argument in the morning, so that I wouldn't have to wait at the backup counsel table during earlier arguments.

The only remaining issue for me was whether I should appear in Court in my bald-as-a-billiard-ball state, the result of the chemotherapy, or wear one of my two hairpieces, which the full-service staff at NIH provided for each of its cancer patients. After the argument was scheduled and I had been given permission by NIH to go, my longtime friend Justice Anthony Scalia visited me at NIH. We enjoyed a nice social visit, and then I explained to him that while I knew we could not discuss anything relating to the merits of this case, I wondered if he would give me his opinion on whether I should wear my hairpiece or appear before the court completely bald. He responded that he thought I ought to wear the toupee because the other justices had not seen me with my very bald head and it might detract from what I had to say.

So the day of the argument, I choked down as much oatmeal as I could tolerate, was unhooked from my IV pole (although the needles remained in my arms), got dressed with Janet's help (complete with my toupee, which in hindsight I wish I hadn't worn), and was driven to the Court. My parents and my brother Mark were there, as well as Janet, several members of my firm, and other friends. The nurse from NIH sat directly behind me. The Court had indeed provided a stool for me to sit on, but after less than thirty seconds, my adrenaline was flowing and I knew I wouldn't need to sit down. And even though the Court ultimately ruled against us (which had more to do with the standing of our client than with my appearance), this experience, together with several others, helped me feel that I was still a contributing part of society. This feeling of worth gave me the ongoing and much-needed motivation to live.

Within days of my Supreme Court argument, I received another tremendous lift to my spirits when Dr. Rosenberg informed me one morning that after just three of the six chemotherapy cycles, my cancer was "in complete and unequivocal remission." Though the news was unexpected, those were wonderful words to hear. My doctor was quick to point out that remission does not mean cure, and the complete report he gave me included both good news and bad.

Because NIH is a research organization, all important decisions with respect to each patient are made by a group of doctors. The group assigned to my case had decided, Dr. Rosenberg explained, not to administer any more chemotherapy, both because I was in remission and because of the significant risk that my immune system could not withstand another cycle. So on the one hand, I was greatly relieved not to have to go through the nausea and other extreme illness that always accompanied the administration of these drugs. But I could tell, although he didn't say so directly, that Dr. Rosenberg had dissented from this decision; I believe he was fearful that while the drugs I had been given were sufficient to cause a remission, they were not sufficient to bring about a cure.

Even with this news, the doctors kept me at NIH throughout the remainder of October as an outpatient. I continued to receive radiation treatments, which were intended to diminish the chances of my cancer's return, and I completed my daily amphotericin-B treatments (the "ampho-terrible" drug used to rid my body of fungal infections).

Janet: I arrived at the hospital that morning just after Dr. Rosenberg gave Rex the news, and as I entered Rex's room I sensed that something good had happened. Rex was trying to restrain a tentative smile, and as I noticed a trace of tears in his eyes, he said to Dr. Rosenberg, "You tell her." But Dr. Rosenberg said, "No, I think you should be the one to tell her."

"Tell me what!" I asked, searching their eyes for an answer. Finally, too choked up to speak clearly, Rex managed to say, "I'm in remission."

I couldn't speak as I looked at his worn-out body and his bald head. Once strong, his body now had no muscle tone. His skin, once tanned and healthy, was now a pasty, grayish white. His face was swollen from prednisone, and his eyes had lost their shine. He was too weak to walk alone, and he still had IV fluids draining into both arms. The doctors had told us at the outset that the treatments would be almost unbearable. Rex's appearance reminded me of the truth of that statement.

"Isn't this wonderful?" he said as he waited for my reaction. When he spoke, I was jerked back to the moment.

"It is wonderful," I said. Then I managed a smile and kissed him, but I was well aware of my very tentative reaction and began to ask myself a long list of questions: Will there be more chemotherapy? How long will the remission last? Do I dare hope that the worst is over? If I get excited about our lives returning to normal, will I be hurt again?

I had never imagined that this would be my reaction. I had never understood pessimists who are afraid to hope the best, fearing that the worst will happen and they will then be disappointed. But I had been hurt so badly, and now I was at least surviving from day to day. I didn't want to let my spirits soar and then be hurt again. I knew that I had to be excited for him, for us, and for our family, but I needed first to rid myself of these fears.

It took several weeks before the reality of Rex's remission began to settle in. I found that as I told people the news, their happiness for us would lift my spirits as well, and I also learned that mine was not an unusual reaction, given our circumstances.

Perhaps more than anything, however, I overcame my hesitations as I expressed to Heavenly Father my gratitude for Rex and for the gift of his life. As I drove to the hospital one morning near the end of October, I spoke aloud in prayer, recounting the many blessings we had been given. As I did so, I realized that our happiness should not be restrained by the possibility of being hurt again. I had been grateful for each day before Rex's remission, and now with new hope, we faced a brighter future. I had cried many times while driving along the parkway, but this morning my tears flowed from my joy—and reflected a depth of gratitude I had never before known.
