Rex E. Lee, Janet Lee, Jim Bell, Marathon of Faith ( 1996)

Chapter 6

"All Is Well"

Janet: During the months that I sat by Rex's bedside, I watched as he changed into someone who barely resembled my husband of almost thirty years. Physically, he was very weak and emaciated and had no hair. But more significantly, he had lost his independence as he came to rely on the NIH staff and me to meet virtually all of his needs. One night in particular demonstrated to me the extent to which our roles had been redefined. My reflections on the incident caused me great concern as we prepared for him to leave the hospital.

Before I left the hospital each night, Rex and I would close the door, say a prayer together, and then give each other a hug and a kiss. One night, I had made my way through the ten-minute maze of halls and elevators and was waiting on the main floor for the parking elevator when a nurse found me and said, "Your husband is calling for you." I hurried back to his room and asked what I could do to help him.

He responded, "You forgot to help me brush my teeth." Suddenly I saw with great clarity the completeness in the transformation of my once strong and self-sufficient husband into this frail and totally dependent cancer patient.

The idea of leaving the hospital, then, seemed like something of a mixed blessing. I was overwhelmed with gratitude that the doctors had deemed him well enough to leave, but I knew that without his intravenous feedings and the support of the NIH staff, he would have to rely on me for much of his care. The responsibility would be mine if anything went wrong. I was thrilled at the prospect of rebuilding our lives together, but we had just been through a rather radical transformation of our roles, with me taking over the job of managing all aspects of our lives—responsibilities which we had rather comfortably divided between the two of us during our marriage. I had never wanted to take this much control of our family matters, but I knew it would be months, maybe even years, before Rex would be completely better, able to take his former responsibilities again. This meant one more adjustment was ahead as we each defined and then assumed yet another new set of roles in our marriage.

In preparation for his leaving the hospital, I had rented a two-bedroom apartment in which Christie, Rex, and I stayed until we returned to Provo. Our first night there was complicated by the fact that Melissa had come for a brief visit and Michael, who was in Washington working as a senate page but living in the dorms provided for the pages, decided to bring two of his friends and spend the night.

The commotion combined with my concerns to make for a fitful night as I contemplated this change in our lives. For some reason, I had thought that the many lonely nights I had spent without Rex would be erased by his return, but the reason for his long absence came with us, and I feared it would come between us as well. Even lying next to him felt unfamiliar, and I spent many hours wondering what would be involved in rebuilding our lives and wishing he would awaken and tell me how he was feeling.

As I sought for spiritual strength and guidance, my thoughts turned to the deeper understanding I had gained of our Heavenly Father and his love for us. I certainly would not have chosen the events of the past four months as a way to learn the lessons I was learning, but at the same time I knew I was grateful for this part of our life together. Rex's cancer had presented us with a crash course in so many things, but the alternative to learning the lessons was failing the most important test I had ever been given. So while I wasn't quite sure how we would deal with what was ahead, I knew that with the Lord's help, we would find a way.

Rex: A recurring and overwhelming thought I had while in the hospital was how good life can be when we're well enough to enjoy it—and how desperately I wanted that opportunity once again. When I was too weak to stand up, I would wish for the chance to head out on a ten-mile run. When I was too sick to swallow, I would crave a hearty meal of soft-shell crabs or bean burritos. As each Sunday came, I would long to be with my fellow ward members back home in Provo. In short, my mind would often turn to life's basic pleasures, and I prayed for the day when I could partake of them once again.

So when the doctor told me on Wednesday, October 21, that I would be able to leave NIH the following Monday, I was thrilled—notwithstanding the fact that I would have to return each morning for radiation therapy, smaller doses of "ampho-terrible," and platelet transfusions. It didn't take long, however, for me to realize how emotionally tied to the hospital I was, and on Sunday I spent considerable time contemplating my attachments to this place that had become my home. Nonetheless, I concluded, giving up my sense of security would more than be offset by living with Janet (even if we couldn't return to Provo just yet) and having the freedom to determine my own comings and goings.

I was also aware, as I thought about leaving, that while my cancer was in remission, there was the significant risk of a relapse. That was not something I liked to dwell on, although I knew I had to face that possibility. As I reviewed my condition—including all the statistical indications of my improved health (some of which were more encouraging than others)—the thing that gave me the greatest solace was reflecting on the words of President Bateman's blessing, which he did not qualify with percentages.

My first real outing after leaving NIH was to go trick-or- treating with Janet, Christie, several couples we knew, and their children. Throughout all our years together, this was something I had always done with our children, and I really wanted to go. We had brought so few of my clothes with us when we first came to NIH that Janet had to go buy me a shirt, jeans, jacket, gloves, and a hat to cover my still-bald head. It must have been obvious to many whose doors we knocked on that I was not well, as several gracious people asked if we would like to come in and sit down for a minute (this invitation is characteristic of Southern hospitality). Janet was slightly stunned the first time I said yes, but I simply did not have the stamina to make it around the neighborhood without sitting down occasionally.

After our night of trick-or-treating, my routine became one of spending my mornings in the hospital and my afternoons in my office at Sidley & Austin. Because my reflexes were not what they once were, Janet drove me everywhere. She handled with her usual grace and support my needing to be part of the world again.

Just after I was released from NIH, I had the second opportunity during those four months to appear before the Supreme Court. For several months, my friend Bruce Hafen, who was then dean of the BYU law school, had been arranging to bring a group of the school's graduates—my former students—back to Washington to be admitted to practice in the Supreme Court. There are three ways to be admitted into the bar of this, the nation's highest court. The first is simply to file the necessary papers and pay the required fee by mail. The second is to have a lawyer who is already a member of the bar recommend an individual attorney's admission in open court. The third is the less common practice of a larger group of lawyers being introduced to the court by a single attorney. When this is done, the lawyer introducing the group simply reads the names of those to be admitted, as well as the state bar associations of which they are already members, and then says, "I am satisfied that each of them possesses the necessary qualifications." It is an absolute rule of the Court that you do not editorialize in making this presentation—that you stick right to the script. But on this morning, as I read the names of my friends to the nine justices and considered the fact that I was going to be able to return to my faculty position and the full-time practice of law, I was overwhelmed with emotion. So I bent the rules just a bit as I added, "Mr. Chief Justice, these are my students. I am satisfied that each of them possesses the necessary qualifications." Chief Justice William Rehnquist looked right up at me and then smiled from ear to ear, knowing full well what this moment meant to me.

Janet: Returning to Provo just days before Thanksgiving was very symbolic for me. Five months earlier, as we had backed out of our driveway, I had looked at the deep green leaves of our crab apple trees against the backdrop of the summer mountains and wondered whether Rex would return home with me. Now, as only a few brown leaves hung lifeless on bare branches, we were returning home to celebrate a holiday that had once represented a time to store up against the winter months ahead, as the frozen earth awaited the promise of spring.

That night I listened to the rhythm of Rex's breathing as we slept in our own bedroom for the first time in months, and I remembered my need to be grateful for newly appreciated blessings: enjoying the familiarity of our home and pleasant surroundings which brought unbelievable comfort; being able to cook in my own kitchen, with our family around me, and then washing familiar dishes; kneeling in family prayer; sitting on a child's bed and talking late into the night; writing at my desk or playing the piano. I wondered whether I had known such gratitude for these simple things the last time I had slept in this bed.

I smiled as I closed my eyes and thought again about the barren trees outside, and I considered that the symbol of my life was not to be found in these lifeless branches of the season, nor in the birds that had flown south to find sustenance in a less harsh climate. Instead, I knew that I could find my sustenance at home as I waited for the world to bloom again.

Just before Christmas, our ward had a surprise party for Rex, at which he was presented with a quilt that included the names of all the members of the ward. Each family had hand-embroidered a square of the quilt, which was then pieced together by skillful sisters and hand-quilted at various Relief Society and Young Women meetings. Sisters had gathered together in extra meetings in order to complete the project by our return home. The quilt was a huge undertaking, but we were told it had brought unity into the ward as all the members had fasted, prayed, and quilted.

Then on Christmas Day, we enjoyed what our children still regard as their very favorite Christmas, even though we didn't spend much on them or do anything particularly special. They were overjoyed just to have Rex home with the family again.

For me, however, the day involved mixed emotions. My sister, who by this time was divorced and had moved to Provo, spent part of the day with us, and late in the afternoon she began to play some of the songs on the piano that we had sung together over the years, both as children and adults. Almost immediately, I asked her to stop. I knew I had just been given the gift I most wanted, yet there was much about our situation that was very tentative, and my heart was still heavy. That was the one Christmas in my lifetime that I just could not sing.

In significant ways, being home was harder for me than being at NIH. There, Rex had an oncologist who watched over him constantly and a team of specialists who met each Friday to confer on his case. Now his care was my responsibility, and it frightened me that he was still so very weak. Rex is not always the best at monitoring his condition, and I knew that if I didn't watch him, no one would. That created in my mind the added burden that it would be my fault if something happened to him, and I worried about him constantly. Then, late one night in early January, the moment arrived that I had feared. Rex began to run a high fever, which signaled some kind of infection.

The only thing I could think to do was call NIH. I was told to get Rex to our local hospital and have the doctors in Provo administer an antibiotic intravenously. Rex was in the hospital for four days while the doctors got his infection under control, and during that time we were very worried, both of us being well aware that one of the principal causes of death among cancer patients—either present or former—is pneumonia.

Rex: As concerned as I was about taking care of myself, I felt a real need to be productive, at least for a few hours a day. Doing so required quite an adjustment, as I moved back into a life where I wasn't tied to a hospital room. My inclination, of course, was to start spending most of my time at my office. Janet, on the other hand, thought I should have a period of transition during which I spent the majority of my time at home resting. The net result was a compromise, though at the time I thought the compromise was mostly toward her view, while she thought just the opposite.

Even with focusing on my work, however, the single factor that dominated my thoughts—and Janet's as well—was the possibility that my cancer would return. I did take comfort in the fact that before long I could work six or seven hours a day and that my blood counts were returning to a respectable level. But I continued to dread my monthly checkups at NIH—partly because of the memories that returned as I got off the subway and walked toward the facility and partly because I was afraid of what the doctors might find. Each time that I went, the news was good, and I would leave the building with a sense of enormous relief as I headed back toward the subway.

My emotional reactions to that building were so irrational that I continued to be amazed by my feelings, even though I was told they were completely typical. I literally developed a love-hate relationship with the place. On the one hand, I was grateful to the people and the facilities for the role they had played in preserving my life. But as I drew closer to the building from the subway on the occasion of each of my monthly visits, my anxieties increased, and it was all I could do to force myself to open the door and go in. Then when I left, I would almost literally run.

In late March 1988, I made my first trip back to NIH without Janet. I didn't think I could be any more aware of how much she had done for me over the previous nine months, but on that trip, I saw her in a whole new light. Quite literally, I felt like half a person while I was away from her, and I realized how much I had depended on her and how much strength I had derived from having her with me. As much as I missed her, it was perhaps good for me to have this realization renewed.

During my day alone at NIH, I also reflected at length on the contrast between my life as an inpatient and all that I could enjoy with my cancer in remission. My sense of appreciation for the finite segments of life had greatly increased since the previous June. Days, weeks, and months had once melted together in my mind, but now each moment had great meaning to me. And while I would never recommend cancer as a way of increasing one's level of appreciation for life's simple moments, it certainly did have that effect on me.

Within days of this trip, our home teachers came for one of their regular visits. Their lesson involved the importance of keeping the companionship of the Holy Ghost at all times and not doing anything that would impede the Spirit's influence. Their message brought to my mind that one of life's great ironies—even tragedies—is that it is harder to maintain the Spirit when times are good than when times are difficult. That Sunday afternoon, I reflected on the fact that while the chances of my cancer returning were still high, so many things had returned to "normal" that it was increasingly easier for me to let things spiritual fall into the background of my life.

Beginning in June, I couldn't help but think each day about what had happened on each particular day the year before: becoming aware of my fatigue, "injuring" my back, receiving my doctor's initial diagnosis, traveling to NIH for treatment, and enduring the four months of chemotherapy. The contrast of those memories with the present was marked. Even though I still was not feeling completely better, I could go to work each day, I could spend time with my family, and I could serve as bishop—although my counselors continued to carry more than their fair share of the load. And after having exercised by walking for several months, I could even run a little bit most days.

June 25 was especially memorable. That was the one-year anniversary of the day on which the doctors in Provo had definitely confirmed the cancer (after our return from Boise) and on which I began telling my children, parents, and friends of my condition. On this day in 1988, I remembered back to a time at NIH when Janet had told me one of her fondest hopes. "I will be so glad," she said to me, "when the day comes that I can ask you how you're feeling and your response will be, 'I feel great.'"

That afternoon, as I returned home from the law school, I reminded Janet of her comment from the previous year (which she remembered well). Then I said, "I'm not quite there yet, but I'm getting very close!"

By early August, the most obvious reminder of my cancer was the fact that I couldn't run any faster than a ten-minute mile, although my pre-cancer rate had been an eight-minute mile or better. The other reminder, to which I had grown accustomed, was a constant ringing in my ear, which I had experienced ever since I left the hospital. These were minor considerations, given that I was enjoying a full life once again—and had even been able to hold up during a three-day river trip with the youth in our ward. A week later, when we held a family reunion with my side of the family, I couldn't help but remember that the year before at this time, I wasn't at all sure I would outlive my parents.

Perhaps the culminating moment of these reflections on the previous year came while we were in Washington, D.C., for my quarterly checkup at NIH and for an argument before the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. Janet and I spent our last night there with our friends Dee and Patti Benson, Jim and Margie Johnson, and Jim and Bette Jo Croft. We ate Chinese food and watched a BYU football game, as the eight of us had done almost one year to the day earlier. There were two big differences this time, however. First, whereas a year earlier BYU had been massacred by Pitt, this year they beat the University of Texas, 47-6. And second, whereas in 1987 I had spent most of the night in the bathroom throwing up, this time I was able to enjoy the meal.

All in all, things were going very well, which is to say that I felt good about everything.

Janet: As the months moved on, Rex became stronger and stronger, and the day finally did come when he could say, without equivocation, "I feel great." Sometimes as we were together I would study my handsome husband. He looked young again. His hair was as thick as ever, without a gray strand in it. His skin had regained its youthful glow, and his step had its old, familiar bounce. His eyes were clear and sparkling, and his voice was strong. There simply were no traces of the body that had once been wracked by cancer and chemotherapy.

He was running again, as well as teaching at the law school and enjoying his long-distance partnership with Sidley & Austin. We were getting our feet back on the ground financially and our family back together emotionally. As the early months of 1989 moved along, life was finally beginning to seem a little less tentative.

On Friday, April 7, Rex and I were in Arizona to attend a BYU Law Society dinner. We were staying in Mesa with my parents, and that evening, as we were rushing to get ready (actually, Rex was rushing me), the telephone rang. When my dad told Rex the phone was for him, Rex said, "You go get in the car, and I'll be right there." It was a familiar request to save time, but in Mesa's heat, I wasn't anxious to oblige him. As I waited in the house, Rex went into the study and then shut the door. Although we were running late, he stayed in there for several minutes.

When he came out, I said, "Who was that? I thought we were in a hurry?" He answered in a hushed tone as we walked out of the door with my parents: "It was Elliot Cameron, and I'll talk to you about it later." As we drove to the dinner, Rex and I made small talk, but all the way there I kept thinking, "Elliot Cameron. Elliot Cameron. I know that name." I knew he had a Church connection, but I could not quite put him in the right context.

We sat at the dinner with my parents, as well as our daughter Diana and her husband, Steve. Halfway through the salad course, an alarm went off inside my head as I remembered that Elliot Cameron was the commissioner of Church education. I began wondering why he would be calling Rex—and why the call had made him so nervous—and suddenly it dawned on me. Jeffrey R. Holland, who had been president of BYU since 1980, had been called the previous Saturday to the Church's First Quorum of the Seventy, which meant the position of BYU president needed to be filled. Rex's reaction to the telephone call made me wonder if he was being considered for the position.

Later that night, when we were alone, Rex explained to me that the call was to elicit his help in finding a new president. That explanation helped me relax somewhat although not completely. Rex never applied or asked to be considered for positions. Things just dropped in his lap unexpectedly, and my concern as we talked was that this might be one of those moments. The only thought I had ever given to that position was when Rex would comment, based on his associations with Presidents Oaks and Holland, that being president of BYU was "a killer of a job." The idea that it might one day fall to Rex had never been an issue in my mind.

Rex: The specific purpose of Commissioner Cameron's call was to ask me to meet the following Tuesday at 8:30 a.m. with the search committee that had been appointed to recommend a successor to Elder Holland. That committee was composed of Elders Marvin J. Ashton (who chaired the committee), L. Tom Perry, and Neal A. Maxwell. Frankly, I thought of little else other than my upcoming appointment between Friday night and Tuesday morning.

Although Commissioner Cameron had not stated this explicitly, I knew enough of the workings of such committees to conclude that I was likely being considered as one of several candidates for the position. As I considered this possibility, I felt some ambivalence. On the one side of the ledger, I felt nothing but great love and loyalty for BYU, and this position would be the ultimate relationship of service to this wonderful university. On the other side, I was very much enjoying what I was presently doing. I was pretty good at practicing law, and I didn't know whether I would be a good university president or not. Furthermore, as I had expressed to Janet on various occasions, being BYU president would be, indeed, a killer of a job—not only because of the sheer volume of the workload but also because of the many publics with whom the president must deal, with no single one of them having expectations identical to those of the others.

Before my meeting with the search committee, Janet and I discussed our views openly and thoroughly. Her reaction was pretty much the same as mine, although she expressed it better: We would approach this with some trepidation and almost hope that it would not be offered to us. But if it was offered, there would be no way we could say no, particularly in view of my newfound health. My additional view on the matter was that I had absolutely no control over how this would all unfold, so I figured I might as well just sit back and see what happened on Tuesday morning.

My interview with the search committee, which lasted about forty minutes, was interesting. We talked about BYU, including its current status, what its future should be, and what steps should be taken to secure that future. But the principal focus of the interview was my health. I told them that if they put that question to my physicians, they would get an answer that was guarded and mixed. My cancer was in remission but could certainly return, especially since my chemotherapy treatments had been cut short. But though the doctors were uncertain about whether I would be present on this planet for the next several years, I was not, and I told them about the blessing I had received from President Bateman—and what a great, reassuring solace that blessing had been for me.

Interestingly, on the Friday following my interview, a rumor ran rampant across the BYU campus that I was going to be named the new president that afternoon. When people asked me about this story, I told them truthfully that I knew nothing about it—and that if such an announcement were made, I would be the most surprised person in attendance.

Janet: Near the end of March, we went to Mexico on a much-needed four-day vacation with Steve and Dixie Oveson, LaVell and Patti Edwards, and Ray and Debbie Goodson. We rested, swam in the ocean, ran, slept, and ate; but the warm, cordial conversations were the best part of the trip. Somewhere in our many talks, the question came up about who might be the next president of BYU. Someone suggested that Rex must have some inside information, but he simply said he didn't know, named a few possibilities, and then turned the conversation to another topic.

During our time there, I began to think more seriously about the possibility that Rex might be appointed, but my hope was that we could continue on in our present mode. I just wanted life to get back to normal—whatever that was—and not have to take on any additional responsibilities. Teaching school with a big family had been hard, moving back to Provo had been hard, and living through Rex's battle with cancer had been the hardest. What I wanted more than anything right then was a life that was a little easier.

One afternoon during our stay, I began to feel guilty about my selfish desires, and I reflected on my supplications to the Lord during Rex's illness. I had told my Heavenly Father repeatedly that I would go anywhere and do anything with Rex if he was allowed to remain with me. At the time, I had envisioned going on a mission and living in a little thatched hut in Africa, with bugs crawling all over us. In my estimation, having Rex with me would have more than made up for the discomfort.

Remembering my earlier resolve, I went into our bedroom overlooking the ocean and knelt in prayer. I told the Lord that I didn't want to stand in the way of whatever he wanted Rex to do and that if BYU was to be my African hut, then so be it. I committed anew that I would willingly do anything asked of me, with love and appreciation for Rex's precious gift of life. I arose from that prayer, moved beyond what I would have anticipated. In fact, I cried a little at the giving of my will to a greater power than mine. Or perhaps what moved me was not so much relinquishing my control as it was recognizing the power of the Lord. But I felt better, knowing that I would not resist whatever Rex was asked to do.

My complete submissiveness to the Father's will led to a strong, peaceful feeling: not one of being led against my will, but a feeling of strength being conveyed through my willingness to do our Father's bidding. As I left the bedroom, I concluded that I would have to wait and see what the Lord wanted us to do. Then I set the experience aside and enjoyed the rest of the vacation.

We returned home on Monday, and just as our plane touched down on the runway in Salt Lake City, I knew what was ahead. It was as strong a feeling as I have ever had. I was exhilarated and frightened at the same time, and I didn't sleep much that night. Never during our time in Mexico or on our first night home did we discuss the possibility that Rex might be called as the university president, but I was not surprised when Rex called the next morning to tell me that the First Presidency wanted to meet with the two of us on Thursday at 8:00 a.m.

Rex: Our interview with the First Presidency was fascinating, reminiscent of the interview we had with President Harold B. Lee in 1971 when I was asked to be the first dean of the J. Reuben Clark Law School. On both occasions we were told that these BYU positions are not Church callings; rather, they are offers of professional employment. Yet in both instances, we were told that a committee of General Authorities had considered the matter carefully and prayerfully and had come to the conclusion that I was the person the Lord wanted to serve. Though I accepted their explanation that this offer was different than a calling, I also knew that this was not something that a loyal, believing Church member would decline. Nor would I have done so had the matter been put to me as a straightforward offer of employment. Janet and I had already crossed that threshold, and I accepted gratefully and enthusiastically, though not without some misgivings about my own abilities, which I explained to the Brethren.

During this period, I was especially grateful to Janet for the reassurance and support she gave to me. I knew that the rewards would be largely mine and the sacrifices largely hers. But she was wonderfully supportive as she told the First Presidency of her promise to the Lord to support me in anything he wanted me to do. As for me, I had much the same feeling after our interview that I had experienced when I was asked to be solicitor general—both a thrill and a sense of unreality that such a thing was happening to me, a kid from St. Johns. With the government appointment, I was humbled by the fact that I was following legal giants such as John W. Davis, Robert H. Jackson, and William Howard Taft. This time my predecessors were spiritual and educational giants: Karl G. Maeser, George H. Brimhall, Franklin S. Harris, to name but three, as well as the three presidents I had personally known and admired—Ernest L. Wilkinson, Dallin H. Oaks, and Jeffrey R. Holland.

We did not tell our children what was happening until the day the announcement was made, but they knew I was being considered and pestered us with questions just the same. We were as evasive as we could be without prevarication, but it was particularly hard one morning when Melissa said to Janet, "Mom, I'm really glad Dad made the last cut. I just hope he doesn't make the next one." At that point, it was hard not to break the news to her: Unless some change occurred, I had made the final cut.

Janet: As we left the First Presidency's office, we were stunned as we began to consider the implications of what was ahead for us. At the same time, this opportunity seemed so right to me when I considered the events of the previous two years. To me, it seemed obvious that this was the reason Rex's life had been preserved (even though he has never been willing to acknowledge that such was the case). And it also struck me with great force that this was a job the Lord wanted us to do. Us. It felt so good to approach a job together, and I wanted to be a part of everything he did. I had nursed Rex back to health, and now I wanted to reap the harvest with him.

For Rex, working is his life's blood. I knew, as he recovered from the cancer, that he would always work—and work hard. I accepted that, yet I knew his focus typified the fact that we did things so differently. He wanted to plan each minute of his day by the clock, while I was more inclined to adapt my schedule as situations arose; he gave little thought to minor details, while I worried about such things perhaps more than was necessary; he was inclined to do two things at once, while what I wanted was his undivided attention when we talked. The very traits we found frustrating in each other were the same traits that, when manifest in other ways, became the most endearing. I loved his efficiency and was constantly amazed at how much he could accomplish. My painstaking attention to detail often pleased him when he saw the end result. We found that it worked best for us to smile through our differences and simply accept the total package. Looking toward BYU, I sensed that this new opportunity would enable us to enjoy in new ways the fact that our differences overlapped to make us who we were. And I could also see that this new opportunity would provide us with more time to be together than we had ever experienced before. I was profoundly grateful, once again, for how well the Lord knows each of us and how he blesses us individually.

As we prepared for Rex to assume his new responsibilities on July 1, 1989, I felt a surge of energy and almost giddy expectation brought on by being able to look beyond tomorrow. When we met with some of Rex's staff in a calendaring meeting just before he formally took office, I savored the chance to write specific commitments on my calendar—events that would take place a week, a month, six months ahead. It felt so good to see a life ahead of us, a life we would share after having lived so tentatively for the previous two years.

I wondered, as I left the meeting, how apparent my joy was to those on Rex's staff whom I was just getting to know. Then, as I drove out of the parking lot, I heard the Carillon Bells on campus mark a new hour with their familiar refrain from "Come, Come Ye Saints." As I listened, I remembered many times in the preceding months when I would hear those bells and my thoughts would turn to the line, "And should we die before our journey's through." But this afternoon I could only hear the glad refrain, "All is well! All is well!"
