Rex E. Lee, Janet Lee, Jim Bell, Marathon of Faith ( 1996)

Chapter 7

Joy Defies Circumstances

Rex: From the very first day, I found my new job at BYU absorbing, interesting, and exciting. In part, my reaction stemmed from being so intimately involved with a university I have loved since I was eighteen years old. I also enjoyed finding new challenges and opportunities each day when I came to work. As my colleagues and I worked on issues and initiatives that we hoped would benefit the university, I enjoyed a resurgence in my energy level that I had not experienced since before my battle with cancer two years earlier. I was quick to recognize that, in large measure, the source of my newfound energy was a substance called adrenaline. I knew it wouldn't last forever, but for the moment, it sure beat chemotherapy.

More than anything else, though, the source of my enjoyment in this job was that Janet was so much a part of it. She literally shared in my responsibilities every day. There were the obvious events that brought us together—banquets, football and basketball games, concerts, receptions, and the like, which a president and his wife will typically attend together. But beyond that, Janet became very involved with the students, faculty, and alumni and shared with me the insights she gained from those interactions. I was filled with appreciation for all her qualities as we shared the social aspects of this new position as well as its challenges and burdens.

As the school year started in September 1989, Janet and I were feeling very optimistic about my health and my future prospects of health. We were on our first major trip for BYU, a trip that included fund-raising and other alumni activities in New York and Washington, D.C., and a football game between BYU and Navy (which we won). During the Washington segment of that trip, I made one of my quarterly visits to NIH, and the doctor said everything looked good. Janet then reminded him that it had been two years almost to the day since I had gone into remission, and we asked if that was a significant fact. His response was that for non-Hodgkins T-cell immunoblastic lymphoma, two years from the time of remission is the critical time and that only 10 percent of patients who reach that point go into relapse thereafter. I always experienced significant joy as I walked out of NIH's Building 10 following one of my checkups, but that day I almost floated out.

That prognosis was at the forefront of my consciousness for many days to come, and my thoughts centered on two things I had learned from my experience two years earlier. The first was the constant, everyday appreciation I felt for the privilege of participating in this earthly experience—which was a feeling that I knew would never diminish, no matter how many years passed after my bout with cancer. The second was my appreciation for Janet. Her loving care had benefited me throughout my life, but that was certainly highlighted during my months at NIH, as she had cared for me in ways that I would never forget. In fact, it is something of an understatement to say that no other human being could have been as good for me during that time as Janet was.

The months that followed that visit were filled with opportunities to view distinct parts of the university in ways I had never experienced them, to discuss with our board of trustees long-range issues facing the university, to meet with students and faculty in question-answer sessions, to participate in the inaugural ceremony held in my honor on October 27, to enjoy football and basketball games, and to visit with alumni and friends of the university. And if the fall hadn't been busy enough, as Janet and I looked ahead to the first few months of 1990, we saw a slate of activities that would keep us as busy as I had been since January through April of 1987. (Of course, I was not anxious to repeat the aftermath of those four months.)

Janet: Rex approached his new assignment at BYU with his characteristic passion and energy. In fact, his two secretaries, Janet Calder and Jan Nelson, commented to me almost immediately that they were astounded by the volume of work he could get through in a day and by the efficient way that he handled the various aspects of his job. They learned that they could almost set their clocks by his comings and goings, and others who worked with him soon discovered that they couldn't be late for a meeting or luncheon because he was always there on time. Having watched him work for the thirty years of our marriage, I was not surprised by people's observations on his performance. What did surprise me was the extent to which I was able to be part of his very busy life, which helped me enjoy every facet of our new life together. The university kept us busy, but we were also able to keep up with our always-active family, and we attended reunions, weddings, Fourth of July celebrations, grandchildren's birthdays, video parties, Sunday dinners, and Lake Powell vacations.

Just three weeks after Rex began his presidency, our granddaughter, Jordon, was born to Tom and Kimberly. Eighteen months later they increased our grandchildren to four with the addition of Jacob Rex. Also in 1991, Diana and Steve had their third child, Alexander Steven, and Wendy and Tom had their first, Colton Thomas. Grandparenting became a priority along with our other responsibilities.

My one fear, as the first few months rolled past, was the idea of speaking at the fall 1989 devotional in front of thousands of students as well as television cameras. But in the end I found the process of preparing that first talk to be quite invigorating. Then Rex suggested that at the January 1990 devotional we should talk about our experience with his cancer. That was not something I cared to do; I didn't want to expose so much personal pain. But Rex won out, and we worked together on the first of several talks that we would give side by side rather than one after the other.

A week before this devotional, we were at NIH for Rex's quarterly checkup. During that visit, the doctor expressed concern over an unusual spot on Rex's skin, as well as over some lymph nodes he could feel under Rex's left arm. It was agreed that Rex should submit to a biopsy of the spot when we returned to Provo. As we returned to Provo to put the finishing touches on our talk, we were feeling a great deal of apprehension about this rather uncertain situation. However, we didn't tell anyone about our experience at NIH, largely because we didn't know if there was any real cause for concern. As we concluded our talk, we explained that his cancer had, in fact, been the most important test we had ever been given—and he then added, "And it may not be finished yet." At that moment I experienced the ominous feeling of storm clouds gathering.

Rex: Near the end of January, Dr. Warren Eyre, who was then my dermatologist, did the biopsy on my skin just above the left elbow. He told me that it would be about a week before the results would be available. I explained that we would be in California for a few days and he suggested that I phone his office for the results.

As instructed, I made the phone call on Friday, February 9. Dr. Eyre was not in, but the nurse read me the analysis. To my great relief, the report was that I had psoriasis. That relief was shattered when I returned to Dr. Eyre's office the following Tuesday for a regularly scheduled appointment. He said that further analysis by a pathologist in Salt Lake had shown that the original diagnosis was wrong. Dr. Eyre then said, "This shows definite signs of T-cell involvement." Those precise words, like two other phrases before them—"definitely destructive lesions" and "complete and unequivocal remission"—will always remain with me. I immediately knew the significance of his words. They were tantamount to a death sentence. The treatments of most cancers are significantly more difficult the second time, and given my particular circumstances—including the type of cancer, this relapse after remission, and my compromised immune system—any attempted treatment would have to be characterized as a very long shot. Dr. Eyre informed me that his office had sent the analysis to Dr. J. Cordell Bott, my local oncologist, to compare these tests with those from my earlier diagnosis in 1987.

The next three days, Tuesday morning through Friday noon, were probably the darkest and most depressing of my life. I had asked Dr. Eyre to notify the people at NIH, and on Wednesday, I called my attending oncologist there and asked if he had heard the news. The response I received was phrased in the worst possible words, at least for me. He said, "Yes, I've heard. And I feel just terrible for you."

He of course meant well and was merely trying to express his sympathy. But sympathy has never been what I have wanted or needed. (That has been true since my cancer was first diagnosed in 1987.) What I really needed to hear that day was something like what I had been told almost three years earlier by Dr. Longo: "I want you to know that we're going to do everything we possibly can for you. I'm working on it right now, and I assure you we will leave nothing undone that can be done."

On Thursday afternoon, I was in a faculty advisory council meeting in the law building when my friend and former assistant Carolyn Stewart came into the room and handed me a note to call Dr. Bott. I was terrified to make the call, and it was actually physically difficult for me to pick up the telephone and dial Dr. Bott's number. The news that he gave me was the worst possible, exactly what I had feared: "The markers on this most recent test match up closely with those from the tests we did in 1987." I asked him if he had reported those results to my oncologist at NIH. He said that he had, and they wanted to see me in Bethesda as soon as I could get there.

That was the lowest point of the entire three days. I imagined reentering the NIH hospital, probably never to emerge again until it became apparent to everyone—as it certainly would within a short time—that nothing else could be done for me, and I would then be sent home to die.

On Friday morning, we had a meeting in my office with Elders David B. Haight and James E. Faust on a university matter that had implications for the Church. At the conclusion of that meeting, I explained to these two brethren what had happened to me during the preceding three days, and I asked if they would be willing to administer to me. Elder Faust did the anointing, which was sealed by Elder Haight, with members of my president's council also participating in the circle. Elder Haight's blessing was quite different from the one I had received from Merrill Bateman three years earlier. His was basically a plea with the Lord to let me live. But it was not just an ordinary plea. It was stated and restated in several different ways, with an urgency in his voice that I had seldom heard.

After the blessing was over and these two brethren and my colleagues had left, my secretary, Janet Calder, told me that I'd had several phone calls and that the one from my friend Steve Freestone, director of pathology at Utah Valley Regional Medical Center, seemed particularly important. I returned Steve's call. His news was as welcome as it was unexpected. His partner, Paul Urie, who is an expert on a form of T-cell lymphoma called mycosis fungoides, had been reexamining the samples from my skin biopsy. He was virtually certain that what I had was not a relapse of my former immunoblastic lymphoma but rather this thing called mycosis fungoides. It is also a T-cell lymphoma, but in several respects it lies at the opposite end of the spectrum from the cancer I had in 1987. It was incurable, but indolent, and it could frequently be controlled. Steve told me that if I had this kind of cancer, they could predict a longer life expectancy than the very short time I could expect with a relapse of the immunoblastic form. He told me I could live for a fairly long time and, best of all, lead a pretty normal life.

I could scarcely believe my ears. I wanted to ask several questions, all at the same time. "Are you telling me," I asked, "that Janet and I can still take our planned trip to Jerusalem in a couple of months, that I can carry on my activities as president of BYU, and that I can run on Saturday mornings with Janet and my children?"

"Yes," he replied. "That's exactly what I'm telling you."

"How sure are you about Dr. Urie's diagnosis?" I asked.

He answered, "We're very certain. We've looked at it many times, and rather carefully, because while immunoblastic forms of T-cell lymphoma frequently follow the indolent forms, we don't know of any instance in which it has been in this order. But Paul is an expert on mycosis fungoides, and he is confident that that is what you have."

And then I asked the big question: "You say that I can expect to live for some time. What's your best guess as to how long that is?"

He responded that that would depend on a number of other factors, which had not yet been ascertained, but he would expect it to be years rather than months.

"How many years?" I asked.

Again, he responded, "That's impossible to answer with any degree of certainty and depends on a number of other as-yet-undetermined facts. But mycosis fungoides patients generally live between three and thirteen years following diagnosis."

I hung up the phone and sat there for some time, basking in the joy of what my friend had told me. Perspective is an amazing thing. Four days earlier, if a doctor had informed me that I had an incurable form of cancer and could expect to live somewhere between three and thirteen years, I would have been devastated. But as I compared this news against the background of the earlier indications, I was ecstatic. My life was not about to come to an end, at least not within the next few months. If their diagnosis was correct, I could expect to see another Christmas. Indeed, many Christmases. I would be around for Michael's missionary farewell the following fall, and probably for his homecoming, and perhaps several weddings—not only Michael's but Stephanie's, Melissa's, and Christie's as well. And my life would be conducted outside of a hospital, doing normal things, including living with my family, continuing to work at a job that I enjoyed as much as any that I had ever had, and in general, leading a normal life. My greatest hope was that Dr. Urie's diagnosis would turn out to be correct.

When I called my oncologist at NIH, he told me that this diagnosis could not possibly be correct. He, of course, had had much more experience with T-cell lymphomas. And he said that the immunoblastic form always followed the indolent form, and it never happened the other way. For some reason, at that point I assumed the role of a fool—a lawyer who represents himself—and attempted to argue my case that I had mycosis fungoides. My approach was totally irrational, based on an assumption that if I could persuade this doctor, against his own judgment, I would somehow win an acquittal.

Janet: I was still in California, where I had stayed for a few extra days with our daughter, Wendy, after learning that Rex's biopsy showed nothing serious. When Rex returned to Provo and received the news we had both feared for two years, he decided to shield me from the turmoil he was undergoing until Ireturned home. But before Rex received Dr. Urie's report, his desperation overtook his desire to protect me, and he finally called to share with me what he had been told. Courageously, he tried to explain the good in this bad news, and as I struggled to match his optimism, I did my best to give what comfort I could over the telephone—all the while thinking, This cannot happen to us again.

Neither of us nor our children had completely recovered from his first bout with cancer, and being hit with this second assault was unthinkable. As we talked, I thought of our children having to endure such grief again and wondered why Rex's job was now going to be made so difficult. As we poured out our hearts across the miles of telephone lines, we began to find relief, and finally I dried my tears as we began to plan for another battle with illness.

When we received the news that the biopsies showed an indolent form of cancer rather than the more aggressive form, which appeared to still be in remission, we had decided that the children needed to be told what was happening. We didn't want them to learn about Rex's cancer from some other source, and Rex needed to return to NIH immediately for tests.

Early Saturday morning, Rex began the task of talking with our children by waking Michael, who was then eighteen. Michael's initial reaction when Rex sat down on the side of the bed was that his father was going to make some sort of deal with him—probably that Michael clean the garage in the morning so that the two of them could do something together in the afternoon. When our son learned that his father had a second form of cancer, his first thought was that it was too much to hope for another miracle and that he would possibly lose his father before leaving on his mission—and most certainly before he returned.

Most of Michael's questions were answered with "I don't know," and in the absence of any concrete information, the two of them hugged, exchanged their love for each other, and shed more than a few tears.

That evening, Diana, Michael, Stephanie, Melissa, and Christie joined Rex for what he was determined would be a celebratory dinner. There the family discussed Rex's condition, and Rex assured them that this particular cancer would be slow to take his life. But because they had not gone through the sequence of events that Rex and I had, the children found it difficult to see this news as a cause for celebration. When Rex and the children returned home from dinner, they continued to talk about this turn of events, and then I called from California and talked with each child over the telephone. Many of their concerns were understandable: Why did we get Dad back only to have him taken again? Can we really expect another miracle? Will the two of you have to stay at NIH for a long time? Will Dad be here to write to me on my mission? Will he live long enough to know my children? How can I grow up without a father?

It took time for the fears to subside—partly because of the shock that inevitably accompanies such news and partly because Rex and I still had to return to NIHfor more tests needed to confirm the nature of this second cancer. But finally we as a family found solace for our pain, and we chose to soothe our swollen eyes with thoughts of gratitude and hope.

Rex: Janet and I spent most of the next week at NIH, where people conducted the same tests and others as well. At the end of the week, the doctors rather incredulously came to the conclusion that Dr. Urie was right. They also told me that the country's leading expert on this particular form of cancer was Dr. Steven Rosen, a member of the medical faculty at Northwestern University, and that they would attempt to persuade him to take me on as a patient.

Dr. Rosen, in addition to being an expert on mycosis fungoides, is one of the finest human beings I have ever known. From the very first, we liked him as a doctor, as a person, and as a friend. He has the ability to recruit his patients' efforts in the process of their own healing.

In our first visit, he explained that while my disease is a lymphoma and not a skin cancer, it manifests itself in skin lesions, which can be one indicator of the progression of the cancer. In my case, however, the disease had reached my bone marrow, and Dr. Rosen decided I should skip the initial treatments and move to interferon injections, which are used when this cancer reaches a more advanced stage. Even though this could have been discouraging news, he gave it to us in such a positive context that I was not discouraged.

Janet: On February 26, 1990, our fifteen-year-old daughter, Melissa, made the following entry in her journal:

I found out something very disturbing tonight. My dad's cancer is incurable. There is no cure! They are working on one but as of now there isn't one. How could this be happening? He had cancer already two years ago. I thought we were through with this for years. This means my children won't know my dad, their grandpa. This is the saddest thought. I love my dad so much and want him to be around forever, not die in ten years, or less. He is announcing about his cancer to BYU tomorrow at 3:00. If you couldn't tell, I'm very upset right now and I'm going to go to bed.

Rex concluded that he needed to tell the BYU community about his condition, and that announcement took place on February 27, his fifty-fifth birthday. The announcement itself was a difficult moment for me, but as I watched Rex share this news with the university family, I was struck once again by his love of life, by how deeply he can drink from the stream of life, and by how contagious his characteristic enthusiasm can be.

His style of leadership was evident as he encouraged the university to continue moving forward rather than being weighed down by this news, and I found myself lifted as well, knowing that he and I would have more time together—time I knew we would live in the fullest manner possible as we fought this new battle.

It was a battle we fought hard. Rex endured drugs and treatments, and at times we both experienced fear over what was ahead. But there were also very obvious blessings. One came in the form of outstanding medical care, provided by doctors who were determined to do all they could to keep this cancer in check. The interferon treatments Dr. Rosen prescribed lasted for almost two years. The shots were administered at home intermuscularly; half the time Rex would give them to himself in the abdomen, and the rest of the time, I would give them to him in the arm. From the very beginning, every indication was that the interferon did what it was supposed to. Indeed, during the time Rex took the treatment, his skin improved about 90 percent and the involvement of the disease in his bone marrow actually decreased. But while the interferon had its intended effect, it also had the usual and predictable side effects: flu-like symptoms, chills and fever, and a general and constant fatigue and malaise. In Rex's view, however, the side effects of interferon were certainly worth the benefits. He was alive, eating dinner almost every night with our family, teaching his priesthood and Sunday School classes every Sunday, actively serving as president of the nation's largest private university, running with me most mornings, and doing all the things that normal people do.

The other blessing we were given—and it was a rich one, indeed—was BYU. Instead of staying home and mourning another setback in Rex's health (and the obvious reality that his life would be shortened), he and I both worked. We did some of our work separately, as he put in his usual six days a week (plus many Sundays when he participated in religious activities that are integral to BYU). He attended to the many matters that find their way to the president's office, and he was the driving force behind many initiatives the university undertook. But we did much of the work together as we wrote talks, met with students, hosted dinners, traveled in the university's behalf, and immersed ourselves in the life of the university.

Perhaps the most memorable of many trips came soon after we received news of Rex's second cancer. It involved traveling to Jerusalem, and as Rex attended countless meetings, I saw much of the land where our Savior had lived.

As I visited so many of the sites without Rex, my thoughts instinctively turned to the fact that the life of Christ had been filled with adversity but also with joy. Then, as Rex joined me one day for a trip to the Sea of Galilee and on another day to the Garden of Gethsemane, I realized that even though Jesus had the power to walk upon the water, he also had the strength to submit himself to the will of his father. These were lessons I needed, given what I knew was ahead, and I returned from the Holy Land grateful and renewed.

When we were home in Provo, we encouraged our children to join us in many of our university activities, particularly concerts, plays, art exhibits, and athletic events. They also helped host dinners in our home, as had been the case during our Washington years. Our lives were entirely centered around BYU and our children, and we never tired of the job. It was exhilarating, and we found that as we gave service to the university, any pain we were experiencing dissolved. Our involvement there activated our hopes, comforted our hearts, and energized our spirits.

The opportunity to speak frequently was something I enjoyed very much. The reading and writing I did in preparation for each address helped me focus my thinking, and as I thought more deeply, I also began to feel more complete and whole. Interestingly, as my identity became even more connected to Rex's through our shared activities, I gained a stronger sense of self, bringing us even closer together. Our mutual respect likewise grew, and we saw ourselves as a team as much in our individuality as in our togetherness. I had spent my life as a wife, mother, and sometimes teacher, and now I was his colleague.

Rex: As early as a few months after I returned to Provo from Bethesda in 1987, I began to notice a slight tingling in my feet. It didn't affect anything that I did, but it would not go away and was a bit annoying. My oncologist in Provo, Dr. Bott, asked me if it felt as if I were wearing socks and gloves, and I told him those were the areas that appeared to be affected. He told me that the culprit was the drug vincristine, which had been part of my chemotherapy. What I was experiencing was a common side effect of that drug, he said, and although it probably would not get any worse, it probably would not get any better either. So I resolved to just live with the minor discomfort.

Toward the end of 1991, the tingling sensation, especially in my feet, led to a slight numbness, and my ability to maintain my balance was slightly impaired. In March 1992, Janet, my daughter Wendy, and I were just finishing up a five-mile run along the banks of the Provo River when, for no apparent reason, I stumbled and almost fell. This was the first time I had actually stumbled. From that time forward, my numbness and lack of balance slowly progressed. I remember another time in June 1992 when we were in San Diego for a Western Athletic Conference Presidents' Council meeting. I was running with Janet and three of our daughters. After a couple of miles, I simply was not able to run any more. I had to put my arm on Janet's shoulder for stability and walk back to our hotel. That summer my neurologist, Dr. Joe Watkins, ran some tests and concluded that what I had was peripheral neuropathy, a damage to the nerves in my peripheral nervous system that was affecting both my arms and my legs. He told me three things about peripheral neuropathy: first, he wasn't sure what caused it. It could have been the original cancer, the chemotherapy or radiation treatments, or the possibility that in attempting to cure my present cancer, my body's own mechanisms had misfired and damaged my peripheral nerves. Second, it could not be cured, and there was nothing that could be done to prevent its further progress. And third, he hoped that it would reach a "plateau" level and not progress any further, although he could not assure me that would happen.

All of these conclusions were confirmed that summer and fall by two specialists in both oncology and neurology, one at the University of Utah and the other, a colleague of Dr. Rosen, at Northwestern. I saw Dr. Rozental at Northwestern for the first time in October 1992, right after the first BYU-Notre Dame game. (We lost that one, but we would get our revenge two years later in one of the sweetest events of my life. On that day, as on many others, I reflected on how grateful I was to be on this planet for such an occasion.) I asked Dr. Rozental at that time if there was any reason that I should stop running. He told me no but asked me to notify him if for any reason I was unable to run any more. I inferred (correctly, I believe) that he thought—though he didn't tell me—that that time would come.

In fact, it did come. I don't remember exactly when, but I remember that by the time of the June 1993 WAC Presidents' Council meeting, I was no longer running. It was not, of course, a matter of my legs all at once being unable to support more than a walk; it came on gradually. The pain, mostly in my legs, also increased gradually, and we sought the advice of medical experts who helped me deal with it in various ways.

Throughout this progression of events, I was grateful for the fact that neither my cancer nor my neuropathy affected my ability to carry out my responsibilities as president of BYU. The cancer was present, but its consequences were thus far undetectable. Some of the effects of the neuropathy were visible. I walked more slowly and sometimes had to stand in meetings to relieve the pain. At times my lack of stability was apparent. Because the neuropathy affects my hands, I had moderate difficulty with my handwriting, and I noticed it was more of a challenge than before to use a knife and fork, to button shirts, and to tie neckties. But none of these progressed beyond the category of "I wish it weren't so." Even with the cancer and the peripheral neuropathy, my work at BYU over these years continued unimpaired, with at least one notable exception.

During April 1993, my father was very ill, and Janet and I spent several days with him in Mesa, Arizona, where he was hospitalized. As I left his hospital room before returning to Provo, both he and I knew that we would never see each other again in this life. Yet right to the end of that visit, he maintained his sense of humor. As I was leaving his room, I received a phone call that lasted for several minutes. When I finally hung up, Dad asked me what it was about, and I told him we were having some problems in our athletic department, though nothing serious. A great fan of BYU, he responded, "Oh, that must be serious—far more serious than my impending death."

The following Saturday, my brother Doug called to tell me our father had passed away, and Janet and I began to make plans to drive to St. Johns, which is not accessible by commercial aircraft. When my friend Jon Huntsman learned of this news, he immediately called and insisted that my family and I make the trip on his airplane. He knew that my peripheral neuropathy made it extremely painful for me to travel long distances by car. I gratefully accepted.

During this time, I was experiencing an increasing swelling in my left leg, and by Monday it had become rather painful. My doctor ordered a sonogram, which revealed blood clots, and he immediately told me I would have to be hospitalized. I told him that was fine but that I could not remain in the hospital on Wednesday because I had to speak at my father's funeral. He made a comment about there being a double funeral if I left, and I soon realized that I was not going to be traveling to St. Johns.

Knowing this, I called Jon, told him of my circumstance, explained that we would not need the use of his plane, and thanked him for his generosity. He said, "Well, what about your family? Don't they plan to attend?" I responded that they did but that there was nothing wrong with their health and they would simply drive as we had originally planned. I resisted, but he insisted. Plans were made for my family to be flown to Arizona for the funeral.

Jon is generous with his means, but he also gives of his precious time. The next day, as I sat in my hospital bed working on an upcoming graduation talk, in walked Jon with Rick Majerus. Though Rick coaches basketball at BYU's in-state rival, the University of Utah, I have always appreciated that Jon introduced me to this man who has since become a very good friend. He is best known for his coaching skills, and those who don't know him well see him as having a rather rough exterior. But the qualities of this man extend far beyond anything he has accomplished on the basketball court. As is the case with each of my friends, these two did much during their visit to lift my spirits during what turned out to be a rather lengthy hospitalization.

On Wednesday, as planned, my family flew to St. Johns, where Janet, with characteristic elegance, delivered the talk I had written. Then a week later, when my blood clots still had me confined to a hospital bed, she delivered my April commencement talk, demonstrating in a particularly public way that we did, indeed, perform my university job as a team.

Janet: Soon after we learned of Rex's peripheral neuropathy, I read a passage in You Gotta Keep Dancin', a book by Tim Hansel, who had experienced a near-fatal climbing accident and had lived his life since in constant pain. "There is nothing wrong with happiness," he wrote. "It's wonderful. The only problem is that it's based on circumstances, and circumstances have a tendency to shift." Having experienced more than a few such shifts in our lives, I was intrigued by what he then said: "Joy, on the other hand, is something which defies circumstances" ([Colorado Springs: LifeJourney Books, 1985], p. 54).

For Rex and me, the only way we could survive was to adopt what we came to call "selective attitudes" and to make conscious decisions about how we would respond to the challenges we faced. On winter mornings, as my daughters and I jogged on a nearby indoor track, I became strangely drawn to the people there who would routinely run, walk, limp, or even push themselves in wheelchairs. Regardless of how we went about the task, we were each going to get around the track as best we could.

Then one morning as I rounded a curve, I saw two men walking together slowly. One was hooked up to an oxygen tank, while the other was pushing it for him. Each time they made it halfway around the track, they stopped for a minute as the man on oxygen regained his strength. My first impression was how wonderful it was that a man of such frail health would make the effort to come and walk the track. I could imagine the courage and determination that act required. Then, as I watched his companion, I realized that the example of each man was equally compelling. The courage of the one was admirable; the service of the other was Christlike.

That image serves as a great motivating force in my life as Rex goes through the changes that inevitably grow out of his condition. He has contracted countless infections as a result of his weakened immune system. We have learned to treat these with antibiotics, and he then invariably has gone to work, hoping the fever will subside. But the constant threat of infections makes life more of a struggle for him. I match my stride to his as his pace slows and as he begins to take stairs one at a time, instead of bounding up them two at a time as had always been his practice. I offer to help as he struggles to button his shirt each morning. I have yet to master the necktie.

I admire, love, and encourage him as he makes both conscious and unconscious decisions about living a full and productive and joyful life, despite his never-ending pain. I watch him grow in patience and empathy as he feels a unity with those who also hurt.

Rex: To be honest, as I faced the prospect of my second cancer, many of my thoughts did not coincide with what others have described as my typically optimistic mindset. My very first entry in my sixth bound journal was made at the end of that awful week in February 1990, and even though the news of my second cancer had by then taken a definite turn for the better, I still wondered as I wrote on that first page whether I would live to complete the new volume I held in my hands.

Four years and four months later, I did in fact fill the last page of that journal. The date of that last entry was July 3, 1994—seven years to the day from the time I was admitted to NIH. I looked back at that day in 1987 and realized that at that time, I had seen my chances of getting to 1994 as being about as good as Switzerland going to war. Life had moved at a rapid pace over the ensuing seven years, but I had moved right along with it—despite my second cancer and the peripheral neuropathy (as well as blood clots, surgery to repair a hernia, and finally having my wisdom teeth pulled just weeks before my fifty-sixth birthday).

July 3, 1994, also marked the fifth anniversary of the Monday I assumed my responsibilities as president of BYU. During those five years, I had worked with my colleagues in long-range planning for the university, in resolving numerous challenges that had come to us, in launching a capital campaign that we were confident would raise a quarter of a billion dollars for BYU, and in overseeing a period of construction on campus that rivaled the feverish pace of the Wilkinson era. I had watched as our football team upset the University of Miami, which was the number-one-ranked team in the country at the time; and I had traveled with BYU performing groups to Russia, eastern Europe, Spain, and the Middle East. I had hosted Ronald Reagan, former president of the United States (who at the end of his speech and question-answer period had regaled his audience with the latest jokes on the former Soviet Union, almost making me late for a flight I needed to catch to Washington, D.C.). I had also helped arrange for the visit of President George Bush during his presidential campaign in 1992. And Janet and I had attended the Heisman Trophy award ceremony for Ty Detmer.

In addition to all that went on at the university, I had argued nine cases before the United States Supreme Court (which was my idea of a hobby during my years as president) and had enjoyed a string of six straight wins even as my problems with peripheral neuropathy had worsened considerably.

More important than a fulfilling professional life was the extent to which I could still enjoy being with my family. Even with all the demands BYU placed upon me and Janet, we found opportunities for children to join us at various official functions; we continued to take trips to Lake Powell as a family; and if we were in town, we always had everyone over for Sunday dinner.

I had been able to watch my son Michael leave on and return from his mission, and I had learned from him, among other things, that a "really cool" bike crash must involve, among other things, (1) at least half of the body ending up under the bike, (2) contact between the handlebars and either the chest or abdomen, and (3) at least some broken skin. (Foolishly, I had thought a bike crash was just a bike crash.)

There was no shortage of other momentous moments in our lives. On this day as I wrote, we were two weeks away from Stephanie's marriage to Bret Paulson. We had watched Michael marry Sharon Burr a year earlier. My signature was on the diplomas of Michael and Wendy, as well as four of our children-in-law, and Janet and I would watch with pride as Stephanie graduated a year later.

As I reached the five-year point in my presidency, I was well aware that I did have a very serious illness that would no doubt shorten my life. There were days of discouragement as I contemplated that reality. But I generally concluded that my best option was to be grateful for each day I lived and for a wife who helped to ensure there would be many more ahead.

I was also aware of the pain associated with my peripheral neuropathy. And while having to give up running was hard for me, I didn't have to reflect for long on what I sometimes viewed as my sorry state before I realized that there are millions of people in the world who live productive lives with much less mobility than that with which I have been blessed.

I spent a good deal of time writing on the third day of July. I expressed my gratitude to Janet, my Heavenly Father, and medical science for my blessing of life. I wondered what thoughts and events would fill my soon-to-be-started seventh volume. And I contemplated the words of one of my doctors when he said, "There are no peripheral nerves in the brain," which meant that even with decreased mobility I could do many of the things I enjoy in life.

My thoughts returned with some frequency to that statement. I began looking around at the way other people make their livings and realized how many depend so much on the use of their hands or their legs or both. I concluded that for about 85 percent of the working population in the United States, neuropathy at the stage mine had reached would mean unemployment. If I were a waiter in a restaurant or an automobile mechanic; if I had any of my old jobs on the sawmill; if I were an architect, dentist, almost any kind of physician; or if I made my living in so many other ways, I would be out of work—and would have been for several years. And given the way I am wired emotionally, forced unemployment would probably be about as difficult for me to take as my various physical ailments.

I also had this thought: Many people I know have much more serious physical problems than I, and many acquired these problems at a much earlier age. I repeatedly remind myself that for fifty-two years, I enjoyed almost perfect health. I literally cannot remember missing one day of work because of illness, though there may have been two or three when I should have. And these thoughts brought me back to my reaction that Friday in February 1990 when my friend Steve Freestone told me he and his partner had diagnosed my illness as mycosis fungoides: Every day is an extension of my life.

My final reflection as I filled that last page in my journal had to do with whether I would forgo what had happened and trade my circumstances at this point in my life for those eight years earlier, before my first cancer. There were obvious pros and cons, although I found it difficult to compare one category (what might have been) with the other (reality). The conclusion I came to that day was that yes, I would trade. But since the choice is not mine to make, I'll play with the cards I was dealt.
