Rex E. Lee, Janet Lee, Jim Bell, Marathon of Faith ( 1996)

Chapter 8

Pacing Ourselves

Rex: There were many things that helped to make the BYU presidency such a wonderful job. For me, probably the most prominent was the fact that unlike other responsibilities in the past, this was one that Janet and I truly shared. The law school deanship offered some opportunities in that respect, but not anything like being president. The other attractive features mostly had to do with relationships with people, the students, the faculty, the alumni and other friends of the university, and members of the board of trustees. Among the things that made it a challenge were the breadth of responsibilities and the inflexibility with which the work of that office must be carried out. In May 1995, I learned exactly what effect that inflexibility could have on me.

Thursday, May 4, came at the end of a very busy seven-day period that had included our April commencement exercises, the ground breaking for our law school's new library, and a full slate of meetings with my president's council and the university's board of trustees. In a Thursday morning devotional assembly, Janet and I welcomed the participants of BYU's annual women's conference, and we then attended a luncheon for the organizers and special guests of that conference. After the luncheon, we went straight to the Salt Lake City airport and caught a three o'clock flight to the east coast, the principal purpose of which was to meet with some of our major donors, asking them to make large contributions to our capital campaign. I was feeling run-down as we headed out of town, but given the preceding week, that was no surprise.

In addition to our university business, we made a quick trip to Orlando, Florida, to see our daughter Wendy's new baby girl, Madeleine. We then spent Sunday in Washington, D.C., with our son Tom, who was living there with his family as he completed a Supreme Court clerkship. He and his wife, Kimberly, had a new baby boy, Bejamin Thomas, the fourth of four grandchildren born between January and April, starting with Michael and Sharon's twin boys, James Rex and John David. Janet and I had arranged our trip to be there for our newest grandson's blessing. Janet then stayed while I flew back to Utah for an important meeting on Monday morning, after which I was to return to Washington D.C., Monday evening. By the time I reached Provo Sunday night, I could feel one of my bacteria-induced fevers coming on.

For several years, I got one of these infections about every two months, sometimes more often. During my time at BYU, infections constituted one of my more serious and ongoing health challenges, though I had not yet recognized just how serious they could be. Infectious disease specialists had helped me during those years, and generally the best they were able to do was simply to treat the infections with antibiotics as soon as they began. Sometimes my temperatures would rise to 100 or 101, but my fevers were not accompanied by other symptoms of real illness. Usually, these temperatures would then subside in a matter of hours. But I could generally tell when the infection was serious. In those cases, my temperature would rise to something like 102 or 104, I would feel unusually weak, and I would develop serious chills at night.

All of those symptoms occurred Sunday night, and I started myself on an antibiotic the doctors had me keep on hand for such moments. The one problem with this antibiotic is that among the bacteria it destroys can be those that prevent yeast infections, which in some instances are even more serious than bacterial infections. As a consequence, whenever I took the antibiotic, I would accompany it with another drug that prevents yeast infections. One of the many things Janet helps me do is to keep track of my medications, and with her gone, I forgot to take the second drug with me as I packed Monday morning. (This was not the first time I had forgotten, and sometimes yeast infections would result and sometimes not.)

I would not have returned to Washington to complete the scheduled trip if I had felt I had a choice. I knew that my body, in its present condition, was simply not capable of meeting the physical demands that lay ahead. But I had no option. This trip had been planned for a month and a half, and two very busy and important people—Hyrum Smith and Dick Marriott—had scheduled time to be with me as we met with possible donors. All three of us, and also Tom Mullen, the BYU Development officer who accompanied us, were essential to the success of the trip, and Hyrum had scheduled his private jet to take us there. Those whom we were contacting had also set aside their time, and in several other respects the groundwork had been laid. After I had asked so many busy and important people to meet with me there was no way I was going to tell them that I didn't feel well enough to come.

Janet and I returned home Tuesday evening, and Wednesday I stayed home to rest (which, my secretaries later told me, was a sure sign that I was really sick). My temperature did go down considerably, and my general strength and feelings of well-being improved slightly. But then a yeast infection began to develop, and by Friday the inside of my mouth looked like a mature cotton field. I felt almost as sick as I had on Sunday night when I first started taking the antibiotic. There were several important things that I felt I had to do on Friday. The first was to meet with my dear friend Jon Huntsman, who gave me some of the best long-range advice I have ever received, and the last was to attend a wedding reception in Salt Lake. Janet had to drive us home, and I went right to bed. The next morning I felt as sick as I had in months, probably years, and my doctor told me to go to the hospital for some tests.

The doctors kept me in the hospital as they looked for the source of my infection, and I stayed in the hospital for sixteen days—my longest hospital stay in history, except for the four months at NIH. Doctors eventually located the source of the bacterial infection in my lungs, where they thought they also saw signs of cancer, including the original T-cell immunoblastic lymphoma that I had experienced in 1987. That possibility remained the principal diagnosis for several days, during which time surgeons entered my lungs from three different places to perform biopsies. They finally concluded that there had been no relapse of the immunoblastic lymphoma, although they found definite signs of the mycosis fungoides in my lungs. But as Dr. Rosen later said, he could have told them that without doing the biopsy. My present cancer is and always will be systemically spreading throughout my body, but it shows every sign of behaving itself.

Janet: Rex was very sick during these days of uncertainty, as the doctors ran a wide range of tests, came to various (sometimes conflicting) conclusions, and struggled to help my husband stay alive. Rex had been plagued with these recurring infections and fevers for over two years, but now nothing seemed to help him recover. He had always kept going when the infections came, but this time he was too weak to carry on in his typical routine of meeting with colleagues, dictating correspondence, and hosting visitors from his hospital bed.

From day to day, it took all his energy just to survive. We tried to keep visitors to a minimum because of Rex's sense that he needed to be up for friends who came to see him. Occasionally, when a custodian or lab technician would come into the room, Rex would come to life—asking where they were from, joking with them, and engaging them in lively conversations. But the children and I knew how ill Rex really was, and Christie commented one night that she was going to come the next day dressed as a custodian and carrying a mop so that she could enjoy him at his best.

I found it difficult to see him become weaker and weaker each day—this man who, when he couldn't run, had switched to a treadmill so that he could keep his balance as he continued to exercise; who, when he should have rested after his long days at work, attended every family event, helped children with homework, and made sure I always knew I was his very best friend. As the doctors looked for the source of the infection—and for signs of a spread of his cancer—Rex continued to grow weaker. He lost twenty-five pounds, and I wondered if this was to be the end.

Our daughter Melissa was in London for the summer attending BYU's Study Abroad program, and she and I were making long-distance arrangements for her wedding, which was scheduled for Friday, August 25. I wondered if I should have her come home early and whether we should go ahead with the wedding on schedule. When I asked Rex's oncologist, he was kind but frank. "Plan the wedding," he said, "and if Rex can be there, he will be there. If not, you're going to have to go on with your life."

This was a very matter-of-fact response to my heart's pleadings, and I wanted to scream, "We are discussing my husband—the love of my life!" Then, as I considered his response, I thought how hard I must be to please. On the one hand, I find it difficult responding to others' sad, pitying eyes and emotional voices. At the same time, it almost made me shudder to be met with such blunt objectivity.

As had been the case at NIH, it was difficult for me to leave Rex's room each night. Christie was our only child still living with us, and each night a friend would stay with her until I returned home. We would visit for a while, and then I would have some time to myself in the solitude of our home. I would read the thoughtful notes that friends had sent, water the plants, let the dog out, lock all the doors, and tidy up anything Christie and her friends hadn't cleaned up. I was actually glad for any little messes I could find, as they gave some sense of normalcy to the day. Then I would go through the nightly routine of getting ready for bed.

Most nights, sleep would elude me and my thoughts would match the blackness of the night. After praying and getting into our empty bed, I would return to my knees and continue to pray for Rex's recovery as well as for my own much-needed courage, calm, peace, and strength. I would reflect on scriptures I had read that day, on conversations with friends, on insights I had gained during our various challenges over the years. And I would try to remember a twofold lesson I have come to rely upon for strength: I am not alone, because my Heavenly Father is always with me; and I am not alone, because everyone faces such storms. They may come at different times, but we each will face our own difficulties and trials. They may come in different ways, but meeting those challenges and yet somehow finding peace seems to strike a universal chord in all of us.

As I struggled with my feelings during those dark nights, the thought of losing Rex wracked my soul. As I lay in our bed at home and thought about him at the hospital, I would try to turn my thoughts to the gratitude I felt—and wanted our children to feel—for the eight additional years we had been given with Rex. Eventually, I began to feel peace again. It was not a peace that freed me from concerns about Rex's condition or about the future; rather, it was a peace that came from feeling the strength of my Comforter. I was grateful I could recognize this power—and grateful for the many times I had felt it before.

For much of the time Rex was in the hospital, his condition was either worsening or barely staying level. When he had been at NIH, we had come up with the idea of trying to think of the most positive thing about each day as I prepared to leave; then I would try to focus on that during my trip home, even though much of the time I would just cry. (Some might view this trick as something of a delusion, but it seemed better than dwelling on the worst of what was happening.) We tried to do the same during this hospitalization, but there were several times when the best we could do, as we kissed each other good night, was to agree that tomorrow would be a better day.

On one particularly difficult day, my daughter Diana came and convinced me to go on a walk with her. While we were together, she asked how I could remain so calm and philosophical in the face of what was happening. I tried to explain to her that although my heart was breaking, I really had no other alternative—that, for me, falling apart and crying all day would only make matters worse. Through the difficulties Rex and I had faced over the years, I had come to realize that there are times when the only thing I can control is the way I respond to my circumstances. There are times when having dominion over my own attitude seems to be my sole means of exercising my God-given agency.

As Rex's condition continued to look bleak, our oldest son, Tom, came from Washington to be with his father. During Rex's good moments, the two of them discussed the law, a favorite subject for these two University of Chicago Law School alums. It was obvious that as Tom asked Rex his opinion on cases familiar to both them, Rex's spirits were lifted. Rex, however, was not the only one who was strengthened by Tom. When my son walked into the hospital for the first time and put his big arms around me, some of the burdens simply flowed from my consciousness. The memory of a little boy who had needed my hugs in exchange for his hurts was a million miles away, and it was now his turn to comfort me. In the days he spent with us, I felt that my burden was being lifted and carried by my son and that because of his assistance, I could relax a little. One night we returned home from the hospital and I started to take the trash bins out to the curb. Tom stopped me and took over. It was such a small act, but I began to cry as he headed out the door—and as I recognized the significance of his gesture and its effect on me.

Even after Rex was transferred out of the intensive care unit, he could walk only with the aid of two strong men—and then only for a few steps—before he was exhausted. It was during this time of "improvement" that Elders Neal A. Maxwell and Henry B. Eyring came to visit him, and I sensed that they were surprised at how ill Rex appeared. (Elder Maxwell was chairman of the executive committee of the board of trustees, and Elder Eyring was commissioner of Church education.) They stayed in the room for only a short time, and then the three of us spent a few minutes talking in the hall. They asked what they could do to help and then expressed the same thought I had been having—that somehow Rex was going to have to cut back on all he was doing.

Rex: My recollection of that hospital stay is hazy, at best. I do remember that I talked rather infrequently with my office and my vice presidents, that all of my children came to visit, and that I began hearing rumors that were circulating concerning the seriousness of my illness. Those reports irritated me, and I told Janet to tell people at BYU and in our ward that I was not as ill as had been reported. When I discovered after my release that, in this rare instance, the rumors had been correct—and that I had come very close to death—I began to wonder whether I could continue to keep the pace that was required of me at BYU.

The aftermath of that hospital sojourn was even more discouraging than the actual inpatient experience. For one thing, the days in the hospital were not my only "down time." Throughout my life I had been accustomed to bouncing back from illnesses rather quickly. Not so when I left the hospital in 1987, and not so when I left it on Memorial Day 1995. I was weak, lacking in energy, and simply unable to do the kind of work that my job demanded for more than a short period of time. To be sure, that circumstance improved, but the improvement was exasperatingly and uncharacteristically slow.

At the same time, my doctors, several of whom are also good personal friends, told me how serious this episode had been, that it had, indeed, been life-threatening, that it could happen again, and that I must make adjustments in my life to prevent its recurrence. They responded to my obvious question—"What should I do to prevent a recurrence?"—by emphasizing that I needed to avoid stress, long hours, and particularly inflexible demands that would not permit me to cut back when I felt an illness coming on. As I listened to each doctor describe things to avoid, I realized they were reciting my job description. Then I learned from Janet that one of my physicians, Dr. Tracy Hill (a pulmonary specialist who had become involved with my care during my bout with blood clots), had put the matter to her more directly when he asked, "Does he want to die in office?" In truth, I didn't; but the demands of my job and the fragile nature of my health simply were not compatible.

At the time I left the hospital, however, I was simply not emotionally prepared to resign. I had enjoyed my job too much and had programmed myself for several more years of similar activity. Janet was the first to bring up the possibility. I was lying on the couch resting, and I simply told her this wasn't the time to discuss the issue. But as the days went on, I pondered the matter myself and then did begin to discuss it with Janet. As much as I wanted my situation to be otherwise, it became very apparent that stepping down was the only option. It was not fair to my family, to me, or to the university to enhance the likelihood that something like this might happen again. To put it another way, I couldn't continue to have a job that lacked the flexibility to allow me to take steps as needed to prevent the recurrence of life-threatening illnesses.

On the first Wednesday of June, while I was in the midst of this agony, I attended the regular monthly meeting of the board of trustees, at which President Gordon B. Hinckley presided. At the conclusion of the meeting, President Hinckley asked to speak with me for a moment in his office. As we sat down, he said, "We're very concerned about you." The tone of his voice conveyed a compassion and genuine concern that adorn this great man so gracefully. In those simple words, which he repeated several times—"We're very concerned about you"—I felt an obvious outpouring of the prophet's concern. That brief conversation led me to conclude that the decision toward which I was leaning was the correct one. I acknowledged to him that in view of the fact that my health had taken a rather pronounced turn for the worse, I was concerned that I would not be able to continue as president of BYU, and he said he understood and then reiterated that his only concern was for my well-being. I asked if I could have his permission to meet personally with Elders Maxwell and Eyring and present a proposal which they could then approve or modify and present to him and the rest of the board.

On June 12, 1995, I met with Elders Maxwell and Eyring to discuss the matter. As I left for that meeting, Janet and I prayed, among other things, that Elder Maxwell would be inspired to advise us as to the best course to take. Prior to that prayer, I had not intended to include that request; I suspect the reason it came to me on that occasion was that I knew, from past association with him, of Elder Maxwell's deep compassion for other people and his similarly deep insights into what is best for them, especially in significant circumstances in their lives.

I began the meeting by reviewing for the two of them the circumstances that had led me very reluctantly, though quite clearly, to the conclusion that I should ask to be released. I then explained that because of several projects then under way at BYU, I felt the best time for my release would be in May 1996. I also reviewed three or four other personal requests that would help Janet and me make the transition back to teaching at the BYU law school and practicing law with the firm of Sidley & Austin.

As I concluded my thoughts, Elder Maxwell folded his hands, leaned back in his chair, paused for a few moments, and then said that he agreed with everything I had said and requested, with one exception: the timing of my leaving office. In his view, stretching my service out for another full year simply put too many demands and imposed too many risks on me. He suggested that a better time would be the end of the calendar year, which would give the board of trustees the opportunity to conduct a proper search for my successor.

I had two immediate reactions to this quite unexpected response. First, I worried about several projects that would be disrupted if I left at the end of the calendar year rather than the academic year. But Elder Maxwell had not taken those into account at all. They pertained to the interests of the university, and his only concern was for me. My second reaction was that though Elder Maxwell's counsel was not exactly what I expected, I had received exactly what I prayed for: his inspired judgment. As the three of us talked the matter through further, I saw adjustments that could be made to take care of, or at least diminish, all of the concerns I had.

The board of trustees approved my proposal on Friday morning, June 16, and that afternoon I announced my decision, together with my reasons for reaching the decision, to the entire BYU community. Their response at that meeting, which was held in the de Jong Concert Hall, will remain one of the outstanding memories of my life. I had been concerned that people might feel I was leaving prematurely, and without just cause, after six and a half years. There was no hint of that, either at the meeting or afterward. In fact, following the closing prayer I was surprised that there was a prolonged standing ovation, which I interpreted as an expression of love and appreciation.

Janet: Although we both knew the decision was right, making the request was one of the hardest things Rex had ever done. (Having him make the announcement was one of the hardest for me.) He did not want to fail the university in any way, and even though he eventually had to cut back somewhat on the time he spent in the office, he worked to keep his commitment to the BYU family that these last six months would be one of the most productive periods of his time in office.

As the two of us worked during these final months of his presidency, some of our friends suggested that Rex should reduce his workload, that his three hospitalizations in the intervening months indicated that he needed more rest than he was getting. I had similar thoughts at times, but I also knew that in Rex's case, being involved in something he loved was a great source of strength and possibly sustained him more than it impeded him.

I also heard comments at times questioning our way of dealing with Rex's cancer. Perhaps some people felt that by attempting to preserve some degree of normalcy in our lives, we were denying our inevitable mortal separation. It is true that neither one of us felt inclined to dwell on that eventuality. Once, as Rex and I were leaving one of our many doctors' appointments, the doctor suggested that we ought to take some time to discuss death and dying. As we drove away, I asked Rex if that was something he thought we should talk about. He weighed the option very quickly and said, "No, let's talk about living. I'm hungry, so why don't we go get a burrito before the basketball game." What is also true, however, is that underneath the routine of our very busy lives was the constant heartache of accepting that we would not grow old together, as we had always dreamed of doing. Though our innermost feelings remained unseen by others, the reality of Rex's condition followed us like our shadows—which are their smallest when the sun is the highest. But reality, like shadows, often loomed larger than either of us could bear for more than a few moments at a time.

Rather than dwelling unduly upon such thoughts, how ever, we smiled, we laughed, and sometimes we cried; then we went about our lives as "normal" people do. We tried to see life with all of its goodness and beauty and ourselves as part of this glorious world. I often thought that I did not want to spend my time looking through a periscope of fear, where all I could see would be an ocean of black. If I focused only on Rex's poor health, on the things he no longer could do, and on my eventual loss, I would not be able to see and enjoy all that we still share together. Nor could I deny the miracle of enjoying life together eight and one-half years after his first cancer was diagnosed.

Two events in our family's lives bridged the weeks between the end of BYU's 1995 summer term and what we now knew would be our last semester on campus. First, our daughter Stephanie graduated—the last of three of our children whose diplomas bear Rex's signature. When Rex first became president, Stephanie was sixteen and had reservations concerning his new position. In her mind, having a father who was also president of BYU brought embarrassing attention to her and her family. But as she walked across the stage on this August day and received not only her diploma but a hug and a kiss from the university's president, she viewed his role at BYU very differently than she had six years earlier. And when she took her seat and was asked by some fellow students why she rated a kiss from the president, she proudly declared, "He's my dad."

Two weeks later, our daughter Melissa was married to Brett Wimmer, the son of our friends from many years before, Larry and Louise Wimmer. At their wedding luncheon, Rex was his usual charming and jovial self as he made a few remarks as the father of the bride. But he also reflected with tenderness on his eternal perspectives of birth, marriage, children, and death, and his remarks had particular meaning to all who were there. I often thought about the fact that Melissa and Brett had met quite by chance; but Brett, having experienced the loss of his own mother to cancer several years before, was able to provide a unique form of support to Melissa, who was having to deal with her father's weakening condition.

Just before Thanksgiving of 1995, Rex spent several days in the hospital as the doctors tried once again to get his pneumonia under control. Rex's body responds better to intravenous antibiotics than oral ones, so it was decided to insert a Hickman catheter into his chest, which would also provide a central line for any other intravenous procedures he needed. As I contemplated administering the antibiotics when we returned home, I thought back to the many medical procedures I had learned to deal with over the years—giving shots, changing dressings, determining which ointment would soothe his raw skin, checking for swollen lymph nodes, and watching for the hollow eyes that let me know Rex was pushing himself beyond reason.

During these days, I would sometimes think back to the fact that even as a little girl, I had never wanted to be a nurse. I used to feel faint at the mere smell of the alcohol doctors use to cleanse wounds. Yet here I was, immersed in Rex's care and unable and unwilling to turn my back on what had become the heartbeat of my life. The once-unfamiliar CAT scan rooms, treatment procedures, and hospital stays were becoming familiar to me; and at the same time I was coming to appreciate how good it feels to be free of pain, because I could see how terrible it is to suffer from it.

Perhaps exceeded only by the experiences of birth and death, pain is one of the experiences most common to all of humanity. Even the Savior, in his perfection, was not free from it. In my own way I was learning the relationship between suffering and happiness, and that my awareness of joy was not found in freedom from torment but through finding peace in its midst.

I knew that much of the peace both Rex and I enjoyed came directly from our Heavenly Father and that some came from those sent in his behalf. I came to regard the nurses and other hospital staff who cared for Rex—and, in less visible ways, for me—as angels of mercy. The doctors in charge of his constant care (whose numbers make naming each one impossible) exercised judgment I often sensed was inspired, and they became close friends. Our neighbors and friends far and wide offered many outward expressions of support, as well as their less visible love, concern, and prayers. My father and mother, who live in Provo, helped our children and grandchildren with things I would ordinarily do, and Rex's mother would call frequently from Arizona and would lift Rex's and my spirits each time she did. Rex's brothers and their wives—Doug and Dixie, Richard and Clarice, and Mark and Robin—offered love and support in ways that only family members can give. My brother Glen, a doctor himself, and his wife, Mary Ella, a nurse gave comfort to both our bodies and souls. My sister Lois and her second husband, Alan, warmed our hearts in ways that few can. Our children, likewise, supported by our four sons-in-law and two daughters-in law, would often turn the tables by providing for our needs. Somehow each one knew exactly what to do and say at precisely the time things needed to be said and done. The years of sharing encircled us with love.

Even with the support of so many, I often thought about something my mother shared with me long before Rex's first cancer. She said that when I was young, she would always give me plenty of warning before bedtime or any other intrusion into my activities, because then I could meet the change cheerfully. Through all of our challenges over the ensuing years, I have seen how well my Heavenly Father knows me and how he shows his love as a parent by giving me some sort of warning and then time to prepare. With my husband once again in the hospital, I couldn't help but think of the greatest challenge that I knew Rex and I were yet to face, but I was grateful that my Heavenly Father was allowing me time to prepare for what was ahead.

When Thanksgiving Day came, we spent much of our time in the usual preparations for our meal together. Six of our seven children were with us, together with five in-laws and eight grandchildren, which made for a very busy day. In the middle of all the preparations, however, my mind kept returning to our Thanksgiving eight years earlier, just after Rex had returned from NIH. On that day, we were frightened, sad, and almost hesitant to be grateful because of our inability to see what was ahead for Rex. If I had known then that in 1995 I would be spending yet another Thanksgiving with Rex, and if I could have seen the extent of our joy over these eight years together, I could not have contained my joy.

As we sat down to eat, I admired the table and the food, but I knew that what I was really enjoying was the spirit that was in our home. As we took turns expressing our individual thanks, I marveled that each person momentarily forgot the physical trappings that sometimes can seem so important in our lives and concentrated instead on our family's eternal blessings. When Rex took his turn, he spoke specifically of each of our seven children, our six children-in-law, and our ten grandchildren, expressing, as he did so often, how proud he was of each of their unique talents and abilities. He and I then expressed our appreciation for each other and for a kind and loving Heavenly Father who had allowed us this extra time together to be with our children and grandchildren. I noticed a few well-concealed tears around the table, but I knew they were not tears of sorrow.

Later that night, I continued to reflect on what our life had been like eight years earlier and what it was like in 1995. I remembered how I had thought, upon getting out of bed that dreadful morning in Boise, that the carefree joy of youth had been taken away from me and that I would never be the same again. I have learned to understand that I was only partially right. That naive happiness has given way to something of far greater substance—a deeper joy that I could never have known without the challenges of the intervening eight years.

In that time, Rex and I have loved life to the fullest. We have shared laughter and optimism, as well as silent struggles and efforts to be strong. We have prayed separately and together, shedding tears, composing ourselves, and then entering our world once again with happy hearts. Time and time again, we have been shown how quickly despair can turn into delight as we have enjoyed the world and all that is in it.

There are so many things we have learned over these eight years. But as I thought through them over and over before I went to bed that Thanksgiving night, I knew that the most important lesson for me was the realization that I will always be happy—that no matter what happens in a future that neither Rex nor I can clearly see, no matter how dark the night becomes before the sun rises again, I will always know joy.

Rex: As the end of 1995 approached, I was concerned that I spend my last weeks as president of BYU as productively as possible. There were many matters that still required my attention. My health, however, was not cooperating in the way I had hoped. While I did spend much of my time at the university, I also worked from a hospital bed during two different stays in the months of November and December. The second hospitalization was the week before Christmas, and there was some concern that I wouldn't be released before December 25. Two days before Christmas I had improved sufficiently to be home for Christmas with Janet and every one of our children, including their husbands and wives, and all ten of our grandchildren.

Janet's and my Christmas gift to our children and their spouses that year was a vacation we were scheduled to take together on January 3, and there were understandable concerns about whether I would be able to make that trip or not. Janet, in particular, was worried that it might be hard for me not to be able to join in all the activities. But my thought was that even with my limitations, I could still enjoy being with my fourteen favorite people in this world, and I could participate in their activities vicariously.

As I packed up my office at BYU, I was not without emotion, but as I left and knew that the office would be occupied by my dear friend Merrill Bateman, I was excited about the prospects of returning to the practice of law, teaching at the law school, and trying to get a little more rest, which everyone told me I needed.

During the first two days of our one-week vacation, I felt better than I had in months. My neuropathy made it difficult for me to get around, but I had brought work with me, and I really did enjoy relaxing, working some, and watching our family enjoy themselves. The second day, as Janet worried about leaving me alone while she and the children went on a hike along a trail she and I had discovered together sixteen years earlier, I told her, "I'm as happy as a clam," which pretty well summed up my state of mind at that moment.

Janet: Before the children and I returned from our hike, Rex knew he was getting sick, and by that evening he had developed a fever. We contemplated cutting the trip short, which Rex wouldn't hear of; so after consulting with our doctor in Provo, I started him on the intravenous antibiotics we had packed but had hoped we would not have to use. Fortunately, within twenty-four hours his fever did subside even though he was still very weak. We all tried to keep him comfortable as he encouraged us to get out, have fun, and then share our experiences with him.

The flight home can only be described as miserable, and it was evident by the time we landed in Salt Lake City that Rex needed to return to the hospital. He insisted that we go home first, largely so that the children wouldn't be overly concerned about his condition, but we were there only a few minutes before we knew he could not stay.

As had been the case for so many years, my foremost concern was Rex's health, while his was the work he had to do and the commitments he had made. In particular, he was concerned with being able to make an upcoming trip to Denver, Colorado, where he was scheduled to argue a case in behalf of BYU before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit on January 25, 1996. And, as had generally been the case, he did respond to the antibiotics and was able to leave the hospital a week later. This time, however, he left with an oxygen tank that now helped supplement the needs of his ailing lungs.

Before leaving on Rex's trip to Colorado, we found ourselves growing more comfortable with our new routine, which involved monitoring oxygen levels, administering antibiotics through Rex's Hickman catheter, and providing respiratory therapy, but which also involved enjoying the many things we were able to do. Through it all, Rex remained remarkably active, driving himself to meetings and climbing stairs when he probably should have taken elevators.

One day, Rex was able to walk into the law school to hear our son Michael argue in the annual moot court competition. Rex was overcome with emotion to even be there, and when Michael took first place, he enjoyed a moment of understandable pride. When we left for Denver a short time later, however, Rex was feeling quite weak, and so we rented a wheelchair for him to use on the trip. Pushing him through the two airports while juggling his oxygen tank was a new experience for me, but by the time we reached the courthouse in Denver it had almost become second nature. When I hit a bump and almost knocked him onto the floor, Rex continued to joke with the other lawyers, asked me to turn his oxygen up, and rearranged the papers that had slipped from his lap—all in a casual manner that distracted us from the fact that this was the first time he had entered a courtroom in a wheelchair and on oxygen.

For a moment, as he approached the bench to plead his case, it was sobering to see him looking frail and sitting in a wheelchair instead of standing tall as I had seen him so many times before. But as his confident voice began, "May it please the Court . . . " I saw how glad he was to be there. We were where he wanted to be, he was doing what he loved and did so well, and there was no space for sadness.

When his argument was over, we returned to the courthouse halls, greeted friends, briefly discussed the case with the other BYU lawyers, and then braved the cold Denver winter on our short walk back to our hotel for lunch. We found a table convenient for a wheelchair, checked Rex's oxygen level, and ordered soup and salad. Rex was jubilant, the conversation was lively, and I found myself forgetting our new circumstances. Rex wanted things to be normal, and as nearly as possible, we made that happen.

We returned to Provo later that day, and as Rex fell asleep that night, I reflected on one of our first days at NIH, when I talked briefly with a woman who was pushing her husband through the hospital halls in a wheelchair. When she told me he had been battling cancer for ten years, I didn't think I could ever do what she was doing, but my time had come and I found I could. Now, almost nine years later, I bowed my head and thanked my Father in Heaven for giving me the strength to do what I had to do. As I offered that quiet prayer, however, I felt gratitude for something more than strength: I felt joy and peace as I thought about helping Rex do all the things he loved doing. We still laughed and talked and prayed together. I still liked us.

Rex awoke and found me with damp eyes. "What's with you?" he asked. "I'm just happy," I answered honestly, and he squeezed my hand.
