Rex E. Lee, Janet Lee, Jim Bell, Marathon of Faith ( 1996)

Chapter 9

Reflections

Rex: If I could trade my physical body of 1995 for the body I had in 1985—even allowing for the normal deterioration that comes with age—I would surely do so. Nevertheless, I have learned some valuable lessons, and as those lessons have been added to my fund of knowledge and understanding, my life has improved correspondingly. Inevitably, we learn from any of life's experiences.

This is not to say that I recommend cancer, chemotherapy, and peripheral neuropathy as a way of improving your life. I don't; the costs are far too high. But I think it is possible for other people to learn these same lessons vicariously without having to endure the difficulties others have experienced. What I've learned may also be helpful for people who have the same or similar health challenges as I do. For both groups I offer the following thoughts.

Probably the most important thing I have learned is the value of life. I clearly recognize how essential it is to appreciate life and the many blessings it offers—not just as we look back in retrospect, but right now, at the very moment that the good things in life are happening to us. Prior to 1987, I had never given these matters any thought. Life was just there, and I lived it. Days, weeks, and months passed, and months in turn evolved into years, each year seeming to go by a little faster than the previous one. But I never gave any thought to the reality—or the consequences of the reality—that this succession of mortal time segments would not go on forever. Just as we assume that cancer is something that happens to someone else, so also we often feel that the end of mortality lies in such a distant future that there is no point in thinking about it.

And then, on June 22, 1987, I suddenly and abruptly faced the probability that I would never experience 1988, and I of course immediately began to long for more time. When my cancer was later declared to be in remission and I was released from the hospital and returned to a more normal life in Provo, I had an entirely different outlook on life and the segments of time of which life, after all, consists. Every day, every week, every year was a bonus. I felt that way in 1987, and I have felt that way ever since.

The point was brought home to me again in February 1990, when for three horrible days—probably the worst days of my life—I once again thought I would never see another Christmas, probably not even the upcoming BYU graduation in April. Then, when I was told that I had a less aggressive form of cancer than the initial diagnosis had indicated and that I could live for somewhere between three and thirteen more years, I was literally ecstatic. My mind raced through all the wonderful things that could happen to me even if I were granted only three additional years. In my relief, I felt it was not that my life had been shortened; rather, it had been extended.

I concede that because of my illnesses it is probably easier for me than for most people to regard each passing day as a bonus, but there is no logical reason that others who have not had a life-threatening disease cannot learn from my experience rather than having to endure it themselves. We can learn to appreciate the value of each of the days, months, years, or decades to which we look forward.

The second lesson I learned centers around the same issue of appreciating the value of life and health—not from the standpoint of the "here and the now" or the future, but rather in retrospect. Since the time of my illnesses, I have noticed many people, both friends and strangers, whose physical abilities have been impaired, many of them much more seriously than mine and at a much younger age. I am now deeply grateful for the fact that I had fifty-two years of virtually perfect health, with hardly a day of sickness during all that time. During those fifty-two years, my energy supply was virtually inexhaustible. I was able to run thirteen marathons, including two at Boston and one that I finished in under three hours. Today, my energy supply is very definitely exhaustible. Not only am I unable to run marathons; I cannot run at all. But I appreciate in retrospect those fifty-two good years.

A closely related fact is that I can still do much that makes my life happy. To be sure, there are a lot of things I can't do—things I see my friends doing, things in which I wish I could participate. One of the things I have learned in this respect is that attitude, mind-set if you will, is all-important. Just as it is crucial for me to regard life as having been extended rather than shortened, it is equally important to concentrate not on the things that I cannot do but on things that I still can do that can make my life very happy if I will let them.

This latter effort has at times been difficult, because I have struggled with two conflicting inner voices. Each of them speaks to me on a regular basis. My conflict is, to which of these should I listen? The first says, "Isn't it a shame? You'll never run another marathon. To put it bluntly, you have become to the marathon what Bart Simpson is to the Nobel Prize. You remember all those roughhouse games you used to play with your children, and how many pleasant memories you associate with them? How much of that can you still do? And remember that week-long hike you took with your son Tom and other Boy Scouts into the Uintahs, and you'd always planned to take that hike again with the entire family? Well, forget it. And what about Lake Powell? It will never be the same again. Cliff jumping and water skiing are out of the question. So are the long hikes that include climbing steep sandstone hills. Things are really bad."

The other voice says, "Things are really good. You are alive. Because your central nervous system is unaffected by your illnesses, you can still engage in challenging and interesting intellectual activities. There are still games you can play with your grandchildren, including many of the same ones you used to play with your children. And Lake Powell? You can drive the boat, ride on the water weenie, and laugh and joke and play with your children and grandchildren. Come to think of it, it isn't all that bad to be the one who stands on the bow of the boat and yells out instructions as to where to put the anchors. What you now have is a legitimate excuse to pick the cushy jobs and leave the tough ones to someone else."

I faced a similar conflict when I came out of the hospital in May of 1995. The experience left me very weak and lacking in energy. Regaining that energy was exasperatingly slow and initially was the cause of considerable discouragement and even a bit of resentment. To be sure, my energy was increasing, but the rate of increase was tortoise-like. What I found was that I had to concentrate not on comparing my energy level with what it had been before I went into the hospital but with what it had been the week before.

After my cancer was diagnosed, a topic of conversation that was difficult to discuss centered around the reasons I may have gotten cancer and the reasons I was later cured. Some wanted to discuss the question "Why me?" I think that included within that simple little two-word question are two elements. The first is the question "Why was I the one who got cancer?" That question, interestingly enough, was never one I asked myself. But many of my friends did ask it, some of them with a tinge of resentment and some with more than just a tinge. The second element of the question is "Why did I survive, when others—people who were every bit as worthy, every bit as needed by their families, and for whom just as many family members and friends prayed just as fervently—are not alive today?" That second question is the one I asked.

With regard to the first question, the question of why I got cancer, Janet and I heard comments based on two quite opposite premises. The first and probably the most common idea was that bad things—or at least really terrible things like cancer—just shouldn't happen to good people. That is a notion with very ancient roots.

Consider Job. His friends felt that his terrible illnesses were a manifestation of his wickedness. Some of our acquaintances seemed to wonder the same things Job's friends wondered: What had I done to deserve this illness? I often thought, when that question was raised, of a similar question put to the Savior concerning a blind man: "Who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?" (John 9:2-3).

During my stay at NIH, I received a card from a longtime friend at the Justice Department with whom I have carried on a longstanding and good-natured banter about the net value of my Mormon lifestyle. His card contained a six-word variation on this theme that has prevailed from Job's day to ours. His card said, "Well, so much for clean living."

The other assumption, made by some other friends and acquaintances, was quite the opposite from the first: In their view, my cancer was due to my righteousness, rather than the lack thereof. I was being tested because I was so valiant.

This response reminded me of a story I've heard Elder Dallin H. Oaks tell about the man who was being ridden out of town on a rail and who commented that if it weren't for the honor of the thing, he would just as soon walk.

For me, the answer to the first aspect of the "Why me?" question seems fairly clear. I got cancer not because I was particularly wicked or because I was particularly righteous. The Savior himself made that clear in his answer to the question about the blind man. The Savior explained, "Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest in him" (John 9:3). I believe that what this and other scriptures teach is that the plan under which we are here necessarily assumes that we are on our own as to many matters, and one of those is susceptibility to serious illness or other disasters. If our Heavenly Father intervened to spare really good people from those kinds of experiences, much of the effect of this life's developmental and testing process would be blunted. If it were readily and objectively determinable that living a certain kind of life—either good or evil—in effect immunized a person from many of life's crises, it would be much easier to persuade people to live such a life. As it is, the case must be made exclusively on the merits of living a good life.

What about the second question, the one I asked myself: Why have I been spared, when others with similar illnesses have died? Here again, my friends—this time by the trainload—have been willing to supply the answer. My life was preserved, they say, because there were important things for me to do here—specifically, my work as president of BYU since 1989. I think that is what Janet believes in her heart.

I respect that view, and I acknowledge that it may be correct. But I am reluctant to accept it unequivocally for three reasons. First, it seems inappropriate and immodest for me to take that view when, in fact, other sons and daughters of God have such important missions to fulfill on earth. Second, every argument—and I mean every argument, including the one that the Lord needed a BYU president to succeed Jeff Holland—that could be made as to why I have been left on this earth can also be made for my friend Terry Crapo, whose cancer took his life in 1982, and to others as well. Certainly someone else could have served in my place. And finally, the only thing that is really certain is that we just don't know why some people recover from serious illness while others, with the same illness, the same worthiness, and the same faith and prayers, do not.

Both the scriptures and my own personal experiences and observations make it very clear that formal, extraordinary efforts (principally fasting and prayer) to invoke divine intervention on behalf of loved ones are proper, should be undertaken, and frequently bear fruit. But we cannot be assured this will always be the case. Indeed, if it were the case, two of the fundamental premises of this existence—the need for independent earthly experiences and the need to be tested—would be frustrated.

Far more important to me than knowing why I recovered from the first cancer and why the second has been kept at bay is taking full advantage of the fact that both things have happened, in fulfillment of the most fervent prayers that I have ever offered. What I do know is that I am alive; I am able to live outside a hospital, away from an IV pole, and to do work that I love; and I am blessed with a family whom I love and particularly with a wife who during so many difficult times gave me a new insight into what love really means.

The Savior has told us that we should love one another even as ourselves. I take that quite literally as the ultimate manifestation of love: concern and feeling for every other human being. Christ himself is the only person who has achieved that state. But during my many illnesses, I learned that it is possible to achieve that complete love for some individual people. And I saw it in Janet toward me. I came to realize, quite literally, that my life, my welfare and happiness, were just as important to her as were her own.

I first saw it manifest in her decision to go with me to NIH. On its face, that seemed like quite an impractical decision, even bordering on irrationality. We had a large family, all of whom needed caring for and four of whom were still living at home. And the youngest was just a small child. It made little sense for her to leave these responsibilities and travel two thousand miles east to be with me when, as I assumed at the time, there was little she could do since she was not a doctor. But I could soon tell that this was not an open issue; she was going. And she did.

The depth of her feelings for me became even more apparent once we arrived in Bethesda. I deeply appreciated her direct involvement with the doctors, her in-depth acquisition of understanding about the nature of my disease and its possible treatments, and her voluntary involvement as part of my medical team. Any one of the doctors was with me, at the most, once or twice a day, usually for less than a half hour. But Janet was there virtually all the time. She saw things they did not, simply because she was a more constant observer. And because she had at least a good working knowledge of some of the characteristics of my cancer, and because her instincts for health matters are borderline phenomenal, she could pick up signals that they did not. Time after time at NIH and in the years since then, she would make suggestions as to things that ought to be done—and she was not at all hesitant to make them. The doctors and nurses soon came to respect her ideas because more often than not they had real merit.

To be sure, she was not at the hospital every hour of every day, but she was there most of the time. And I began to worry about her health—her emotional if not her physical health—when I considered the amount of time she spent at the hos-pital. We had many friends in the area because for five of the preceding six years, the Washington, D.C., area had been our home. These friends noticed Janet's constant attention to me and were concerned about the same thing as I. They would go out of their way to invite her to events that might take her mind, at least temporarily, away from my illness. Consistently, I would urge her to accept those invitations or at least to do something that would take her outside the hospital. I was always telling her, "Look, I have to stay here. I have no choice. But you do. I appreciate your being here, but you shouldn't have to bear this much of my burden." And in fact, she did accept a few of those invitations, principally to accommodate people whose only objective was to be helpful. But she always said that during those times her mind was focused mostly on what might be happening in my hospital room.

These acts of love were not limited to Janet. Each of our children—at many different times and in many different ways—have demonstrated their love for me and helped me endure the challenges I have faced.

When I left Provo to travel to NIH in June of 1987, I was facing the probability that I would never see another Christmas with my family. When my second cancer was initially diagnosed in February 1990, I felt certain that I would not see my son Michael leave on his mission (let alone return), would not witness any more of my children being married or graduating from high school or college, and would not do many of the other things that fill parents with joy. I have no idea why I have lived for so many years beyond what anyone expected. What I do know is that I have savored and will yet savor every moment I spend with a wife and children who have, through their love, made each day of my life worth living.

Janet: It is a wet winter morning near the end of 1995. I have awakened especially early and have decided to head out for a run by myself, despite the dark, cloudy sky and the fact that I will have to run alone. Usually, I much prefer to run with Diana and Melissa, but we didn't made arrangements last night and it is too early to call.

I dress quietly, so as not to disturb Rex, and go downstairs to let the dog out while I finish tying my shoes. Before I even have my second shoe tied, Ike is scratching at the door, begging to come back in and thus alerting me to the fact that it is cold and rainy. For a second, I consider running on Rex's treadmill, but I decide the time in the quiet outside will be worth getting drenched. So I step out into the cool morning, closing the door behind me. As I run down our driveway and head south toward the Provo Temple, I feel free and happy to be outside. As I pick up speed and dodge a few puddles, I think about what it means to close a door and move ahead once a decision is made.

My feet move at a steady pace, and I think of the marathon I ran in 1994 with Diana, Wendy, and Stephanie. When I began training for this race, I could barely comprehend running 26.2 miles. I had been running six miles a day for years, but the thought of running more than four times that distance seemed impossible. But with incremental increases, I soon found that running twelve miles seemed more effortless to me than running five miles had years before.

The marathon itself was harder than I had imagined, particularly the last seven miles. I found myself trying to look ahead, wondering what hills I had yet to climb. I also looked back, worrying about who might be passing me. Whichever way I looked, my pace seemed to slow. Then, as is common in marathons, another runner joined me and said, as if he could read my mind, "Don't get discouraged . . . I've run this race before. The end isn't as bad as it may seem from here, and there's water up ahead." Then he went on.

I think about how difficult it would be for me to keep running through the cold if I kept looking back at the door or too far ahead in anticipation of my destination. I wouldn't notice the sky as it begins to lighten, smell breakfast cooking at a neighbor's house, or see white ribbons of smoke drifting from another's chimney. It makes me feel warm, in the chill of the morning, to be among neighbors who are awakening to the beginning of a new day.

My route through our neighborhood is a nice change from my usual run up Provo Canyon. When I head up the canyon, somehow I have the sense of running away from my cares. This morning, I feel more centered, more grounded to my world of reality. There is no conversation with my daughters; I am left simply with my own thoughts. As I pass the temple and run down the hill toward the Missionary Training Center, I can tell that this is going to be a soul-searching morning. I feel a sense of contentment and peace, and I know this will be a good run. I haven't been able to run in a few days, so it feels especially good to have the wind in my face and hair as I slip deeper into my thoughts.

My mind turns to the many times Rex and I ran this route together. We ran it in the fall, when leaves crunched beneath our feet. We ran it in the winter, with snow dusting our faces. Together we marveled at the new birth of springtime, and in summers we felt the scorching sun. What a wonderful cycle the seasons make, and we have enjoyed them all.

I think of Rex at home, still sleeping. Last night as I was falling asleep with my head on his shoulder, I listened to the rhythm of his breathing. I had just finished giving him a ten- day cycle of intravenous antibiotics, and the whistling and wheezing were gone from his lungs. My memory of those clear, deep breaths is like a song in my ears and makes me smile. Our past experiences tell me that the pneumonia will return, possibly within a few days, and I know I must enjoy each day that he is free of infection.

I think of him awaking, and I wonder if that simple act each day is like a bad dream for him as his senses surface, his pain registers more keenly, and he is once again aware of all he cannot do.

When he awakes, he will know where I am. At first, when he couldn't run, I felt I should stay home too, but he insisted, with his characteristic unselfishness, that I go ahead without him. "There's no point in both of us staying here," he would tell me. He is always logical, but still I would feel guilty as I left the house. For a time, I would walk with him and then run either before or after that time together. But the neuropathy has advanced now to the point where even walking to his car is an effort.

Seeing Rex in pain is hard for me. He tells me that it never ceases. There is effort in his breathing. His legs ache and are getting harder to move all the time. Yet I am learning that it doesn't help either of us if I allow myself to feel his discomfort so personally that I become his partner in pain. What he needs more than my empathy is my strength.

We are dealing with changes in our lives. Rex's care takes much of my time, yet I now find tasks routine that a few years ago I could not have imagined performing. As we take one day at a time, we are adjusting to new treatments, new medications, and new needs. I now must button Rex's shirts, and I help him up and down the stairs. Recently, in an uncharacteristic moment of frustration, he said to me, "I'm no good to you anymore. I just can't do what I used to be able to do for you." I assured Rex that he remains everything he has ever been to me, that I know what he is and what he will always be, that I really do not see him as any less than what he has always been. It was typical of him that within a few minutes, he was able to set the frustration aside and move on with the day.

Continuing on with our happy lives is important to both of us. Although we are constantly reminded of the progression of his illness, we never give up hoping for more time together. I remember that a few days ago, a doctor said something that made my heart glad. I had asked him how long a particular treatment Rex was receiving would last, and he responded that it could go on for years. I didn't question him. I elected instead to be left with the thought that the two of us could be together for years to come.

As I turn north and run along Timpview Drive, I look up at Mount Timpanogos, which is shrouded in a thick white cloud that dwarfs her majesty. A blanket of snow will cover her for several more months, and storms will blow against her surface. But neither wind nor rain nor snow will wear her down. The vegetation will lie dormant under her cold, white crust, but with the warmth of spring will come rivers and streams, nourishing the flowers and greenery that will come alive again and delight the strong and brave who are determined to reach new heights. But until spring, Timp will undergo a much-needed metamorphosis, as her ground soaks up the moisture it will need to produce life once again. I wonder if I, too, am in a time of preparation and nourishment that will help me stand against greater storms to come.

We have been through such a mixture of seasons, Rex and I. One day it is winter, then the next day it's spring. It all depends on how he feels or what a doctor says. Some days, we feel the winds of winter for an hour, and then spring bursts forth as we attend a dinner, a devotional, a musical, or a sporting event. Our spirits soar and then they slide, but through the ups and downs we feel a gentle peace that all is well, that God is in his heaven, and that he is aware we are here. We feel comfort knowing that he whose will shall be done knows us and loves us.

I run as far north as Timpview Drive goes and then turn south again on my way home. I want to be home for a few minutes with Christie before she leaves for school, and I need to help Rex get ready for the day. As I run past Rock Canyon School, where each of our seven children attended elementary school, I watch three children dart across the crosswalk, with lunchboxes held tightly and backpacks hanging like camels' humps over their bulky coats. In my mind's eye, I see my own children as they were a few years ago: Stephanie with her Holly Hobbie lunchbox and Michael wearing Tom's old brown coat with fake fur around the hood. He is lost somewhere in its immensity, but because it belonged to Tom, Michael feels bigger. I remember them walking to school "together," with Michael about five paces ahead of his younger sister. I think about our lives then, and for a moment I desperately want to go back. "You can't go back," Rex's voice interrupts. But for the moment, his logic doesn't deter me.

I try to remember us—what we were like, what we thought about, the depth of our understanding. Life was good. I liked Rex being healthy and strong, even if that was something I took for granted. But when I think of us then as compared to now, I realize how much we have learned. Rex's physical body was stronger, but he now has so much more spiritual strength. He is more empathetic. His understanding of life with all of its complexities has intensified, and his faith in God has matured. He has learned patience, become more sensitive, and increased in his awareness of others.

And me? I remember myself as young and inexperienced. I was raising seven children, active in the Church, and busy with Rex's involvement with the law school as well as my own endeavors. As I look at that time more clearly, I recognize that I have grown too. I realize I have gained insights into our Savior's life and atonement, events that sustain and lift us. The challenges we have faced have brought new understanding, which I now see as an essential part of God's plan. Rex and I share a love for each other that I could not have comprehended as a starry-eyed coed, looking into Rex's warm brown eyes, or even as a young mother busy with an ever-active family.

I have come to see hope as something beyond merely wishing my husband could be well. I am not yet ready to give up that hope, but when it no longer seems possible, I will hope that he can still be with us a while longer; and when the shortness of his earthly stay is evident, I will hope for his comfort and for the strength to help him through his final moments of mortality. Then, when he is no longer here, I will hope that my life will merit my joining him some day and that I can fill the time in between with happiness, with an appreciation for my family, with a clarity of purpose, and with the strength to give service—all with much-needed steadfastness and faith in my Father in Heaven.

As I turn up the hill toward home, I realize that I have been gone for more than an hour. People are rushing to work and school, and I know I need to hurry to help Rex. Then, as I walk up the driveway toward our house, I think of the last time Rex and I ran along the Potomac River, just before his first cancer was discovered. I think of that spring morning when we laughed like children in the warm Virginia sunshine, and I am keenly aware of all the learning and all the love that have filled our lives since that day. I turn for a moment and watch the sun trying to make its way through the clouds, and I think of all the mornings when that same sun has risen over these mountains, warming and brightening our lives and reaffirming the existence of a God in heaven who gives light and life to all the world.

With gratitude, I look back over the years, remembering the process as well as the progress. Then, with faith overshadowing my fears, I look into our unknown future and open the door. I know Rex is waiting.
