Rex E. Lee, Janet Lee, Jim Bell, Marathon of Faith ( 1996)

Epilogue

Early on the Sunday of February 25, 1996, feeling too exhausted to attend church, Rex suggested that he could teach our Sunday School class if we held it in our home. (We had taught the seventeen- and eighteen-year-olds in our ward for several years—and we had enjoyed this calling immensely.) Rex's suggestion was characteristic of his desire to find ways to lighten my responsibilities, and on this Sunday morning, he again wanted to help in some way as he watched me prepare for our large family Sunday dinner.

Sometimes we taught our lessons together. Other times we alternated, having one teach while the other gave backup support. Lately, the job had been largely mine, with our son Michael filling in if we were out of town or Rex was in the hospital. Our class was large, somewhere between fifteen and twenty, and we were constantly amazed at the depth of these high school students' spiritual understanding. Through the years we have been pleased to have been able to have our daughters Stephanie, Melissa, and now Christie in our class.

As I brought the class into our living room, Rex was already seated in an armchair, with life-giving oxygen being provided to his damaged lungs through tubing extending to a tank in the next room. Earlier, he had asked if he needed to wear a white shirt and tie, but I knew there was great effort and some pain involved in his changing clothes, so I encouraged him to dress only once. He had opted for a more casual combination of cotton pants and a sport shirt that he could wear with comfort the rest of the day.

I watched with great admiration and love as he taught our class, asking questions, listening to responses, and praising students for their knowledge of the gospel. He spoke of the Book of Mormon, of its truthfulness, and of its application to our lives today. The last scripture I remember him quoting was "I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded" (1 Nephi 3:7), and I could not help but reflect that Rex, throughout his life, had always done exactly that.

When the lesson was over and the class left, I made sure that Rex was comfortable before I went to sacrament meeting. As I drove the short distance to our chapel, a melancholy feeling came over me. I thought of the struggle Rex was undergoing, how difficult it was for him to perform ordinary tasks, and how dependent he was on me to get through each day. I was willing to do anything necessary to be with him, and he pushed himself to keep going. And with each increment in the progression of his illness, he adjusted with an attitude of acceptance that was beyond my expectation of simple submission.

A year or two ago, he had dreaded the time when he could not walk, but now we were planning trips with a wheelchair and oxygen tanks with joyous anticipation. His attitude—both spoken and unspoken—was "Just let me live my life, and I will do it with whatever limitations I am given." I loved his willingness to be part of our lives for as long as possible, but I was beginning to wonder how long that would be. As I pulled up in front of the church, I sat in the car for a moment and bowed my head. A prayer I had been afraid to offer was spoken silently and somewhat reluctantly. In that moment I knew his life was in the Lord's hands—and that no matter how hard I tried to keep him here, I was not the one in control.

It was with great effort that I whispered, "Thy will be done," but peace came in knowing that while I could not comprehend all things, the loving Father to whom I had just prayed was both omniscient and omnipotent.

After our meetings, the family gathered in our home for Sunday dinner. The conversation was lively, as usual, and the grandchildren made their customary exits and entrances into our family room, outside, and downstairs in the playroom. With typical good humor, Rex visited with everyone, ate dinner with us, and was the center of attention even from his place on the couch. When he needed something, others were eager to get it for him, and when he wanted to walk a short distance, there was always someone at his side. Although his health had declined over the past several weeks, we were all used to his routine, and the day seemed quite normal. In fact, with all of the familiar activity, I found myself setting aside my earlier concerns.

Although this was a Sunday like so many others we had spent together, it was meaningful, with its beauty growing out of its simplicity. Before everyone left, our sons asked Rex if he would like them to give the sacrament to him. Tom and Michael went into the kitchen and made the proper preparation, returning to the family room where Rex remained on the couch. First, the three of them sang a hymn in Spanish. They sang with gusto in a language they all loved. Then the prayers were offered and the bread and water were administered with reverence. Following the sacrament, Tom, Michael, and Diana's husband, Steve, gave Rex a blessing. There were tears in our eyes as we all gathered for a family prayer.

We said good-bye to everyone but our two youngest children, Melissa and Christie, who remained with us for the next couple of hours until it was time for bed. The four of us were unaware that this would be our last evening with Rex in our family room. He laughed and talked with us the way we had done on so many other occasions. The girls then helped me with the difficult task of helping Rex upstairs, and we joked about wishing we could carry him piggyback the way he had conveyed the girls to their beds when they were younger. We adjusted the oxygen and then told Melissa good-bye when her husband, Brett, came to take her home. I then helped Rex get into his pajamas while Christie got ready for bed.

When she came in to say good night, Rex was lying in bed exhausted. He perked up at the sound of her voice and spoke her name to get her attention. " Christie," he said, "I just want you to know how very proud I am of you. Your participation in our Sunday School class this morning was outstanding, and I loved the way you spoke up with confidence and enthusiasm. I am so pleased that you are in our class. In fact, Christie, I am so very pleased with everything you are doing with your life. I am proud of the way you interact with your friends and family, I am proud of your performance at school, and I am very proud to be your father. I love you very much."

"I love you, too, Dad," she said as she kissed us good night.

For the next few moments in the darkness of our room, we talked happily about the U.S. Supreme Court case that Rex would argue in a few weeks and of our two new grandchildren who would be born in May and October. Then just before Rex fell asleep, I told him I had a new plan—that we should invite a few couples into our home once a week so we could enjoy being with friends without the worry of transporting oxygen. "It will be fun," I told him. "I love it when you talk that way," he said and closed his eyes.

The next morning, after months of recurring respiratory infections complicated by his cancer and progressive peripheral neuropathy, Rex was taken to the hospital the day before his sixty-first birthday. During the night, the all too familiar pattern of chills and fever had set in, and when it became clear that his need for oxygen was exceeding our home supply, we left for what was to be our last trip to the hospital together. Characteristically, he kept putting off our departure because he planned to participate in a scheduled conference call, but we finally had to leave before the call came.

For the next two weeks Rex was in the intensive care unit at the Utah Valley Regional Medical Center. The family gathered around his hospital bed, at first engaging him in conversation and, on his birthday, joining with him in a quiet celebration. Then, as his condition worsened, we simply spoke words of love and admiration. At times, our tears mingled with laughter as we remembered our favorite "Rex Lee" stories and personality traits.

For a time I felt an almost desperate need to speak with him, to hear and be heard. But as communication became difficult and then impossible, previous conversations between us played through my mind. Words unspoken now seemed insignificant and unnecessary. A lifetime of sharing had been stored in our hearts. We had found fulfillment in each other's successes and had felt sadness in our sorrows. He had helped with my challenges and rejoiced in my triumphs. Likewise, I had supported him in all that he did.

Now, in his hospital room, I thought about the many things he had been asked to do, and I was aware that what we were doing now was the most difficult of all. I tried to think of what he would tell me if he could, and then I remembered what I needed to know.

Rex's accomplishments were many, and although he didn't aspire to the positions given him, he worked hard to achieve excellence in everything he did. Each time we faced a turning point in our lives, I would ask what I could do to help. His answer was always the same and always unequivocal: "Just be happy, Janet." Now, in the midst of our final challenge, his words came back to me. Yet this previously simple request now seemed an impossibility.

For almost nine years, Rex and I had known that as his health challenges increased, we would fight for his life together. I had always promised that as living became more difficult for him, I would be there holding his hand, giving comfort, and easing his pain in any way I could. I had told him that when his mortal strength was gone, I would be strong for both of us, finding joy in loving life as we had always done together. I would see him in each of our children and grandchildren, I would be reminded of him in every season, and I would feel close to him each time I bowed my head in gratitude to our Father in Heaven. I would run and think of him, and when I became too old to run, I would walk and imagine him by my side. I had offered these promises effortlessly and lovingly. But I had never considered happiness as part of the process of letting go.

On Monday, March eleventh, we knew that Rex's earthly life was coming to a close. Our seven children joined me in his hospital room as we spoke of favorite shared experiences, of our love for him, and of our faith in God. The last outpouring of our hearts paid tribute to our husband and father. Then, as efficiently and purposefully as he had lived his life, surrounded by our eternal family and with his hand in mine, Rex left mortality. As I held him close, I was filled with appreciation for the life we had shared. I felt his spirit soar as I whispered words of love and gratitude. I knew he was free from his pain, and I could feel his joy. Unexpectedly, the sharing of his triumph subdued my personal sadness as I said, "I am so happy for you, Sweetheart."

Together we had run many miles, loving life, raising our children, confronting illness, expressing our love for each other and for our Savior, and preparing for the day that we knew would come too soon. As I walked out of the hospital that afternoon, his words filled my heart: "Just be happy, Janet."
