Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, Women of Nauvoo ( 1992)

Preface

We walked the roads of old Nauvoo, now partly restored, during our first visit there together in 1984. During one evening, we strolled down a dusty road in the moonlight from Heber and Vilate Murray Kimball's home to the Joseph Smith properties on Water Street.

That particular evening, we remembered how Heber stopped at the Murray farmhouse to get a glass of water years before in New York. The owner of the farm asked his sixteen-year-old daughter, Vilate, to bring a glass and serve the thirsty young man. From that first meeting, a long courtship and loving relationship began.

A feeling arose in our hearts as we contemplated a walk Heber and Vilate made in Nauvoo during a particularly trying time when their faith was tested to the utmost (see pages 96-97).

This book is a small effort to rediscover and recall the rich spiritual heritage found in Nauvoo, especially among the great sisterhood that transcends both time and place. The sisters in Nauvoo, while sharing a common connection with the restored gospel, were quite diverse. Sometimes these sister Saints exhibited great faith, and at other times their faith faltered and failed them.

When faced with personal trials or institutional crises, each sister made her own decisions. A classic example is the story of Martha Hall Haven and Sarah Hall Scott, two sisters who arrived in Nauvoo in 1843 with their husbands.

Both women were full of hope and expectations as they gathered with the Saints on the Mississippi River. Each one, however, was an individual-complex and difficult to understand at times. Each reacted to the Nauvoo experience quite differently; finally, Sarah left Nauvoo, disappointed with life there and the direction the Church took in doctrinal matters. On the other hand, Martha rejoiced in the experience and headed west with the main body of Saints in 1846.1

The stories contained in this book represent numerous unrecorded stories of women in our history. Unfortunately, many contemporary diaries of both men and women connect these individuals only to their husband's name and refer to them as Brother So-and-so "and spouse." Historians are writing path-breaking studies dealing with nineteenth-century Mormon women, including those who settled Nauvoo some one hundred fifty years ago.2 Our own work in this book relies heavily on these articles and books written at a time when women's studies, in American history in general and in Mormon history in particular, are blossoming. Specifically, the works of Lavina Fielding Anderson, Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, Jill Mulvay Derr, and Carol Cornwall Madsen are most helpful. A representative example of their insightful efforts is found in Maureen Ursenbach Beecher and Lavina Fielding Anderson, eds., Sisters in Spirit: Mormon Women in Historical and Cultural Perspective (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1987). While we developed the many ideas and constructs of this work independently, they nevertheless have been clarified and enhanced by these scholars' research and publications. Few published histories of the Nauvoo period have attempted to go beyond the lives of prominent men and Church institutions. A refreshing exception is the recently released study by James B. Allen, Ronald K. Esplin, and David J. Whittaker, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841: The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in the British Isles (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1992). While narrating the early apostolic missions to Great Britain, the authors provide in chapter eleven, "Meanwhile, in Nauvoo" (pages 267-91), a delightful review of the women who sustained these men. A prodigious amount of research and writing on the broader history of Nauvoo has also contributed to this work.3

Still, much work needs to be done regarding women's history in general. Louise A. Tilly of the New School for Social Research spoke at a seminar sponsored by the University of California, Irvine, a few years ago. There she related a story of a historian who discussed women's participation in the French Revolution. At the end of the presentation, an older, well-known scholar of the French Revolution stood up and asked, "Now that I know that women were participants in the revolution, what difference does it make?"

Tilly then remarked that an "increasingly urgent task for women's history is to produce analytical problem-solving studies as well as descriptive and interpretive ones, and connecting their findings to general questions already on the historical agenda-not only analyzing its implications, but of connecting the problems of women's history to those of other histories."4

While our study is definitely descriptive, it also brings together some informative sources that may allow those interested in Nauvoo to readjust their view of the City of the Saints. Other vehicles, intended for the academic community, are being used to explore women's issues within the context of Mormon history; still there remains the challenge to connect these studies with the broader discussions of history.

When quoting from letters, diaries, and contemporary accounts, we have modernized spelling, punctuation, and capitalization when the text would otherwise be confusing or misleading, and we have spelled out abbreviated words in the interest of readability. Unusual or archaic words are defined within brackets.

We hope that this small work contributes to the growing literature, both academic and popular, of an incredible story of sisterhood established on the banks of the Mississippi River, and that it will help to establish a meaningful link with a vanishing world. As Nauvoo resident Eliza R. Snow wrote, "To narrate what transpired within the seven years, in which we built and occupied Nauvoo, the beautiful, would fill many volumes. That is a history that never will, and never can Ârepeat itself.' "5

The story of the women of Nauvoo highlights the sister Saints as individuals, as women as well as members of the Church, unique and diverse from each other, yet bound together in the bonds of community often stronger than biological ties.
