Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, Women of Nauvoo ( 1992)

1 An Unknown Story

Such is the heroism of the women of "Mormondom" but words would fail to tell it all and we can only look for the record of it in the archives above.

-Mary Ann Stearns Winters

Mary Ann Weston Maughan was born and raised a Methodist near Gloucester, England. She was baptized a member of the restored Church at the age of twenty-two and married a Latter-day Saint named John Davis in December of the same year. Within four months, however, she was a young widow without means of support. Her husband had been injured internally as the result of a beating by an anti-Mormon mob, and had also suffered a bad fall, all of which left him ill and bedridden for several weeks. His condition gradually worsened, and he died on 6 April 1841. Mary soon made preparations for the long trip to Nauvoo. She "started to walk a little way" with a company of fellow Saints, but soon came to a place where they were about to "lose sight of [her] father's house." She later recalled:

I sat down and I might have stayed there if some of the company had not come back for me. I was sick and quite overcome with the grief and sorrow I had passed through in the last three months. . . . We were a sorry company that traveled to Gloucester that morning. Myself and others wept all the way. . . . Now I had left all and was traveling alone to a land unknown to me, but I had cast my lot with the people of God and in him I put my trust.1

She also wrote:

The last and hardest trial was to take leave of my father, mother, brothers, and sisters. My dear good mother was most brokenhearted to see me go, but Father was more calm. . . . My two little sisters clung around my neck, saying, "We shall never see you again." I had not told them this, for I knew the parting from them would be very hard. Little Jane wanted to come with me, but this was impossible, for she was only eight years old.2

Among the many who left their homes to gather to Nauvoo, Mary is part of the little-known history of Nauvoo-the history of the women who settled the swamplands of old Commerce, Illinois, known by the Saints as Nauvoo and as the City of Joseph. These sister Saints-often alone and without companionship-made significant contributions to this beautiful city, and endured such difficulties as Joseph Smith's martyrdom and the western exodus. The institutional records of old Nauvoo-the ecclesiastical, economic, and civic records-tell a story; but the Relief Society minutes as well as the letters, diaries, and recollections of the women themselves tell another story of Nauvoo.3

Nevertheless, our view of life in Nauvoo from a woman's perspective is rather sparse. While Nauvoo-period letters, diaries, and journals of men are relatively plentiful, most of the information available about women's lives during this time comes from either a small collection of contemporary women's diaries and letters or a larger collection of recollections and autobiographical statements produced many years subsequent to the events in Nauvoo. This sparsity of primary sources from women of the Nauvoo period may be explained by a non-Mormon immigrant who pointed out, "Pioneer women were quite too busy in making history to write it."4

Although the diaries of the men in Nauvoo add to our understanding of the Saints' experiences, what they left unrecorded can often suggest something about the lives of their mothers, sisters, wives, and daughters. The sisters' own records show a rich variety of responses to the Nauvoo experience.5 The sisters noted or recalled the cheerful and lively moments as well as those of suffering and death.

As converts arrived in the City of the Saints, they testified to the new and strong ties formed with fellow Saints, a good beginning for a new life. While each responded differently to the challenges that life in Nauvoo presented-some with faith and others with doubt-each nevertheless left us something worth preserving.

The Saints arrived at the Mississippi River as refugees from state-sanctioned persecution in Missouri during the winter of 1838-39. Within seven years, they left their homes, farms, businesses, and temple in Nauvoo, Illinois, as a community in exile, and crossed the same river to the shores of Iowa. This time the Saints fled west to the Indian lands beyond the Missouri River to establish Winter Quarters. The following year, a vanguard pioneer company left Winter Quarters to blaze a trail to the Great Basin. In the Great Basin, the Saints established another community, Great Salt Lake City. Soon hundreds and thousands of Saints from North America, the British Isles, and Europe followed.

These pioneers brought with them what they could. More important, however, they brought with them the spiritual heritage of Nauvoo-of which the sisters were particular recipients.

During the seven years the Saints resided in eastern Iowa and western Illinois, they established the headquarters of the restored Church at Nauvoo, Illinois. They built several communities in the area before they were forced once again to find refuge in another location.6

Before their departure, however, the sister Saints in Nauvoo received choice blessings and promises through the Prophet Joseph Smith, blessings that sprang from important events beginning in 1842.

On a Thursday afternoon, 17 March 1842, twenty women met in the upper room of Joseph Smith's Red Brick Store in Nauvoo, Illinois. Also in attendance at this historic meeting were several Church leaders, including the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph organized the "Female Relief Society of Nauvoo" on this day. Emma Smith was selected to be the first president, with Elizabeth Ann Whitney and Sarah M. Cleveland as counselors, Eliza R. Snow as secretary, Phebe M. Wheeler as assistant secretary, and Elvira Annie Cowles as treasurer.

Emma Smith, the Prophet's wife, suggested the name by which the organization came to be known in this first meeting. She said on that occasion, "We are going to do something extraordinary. When a boat is struck on the rapids with a multitude of Mormons on board, we shall consider that a loud call for relief. We expect extraordinary occasions and pressing calls."7

The establishment of the first Relief Society was a remarkable event, because it was an important aspect of the "restoration of all things." Other women's groups were organized in America before, but the scope and vision invested by Joseph Smith in this particular organization made it a truly distinctive feature of the Church and a unique group among the women's benevolent societies of the day. The women themselves saw their "society," as it was commonly and consistently called in the minutes, as more than simply a charitable organization. The organization of the society also provided an official "seal" for the spiritual blessings granted to the sisters in Nauvoo.

By 1844, more than thirteen hundred women had joined the Nauvoo Relief Society. The society's involvement in the affairs in Nauvoo went beyond the responsibilities of taking care of the poor in Nauvoo.

The involvement of the sister Saints in diverse enterprises during the period was quite remarkable for the time. A few days following the organization of the Society, Joseph Smith said that they "should move according to the ancient Priesthood, hence they should be a select . . . choice, virtuous, and holy [Society]."8

In Nauvoo, Joseph Smith began to expand the role of women in the Church through the introduction of temple worship and ritual. Women received sacred ordinances and participated along with men-first in Joseph's "Quorum of the Anointed" and later in the completed Nauvoo Temple.9

The story of the first Relief Society is an aspect of the broader history of Nauvoo and is a part of the heritage Joseph Smith and the early sister Saints left to the Church today.

Nearly sixty-five years later, Church leader Orson F. Whitney wrote:

Among the outward evidences of the divine origin of "Mormonism," there is nothing that testifies more clearly or eloquently to the truth of the latter-day work, than the provision made therein for the uplifting and advancement of women; for the salvation and exaltation, in this world and in the world to come, of woman as well as man.10

The organization and establishment of the Relief Society in Nauvoo one hundred fifty years ago has left several important legacies to the sisters of the Church and to the membership in general. Among the important and significant treasures preserved from its founding are the minutes of the Relief Society of Nauvoo, an invaluable source. Not only does this record help one understand the historical setting of Joseph Smith's work among the sisters, but through its pages one can begin to see the role women play in the establishment of the kingdom of God.

The first Relief Society minutes, 17 March 1842, were originally recorded into the "Book of the Law of the Lord" by Willard Richards, a secretary of the Prophet. At a later time, these minutes were transcribed into the "Female Relief Society of Nauvoo" minute book. Following her call to act as secretary, Eliza R. Snow kept the minutes of the society's meetings in this important early record.

Eliza Snow, later the society's second general president, fulfilled her stewardship as secretary when she faithfully recorded the activities and proceedings of the meetings held in Nauvoo. When the Saints abandoned Nauvoo in 1846, she included the priceless records among the few items she brought across the plains to the Salt Lake Valley. In Utah, when Brigham Young called her to reorganize the Relief Society among the units of the Church, she carried the records with her from ward to ward to help local priesthood leaders organize units of the Relief Society according to the order set forth by the Prophet Joseph.

In 1905 Bathsheba W. Smith, general president of the Relief Society at the time, spoke to a group of Relief Society sisters in the Pioneer Stake and mentioned this important record book: "I have the book of the Relief Society Sister Eliza kept, and I am very proud of it."11

Portions of the Nauvoo Relief Society minutes were incorporated into several published sources, including History of the Church, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and The Words of Joseph Smith.12 These minutes have been a blessing to the Church and remain one of the invaluable records preserved in the Church archives.

The Nauvoo Relief Society minutes, along with the contemporary diaries, letters, and later reminiscences of the women who participated in the momentous events in the City of the Saints, provide an interesting and illuminating account of the Nauvoo period. This story has largely been forgotten by the Saints, and only recently has it been rediscovered.
