Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, Women of Nauvoo ( 1992)

2 Coming to Nauvoo—Sisters Gather

We walked until our shoes were worn out, and our feet became sore and cracked open and bled until you could see the whole print of our feet with blood on the ground.

-Jane Elizabeth Manning

Many of the Saints who fled across the open prairie of the state of Missouri and the Mississippi River bottoms during the harsh winter of 1838-39 to the safety of Iowa and Illinois were courageous women. These sisters were not simply acted upon by forces beyond their control; they were actors in this great drama of Mormon history.1

A few years later, these same women, augmented by many more recent converts, left Nauvoo in 1846 to begin their famous trek to Utah. These Latter-day Saint grandmothers, mothers, daughters, and sisters made their way through the wilderness of Iowa to a temporary gathering place, Winter Quarters, before beginning the long journey to the Great Basin.

Thousands of sister Saints and new converts arrived in Nauvoo with excitement and great expectations between the years 1839-46.2 Every sister, whether young or old, married or single, came to the City of the Saints with a sense of adventure-the very act of accepting the gospel message demanded tremendous courage and sacrifice. For many of these women, leaving family and friends behind to join their sisters in Nauvoo was truly a singular act of faith.

Unlike most of their pioneering non-Mormon contemporaries, Latter-day Saint women gathered to Ohio, Missouri, Illinois, and eventually Utah for non-economic reasons.3 They traveled to these various places with their families or alone for usually one reason, to be with the Saints. The gathering to Nauvoo was no different.

The story of the Saints' gathering to Nauvoo began in January 1839, when plans were established to assist the poorest Saints to move from Missouri. Drusilla Hendricks, whose husband was wounded at the Battle of Crooked River just a few months earlier, recalled this period:

We were compelled to stay at Far West until after the surrender, when we went home. The mob had robbed the house of bedding and, in fact, everything but my beds. My husband could not yet move hand or foot. Then we had to settle our business matters and fix to get out of the state. I went to work and sold what I could and gave our land for money to buy two yoke of cattle. Finally we had to leave everything, only what we could put into a little wagon.

About the middle of January, Father Joseph Smith and Father [Isaac] Morley, with five or six others, came and anointed and administered to my husband. They stood him on his feet and he stood by them holding to each arm. He began to work his shoulders. I continued to rub him with strong vinegar and salt and liniments. The brethren were leaving the state as fast as they could.4

The brethren were leaving the state because their lives were in immediate danger. Charles C. Rich left following an attempt on his life at Far West by Missouri militia personnel. His wife, Sarah Rich, was left behind and forced to make her way east to Illinois without his help. When the small group she traveled with reached the Mississippi River, the ice was broken up on the west side of the river and was running, so the ferry boat could not cross.

Having traveled so far, and now being only a few hundred yards from their destination yet unable to reach it, Sarah and another woman felt very downhearted. The knowledge that their husbands were on the opposite side in Quincy, Adams County, Illinois, waiting for them worsened the emotional strain of the situation. Because the ferry was not in operation, the only way they could cross was by using a skiff or a canoe to maneuver through the ice to the island and from there to walk on the ice to Quincy on the east side.

While Sarah waited on the riverbank, a male member of the group, George D. Grant, told her to cheer up because he would go over and tell Brother Rich she was there. In his attempt to cross, George fell through the ice and was barely saved by two other men. "So when we heard this news we went back to our wagons clearly discouraged," Sarah recalled. "I went into the wagon to cry, while Sister [Louisa Taylor] Stout and my dear father . . . prepared dinner."

Not much time elapsed before Sarah's husband learned that she was there, and he made the crossing himself with another Latter-day Saint brother. "Great was our joy to meet with our dear companions," she enthusiastically remembered, "who were compelled to part with us three months before and flee for their lives from a howling mob." On the following day, both husbands decided to take their wives across the river to better shelter and security, despite the river conditions. Because Sarah was pregnant and near delivery, she agreed to cross over immediately, as she did not know when the baby would be born.

They got into a canoe, and the men rowed them across the river to the point where they could cross the remainder of the way on the ice. Sarah left her aged father on the Missouri shore so he could take care of the teams and wagons until the ferry boat could cross. She remembered that the old man "stood with tears in his eyes watching us, not knowing whether we could reach shore or not."5

Emma Smith made her departure from Far West, Missouri, with a group of Saints on 7 February 1839. Her husband still languished in a "lonesome prison" in Liberty, Missouri. She wrote to him shortly thereafter:

No one but God, knows the reflections of my mind and the feelings of my heart when I left our house and home, and almost all of everything that we possessed excepting our little children, and took my journey out of the State of Missouri, leaving you shut up in that lonesome prison. But the reflection is more than human nature ought to bear, and if God does not record our sufferings and avenge our wrongs on them that are guilty, I shall be sadly mistaken.6

Emma finally arrived at the western shore of the frozen Mississippi River. Somewhat fearful of the thin ice, she separated her two horses and walked apart with two-and-one-half-year-old Frederick and eight-month-old Alexander in her arms. Julia held securely to her skirt on one side and positioned young Joseph on the other side to begin the walk across the river.

Emma also carried Joseph's manuscripts of his Bible translation in heavy bags, along with her husband's other personal papers fastened securely to her waist. She then walked across the frozen river to safety in Illinois.

Mary Fielding Smith, whose husband, Hyrum, was also shut up in Liberty Jail, told her experiences during the difficult exodus in a letter to family in June 1839. She recounts the tale of her tribulations:

My husband was taken from me by an armed force, at a time when I needed, in a particular manner, the kind [of] care and attention of such a friend, instead of which, the care of a large family was suddenly and unexpectedly left upon myself, and in a few days after, my dear little Joseph F. was added to the number. Shortly after his birth I took a severe cold, which brought on chills and fever; this, together with the anxiety of mind I had to endure, threatened to bring me to the gates of death. I was at least four months entirely unable to take any care either of myself or child; but the Lord was merciful in so ordering things that my dear sister could be with me. Her child was five months old when mine was born; so she had strength given her to nurse them both.

Mary recalled the persecution the Saints encountered following the fall of Far West and their subsequent expulsion: "This happened during my sickness, and I had to be removed more than two hundred miles, chiefly on my bed." The journey was hard on the family. "I suffered much on my journey; but in three or four weeks after we arrived in Illinois, I began to amend, and my health is now as good as ever."7

Martha Pane Jones Thomas arrived in Missouri from her home in Kentucky in 1837. She and her family departed the former Mormon capital in Missouri on Valentine's Day, 1839. Martha was eight months pregnant when she began the journey.

We started across the prairie to Tenny's Grove, about twenty miles [from Far West]. The snow was about six inches deep. The children all barefoot, except the oldest boy. To hear them crying at night with their feet cracked and bleeding was a grievous sight for a mother to bear. I would often grease them and put on clean stockings, instead of making them wash them when going to bed.

Hundreds of Saints were on the road heading east at the time. Their escape to Illinois was sometimes accomplished as fast as eight days, and other times it took as long as three weeks. The usual trip took between ten and eleven days. Some of the last Saints out of Far West found camp poles and wood for fires all along the way, provided by the Church's Committee for Removal. One man returning from Illinois to Far West reported over two hundred wagons between the Mississippi River and Far West, all heading for safety in Illinois. For those without sufficient provisions, the way stations provided welcome relief.

Martha Thomas's family "found stations all along the road with provisions." They were "much surprised as this was the first station we ever saw. We acknowledged the hand of God. Drew provisions and went onto the next, until we reached [the Mississippi River]. We could not cross for the ice. Several hundred families were camped on the river bank."

While camped at the river, word came that the militia intended to shoot all the Mormons still remaining in Far West on a certain day. Martha's husband arrived at their campsite from a meeting and said, "Mother, what do you think of our team going back to Far West?" He continued, "The Brethren and Sisters (for there were many widows and children) are all to be shot if they are not out by such a day." Martha responded, "Well, dump the things out by that log." Soon her husband was on his way back to help.

During the evening, the family drove four stakes into the ground and laid some poles, tied up with bed cords so that several quilts could be hung all around, except at one end, "which was left open so the heat of the log fire would shine in and keep [us] warm." Martha thought, "A Queen never enjoyed such a bedroom. It was a comfortable place [and] had one good night's rest in it."

The next day, boats began making one trip across the river per day. "Just imagine," Martha recalled, "I was left on the shore, with no living one with me, but four small children. The sun was down. I could not see across the river. I wrapped the children in the bed clothes. It was very cold and [I] sat down on the bed to watch for the boat. I began to look at my situation, not knowing what moment I might be taken sick [have the baby]. For the first time the tears stole down my face, on my own account. One of the little ones said, ÂMother, are you sick?' ÂNo,' said I, Âthe wind is so cold.' "

Just at the moment of despair, a fellow Saint, Brother Wiswager, rode up. "Seeing I was feeling bad," Martha fondly recalled, he "stayed with me until he heard the boat coming. He had twelve miles to ride after dark." He offered them lodging in Quincy, where he established his own family in a twelve-foot-square house. Brother Wiswager joked, "We have five chidlren, you have five, four grown persons, plenty of standing room!"

In a few days, Martha was "put to bed" and delivered a fine young baby boy, whom she named after Joseph Smith, who was still incarcerated in a prison in Missouri.8

Another Missouri Saint, Nancy Tracy, made a "cart out of two wheels of an old wagon" drawn by one horse. The small cart had "a bed sheet for a cover" and little room for any of the family's personal effects. Nancy, her husband, and three small children started their journey from Far West to Illinois sometime in March 1839. "It [was] storming incessantly," Nancy wrote. She continued her narrative:

We traveled on until we came to the Mississippi bottom. It was three miles across the river bottom. We were five days in crossing it through mud and water. I had to wade and carry my child six months old and gather brush at night to make my bed upon, for our cart was not large enough to sleep in and when it stormed, which it did nearly all the time, we had to take it as best we could. Well, we crossed the river at Quincy and traveled up the river, stopped one year near Payson, Illinois, and then came to Nauvoo.9

The people of Illinois, particularly the citizens of Quincy, reached out to help the refugees from Missouri. Writing to friends in the East, Elizabeth Barlow mentioned the help the Saints received in Illinois: "The people of Quincy had contributed between four and five hundred dollars for the poor Mormons. God had opened their hearts to receive us. May heaven's blessing rest upon them. We are hungry and they feed us, naked and clothed us. The citizens have assisted beyond all calculations."10

Following Joseph Smith's escape from his imprisonment in Missouri, he soon took steps to locate the Saints in a new gathering place, Commerce, Illinois, forty-five miles north of Quincy.

The gathering to Commerce, later called Nauvoo, was often a multi-step operation for these Missouri exiles. Leonora and Eliza Snow left their Missouri home and settled briefly in Lima, a community between Commerce and Quincy.

The Snow sisters found much-needed work as seamstresses and lodging for themselves and Leonora's two young children in an upstairs apartment of a home. The sisters, however, did not tell the owners that they were Mormon refugees. Sometime later, Eliza reported hearing the gentleman of the house "proclaiming loudly against the Mormons" in the parlor below their room. His accusations were based on rumors and hearsay. Eliza and Leonora noticed a change in his tone, as he told his visitors about the "two noble women" living in his home, insisting all the time that "no better women ever lived."11

Other sisters were able to go directly to the gathering place, so they packed their wagons again and started to rebuild their lives. Julia Ives Pack brought her mother, Lucy Ives, with her to Nauvoo. Lucy was forced from her Missouri home at the "point of a bayonet" in February. Now, eight months later, she died on 20 October 1839 at the home of Stephen and Hannah Hogaboon Markham, "completely worn out by the mobbings and hardships."12

On 10 May 1839 Emma and Joseph Smith moved their family into an 1803 two-story log cabin called the Homestead. Joseph Smith III recalled his family's arrival: "[We] left Quincy, May 9, arrived at Commerce the following day, and moved into a log house. . . . Grandfather Joseph and Lucy Smith lived in a small log house [summer kitchen] on the west side of the frame attachment to the block house."13

While the exiled Missouri Saints built up Nauvoo on the banks of the Mississippi River as a refuge from the storm of persecution, missionaries in Great Britain were having great success in converting many individuals to the restored Church. Joseph Smith, through the missionaries and other Church leaders, encouraged these new converts to gather with the Saints in western Illinois and eastern Iowa. As Nauvoo had become a safe haven for the driven Missouri Saints, so it now would become a retreat for the politically and economically disadvantaged British Saints.

These ambitious Saints made their way west by whatever means were available. Some sisters, along with family members, arrived by canal boats, wagons, stages, river boats, and horses; and some simply walked the whole way to the new city of the Saints. By 1840, a massive emigration began when British Saints crossed the Atlantic Ocean, commencing their travel from the docks of Liverpool, England, on sailing vessels to New Orleans.14 Atlantic crossings were slow and tedious. The journey from Liverpool to New Orleans took as many as seventy-one days or as little as thirty-seven days. The average crossing took fifty-four days. From New Orleans the Saints continued their journey by steamboat up the Mississippi River to the boat landing in and around Nauvoo. The difficulty of travel was augmented by the sorrow of leaving family and friends.

The hardships of gathering also came to bear upon loved ones left behind who suffered because family members ventured afar. There is no measuring the last look of anguish on a mother or sister's face as a family member began a long journey, never again to be seen. And there is no reason to doubt that the memory of that look stayed with the convert to the grave.

Jane Robinson, an English girl at the time of her conversion and her migration to America, wrote:

I believed in the principle of the gathering and felt it my duty to go although it was a severe trial to me, in my feelings to leave my

native land and the pleasing associations that I had formed there; but my heart was fixed. I knew in whom I had trusted and with the fire of Israel's God burning in my bosom, I forsook my home.15

The first sister Saints from England left on 6 June 1840 with a group of forty-one excited, newly converted members of the Church. Forty-four days later, after three days in quarantine, these immigrants landed at New York "safe and in good spirits."

Crossing the ocean from England during that period was hazardous and difficult, as was often noted in the Saints' diaries and later reminiscenses. One reporter noted, "The men, women, and children screamed all night in terror."16 Another diarist recorded:

The wind blew hard . . . ; many were sick all night. . . . Such sickness, vomiting, groaning and bad smells I never witnessed before, and added to this the closeness of the berths almost suffocated us for want of air. . . . On the Friday night a little girl belonging to a family in the second cabin was frightened by the storm and lost her reason.

Two days later the author wrote, "This night the child which was frightened died."17

Sometime later, another immigrant company aboard the ship Palmyra ran into a severe storm that lasted eight days. There were no fires and therefore no cooking. The passengers lived on biscuits and cold water when they felt like eating. Young Ann Pitchforth noted:

The waves dashed down the hold into the interior of the vessel, hatchway then closed, all the utter darkness and terror, not knowing whether the vessel was sinking or not; none could tell-all prayed-and awful silence prevailed-sharks and sins presenting themselves, and doubts and fears; one awful hour after another passing, we found we were not yet drowned; some took courage and lit the lamps.18

Mary Field Garner crossed the Atlantic as a young girl with her parents. She recalled:

After joining the Church my parents were not content to stay in England, but they wanted to be with the main body of Saints at Nauvoo. As soon as they could save enough money to make the voyage they came to America. . . . The sea was very rough, and there was a bad storm which caused the ship to be driven off its course. Thus it took us seven weeks to make the voyage. We were at sea only a short time when I became seasick.

To Mary's dismay, the "sickness lasted the whole trip," but she rejoiced when they saw land again.19

The relief of landing was somewhat tempered by the fact that at New Orleans the Saints had to board a steamboat to continue their journey to Nauvoo. The steamboat trip, especially on the budget most Saints were able to afford, was not a luxurious river cruise. Conditions were very unsanitary-the boats were notoriously dirty and smelled of livestock. The boats themselves were crowded; even those who had cabins often were found sleeping on the floor as they doubled up.

The steam engine was loud with its roaring furnace, and the shrill of the safety valve's whistle constantly reminded the passengers of the danger of explosion. Seasoned travelers slept dressed in case of accident at night when the danger of hitting river snags was highest. The huge wheels splashed noisily as the boat continued its journey. Several letters and diaries mention people falling overboard. Small children were watched continually during the trip up the Mississippi.

Elizabeth Kendall, widow of John Kendall from England and mother of three children, arrived in Nauvoo in February 1843 from her homeland. She arrived at the upper landing in Nauvoo at the conclusion of her riverboat journey from New Orleans. Upon arrival she "hustled about finding a place to leave her children and securing information from those who were there to give it." She started the walk to the city, one mile away:

She found on the corner of Main and Kimball streets a long, one-story brick building, built with its fronts to the west where a door opened to Main street; parallel with Kimball street it ran back towards the east. Ten comfortable rooms with doors opening into the garden plot, each room with such a door, two windows and a fireplace. This was a tenement owned by a widow, whose tenants were preferably widows. . . . [She] secured the third room from the east end, . . . returned to the landing for her children and her early store of goods; putting them in the room she now called home, she went buoyantly about the town seeking work.20

Another new English convert, Jane Mellan, wanted to emigrate to America. She and her husband, John, were unable to afford the trip to Nauvoo. John was sent ahead, hoping to find employment to pay for the passage of his young family, which included two children. Four months following his departure, Jane gave birth to their third child, who died within the year.

Jane soon departed England for America and arrived in New Orleans with only four dollars left. This resourceful sister secured passage on a Mississippi steamboat for her family, having worked for a riverboat captain in New Orleans. Upon her arrival in Nauvoo, she was informed of her husband's death.

Taken in by Emma Smith, Jane was determined to continue her life as productively as possible. Early one morning a short time later, Jane made her way down a street to do the family wash when she met her husband face to face-his death had been only a rumor. Soon the reunited couple moved into a rented house and began their new life in Nauvoo together after a long period of separation.

Several newspapers and non-Mormon visitors made comments about the sister Saints newly arrived from England. In 1841 the Quincy Whig noted that a group of Saints from England seemed to have "an honest and healthy look." The group included "many comely women, . . . handsome and delicate," as well as ninety

children under the age of fourteen.21 The Fort Madison Courier said that the English Saints "appear to be quite [an] inoffensive people and possessed of some means."22

A Scottish minister, traveling on the Mississippi in the summer of 1844, was especially interested in the Mormon immigrants he observed, since the British churches were much shaken by the impact of the Church's missionary effort overseas. He met a British sister Saint whom he described as "intelligent on all other points but the Mormonite delusion, on which she seemed crazed."23

A Canadian, Eliza Dana, and her sisters were baptized "with aching hearts," because their parents disapproved of their involvement with the Saints. Following their baptisms, however, their mother joined the Church before the family moved to Lockport, New York. Eliza remained at Lockport for eighteen months until the spring of 1844, when she "was united in matrimony" on 18 April to William Gibbs. Soon the newlyweds started toward Nauvoo. She recalled:

When we got within one hundred and eighty miles of Nauvoo, the roads were so fearfully bad we stopped four weeks for them to improve. While there we received news of the death of the prophet Joseph. Notwithstanding we had none of us ever seen him, it cast such a gloom over our minds that it seemed to blight all our future prospects. In a few days, however, we journeyed on, but when we arrived at Nauvoo it was not the Nauvoo we had anticipated. All was gloom and madness, and as time passed, sorrow and distress seemed to mark us for their particular victims.24

Catherine Spencer and her husband, Orson, a Baptist minister, were converted to the Church in Middlefield, Massachusetts, by Catherine's brother-in-law, Daniel Spencer. Daniel had accepted baptism into the new Mormon faith earlier and had come to Massachusetts with the express intention of converting his minister brother and his sister-in-law. After several days of conversation and lively discussions, Catherine said to her husband, "Orson, you know this is true!"25 Orson did know, and, as a result, the couple were baptized shortly thereafter. For Catherine, baptism meant family conflict. Her share of her father's estate was immediately revoked.

Friends offered help to Catherine Spencer, but only if she would renounce her newfound faith. Her reply was, "No, if they will withhold from me the supplies they readily granted to my sisters and brother because I adhere to the Saints, let them. I would rather abide with the Church in poverty, even in the wilderness, without their aid, than go to my unbelieving father's house and have all that he possesses."26

After giving up a paid Baptist ministry and a salary that kept them quite comfortable in Massachusetts, Catherine and Orson joined the Saints in Nauvoo, Illinois. At the age of thirty-five, a short four years later, Catherine Spencer died in the severe winter weather as the Saints were driven from their Illinois home into the wilderness of Iowa in 1846.

Jane Elizabeth Manning, a free black born at Wilton, Fairfield County, Connecticut, on 11 May 1821, was an early convert to the Church. While a young girl, she lived as a servant, not a slave, in the home of a prosperous white family. Jane was a Presbyterian when Charles Wandell, a Mormon missionary, arrived in the area with his companion to preach the restored gospel. Eventually, Jane was converted by the message and introduced her own family to the Church. Soon thereafter, Jane and eight family members immigrated to the Church headquarters in Illinois, where she met Joseph Smith.

Jane, along with her mother, Eliza; her sisters, Angeline and Sarah; her brothers, Isaac and Peter; her sister-in-law, Lucinda Manning; her brother-in-law, Anthony Stebbings; and her small son, Sylvester, left Wilton, Connecticut, in October 1843. They traveled with a larger group of Saints from the area as far as Buffalo, New York. Separated from the main body of travelers when boat authorities refused to allow them on the steamer, Jane led the little family of Saints eight hundred miles to Nauvoo.

Jane remembered, "We walked until our shoes were worn out, and our feet became sore and cracked open and bled until you could see the whole print of our feet with blood on the ground. We stopped and united in prayer to the Lord, we asked God the Eternal Father to heal our feet and our prayers were answered and our feet were healed forthwith."

They were stopped in Peoria, Illinois, and threatened with imprisonment when they were unable to show their "free papers." The group of Saints finally convinced the authorities they were never slaves and were not therefore required to have "free papers." Jane and her family were allowed to continue their journey to Nauvoo.

"We went on our way," Jane recalled, "rejoicing, singing hymns, and thanking God for his infinite goodness and mercy to us, in blessing us . . . , protecting us . . . , and healing our feet."27

Soon they arrived in Nauvoo, and with the assistance of Orson Spencer they were directed to the home of Joseph and Emma Smith, where Jane met the Prophet for the first time. She later recalled: "I was certain he was a prophet because I knew it. I was willing to come and gather, and when he came in with Dr. Bernhisel I knew him. Did not have to tell me because I knew him. I knew him when I saw him in Old Connecticut in a vision, saw him plain and knew he was a prophet."28

The band of converts was greeted warmly by the household, including Emma, who bid them all welcome. They were seated in one of the rooms of the newly completed Mansion House. Joseph took a chair near Jane and asked, "You have been the head of this little band, haven't you?" "Yes, sir," answered the small black woman.29

Jane related their travels to the City of the Saints. The entire family was invited to stay at the Mansion House until they found work and other accommodations. Jane, however, remained at the Prophet's home, working with Emma to care for guests who stayed with the family.

Another woman arrived in Nauvoo during this same time. Eliza Monroe was the only child of a native East Indian woman and a young British army officer. Like her mother, her hair and skin were dark. Eliza traveled to England following her mother's death. Life was much different there, but Eliza heard the "good news" of the Restoration and soon made arrangements to travel with a group of Saints to Illinois. Helen Mar Kimball Whitney fondly remembered her as being "slender and full of grace and refinement, with none of the proud and haughty airs of an aristocrat."30

One aged convert sent her son, Isaac C. Haight, ahead to make preparations for her trip to the Church's new gathering place. He started on 7 June 1842 and arrived at Nauvoo on 5 July. During the next summer, Isaac returned east to help his mother and father, Katurah Horton and Caleb Haight, gather with the Saints. The company left their home in New York on 13 September 1843. Isaac's journal reviews the difficult trip west:

13 September 1843. Left Movania in company with father, mother, the Bateman family, and Wilson Arden and family for Nauvoo. All in good health, but mother. She was very feeble, but anxious to go to Nauvoo she thought she would try the journey. She stood the journey very well the first week.

23rd [September]. She then began to fail. . . . We had to stop that [day] and the next. 25th [September]. Started again. Mother had to lay on a bed. We arrived in Kirtland [Ohio] on 27th.

28th [September]. Put mother on the canal boat.

Isaac accompanied his mother on the trip to Cincinnati and sent his father and other family members ahead.

6th [October] Mother's health is so delicate that I fear she will not live to get to Nauvoo. 16th [October]. Arrived at Nauvoo; found my family all well. Mother is quite feeble. . . . Father and company arrived by land.

18th November. [Mother] died without a struggle or a groan and has gone to rest in the Paradise of God with the Saints that have gone before, there to remain until the morning of the resurrection of the just when we shall again behold her clothed with bright immortality and eternal life.31

Mary Ann Stearns, not yet ten years of age, was in England while her stepfather, Parley P. Pratt, served a Church mission. She traveled to America and, following the landing, boarded another ship on 1 January 1843 to travel "from the mouth of the Mississippi up to New Orleans." Mary wrote:

The weather was delightful. Oranges were on the trees, and cotton was still in the fields. The captain of the pilot boat invited [us] to take New Year's dinner with [him]. . . . We had a fine dinner, a great treat to us after being on the ship ten weeks. . . . They treated us very cordially, sent nice fruits to mother and children.

Mary's mother stayed with her children while Parley P. Pratt and her daughter went to dinner. The children had "not quite recovered from the measles." Eventually, the company of Saints arrived at New Orleans and disembarked. All two hundred and fifty went on board the Goddess of Liberty for the trip to St. Louis. From there, the company traveled toward Nauvoo, except Mary and her family, who stayed the winter at Chester, Illinois, because Parley was unwilling to venture into Missouri after the abuse he had experienced when the Saints were expelled.

Months later, the family made the trip from Chester to Nauvoo. The trip was an eventful one as the riverboat Maid of Iowa made its way up the icy waters of the Mississippi toward its destination. Another steamboat loaded with Saints, Amaranth, moved along with Mary's group. She recalled:

A little boy of [the] company about eight years old fell overboard and was drowned. I attended the funeral and was much impressed by the accident. By the last of March, the ice breaking up, the two steamers started up the river. Sometimes one would be ahead and then the other, our little boat being much hindered by the large cakes of ice. We were two weeks making the journey, and on the 5th of April, I had a little sister born who was named Susan for our Grandma Frost. The 6th being my own birthday, I regretted it very much that they could not have come together. Brother Snow, with his company, landed at Nauvoo in the forenoon of April 12, and our company in the afternoon of the same day.

Joseph Smith arrived at the landing to greet the Saints, and following "a general handshaking," he came to Mary's cabin. Mary noted:

After cordial greetings, he took a seat and taking the little boys, Parley and Nathan, upon his knees, seemed much affected, . . . tears streaming down his face. Brother Pratt, seeing the general emotion this caused, said, in a tender, jesting fashion, "Why, Brother Smith, if you feel so bad about our coming home, I guess we will have to go back again," tears of joy filling his own eyes. This broke the spell, smiles returned, and joy unbounded filled every heart.

Soon the family was taken to Joseph and Emma's home to be nursed and cared for, following their long journey.32

Not all those who arrived in Nauvoo during this period were converts. Many people came to investigate the new faith and to meet the Prophet-among them was Mary Ann Hoopes Yearsley.

Mary Ann Hoopes married David D. Yearsley on 4 September 1830, the year the Church was organized. Eleven years later, Mary Ann and David arrived in Nauvoo to meet the Mormon prophet and to see for themselves what Mormonism was all about. Following their introduction, Mary Ann, satisfied that Joseph was a prophet, asked him to baptize her. The baptismal service began at the edge of the Mississippi River, where Joseph took her by the hand and went with her into the river to perform the ordinance. Mary recalled, "After the ordinance was performed, the Prophet swam out into the river a short distance, which greatly surprised [us] as [we] thought it a very strange thing for a Prophet to do."33

Another nonmember, Charlotte Haven of Portsmouth, New Hampshire, arrived in Nauvoo sometime in December 1842. She left Quincy on a stagecoach. Writing to her family in New Hampshire on 3 January 1843, Charlotte noted:

Our stage much resembled an Eastern butcher's wagon, and we soon ascertained that the curtains on the sides were destitute of fastenings, for they flapped up and down, to and fro, admitting a bracing circulation of air at every gust, which seemed to come direct from Arctic regions. The driver, who occupied the seat before us, told us we must on no account stop talking, "for," says he, "people freeze to death on these prairies before they know it."

She continued telling family members of a young Mormon girl they picked up along the way. The girl was dressed only in "a calico dress, thin cotton shawl, sun bonnet, and india-rubber shoes." The occupants of the stage offered to share with her their heavy buffalo robe. Charlotte wrote:

At eleven o'clock we came in full sight of the City of the Saints, and were charmed with the view. We were five miles from it, and from our point of vision it seemed to be situated on a high hill, and to have a dense population; but on our approach and while passing slowly through the principal streets, we thought that our vision had been magnified, or distance lent enchantment, for such a collection of miserable houses and hovels I could not have believed existed in one place. Oh, I thought, how much real poverty must dwell here!

Charlotte was obviously a vivacious and attractive young girl. When she took her first walk around the city, passing by the temple, she said, "I verily believe every man at work cutting stone laid down his tools and gazed at me as I passed." Charlotte never joined the Church, but she participated widely in the many balls and socials in the community. As a member of the "Gentile" minority, a group she called "our little society," she was part of a larger aspect of the city.34

The "little society" attitude probably did not reflect the larger non-Mormon population, which may have reached nearly two thousand people. A city ordinance allowed for the exercise of religious belief for all citizens. A visiting Methodist minister, like many other clergy, was invited to speak to the Saints. He did so and was surprised "a little, as I did not expect to find any such thing as a religious toleration among them."35

Sister Saints continued to arrive in Nauvoo during the entire time Joseph gathered the members of the Church to build a community of the faithful. Following his death, the Saints continued to pour into the city.

Irene Hascall, a bride of only a few months, arrived in the city with her husband, Francis M. Pomeroy, from North New Salem, Massachusetts, sometime in May 1845. The new family traveled by way of Hartford, Connecticut, to New York and on to Philadelphia. By means of rail and of canal boats, they arrived at Pittsburgh and then traveled on the Ohio River to St. Louis and finally up the Mississippi River. This migration of sister Saints to the City of Joseph continued even after the first wagons crossed the Mississippi River in February 1846 to begin the trek west.

Irene Hascall Pomeroy's mother, Ursulia, and brother, Thales, left their home in Boston and boarded a ship headed for New Orleans. Ursulia's husband, Ashbel Green Hascall, went to California with Samuel Brannan on the ship Brooklyn several months earlier with plans to meet the family in Utah-the Saints' destination in the west. The family never saw him again, however, as he died before reaching Salt Lake City.

After arriving in New Orleans, Ursulia Hascall and her son, Thales, traveled up the Mississippi River to St. Louis and transferred to another steamboat bound for Nauvoo, arriving in May 1846. The aged matriarch was greeted by her daughter, son-in-law, and new granddaughter. A few weeks later, four generations of the Hascall-Pomeroy family left the City of the Saints and traveled west for a new home in the Rocky Mountains.
