Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, Women of Nauvoo ( 1992)

3 Daily Life—Women on the Illinois Frontier

In Nauvoo City we reside, Where we in peace can now abide, Our dwelling measures "Thirteen Feet," With walls rough-hewn and white-washed neat.

-Abigail Pitkin

Western historian Emerson Hough said that the chief figure of the American frontier was the "sad-faced woman, sitting on the front seat of the wagon, following her lord where he might lead."1 Men are given most of the credit for settling and subduing the frontier; their qualities are those that historians write about as characterizing that period of our history.

Women are often given only secondary credit for carrying out the "duties of a wife" and are called "brave," "mother of the frontier," and "worthy companion and counsellor of those noble and fearless men."2 However, the truth may be, as one writer notes, that the "sacrifices in moving west have been made largely by women."3

The Illinois frontier changed rapidly during the early part of the 1800s.4 Most of the shores along the waterways, especially the Mississippi River, were settled by 1830. Chicago had only Fort Dearborn and a dozen or so houses at the same time. On the central prairies farther from the waterway, the frontier existed in some places as late as 1850.

The area of Nauvoo was settled by Indians as early as 1805 when the Sac and Fox Indians united and maintained a small village in the area. Eventually, the Indians were forced from their Illinois villages in the 1820s. Between 1800 and 1810, the population of Illinois grew to nearly thirteen thousand; in 1820, the federal census taker counted over fifty-five thousand inhabitants. Illinois became the twenty-first state in December 1818.

Eleven years later, Hancock County was organized, and a post office, called Venus, was established near one of the early homes. This post office served two dozen families in the area by 1830. In 1834, Joseph B. Teas and Alexander White surveyed the land near Venus and renamed the town Commerce. The small community served about a hundred farmers, merchants, and traders in the area. Several stores were established before the Saints began to arrive in the area in 1839.

When Emma Smith arrived with her family, they moved into a small cabin overlooking the river. There were several homes and businesses scattered along the east banks of the Mississippi for about one and a half miles, but only a few were vacant for the large group of Saints. Many sister Saints found protection from the elements in dirt dugouts, tents, or their wagons until log homes could be built.

Frances Turley's family, consisting of six children and her husband, Theodore, lived in a tent "for the space of thirteen weeks" before they finished the first Mormon home built in Commerce. On 21 September 1839, with the log home just completed, Theodore left Commerce to begin serving a mission for the Church in England.5

Another convert family from the East was making its way to the Mormon Zion in Missouri when they heard that the Saints were gathering to Commerce. When they arrived, "every house was full." It was too late in the year to begin their own home, so they found a "blacksmith shop" abandoned earlier by two families. This "was the best Father could do," his daughter recalled. The shop "had no floor, nor door, nor chimney. Father made a sod chimney (there were not rocks), a clapboard door, and we lived in that all winter."6

The problem of finding adequate housing continued through most of the settlement period. In England, where missionary work continued and emigration efforts were steady, Church leaders warned the Saints that upon arriving in Nauvoo they could not "expect to rent houses and enter at once on a comfortable living-but must pitch tents and build temporary cottages. Thirty to forty yards of calico will make a good tent and four to six weeks work with little expense will erect a small cottage."7

The Nauvoo of the Mormon period was a section of wilderness area made up of thickets and forest. Inland about a quarter of a mile was some rich farmland, originally part of the earlier Indian agricultural settlement before the first white settler arrived. Access to the town of Commerce was virtually impossible from these farmlands through the thickets, but farmers could have driven their wagons north to the Carthage Road and then westward to Commerce, which was located on the banks of the river.

When the Mormon women arrived in Commerce, their work was seemingly never done; even social gatherings often had a work purpose. These sisters labored to the limit of their strength, in almost every waking hour. They were often perpetually tired, and the fatigue was not lessened by giving birth to a succession of children, born usually without the benefit of a doctor.

Although Joseph was a man of his times, he nevertheless could be found at home doing things that surprised other men-no doubt Emma appreciated these efforts, especially in light of the number of visitors who came to the home for dinner or overnight accommodations, sometimes lasting days and weeks.

One annoyed man reported that Joseph built kitchen fires, carried out ashes from the fireplace, carried in wood and water for home use, and assisted in taking care of the children-duties often relegated to women. "Some of the home habits of the Prophet . . . were not in accord with my idea of a great man's self-respect," Jesse W. Crosby noted.

Finally, Crosby, full of self-assurance, confronted Joseph, hoping to give him some advice on how to manage his home. "Brother Joseph, my wife does much more hard work than does your wife." The Prophet mildly reproved him by saying that a man who did not love and cherish his wife "and do his duty by her, in properly taking care of her," in this life would not be with her in the next. Thereafter, Crosby noted, "I tried to do better by the good wife I had and tried to lighten her labors."8

In fact, the endless work, the heat of summer, the cold of winter, and continual persecution tended in combination to make these women look older than their years, and this is reflected in the few photographs that exist from the early Mormon pioneer period.

Many of these women left comfortable homes with water pumped in and separate rooms for privacy. Most furniture, utensils, dishes, and cupboards were left behind, destroyed, or lost during the persecution in Ohio and Missouri. Still, Abigail Pitkin, an unmarried sister in Nauvoo, was able to look upon her situation with remarkable cheerfulness and amusement, as is demonstrated in a letter she wrote her sister:

I often thought I'd like to give You an account of where we live. What's our employ, what we possess, How we appear, and how we dress. In Nauvoo City we reside, Where we in peace can now abide, Our dwelling measures "Thirteen Feet," With walls rough-hewn and white-washed neat. Our bed springs up against the wall Because our room is rather small; For we in building count the cost Lest too much money should be lost, For mobs you know have saucy grown And will not let us have our own. Our table measures just "Three feet," With falling leaves and varnished neat. With chairs we're blessed with only two Missouri claims the remaining few; Our glass above the table stands, Cracked through the center by your hands, Which oft reminds us of the scene When it was decked with evergreen. On shelves our dishes are ranged neat By pegs supported, quite complete. For old Missouri's wicked clan Our cupboard kept, and warming pan. We have a heifer very small At present gives no milk at all; And fowls which throng our door But lack of corn will keep them poor, Poor things, they'll have to make us meat When we have nothing else to eat. We have a bag to hold our flour, Now nearly full stands near the door, And many old trunks scattered round, In which our cabin doth abound. Our old red boxes join the ring, Of them awhile I fain would sing. Like trusty friends they've by us stood, And from them we've derived much good. We've many useful things around That scarce will get a passing sound. I'd not forget to name the sink For that is useful, oft, I think. On subjects long I must not dwell, But shortly now the tale must tell How we, like "Dorcas," garments make For which we goods or money take. In building often we engage, But that our foes doth much enrage. Our homes to them seem very fair, Which leads them on to act more rare. In dress and manners we appear Much as we did when you were here. Our names we keep but rather would Exchange for better if we could. We've many friends and many foes, Many wants and many woes, But still I am content to be A "Mormon," not a "Pharisee." I still remain your friend, A. P. And wish in faith we could agree. May health and peace your steps attend And wisdom guide you to the end.9

Although many of the Saints started from scratch as they tried to reestablish their homes on the banks of the Mississippi River, merchants quickly supplied a vast array of items to those who could afford them. At first, however, very few could.

A typical kitchen in Nauvoo was probably similar to the other Illinois frontier women's situations. Cook stoves were available, but few Saints could afford the price, especially during the early period of Nauvoo's history when money was scarce.

Charlotte Haven noted the cooking situation in a letter to family shortly after her arrival in Nauvoo: "A Herculean task it seemed to me, with the fire-place and such cooking utensils; but we had a nice dinner-venison, hot biscuits, potatoes roasted in the ashes, etc.-for we were awfully hungry."

Among the items used to cook their dinner was an object called a "spider." Charlotte explained, "This last our grandmothers might have called a bake-kettle; it has three legs and an iron cover, which is covered with hot coals when anything is baking."10

Writing to her sister on 22 January 1843, Charlotte mentioned the venison prepared on Christmas Day. It was "roasted by being held on a long pointed stick over a bed of coals. We also had baked beans, biscuits, and vegetables cooked alternately in the spider and tin dipper, except the potatoes which were roasted in the ashes." On a later occasion the family invited two gentlemen to dinner. The turkey "was cooked by being suspended by a string from the mantel-piece, with the Âspider' beneath to catch the gravy." Shortly thereafter, the "Âspider' [was] cast into the shade by a Yankee Notion cooking stove," and "flat-bottomed tin candle-sticks" were supplanted by several "glass lamps and spirit gas."11

Kitchen items were simple homemade wooden utensils, including cutting boards, rolling pins, spoons, and doughboxes. Eventually, an increasingly available selection of manufactured items could be found in the stores of Nauvoo.

Local newspapers and contemporary letters and diaries listed several types and varieties of crops available to the Saints throughout the year. The major crops included apples, cotton, cucumbers, flax, hemp, Indian corn, gooseberries, grapes, melons, oats, peaches, potatoes, pumpkins, rice, squash, tomatoes, and wheat.

Flax was an important item, and almost every garden had a patch of flax. Gathered in the fall, the family worked together in the winter months to prepare it for spinning and weaving. Women, who were generally responsible for making clothing, spent much of the winter time repairing and making clothes for their family.

From mid-February to April, depending upon the weather, the sisters gathered sap and made syrup and sugar. Following a good thaw, sap from maple trees in the area was gathered when a tree was tapped. Some twenty gallons of sap were needed to make just one half-gallon of syrup. Once sufficient sap was collected, it was boiled down for sugar or syrup.

During the spring a kitchen garden was prepared; and in the summer, fresh vegetables from the garden were enjoyed. Writing to her husband, Bathsheba Smith said:

We have had the garden plowed. It looks very well, but would [do] better if it did not rain so much. The worms trouble all the neighbors' gardens, and have not mine but little. A great many people have had more or less out of our garden such as lettuce, onions, radishes, and greens. . . . Our early potatoes are getting quite large. The corn is in tassel. Cabbage looks well. Vines rather poor. Tomatoes in bloom. Beets quite large. [We] will soon have peas.

Much of the fruit was eaten fresh, "stewed for pies," or dried for winter use. Cucumbers were made into pickles. The sisters made sure that their gardens produced everything the families could use, but the final touch always included flowers. "A good many of our flowers are in blossom," Bathsheba added to her list of garden produce.12

Writing to family in the British Isles, Ann H. Pitchforth gave them some vivid details of daily life in her new home on the frontier in Illinois:

Meat is cheap, two pence (four cents) a pound of choice pieces, one pence a pound the other fowls, one shilling (twenty-five cents) eggs two pence (four cents) a dozen. Meat is cheap, but vegetables are high. We hope by next year to grow our own. Cabbages are five cents a piece, turnips are high. Potatoes are high.13

Many families had a cow on hand to provide necessary fresh milk and other dairy products. In most cases, the mother had the responsibility to care for the animal, unless a child was old enough to perform the daily task. Through the local paper, the Nauvoo Neighbor, the Saints were informed on the correct way of milking a cow: "If you would obtain all the milk from the cow you must treat her with the utmost gentleness; she must not stand trembling under your blows nor under your threats. She may at times need a little chastisement, but at such times you need not expect all her milk."14

The milk from a cow was often made into butter or cheese, which drained from cloth bags or perforated buckets hung from rafters in an out building. Bathsheba Smith told her husband that she had "sold six pounds of butter since" he left for his mission.15 Home production not only provided for families' needs but also provided extra items to trade for those things families could not produce themselves. Bad weather, economic conditions, and other factors induced certain types of food shortages in Nauvoo.

Shortages included the basic commodities of butter, eggs, milk, and flour. Flour was a scarce commodity in any frontier community, and Nauvoo was not any different. Bathsheba noted in one letter to her husband, "I am about out of flour." She did have plentiful supply of another item she identified as meal-the ubiquitous cornmeal.16

It appeared in every kitchen and in most daily fares.

The sisters made "ash cakes" from cornmeal in their fireplaces. Usually this meant they first cleaned the hearth and then placed the cornmeal cakes (a mixture of salt and boiled cornmeal) on the hottest part of the hearth and covered it with hot wood ashes. After it had finished baking, the ash cake was removed from the ashes, then washed and dried and served as part of a meal, or as was the case in many homes, the main part of a meal.

Cornmeal could be cooked in several ways, including johnnycake and a variety of other types of breads with ingredients ranging from molasses to buttermilk. Cornmeal was used to make hasty pudding; and, when sweetened with maple sugar or honey, it was dessert.

The sisters tried to make variations on this basic commodity, but family members still found the daily fare monotonous. On one occasion, Mary Fielding Smith's son John went with his cousin to have dinner with his Aunt Emma and Uncle Joseph. With a boy standing on each side of him, Joseph prayed, "Lord, we thank thee for this johnnycake, and ask thee to send us something better. Amen." Following the prayer, the bread was cut and served to the family, but before they could finish it, a man knocked at the door and asked for the Prophet. "I have brought you some flour and a ham," he said. Joseph took the gifts gladly, blessed the good brother for offering them, and then turned to the family. "I knew the Lord would answer my prayer."17

For others, their prayers were not answered in the same way. Mary Field's father and two sisters died shortly after their arrival in the City of the Saints from their homeland in England. She remembered the situation:

While at Nauvoo my father, William Field, and my two sisters, Eliza and Rachel, died leaving mother with six children to provide for. We were very poor and had very little to eat-cornmeal being our main food. When the other food became exhausted we were put on rations of one pint of [corn]meal a day for the seven of us. We could cook it as we wished. Oh how hungry we were for something else to eat! The children cried for a piece of white bread, and mother ofttimes would cry with us.18

The Nauvoo Neighbor not only gave practical advice but also often ran recipes for such favorites as Admiral Peacock's Pickle for Meat. "The beef, after lying in the pickle for ten weeks," the paper reported, "has been found as good as if it had been salted three days and as tender as a chicken." On other occasions, recipes for potato pancakes, applesauce cake, ginger cookies, and rusk, a cornbread cereal, were published. Other useful cooking tips included information on how to salvage frozen potatoes, the best method for fattening turkeys, and numerous ways to preserve meats, fruits, and vegetables.19

While women of Nauvoo had access to newspaper recipes, they probably relied on the cooking traditions they brought with them or those recipes shared among neighborhood friends.

Another important domestic duty of the sister Saints included preparing for the harsh Illinois winters. The sisters cured meat and dried a variety of fruits and vegetables. Some of the fresh berries and currants were made into jellies and preserves. Apples were also made into cider. This lifesaving task usually involved the children of the home as well.

As the Saints attempted to build a community with precious few resources, many were unable to supply sufficient provisions for their families.

Drusilla Hendricks had most of the responsibility for taking care of the family, including her husband, who was left an invalid after being wounded in the Battle at Crooked River. "I had to lift [my husband] at least fifty times a day, and in doing so I had to strain every nerve," she recalled. With five children under the age of ten, this young mother tried to survive in Nauvoo by taking in boarders, tending a garden, milking cows, feeding livestock, maintaining her home, and preparing the family's daily need for food and clothing.

Her skill at maximizing her resources is demonstrated in an excerpt from her reminiscences:

I paid fifty-six dollars for house rent and got me two bedsteads, four chairs, five falling leaf tables. Kept one of the tables myself and let Brother Lewis have one for moving us to Nauvoo, sold two to Sister Emma Smith for provisions. The brethren gave us a lot and [put] up a log house, and I hired a man to cover it and build a chimney. I and Sister Melinda Lewis chinked and plastered it. We raised a good garden. I began to make beer and gingerbread and go out on public days, this showing that necessity is the mother of invention. I paid a good deal of tithing by making gloves and mittens. I had about thirty pair on hand. I still [did] washing for bread or molasses for my children.

Drusilla recalled an incident that sustained her faith in knowing God was concerned for her family's welfare:

Flour was hard to get. The winter set in early November [1842] and was very hard. I had to buy wood. I only [had] cornmeal for bread. . . . My husband asked me to lay aside my work and pray [for help]. . . . When I was through I felt like I had poured out my whole soul to [the Lord] and I knew that we should have something [to eat]. I had no doubts.

Soon after this experience, a gentleman sold the Hendricks family some fresh pork on credit, which was not due and payable for twelve months. "Who could not see the hand of the Lord in this miracle worked on [a] natural principle?"20

Not only did women in Nauvoo often lack food items and equipment needed in their daily work, but the kinds of food they cooked and the clothes they wore were in many instances much different from what they were used to having. This situation was especially true of the recent converts from England. Many sisters even took on chores that were not considered women's work in the East.

In the frontier community of Nauvoo, women made soap and candles, both long and tiring chores. They spun thread and weaved cloth to make clothing and even worked at shoe making. A wringer and a washboard always stood nearby. For clothing to be very clean, the white things were boiled with homemade soap, making wash day a day-long affair. Care of animals often fell to women; they built fences, took care of the "kitchen garden," and helped in the fields-all this while pregnant about thirty percent of the time. Women's daily activities and responsibilities changed, increased, and became far more difficult. For the English Saints, the change could be even more drastic and dramatic.

Home production, while becoming less important in the major urban centers in the East, still was a significant part of the Nauvoo economy. Irene Hascall Pomeroy made a "double brim [straw hat] for a shoe maker" and received a "beautiful pair of kids' shoes" in return.21 The barter system was the mainstay of individual commerce in the city.

Some eight or nine thousand Saints were in Nauvoo and its vicinity by the summer of 1841. Within a year, Nauvoo eclipsed every other Illinois city in size, with the exception of Chicago. Almost single-handedly the Saints made Hancock County the most populous county in Illinois by the 1845 census.

Nauvoo was a city of log, frame, brick, and limestone homes and buildings by 1843. A non-Mormon resident of Hancock County estimated that at its peak Nauvoo had some "twelve hundred hand-hewn log cabins, most of them whitewashed inside, two to three hundred good substantial brick houses, and three to five hundred frame houses.22 We must remember, however, that during the entire Mormon period, houses, even next door to each other, were different styles, some more substantial than others.23

Like all frontier communities, Nauvoo replaced its first primitive log homes with more substantial structures, maybe somewhat faster in Nauvoo's case, however. On any given block in the city one might find families functioning in two traditional ways. One family would be living in the traditional "first house" or log cabin, where one room encompassed all the family indoor activities, including cooking, eating, socializing, and sleeping. The home next door might be a second home, traditionally called the "big house." The big house was usually a two-story brick home, with a kitchen-eating area separated from sleeping areas, and, if circumstances permitted, a parlor apart from all.

Charlotte Haven described her circumstances upon arriving in Nauvoo at their "little white cottage with green blinds." She wrote to family:

The stage left us at the kitchen door. The introduction to this room was discouraging enough-full of smoke from a fire just kindled in the fire-place, no furniture except a red chest and a box of crockery, upon which was extended a half venison, flanked by a basket of vegetables, and sundry parcels of groceries.

As she briefly toured the other rooms, she saw "a large box stove in what is a parlor and dining room, a bedstead without bedding in the bed room-that was all!"

Soon Charlotte's brother and a boarder provided "a table, three chairs, a coffee-pot and mill, two large tin dippers, and a spider." Two feather beds upon mattresses of husks were used for sleeping.

Charlotte purchased a rug on the following day from a woman living near the temple. Unlike the rugs she was used to, this one was "a coarse, ugly thing, which she called Âhit and miss,'-not a pretty stripe-that was the Âmiss'-and the Âhit' was a few inches of red flannel and blue calico at irregular intervals a long way apart, while the rest was in very shade of fade." Fifteen yards was purchased reluctantly, but the added comfort during the winter was needed no matter how it looked.24

In another letter home, Charlotte described the homes built on the prairie near town. "The houses are still of the rudest construction." They were "mere shelters, many built of logs placed cob fashion, some of only one thickness of boards, and others of sod or mud, with seldom any plastering or floors, and minus chimneys, doors, and windows." In place of chimneys, doors, and windows, the poor Saints substituted a funnel about the roof or through a side wall. A quilt was suspended in the doorway or over a window opening.

"You would think it impossible that human beings could inhabit such hovels," Charlotte commented. She was constantly reminded that they were inhabited by "sundry white-headed, dirty-faced, bare-footed children peeping or thrusting themselves between crevices and cracks." To her surprise, however, "in spite of their scanty clothing and the midwinter prairie breezes that play so freely through their dwellings, these [children] look healthy and happy."

In a sympathetic way Charlotte reminded her family:

When we consider the short time since the Mormons came here, and their destitution after having had every vestige of property taken from them, and after having undergone great suffering and persecution, their husbands and sons in some instances murdered; when we remember that, driven from their homes in Missouri, with famine before them, five thousand men, women, and children crossed the Mississippi to this State in the winter of 1841 [1838-39], we cannot wonder that they have no fitter dwelling place and so few of the comforts of life.

She did recognize the advances being made: "Better and more substantial buildings are fast being erected in city and country, and in a few years things will present a very different appearance."25

Most homes, especially the first log structures, were generally very simple; they remained unpainted or whitewashed at most, with no wallpaper. Most windows were uncurtained, unless they were pane-less, and then a blanket or sheet was placed over the opening. The furniture was almost always undecorated and plain but very practical. A few special pieces or maybe a few family treasures were brought from their previous homes in the East.

Sally Randall reported that her husband obtained "a lot with a log cabin on it, and it [is] paid for. The house is very small, but I think we can get along with it for the present. He had a table and three chairs. We have no bedsteads yet, but shall have soon."26

Ann Pitchforth's reactions to the housing cost in the new frontier community of Nauvoo are outlined in a letter to friends and family:

Rents are very high owing to the increasing value of the land in the city. I intend to save money to buy a house and lot as most people here do; then I shall have no rent to pay. We have a very small house with two rooms and a shed, no upstairs, and the rent is nine pounds and ten shilling [$47.50] a year. By paying twenty pounds [$100] down, I can secure a house and one acre of land and leave the remainder to be paid by ten pounds [$50] a year till paid off. Forty pounds [$200] will buy a house and lot and all in the city. Of course, there are many houses five times as much, but we could improve ours little by little as we could afford.

Sometimes, the euphoria manifested by recent converts was demonstrated in their letters home following their arrival. Ann Pitchforth continued her description of the City of the Saints with an overly simplistic view of this frontier community and increasingly important river city: "There is universal love among them. They are all kind to one another, and very few houses, indeed, have either locks or bolts. All leave everything outside their houses with the greatest of safety."

She did acknowledge, however, "Some bad people get here now and then, but the extremely plain, honest dealing of the people does not suit their chicanery, and they soon get found out and often leave the place."27 Another sister wrote family members in Massachusetts: "I will not pretend to say that there is nothing improper done or said in this place, for I know there is and there must be where the people of God reside. But there is nothing going on here, that I consider to be wrong, that is upheld by the Church."28 Sometimes the municipal officers, assisted by the police, helped the "bad people" to leave.

Although Nauvoo was the City of the Saints, it was also an economically important river town.29 It was founded as the Mississippi River steamboat industry was at the threshold of its golden era. As many as ten steamers passed by Nauvoo weekly, carrying Indians, soldiers, and various types of goods during the town's early years, and by 1843 some four or five steamboats stopped each day. Not only steamboats but also a wide variety of other watercraft plied the currents along Nauvoo's shoreline, including barges, canoes, dugouts, flatboats, keelboats, and log skiffs. These brought a variety of people in contact with the Saints of Nauvoo.

As a result, trappers, gamblers, Indians, riverboat men, bartenders, magicians, musicians, roustabouts, slaves, and prostitutes arrived at the wharfs of Nauvoo. The city council acknowledged the existence of "houses of infamy . . . and disorderly characters in this place, who were disposed to corrupt the morals and chastity of our citizens."30 They passed an ordinance "concerning brothels and disorderly characters" that prohibited such things within the city limits. Nonetheless, Nauvoo's women included more than sister Saints coming together to build the kingdom of God.

John C. Bennett, along with several other "businessmen," built a house of prostitution near the Sunday gathering place of the Saints-the grove. Bennett and his partners then painted a large sign on the front to announce its purpose in an effort to attract a clientele. One contemporary source noted, "We could not get [to the grove] without passing this house and looking right at it, and one or two thousand people would go . . . [past it] on a Sabbath, and they didn't feel very good seeing that house there with great big letters facing them."31 Eventually the house was "condemned" and destroyed by putting it on rollers and pushing it into a ravine.

The average life span for women in America during the nineteenth century was but forty years; for men, thirty-eight. In frontier communities like Nauvoo, it was shorter still. Women, however, were subjected to illness more frequently than men. The major causes of poor health on the frontier were the lack of sanitation and the rigors of life. The sisters in Nauvoo, like other communities in Illinois, worked in the kitchens in the hottest weather, breathed in smoke and soot, and were constantly subjected to either too much or too little heat. The lack of dentists was particularly hard on pregnant women.

Nursing and even doctoring was predominantly the woman's work, though several doctors resided in Nauvoo by 1842. Nevertheless, in the midst of erecting homes and barns, plowing, and planting, in the summer of 1839 many of the Missouri exiles fell ill with the "meanest of all diseases." Called the "ague" by the Saints, it was probably malaria carried by the anopheles mosquito, which thrived in the swampy flats of Commerce. The sickness was common in spring and fall, and newcomers were especially vulnerable.

Already physically weakened by the forced exodus from Missouri during the previous winter and spring, many experienced the chills and fevers of the disease. Those in good health fell ill, and the condition of those in bad health worsened. Many died during the first two years in Nauvoo. The disease was more relentless and deadly than even the mobs they faced in Missouri.

Elizabeth Ann Whitney described her family as "all sick with ague, chills, and fever, and [we] were only just barely able to crawl around and wait upon each other." During this very time, Elizabeth Whitney delivered her ninth child, a boy. Soon Joseph Smith visited their home and invited them to come live at the Homestead. Elizabeth wrote, "[We] went to live in the Prophet Joseph's yard in a small cottage."32 Soon, the sick among the Saints took every available bed in the Smith household, and many more of them were made as comfortable as possible in makeshift bedrolls in the yard.

Emma and Joseph moved into a tent erected in the yard of the Homestead. Emma found little time for anything but nursing those who came to receive help under her hands. Soon she found herself attending both her husband and her young son Joseph III, who had both caught the disease while helping others.

Emma brought many other families into her home, including the Zina and William Huntington family. Both parents and all three children were sick. Zina had contracted cholera and was near death when she arrived at Emma's house. Even with the extra care given her, Zina Huntington died; however, before she died, she spoke words of comfort to her family. Her eighteen-year-old daughter recalled that her mother called her to the bedside and said:

Zina [Diantha], my time has come to die. You will live many years; but, O, how lonesome father will be. I am not afraid to die. All I dread is the mortal suffering. I shall come forth triumphant when the Savior comes with the just to meet the Saints on the earth.33

Zina Diantha was deeply stricken by her mother's death on 8 July 1839. Months later, her mother's words came into her mind and spoke comfort to her: "Zina, any sailor can steer on a smooth sea. When rocks appear, sail around them." Zina Diantha took comfort in these words and prayed, "O Father in Heaven, help me to be a good sailor, that my heart shall not break on the rocks of grief."34

By 20 October, the Nauvoo high council announced to the community an appeal to please resist going to Emma's home for help. She was "exempt from receiving future crowds of visitors as have formerly thronged [the] house."35 During this terrible season of sickness, Church leaders sought redress from the federal government for losses in Missouri, hoping that financial compensation from them or the state would ameliorate the worsening situation in Nauvoo by providing necessary provisions and shelter for the Saints.

After repeated efforts to obtain some redress at local and state levels for their losses, including land and personal property, Church leaders finally decided to approach the federal government in Washington. Joseph left Emma for the nation's capital on 29 October, with Sidney Rigdon, Elias Higbee, and Orrin Porter Rockwell.

Writing to Emma, Joseph was obviously painfully aware of her situation in Nauvoo:

I shall be filled with constant anxiety about you and the children until I hear from you and, in a particular manner, little Frederick. It was so painful to leave him sick. . . . [Try to] get all the rest you can. It will be a long and lonesome time during my absence from you, and nothing but a sense of humanity could have urged me on to so great a sacrifice, but shall I see some perish and [not] see redress? No, I will try this once in the [name] of the Lord; therefore, be patient until I come, and do your best. . . . Believe me, [my] feelings are the best kind toward you all. My hand cramps so I must close.36

Joseph's concerns for his wife were well founded. Emma was pregnant again, and her two sons, Frederick and young Joseph, were both sick. Frederick's fever finally broke shortly after his father left, but young Joseph still had the "chill fever." He lost a great deal of blood from a nosebleed and rebounded only to be struck with a second bout of the disease, which greatly worried Emma.

The day following Joseph's departure for Washington, someone brought Orson and Nancy Hyde to Emma's home with the "ravaging disease." On the following day, Sarah Mulholland brought her husband, James, the Prophet's secretary, to Emma for help. Emma nursed Brother Mulholland for five weeks and then wrote her husband in Washington, "His spirit left its suffering tenement for a better mansion than he had here."37

Another sister, Mary Noble, nursed her two children and a husband. The children died, and her husband "was nigh unto death" through the month of July. At one point, with tears she asked if he "was dying too."38 He survived, however, but not before his wife went through tremendous stress and grief as mother, wife, and nurse.

During one year, the ague accounted for more than 25 percent of the deaths in Nauvoo. The worst months were August, September, and October, which were also the heaviest periods of fever-related death.

Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs's diary entries for April 1845 (from which excerpts follow) reflect the process and intensity of the sickness:

April 10 [1845] Quite unwell with the ague in my face. . . .

12th I am no better; see painful nights. Sarah Ann Woode came to assist me. . . .

14th Mother and the neighbors came in to see me. They are very kind, for which I feel truly thankful.

15th . . . I was no better. Sister Eliza Free came to assist me. I trust that she and her sister Emmeline may ever be blessed and ever find friends to assist them and their children in time of need for their kindness to me in my sickness. Also Mother Lyman, Mother Huntington, and Lee girls, Fanny, Julia, Sister Brewer, Sanders, Merrick, and others. Also Amasa Lyman's wife. I feel grateful to God and my friends.

16th My face still worse. . . .

17-18th Sleepless nights almost.

19th The sun [is] about three quarters of an hour high. My face broke about halfway between my chin and ear, rather nearer the chin. Discharged wonderfully. O living mortality, how soon thou canst decay. . . . Eliza and Emily Partridge came over and made my bed and prepared me some supper. All these kindnesses I never shall forget, and the oft times Mother has sent me milk and things for my comfort. (Fanny Merrick came to help me.) . . .

20th I am still getting better. Father comes every day to see me.

21st . . . Brother Lee's wife, Eliza, and Emmeline Free, and Clarissa Decker called.39

Along with the ague, Mormon women dealt with consumption (tuberculosis), chronic diarrhea, assorted childhood maladies, and other forms of illness. Women also served as midwives. Ann Green Duston Carling (an English convert from Herefordshire), like several other sisters in Nauvoo, was set apart for her midwifery duties by Joseph Smith.

Midwives often carried their precious medical equipment in small black "baby satchels." Included among the instruments were "scalpels, needles, scissors, tweezers, saw blades, a small hammer, a spool of heavy thread, a few obstetrical instruments, plus a package of scorched cloths which had been ovensterilized."40

A unique bonding between doctors and their patients is expected, but bonding between a midwife and an expectant fellow sister Saint increased when the midwife had experienced childbirth herself. A sisterhood was created in a special way between them as they helped each other in suffering and sometimes death. The bonding created a tie that was often stronger than family relationships, a bonding characterized by a common desire to build the kingdom of God.

Commonly shared remedies included a variety of cough syrups. Pine tar cough syrup was made by mixing a small amount of pine tar and honey together. Another, red clover cough medicine, was made from red clover, which grew almost everywhere. A good cup of red clover blossoms was put in an earthenware crock with some boiling water. The pot was covered and the contents allowed to cool before straining.

Another important aspect of women's work and activity on the frontier was entertainment, both formal and informal. Entertaining was a diversion often more taxing on the women than the men of Nauvoo. Evening social gatherings generally served an industrial function. For example, the men might be raising a barn or clearing land, in which case they would bring their sharpened tools and probably engage in competitions as they worked.

The women's work was also cooperative, as in quilting. But the sisters often worked for days beforehand getting food ready and afterwards took unfinished handwork home to finish. They also cleaned up after the meal, including washing the dishes with water they brought into the house and heated themselves.

The frontier reputation for hospitality is well known, and Nauvoo was no exception. The main responsibility, however, rested upon the sisters to entertain the guests by providing food and shelter. On one occasion while entertaining guests, Joseph remarked to W. W. Phelps, "What a kind, provident wife I have!" His history continues:

At this moment Emma came in, while Phelps, in continuation of the conversation said, "You must do as Bonaparte did-have a little table, just large enough for the victuals you want yourself." Mrs. Smith replied, "Mr. Smith is a bigger man than Bonaparte: he can never eat without his friends."41

The diaries of the men of Nauvoo reveal the nature and extent of such activities; few, however, mentioned the effort involved, particularly on the part of the women-it was simply expected.
