Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, Women of Nauvoo ( 1992)

4 Nauvoo—A City of Women

We were . . . glad of a resting place out of the reach of those who had sought our lives. . . . We were truly a thankful and humble people.

-Sarah Rich

While the sister Saints by and large remained in Nauvoo fixing their homes, planting their gardens, raising their children, burying their deceased family members and friends, and meeting together formally and informally, business, political, or Church-related activities often took the men away from the city, some for short durations and others for much longer.

Even when the men were in the city, their days and nights were often filled with work and Church-related activities. This left the women an opportunity to build important new personal networks, some of them informal, others highly structured and formal.1

Beginning in Nauvoo, a network of sisters began to establish a strong female bonding, a sisterhood that survived not only the

troubles and turmoil of the Nauvoo experience but also the difficult pioneer crossing of Iowa in 1846. Annie Wells Cannon stated:

In the forced exodus from Nauvoo, the [sisters], though separated in different companies coming west, carried the spirit [of sisterhood] through the journey, over prairie, plain, and mountain, and ministered in the camps of Israel at Sugar Creek, Garden Grove, Mt. Pisgah, and Winter Quarters. In the rude temporary homes at Winter Quarters, meetings were held to comfort, encourage, and keep up the morale of the women.2

Rekindled in Winter Quarters during the winter of 1846-47, this sisterhood was brought to the valley of Salt Lake, where it blossomed in every Mormon community throughout the Intermountain West. One woman historian suggested that "nineteenth-century women routinely formed emotional ties with other women." Further, she argued, "a specifically female world did indeed develop" in the nineteenth century. Female bonding created a supportive network of women that was "institutionalized in social conventions or rituals which accompanied virtually every important event in a woman's life, from birth and death."3

The sister Saints in Nauvoo experienced many of the same deprivations and joys that other frontier women chronicled; as a result, they too formed a network. However, the female bonding that had its impetus in a larger degree in Nauvoo than ever before in Church history eventually took on new meanings and directions as a result of the doctrinal tidal wave that swept the social, economic, political, and religious landscape of Nauvoo. The social order developed in Nauvoo contrasted with other Illinois frontier communities of the period.4 One of the bases for an intensified bonding among Mormon women was the periodic absences of husbands, fathers, and brothers from Nauvoo.

Women communicated with absent husbands or family members and friends back home mainly through letters. Writing to her mother in New England, a young woman emphasized this:

It is with mingled feelings of pain and pleasure that I attempt to address a few lines to you. Yea, it is a great grief to me when I think how far I am separated from you; but the reflection that although far distant, there is a way we can communicate our thoughts to each other.5

Vilate Kimball reveals a similar feeling in a letter to her husband. She began, "My bosom friend, the love of my youth, gladly do I retire from the busy cares of life to spend a few moments in silent conversation to you." She longed for the opportunity to be with him, "O that I could take the wings of the morning and fly to your embraces, how much easier I could unbosom my feelings, but yet I am thankful that we even have this privilege of conveying our thoughts to each other."

Vilate noted that she had received a "sweet parcel" that Heber had sent by means of a fellow missionary. Along with the package was a "precious letter." Such letters were read over and over again and passed on to other friends and family members. Vilate wrote, "I have read it over and over with tears in my eyes; the feelings expressed therein [are] worth more to me than words could be without them." Vilate closed with this tender note, "Now, my dear, this page is all devoted to love from me and the children. My daily prayer is that you may finish your mission with honor and be returned in safety to our embraces."6

Letters were delivered by chance travelers, by Church missionaries and leaders who left Nauvoo on Church business, and by the postal system. Mail delivery from such frontier communities was often irregular and slow-and always undependable. There is also some evidence that during the latter part of Nauvoo's Mormon history, mail was purposely interrupted by anti-Mormon activists in Hancock County.

The fact that many letters were started on one day and finished several days, sometimes weeks, later indicates the infrequence of mail service. Many letters have postmarks other than Nauvoo, which indicates that some of the letters were paid for by the receiver or that a letter was given to a missionary who put it in the postal system at his final destination, in many cases several hundred miles closer to the intended recipient.7

Nauvoo letters not only reveal the daily life of the women of Nauvoo but also preserve their feelings, hopes, and desires. Several sister Saints left precious letters full of insights to their lives.

In 1844 Vilate Kimball wrote her husband a tender letter; she began:

My dear Companion, It is one week yesterday since I closed a letter to you; although I have not spoken to you for a week, yet you have not been out of my mind many moments at a time when I was awake; and when I am asleep, I often dream about you.8

Bathsheba Smith moved into five homes during one year. Following their wedding, the young couple lived with the Smith family for four weeks before moving into their first home, a rented log cabin with a leaky roof and a chimney that smoked. With stout hearts, the newlyweds knelt at their bedside on the first night and thanked God for his blessings in bringing them together.

Soon thereafter, Bathsheba and George A. Smith moved across the river to Nauvoo and found an unfinished log home to rent. It had no glass in the windows, so Bathsheba hung blankets up to keep the cold out and to provide some privacy. They moved another time. This particular home was "the worst-looking house we had yet lived in," she recalled, but it had "the desirable qualities of neither smoking nor leaking."9

They soon purchased and began building a two-story frame home. Anxious to have a permanent home, especially since Bathsheba was nearly nine months pregnant, they moved into the unfinished structure. Twelve days later, on 7 July 1842, George A. Smith, Jr., was born. Bathsheba not only began to care for her new son but also became responsible for completing the work on the home when her husband was called on a Church mission two months later.10 Bathsheba's letters chronicled the private and public news of Nauvoo. She anxiously awaited letters in return-shared them and saved them as precious items to be treasured. She wrote George A.: "When I get a letter first, all the rest come to hear it. The brethren's wives have all been to see me this week."11

Her letters kept George A. informed, including her preparation for the long winter. "I have got my corn and fodder secured; broom corn, sunflower seed, and beans likewise. Melissa and me did it."

In closing one letter, Bathsheba noted, "I have had so many melons and my dear was not here to help eat them. Oh, I am so lonesome, all alone [except] baby." She then took the pen and, placing it into the hand of the child while guiding it, wrote, "I is a good boy. I write to you. G. A. Smith, Jr." Bathsheba concluded, "I do not know whether you can read baby's writing. Write every chance. You do not know how I want to see you."12

Missionary work included short-term missions to nearby communities and long-term assignments throughout North America and across the ocean to Great Britain. The success in the British Isles was phenomenal. Hundreds, then thousands, listened and believed the husbands, fathers, brothers, and sons sent from Nauvoo to gather the faithful. Mormon women kept the faith at home, providing for their families and fighting the loneliness of separation lasting anywhere from several months to several years.

Almost every household in the Nauvoo area was stricken with malaria during its first outbreak in the summer of 1839. Among the Church leaders who fell ill were many members of the Twelve Apostles.

The Twelve Apostles were called to leave the United States for a mission in the British Isles, but their departure was delayed by malaria. On 14 September, Brigham Young left his sick wife and ten-day-old daughter and crossed the river to Nauvoo from his temporary home in the abandoned Fort Des Moines to leave on his mission. At Vilate and Heber Kimball's home, however, Brigham collapsed from exhaustion and remained sick for four days. Now Heber had not only his own sick wife, who was about eight months pregnant, and children to take care of but also his fellow Apostle.

Mary Ann Young soon heard of Brigham's situation. She "got a boy to carry her up in his wagon to my house that she might nurse and comfort Brother Brigham to the hour of starting," Heber wrote. Four adults and several children were all sick in a small fourteen-by-sixteen-foot log cabin.

On 18 September, Heber bid his wife good-bye, "who was then shaking with a chill, having two children lying sick by her side." He "embraced her and [his] children and bade them farewell" as he and Brigham made it to a wagon. Both wives were unable to come to the door to see them off. Heber helped Brigham into a wagon and began their journey. Heber recorded, "My inmost parts would melt within me at leaving my family in such a condition, as it was, almost in the arms of death. I felt I could not endure it. I asked the teamster to stop."

Heber asked Brigham to gather all the strength he could to sit up and bid their wives good-bye. "This is pretty tough," Heber said, "but let's rise up, and give them a cheer." He and Brigham did so as they waved their hats three times over their heads and shouted, "Hurrah, hurrah, hurrah for Israel!" Vilate and Mary Ann, upon hearing the shout of farewell, managed to get to the door of the cabin with smiles on their faces, and, while leaning on the doorframe, they waved and called out, "Good-bye; God bless you!"13

Both Brigham and Heber returned the good wishes and then told the driver to go ahead. This brief salutation both relieved and sustained the two men as they left their wives for a period of almost two years.

Brigham left some money for his wife, but debts had to be paid. His first letter to Mary Ann, written only hours after parting, explained the various obligations owed. She had only $2.72 left following the disbursement of the funds. "This is almost robbing you I know, but I do not know what else to do. Brother Joseph has pledged himself that the wives of the Twelve should have what they wanted. . . . I do feel as though the Lord would provide for you and me."14 Brigham himself had neither passage fare nor clothing for his journey. He relied upon the Lord to sustain his family and himself as he began the long journey to the British Isles.

Louisa Barnes Pratt's husband was called to leave Nauvoo as a missionary assigned to the Pacific Isles in 1843, leaving her with four children. Addison, her husband, did not return to Nauvoo, but to Salt Lake City in 1848, where his family had moved during his long absence. Louisa wrote:

When it was first announced to me his mission was to the South Pacific ocean, and for an absence of three years, a weeping spirit came upon me which lasted for three days. I then became calm, and set about preparing his wardrobe for the event. He was often in a thoughtful serious mood.

She continued, "The parting scene came. . . . The two eldest daughters wept very sorely." The family walked with Addison to the steamboat landing while Addison carried the youngest child in his arms. "It was unfortunate," Louisa noted,

at the last as he stepped on to the steamboat the children saw him take his handkerchief from his eyes; they knew he was wiping away his tears; it was too much for them. They commenced weeping; the second daughter was inconsolable-the more we tried to soothe her, the more piteous were her complaints. She was sure her father would never return.15

The young family returned to their small log cabin, and Louisa "immediately set about building a framed house, buying the lumber on credit." When completed, she won "the reputation of being a punctual business woman." She relied upon her own abilities to pay for the house and support her family by barter and trade. She employed her abilities as a seamstress and set up a school in her new home to pay the bills.

Another young bride, nineteen-year-old Bathsheba Smith, writing her husband, George Albert Smith, on 16 July 1843 noted:

I wish I could have been with you and stayed until you started, for it seemed such a long time until the boat came. I thought perhaps you would come home again in a few minutes, but I was disappointed. I wanted to see you very much. I would have gone to you if I could. O my dear, it is nothing to cry when one feels as I did when I saw the boat going down [the river]. I was pleased to think you would not have to wait any longer, but then how could I bear to have it carry you off so rapidly from me. I watched it until I could not see it any longer; then I held my head for it ached. Soon your father and mother came in. George A. cries, "Pa." He feels bad [and] wants to see you. He often goes to the door to see you. When we say, "Where is Father?" he will say, "a da pa."16

The bitterness of such departures made reunion sweet, however. Eliza R. Snow wrote of her brother's return from a mission to the British Isles:

This day I have the inexpressible happiness of once again embracing a brother who had been absent nearly three years. I cannot describe the feelings which filled my bosom when I saw the steamboat Amaranth moving majestically up the Mississippi, and thought perhaps Lorenzo was on board; my heart overflowed with gratitude when, after the landing of the boat, I heard Pres. Hyrum Smith say to me, "Your brother has actually arrived." It is a time of mutual rejoicing which I never shall forget.17

Men were not the only ones to leave and return to the City of the Saints on the Mississippi River during the gathering period.

In 1839, Laura Clark Phelps left her small children in the care of "an old lady by the name of Stevenson" while she returned to Missouri. She wanted to free her husband, who had been incarcerated there during the Missouri persecutions. At Columbia, some one hundred fifty miles away from her children in Illinois, Sister Phelps assisted in the escape of her husband and Parley P. Pratt; another prisoner, King Follett, also escaped but was recaptured.

Upon her return to Nauvoo life, Laura Phelps settled down for a few months until August 1840, when she left her older children in Nauvoo while she, her husband, and baby started for Ohio to visit her in-laws for the first time. Eleven-year-old Mary was sent to the Murdock home with her sister. Mary recalled:

Oh! What a strange place it was. Brother Murdock had just married an old maid. She was very particular and everything had to be done just so. At just such a time-we had to have just such an hour to eat, go to bed, and get up. It seemed like we were in prison. We never were allowed a light to go upstairs to bed, but we would go up, get into bed, hug each other, and go to sleep the best we could. They were very particular, however, about making us go to meeting every Sunday.

Mary enjoyed one aspect of the stay, however. "Mrs. Murdock was a fine seamstress and she taught me to sew." Later, she fondly thanked Sister Murdock for the learning experiences gained during the stay.18 The "imprisonment" must have seemed forever for the young girls. Finally, after ten long months, their mother and father returned to Nauvoo.

Sometimes women accompanied their husbands on missions. The first to cross the ocean to the new mission field in Great Britain was Mary Ann Frost Pratt. Mary Ann's sister, Olive Grey Frost, also went with the family in the fall of 1840.19 During the next few years several women-including Charlotte Curtis, Artemesia Beaman Snow, Jennetta Richards, Asenath Melvina Banker, Francis Smith Robbins, and Mary Minerva Snow Gates-went with their husbands on Church missions. By and large, these trips were a respite from the sickness and primitive conditions of frontier life in Nauvoo.

Nancy Tracy's husband, Moses Tracy, was called on a political mission to "the state of New York," where he was to distribute Joseph Smith's Views on Powers and Policy of the Government of the United States. Joseph Smith offered himself as a candidate for president on his personal merits as an interested and involved citizen, not as a religious leader with peculiar insights into national policies.

Nancy recalled, "I wanted to go with him to see my mother and relatives. Consequently, he was advised to take me with him by Hyrum Smith, the patriarch," just before the martyrdom. When they returned to Nauvoo several weeks later, "it was in mourning for these two great and good men."20

Wilford Woodruff was called to leave Nauvoo to take charge of the British Mission in 1844. His wife, Phebe, was also called to accompany him, not to visit relatives but to assist in the ministry. She was given a special blessing by Church leaders on 28 August 1844, just before her departure:

Beloved Sister, in the name of the Lord we bless you as you are about to make your departure over the sea in company with your husband where he is going to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ. You shall be blessed on your mission in common with your husband, and thou shalt be the means of doing much good for you shall have the desires of your heart in all things. Your life and health shall be precious in the eyes of the Lord, and in the hour of distress and trouble thou shalt be preserved by the power of God. Thou shalt be satisfied with your mission. Thy life shall be prolonged, and thou shalt be a comfort to thy husband. Thou must hold him by faith that he may be useful through his life. If thou wilt go in all humility, thou shalt be preserved to return and meet with the Saints in the temple of the Lord and shalt rejoice therein, and thy children shall be preserved until thou shalt return and meet with them again. Thou art sealed up unto eternal life, and we seal all these blessings upon thy head and all others which thou shalt desire in righteousness; even so, Amen.21

Upon the Woodruffs' arrival in England, the Church's Millennial Star announced, "We have detained the press this month in order to announce the arrival of Elder Wilford Woodruff, one of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, accompanied by Sister Woodruff and child; also Elder Hiram Clark, and Sister Clark; Elder D. Jones, and Sister Jones."22

While these three women-sisters Woodruff, Clark, and Jones-journeyed to England, other sisters left Nauvoo to visit family and friends. Louisa Tanner Follett left the city to visit in the East following her husband's death in 1844. On her way home, she wrote in her diary the feelings that arose in her heart as she prepared to return to Nauvoo:

September 5, 1845-Oh, how I long to gaze one more [time] on the beloved City of the Saints and meet the warm embrace of my children and friends. I have left Babylon for the last time, and thanks be to God for his preserving care during my long and protracted journey.23

Following a trip up the Mississippi River, she continued her account of the journey:

Sunday, September 7, 1845. At length we got safe over [the Keokuk Rapids], which brought [us] in sight of the beloved city. . . . At ten o'clock we safely landed at the Stone House, where we met with the most cordial welcome from our friends and relatives in Nauvoo. . . . Although my health is much impaired, yet when I take a retrospective view of the past, I feel that I have abundant reason to bless God that amidst the danger to which I have been exposed that I have been mercifully preserved and brought to join my afflicted family and brethren in Nauvoo.24

Ten-year-old Margaret Gay Judd and her family left their home in upper Canada to gather with the Saints, but lived temporarily in Walnut Grove and La Harp, New York, before finally arriving in Nauvoo in 1841. Margaret recalled, "How happy Mother was! She was a devoted Latter-day Saint, and her one thought from the day she was baptized was to gather with the Church."

When the Judd family arrived in Nauvoo, housing was difficult to locate. A friend, Brother Noble, invited them to stay with his family until they could find something appropriate. Margaret recalled:

Mother had her misgivings, for she knew Mrs. Noble too well to believe they could live in peace, but necessity knows no law so my parents accepted his kind offer, and things went along pleasantly for a little while, but the lady of the house soon began to show the cloven foot. She did not belong to the Church and was as bitter as gall and very quarrelsome. [She] never let an opportunity pass without saying something disagreeable about the Church, especially about the Prophet. All the apostate lies she could hear she took great pleasure in making Mother listen to, but Mother had made up her mind that she would not quarrel with her. It was pretty hard to have to hear her sneers, insinuations, and abuse continually. I remember once Mother had me sit down and read the Book of Mormon-that was too much! She took a cup of water and dashed it over me and the book. Well, things went from bad to worse until Mother could not stand it any longer.

Eventually, Margaret's father bought a lot and obtained some lumber to build a "shanty." The family moved, and "Mother was delighted to get out of a comfortable home into all the discomforts of a shanty where, when the sun shone it was hot, and when it rained it was wet," Margaret recalled. She never "uttered a word of complaint," since nothing "could keep her from enjoying her religion."25

Women were engaged in many other pursuits besides domestic responsibilities. The Nauvoo Neighbor noted that the "Female Association for Manufacturing of Straw Bonnets, Hats, and Straw Trimming" would meet at the concert hall. The notice was signed by "Nancy Rockwood, President."26 Another area where women contributed significantly to community life was in the many schools organized in Nauvoo. Often these schools were held in whatever room could be found-in homes, back rooms of businesses, and the assembly room over Joseph Smith's Red Brick Store.

Hannah Holbrook moved into her new home in January 1843 with her husband, Joseph. By the end of February she was teaching school to several "scholars" at $1.50 per student per quarter in one of the rooms of her newly completed home. Her husband noted that her earnings "became much assistance to me."27

Martha Cory taught school with her husband, and together they had as many as one hundred and fifty students. They began their efforts in a leased room designed for a school room, but as they attracted new students they moved to a newly completed music hall, which accommodated the large number of students. As much as 50 percent of the teachers in Nauvoo were women. Domestic duties, however, remained the emphasis for the women in Nauvoo.

The religious life of the sister Saints revolved around many formal and informal meetings. In the standard winter settings, protracted evening meetings were held in homes and larger public buildings in the city and in nearby Mormon communities. As the sister Saints emerged from nature's long winter "darkness" into God's "marvelous light," they rejoiced in the gifts and blessings of the gospel.28

Eliza R. Snow attended one of the many "blessing" meetings held in the homes of the Saints. She recorded on 19 December 1843: "Tuesday evening [Lorenzo] having returned, we had the pleasure of the company of Father [Isaac] and Mother [Lucy] Morley: it was an interesting season, in the order of a blessing meeting, Father Morley officiating."

Eliza recorded the blessing in her diary, part of which included these statements:

Sister Eliza, In the name of Jesus Christ I lay my hands upon thy head, and I confirm all thy former blessings together with the blessings of a patriarch upon thee. . . . The Lord thy Savior loves thee and has been bountiful in pouring his blessings upon thee, and thou shalt have the blessing to be admired and honored by all good men. Thou hast the blessing to speak in wisdom and to counsel in prudence, and thou shalt have the blessing to be honored. . . . Thy influence shall be great; . . . thy name shall be handed down to posterity from generation to generation; and many songs shall be heard that were dictated by thy pen and from the principles of thy mind, even until the choirs from on high and the earth below, shall join in one universal song of praise to God and the Lamb.29

Prayer meetings were a weekly experience held in the Nauvoo Saints' homes. Usually a local elder invited his neighbors to his home for such gatherings. The sister Saints in Charlotte Haven's neighborhood invited her to attend their meetings. On one occasion Charlotte went to Sarah Kimball's home for a prayer meeting. She wrote to her brother and sister, "You must know the Saints take an interest in our spiritual welfare, by sending us to read the Book of Mormon, The Voice of Warning, and the Book of Covenants, and invite us to attend prayer meetings."30

A few weeks later Charlotte Haven wrote her family again and mentioned another prayer meeting:

Sunday evening prayer meetings are held at the private houses in different parts of the city. Elder C., who lives in this neighborhood, has kindly invited us to attend those held at his house, so I with the Judge have been there three Sunday evenings during the winter. The room is well filled, and the meetings are presided over by the elder, are orderly, and are conducted similarly to the Methodist ones I have attended in country in New England. All are at liberty to speak, and sometimes a subject is discussed. One evening it was baptism for the dead. There were only two or three speakers on that subject.

Near the end of this particular meeting, a sister Saint arose to bear her testimony and relate some of her own personal experiences and tragedies. "She told of the joy she had felt when the new faith was revealed to her in her own English land" and of the trials of her faith as she gathered with the Saints.

The sister's story of personal suffering "hushed the assembly into a profound stillness, the words of the heart found a response in every bosom, and upon every countenance tears of sympathy were visible, as they listened to the mournful tones." She lost her husband and four children during the Missouri persecution, and now her "only surviving son lay prostrate with a fever." Charlotte concluded the story:

In a mother's agony she besought the Lord to withhold his chastening rod, and spare her the only remaining prop of her old age; but if he saw fit to take that also, she fervently prayed that she might bow submissively to his will. It was beautiful to see in the prayer of this sorrowing mother.31

Prayers of faith and blessings did not always bring about the desired response, but many sister saints took courage and believed that the will of the Lord was being accomplished.

Jennetta Richards, having arrived from Massachusetts, wrote to her husband's family to thank them for the hospitality she enjoyed there. She wrote, "I arrived at Nauvoo, [but] I felt my strength completely exhausted." Over the next several weeks her health worsened to the point of her being incapacitated; only then did she begin to feel somewhat better. In a tone of accepting the Lord's blessings, she wrote, "If faith does not heal in every instance, it keeps me alive."32 Friends, family, and Church meetings helped sustain these women in the most difficult times.

For many, Nauvoo was a happy place where nature could be appreciated, especially the sunsets over the Mississippi River. As a young girl, Mary Ann Stearns enjoyed the view from her family home, situated one block north of the temple site. "The view from that point," she recalled, "was a grand one."

We could see over into Iowa, and for miles up and down the river, as well as the lower part of the city that was built on the flats that extended down to its banks. Many a time, with companions, I have stood on the brow of the hill and watched the sun sink down behind the Iowa hills, in the far distant west.33

Contemporary sources confirm this childhood memory as not simply an idealized recollection of the good old days, but as a reality that many Saints vividly recalled years later. Charlotte Haven wrote to her family in the East on 5 March 1843:

We are having beautiful sunsets these days, and from our parlor window we have an extensive western view, and later on in the night the heavens are all aglow with light from the prairie fires. Between the river and the Iowa bluff eight or ten miles west, ten to twenty fires are started, burning the refuse grass and straw preparatory to putting in spring crops. Often I sit up a long time after going to my room, watching these long lines of fire as they seem to meet all along the horizon. The sun is down and darkness is fast gathering, so I must close, with much love from your sister, Charlotte.34

Martha Hall Haven described the familiar scene in a letter to her father and mother. "The burning prairies look grand here. If you were to see such a sight [in] the East, you would think the world was on fire."35

Many letters to family members and friends mentioned nature; at other times the sister Saints noted these reflections in their own diaries. Eliza R. Snow celebrated this in a diary entry on 21 July 1843:

In company with Brother Allen, [I] left Nauvoo for the residence of Sister [Leonora] Leavitt in the Morley Settlement. We rode most of the way in the night in consequence of the annoyance of the prairie flies. It was the season for contemplation, and while gazing on the glittering expanse above, which splendidly contrasted with the shades that surrounded me, my mind, as if touched by the spirit of inspiration, retraced the past and glanced at the future, serving me a mental treat spiced with the variety of charges subsequent to the present state of mutable existence.36

Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs wrote about going into the woods to pick fresh berries:

July 17, 1845. We started for Lima after blackberries . . . 30-31 miles. 18 July. We took a fine ramble through the woods and bushes. . . . 23 [July]. We went to pick berries. Had a good time. . . . While wandering in the bushes beneath the shade of large trees, seeing the plenty of fruit that filled the woods, ah, thought I, the care that our Bountiful Creator has even for the fowls of heaven to prepare for them a feast.37

The harshness of the environment was also described in many letters back home to friends and family, and often a comparison was made between what these pioneers experienced in the new home with that of their former residence. Ursulia B. Hascall's letter to a cousin living in the East made this reference to the Mississippi Valley weather: "It is, has been, so very warm it was as much as a Yankee would like to do to keep from Âroasting.' I have been engaged in domestic affairs this morning, but thought I must omit some things until I could finish this letter, as the mail goes out this afternoon."38

During the summer months, it was not only the heat that irritated the inhabitants of Nauvoo but also a strange assortment of river insects. The "Nauvoo flies," large, mothlike insects peculiar to the area, plagued visitors and citizens during the day. One traveler in the area commented, "No sooner do those [insects] who wage war during the day retire, than their place is filled with others, labouring with equal effect through the night, whilst the indefatigable mosquito, in many situations, heads the attack at all times."39

Winter also had its challenges, as Charlotte Haven wrote to family members in New Hampshire:

This winter [1842-43] has been extremely cold; I almost despair of sunny, warm weather. . . . We had quite a fall of snow last night, and the river has been ice-bound since the middle of November. I used to think we had high winds in New England, but I look back to them now as gentle breezes compared to the violent ones we have here. Every few days we have here a perfect hurricane, lasting for forty-eight hours. Occasionally we have had a thaw, and then-oh, the mud! it seems bottomless.40

She described the soil at Nauvoo as being a "black, sticky loam" that, when you step in it, is virtually impossible to get out of. Nauvoo's roads and walkways were poor at best. Martha Hall Haven wrote, "The soil differs much from anything I ever saw. I have not seen a stone or any gravel in the place. The mud here sticks to my feet just like paste."41

There may have been as much as seventy-five miles of streets and another ninety-one miles of walkways in the city, mostly unimproved. Bathsheba W. Smith noted the problem of the roads during the wet season: "The roads have been so bad, the bridges are most all washed away, that it is almost impossible to go to or come from Macedonia [a nearby community]."42

Charlotte Haven related an incident of crossing one of the roads in Nauvoo when her "feet went down, down, and in all probability would have reached my antipodes had it not been for the assistance of the Judge." He helped her out, but she lost her rubber boots "far below, and there remain to be fossilized as footprints of the primeval man."43

Charlotte's tone changed in May, however. On 2 May 1843 she wrote that "the weather is now very fine, and we shall soon commence gardening." The frozen river opened and flowed, "majestically onward, blue and clear as crystal. Several boats pass daily." The fields around Nauvoo changed also as spring was turning into early summer. "The plain between us and the river, embracing twelve acres or more, is covered with luxuriant grass, looking bright and green."44

By June the gloomy feelings of winter had entirely vanished. Charlotte wrote to her sister:

The prairie flowers are to me an object of untiring interest, their beauty and variety a constant surprise; it is impossible for me to number the different species, for continually new flowers meet the eye. Pink, scarlet, and orange are now the prevailing colors. Lavish indeed has Flora been in her decorations of these wide rolling prairies.45

Socially, things were changing in Nauvoo. Former attitudes colored by strict Puritan and Methodist backgrounds gave way to new expressions without the guilt. For example, Christmas was not celebrated by the Saints in New York, Ohio, Missouri, or the first years in Nauvoo with any of the festive atmosphere common to the English Saints.

So fervent were early American settlers against the "impure" practices of Europe, which gaily celebrated the day, that early colonies imposed harsh fines and even jail sentences for any idleness or feasting on Christmas. The New England and New York Saints, although accepting the message of the Restoration, struggled to determine which traditions from their past should be retained and which should be rejected. In Nauvoo, these Saints came into contact with immigrants from England with different traditions.

On 25 December 1843, Christmas was celebrated by Emma Smith and her family with all the trimmings of Christmas-caroling, visiting friends, eating a delicious dinner, and opening presents.

The Smith family members were awakened from their sleep very early in the morning by some friends. Lettice Rushton, a blind widow of Richard Rushton from England, was "accompanied by three of her sons, with their wives, and her two daughters, with their husbands, and several of her neighbors, singing, ÂMortals, awake! with angels join.' "

The music "caused a thrill of pleasure to run through my soul," Joseph noted in his diary. The rest of those in the house arose to hear the singing. Joseph thanked God and blessed Sister Rushton and the group "in the name of the Lord."46

A few days later, on 31 December 1843, Helen Mar Kimball joined a youth choir to serenade Emma and her family: "We met at our usual place of practice, on the hill near the temple, and although the night was unfavorable, being dark and rainy, we, nothing daunted, started out between twelve and one o'clock, we struck up and sang the New Year's hymn."47

Another holiday, Thanksgiving, was not celebrated in Nauvoo nor the state. Massachusetts convert Martha Hall Haven and her family had observed this holiday at home and so commenced it in Nauvoo among family members. "We have no Thanksgiving in this state," she wrote her mother and father. Her husband's sister "made a feast after the eastern style and invited all the family that is here" on the last day of November.48

Charlotte Haven left a description of an invitation for a party at the Rigdon home. The announcement read: "The company of Mr., Mrs., and Miss Haven is solicited to attend a party at the house of Mr. Rigdon on Thursday the 24th at three o'clock p.m. Sarah Rigdon, Eliza Rigdon. Nauvoo February 20th."

When Charlotte arrived at the Rigdon home, she was escorted through the kitchen-dining room into a room where there was a "large quilting frame, around which sat eight of the belles of Nauvoo." She was kindly introduced to everyone, and then "a seat was assigned me near the head of the frame, and, equipped with needle, thread, and thimble, I quilted with the rest." When the quilt was completed, the door separating the young women and the dining room was opened.

The scene, how changed! Through the whole length of the room . . . a table extended, loaded with a substantial supper-turkey, chicken, beef, vegetables, pies, cake, etc. . . . All seemed more joyous; songs were sung, concluding with the two little girls singing several verses of the Battle of Michigan. . . . Then followed an original dance without music, commencing with marching and ending with kissing! Merry games were then introduced, The miller, Grab, etc., at nine out to a second edition of supper, and then the games were renewed with vigor. We left about ten. [The] party did not break up till twelve.49

Among the many activities that the women of Nauvoo engaged in, singing and playing musical instruments were always popular. On one occasion, Rachel Ivins Grant was visiting her sixteen-year-old cousin. Both young women were at the piano when Joseph Smith came to visit the family. Joseph asked Rachel to sing "In the Gloaming," a popular nonreligious song. "Why, Brother Joseph, it's Sunday!" Rachel exclaimed. To which he responded, "The better the day, the better the deed."50

As Nauvoo grew from a struggling community of log homes to a thriving city of brick homes and buildings, sisters took advantage of increased prosperity by offering their special talents and services to the public. Ann Pitchforth reported to her mother and father in England that she had been talking with her family in Nauvoo about teaching piano and had said, "I wonder where there is a good piano here." At this point, her daughter, little Ann, popped up her head and said, "My Grandlady [her Grandmother in England] has one piano." They all were surprised to think she still remembered her family in England.51

Ann Pitchforth was successful in locating a piano. Within a few months she published the following advertisement in the local Nauvoo newspaper:

Piano-Forte Music, MRS. PITCHFORTH respectfully informs the inhabitants of Nauvoo that she has commenced teaching music on the piano-forte; and wishing to suit the circumstance of the Saints, she offers to teach at the very low rate of three dollars per quarter: so that all classes wishful to learn may be accommodated. As Mrs. P. has had the benefit of many years instruction from several of the most scientific English and German masters, and subsequently has had much experience in teaching, she flatters herself that she will be able to give satisfaction to all those who may favor her with their patronage. Reference, kindly permitted, to Elders Brigham Young and John Taylor. Enquire for Mrs. P. at Misses Bray's milliners, Main Street, or at her own residence, corner of Granger and Parley streets, one block east of the Seventies Hall.52

Another pastime for young women in Nauvoo was making samplers, pincushions, and dolls. In families and among friends, a "candy pull" was often suggested as entertainment. Young teenage girls enjoyed a number of outdoor activities, including horseback riding. Helen Mar Kimball went riding with her father whenever he was home.

On one occasion Heber C. Kimball had business at the Lawrence home, located several miles from Nauvoo on the prairie. The sky was somewhat cloudy during the day, but Heber told his daughter they would be back before it began to rain. Helen wrote:

We had barely got started for home when it commenced raining. Father put his umbrella over me and told me to hold it closely over myself and not mind him. The thunder and lightning were terrific, and the wind blew and the rain poured in perfect torrents; there was no house and not even a tree to seek shelter under. . . . We soon reached Brother Winchester's house, which was near the outskirts of the town, but not before our clothes were drenched through.

They found warm clothing and shelter and waited out the storm. On the way home the "roads were washed smooth, and we found that a heavy freshet [a flooding of a stream because of heavy rain] had passed over the lower part of the city."53

Another activity that both young and older women occupied themselves with was collecting autographs and messages of advice and friendship in their autograph books.54 Barbara Matilda Neff Moses, a daughter of a well-to-do family in the East, visited Nauvoo as a young woman newly baptized into the Church. While among the Saints, she invited well-wishers and Church leaders to leave remembrances in her autograph book.

W. W. Phelps began on a serious note and then ended by rhyming his name in a spirit of fun:

Two things will beautify a youth, That is: Let virtue decorate the truth. And so you know; every little helps, Yours, W. W. Phelps

The next person to write, Joseph Smith, responded to Phelps's admonition by quoting Paul the Apostle:

The truth and virtue both are good When rightly understood, But charity is better, Miss- That takes us home to bliss. And so forthwith Remember, Joseph Smith

Brigham Young, who was sometimes serious and at other times humorous in the messages he left in autograph books, wrote:

To live with Saints in Heaven is bliss and glory, To live with Saints on Earth is another story.

Eliza R. Snow, Zion's poetess, so named by Joseph Smith, signed Barbara's autograph book on 12 May 1844:

O God, my Father, bless her- Be thou her friend and guide; May guardian pow'rs caress her While watching by her side. An tho' the earth's foundation Is from its center torn; On visions of salvation, Let her be upward borne. Inspire her with thy Spirit, Go fix her hopes above; And bring her to inherit The fullness of thy love.

Wilford Woodruff composed an acrostic using the letters of her name:

Behold there's glories within thy reach, O virtuous maid, Ah, maintain thy faith, for this generation will fade. Round thy bower [abode] salvation and peace shall twine, Blessing surround thy head through the new covenant divine. Attend, O Barbara, to that truth and that light, Round thy path it has shown by day and by night, And to the brightness of its rising the Lord shall come.55

Another young girl, Margaret Pierce, passed her autograph book around Nauvoo and among the settlements across the river in Iowa:

This world, my dear Margaret, is full of deceit And friendship a jewel we seldom can meet. How strange does it seem that in searching around, This source of delight is so rare to be found.

Friendship is like the cobbler's tie That binds two souls in unity. But love is like the cobbler's awl That pierces through the soul and all.

I would write better if I could But nature said I never should.

S. M. White-Nauvoo, August 3rd, 184356
