Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, Women of Nauvoo ( 1992)

5 Daughters, Wives, and Mothers—Sisters at Home

Good parents will bring up good children; and good children will exalt themselves to good saints; and good saints will take the kingdom, under the whole heaven, and possess it forever and ever.

-John Taylor

The most basic dimension of society in pre-Civil War America was the family. This was certainly true of the women of Nauvoo, whose lives revolved around their families. Like their non-Mormon neighbors, the Saints in Nauvoo reflected many of the values and dreams of most American families.1 Nevertheless, in some very important ways, the sisters' values and beliefs differed from the larger American society. The Times and Seasons stated, "Good parents will bring up good children; and good children will exalt themselves to good saints; and good saints will take the kingdom, under the whole heaven, and possess it forever and ever."2

The sister Saints in Nauvoo believed that little children were "not capable of committing sin" (Moroni 8:8) and dismissed the traditional Protestant belief in the depravity of the child. An 1843 editorial in the Nauvoo Wasp reported:

We hope that since we, as a people, are favored with more religious light than others that we shall not be neglected in [raising children], but that our children may be taught the principles of morality, industry, and virtue, and when these are attended to . . . that we may become the praise of the whole earth.3

More so than during the Kirtland period, the family in Nauvoo took on added significance-eternal family organization entered the Prophet's teachings. The "celestial" family was made possible by the divine ordinances revealed in Nauvoo to Joseph Smith.

Children were a significant part of private family life but were also equally important to the community as a whole. From the moment of birth, children were considered as blessings from heaven. They were blessed as infants by the elders of the Church. Unlike other religious ceremonies of the period for infants, the blessing simply invoked divine favors for the recipient and publicly provided the young Saint with a name that would be officially entered in the records of the Church. Later at the age of eight a child was baptized into the faith and confirmed a member of the Church.

The woman's responsibility was to prepare her children for these important events. Nevertheless, these sister Saints recognized that occasionally their husbands' sometimes long absences could create a void in family life and leave family members feeling a sense of loss. Writing to her husband, Vilate Kimball noted the children's desires:

The children are impatient to have you come home; you are losing all of the most interesting part of little David's life. A child is never so pretty and interesting as when they first begin to walk and talk. He is now well and goes prattling about the house, and you may be assured we all think him very cunning. He is called Heber altogether by the neighbors.4

Surprisingly, births were never mentioned in Nauvoo's local newspapers, and often journal entries and letters contained only the notice of the birth itself, with no mention of pregnancy. If it was noted, the sisters' Victorian sensibilities forced them to use some other term.

Charlotte Haven wrote to her mother on 19 February 1843 about the birth of a nephew without having mentioned the expectant mother's condition in any previous letter. "A very happy Sunday morning dawned upon us," she began her letter, "for about midnight Elizabeth [her sister-in-law] gave birth to a fine, healthy little boy." Charlotte reported that the baby weighed nine pounds and felt fine. Her letter continued:

We had two experienced Mormon women with her all day yesterday, and Dr. Weld came towards evening and tarried till after daylight. Brother H. seems to be the only one in danger; you, Mother, know already how fond he is of children-he is now carried beyond himself, so perfectly happy; in his transports of joy he laughs and cries alternately, and cannot keep quiet, but jumps up to look at the baby or its mother every few minutes.5

Note that while the activities of the child and father were freely discussed, nothing was said about the birth itself or the mother's condition, except that she was fine.

A few years later, Irene Hascall Pomeroy wrote to her mother in Massachusetts about the birth of a new daughter, Francis. "Dearest Mother," she started, "I have wonderful news! Last Wednesday morning at the break of day we were presented with a beautiful girl weighing eight pounds and a quarter. It is the prettiest little babe you ever saw." Irene sent a lock of hair to the new grandmother and another piece to the great-grandmother.

The baby was admired by friends and family. Irene noted, "It does nothing but nurse and sleep." On 30 September she continued her unfinished letter, "Our lovely babe is one week old this morning [and] is pretty as ever and appears to be perfectly well, excepting when I eat too much pumpkin pie." Irene was elated with the birth of her first child. "Tell Aunt Milly I am happier than I used to be, now I have such a pretty little girl to Âfix up.' "6

Mary Fielding Smith, like most wives of prominent community and Church leaders, sometimes had a difficult time balancing her public and private lives as a mother and a stepmother of five children. In a letter to her husband, who was touring Church branches in the Northeast, she signed it, "Your faithful companion and friend, but unhappy stepmother, Mary Smith."7 The stress of rearing one's children was magnified by being placed in a position to replace a deceased mother.

Mary Ann Phelps, a stepdaughter of another family, recalled her own situation from a child's perspective as a woman tried to take the place of her mother: "The woman Daddy had married was so different from my mother. Well, I guess she did the best she could, but she had no management, and my mother was such a fine woman to manage and keep things going along. This made it very hard for Father."8

While many sister Saints arrived in Nauvoo with family members by their sides, others had left loved ones behind in order to join the Saints themselves. While physically separated from family, each of these women hoped for her family's conversion, followed by an ultimate reunion in Nauvoo. Clarissa Chase wrote to her sister about the recent April 1844 Church conference:

There were about two hundred elders called upon at the conference to go and preach through the different towns in the United States. John Cleason is . . . going to start in about two months, and he thinks he shall call on you before he returns, and I want some of you to be ready to come home with him.9

A woman's experiences in Nauvoo were made up of contradictions. Nauvoo was a place alive with dinner parties, Christmas celebrations, quilting bees, cornhusking parties, circuses, Fourth of July celebrations, military parades, house-raisings, and excursions on the Mississippi River. On the other hand, it was also a city of sadness, sickness, funerals, and challenges.

Local newspapers in Nauvoo chronicled life in the city. Sometimes they made note of sorrows that beset the sister Saints and their families. One such notice appeared in the Times and Seasons on 2 August 1841: "Drowned-In this city July 23rd, Samuel W., aged 8 years, and James F. C., aged 6 years, both children of Stephen and Mary Luce, formerly of Maine."10

Emma Smith, overworked and exhausted, gave birth to a child on 6 February 1842, a son who did not survive. Only five months before, her fourteen-month-old baby boy, Don Carlos, died from the effects of malaria. In the middle of February, Joseph and Emma buried their child amidst a great deal of sorrow.

The sisters' personal letters and diaries often spoke, without self-recrimination, of their sorrows-many times without their spouses to assist and comfort them. As letters were the principal means of communication at the time, they tended to be obituary notices, reporting the deaths of friends and family.11

Sitting down at a small desk in a candle-lit room during a cold winter's day, Sarah Mulholland began writing her brother-in-law and sister about the events of the preceding weeks in Nauvoo:

It is with feelings easier felt than described that I sit down to write a few lines to you. . . . We have had to part with our dear mother; what a heart-rending sight to stand and see such a tender and an affectionate mother pass through the dark valley of death. But it was not too trying as it might have been if she had not had such a glorious hope in the trying hour of death. The God she served owned her in the hour of death, and eased and softened every pain.

Sarah recounted how "the sweet spirit took its flight, without causing her to have a struggle or a groan." Her death "left a sweet smile on her blessed face." Sarah admitted to her sister Mary, "I miss Mother, the little dishes of butter . . . [do] not come now; no, no, Mother [is] gone."12

Ellen Briggs Douglas, an English convert, wrote her family in Britain, "I know not whether you will have heard or not of the great and unremedied loss that I have sustained in the death of my husband, my children of the loss of the kindest, most affectionate father, and you, my fathers and mothers, of a son and brother."13

The Prophet's aunt Temperance Mack wrote her daughter an "obituary letter" in September 1840:

My dear daughter, I fear you have suffered some anxiety in consequence of not having heard from me sooner, but as sickness has been the cause I am sure you will excuse me. . . . There has been considerable sickness here of late and some deaths, among which are your cousin Don Carlos, your cousin Joseph's youngest child, and the young Elder you heard preach on the Sabbath morning after your arrival here.14

When Wilford Woodruff left his wife, Phebe, and his daughter, Sarah Emma, for his first mission to Great Britain in 1839, Phebe was pregnant. During his travels to England he dreamed about his wife. On 28 November 1839 he related:

[I] had a dream while upon my bed. And in my dream I saw Mrs. Woodruff, and notwithstanding we rejoiced much having an interview with each other, yet our embraces were mixed with sorrow for after conversing a while about her domestic affairs I asked where Sarah Emma was, our only child. She [said] weeping and kissing me, "She is dead." We sorrowed a moment and [then] I awoke. Phebe also said she had not received my letters. Is this dream true? Time must determine.15

Nearly a year later on 26 November 1840, Wilford received several letters from Nauvoo, one from Sister Margaret Smoot and another from his beloved Phebe-his dream had indeed been a warning. He noted, "The letters from Phebe and Sister Smoot gave an account of the death and burial of our oldest child Sarah Emma, who died July 17, 1840, being two years and three days old."16

Phebe wrote to Wilford on the day following Sarah Emma's death:

My dear Wilford, what will be your feelings, when I say that yesterday I was called to witness the departure of our little Sarah Emma from this world? Yes, she is gone. The relentless hand of death has snatched her from my embrace. But Ah! She was too lovely, too kind, too affectionate to live in this wicked world. When looking on her I have often thought how I should feel to part with her. I thought I could not live without her, especially in the absence of my companion. But she has gone.

Phebe continued, "Yes, Wilford we have one little angel in heaven, and I think likely her spirit has visited you before this time." Her description of the last days and moments of Sarah Emma's life must have caused tears to well up in her lonely companion's eyes. "She used to call her poor papa and putty papa many times in a day. She left a kiss for her papa with me just before she died."

The walk to the cemetery was quite hard for the young mother. "She had no relative to follow her to the grave or to shed a tear for her," Phebe wrote Wilford, "only her Ma and little Wilford [a son born while Wilford was gone]."17 Sarah Emma may have died of a respiratory infection, but many other children were attacked by a more common disease of the Mississippi Valley, the ague.

The ague-malaria, with its chills and fever-took many lives before the swampland was drained and the anopheles mosquito was somewhat controlled. Writing to her family in 1843, Sally Randall mentioned:

October 6, 1843-Dear Friends. . . . We landed in Nauvoo on the 22 [September 1843] about two o'clock in the morning. I found James [her husband] in as good health and circumstances as I expected. He has a lot with a log cabin on it. . . . It is very sickly here at present with fevers, ague, and measles. A great many children die with them.18

Four weeks later, Sally wrote again, but it reflected her own personal grief:

November 12 [1843]-Dear Friends. . . . George [her son] has gone to try the realities of eternity. He died the first day of this month about three o'clock in the morning. He was sick three weeks and three days with ague and fever. . . . He was taken in fits the day before he died and had them almost without cessation as long as he lived. When he breathed his last he went very easy, but, oh, the agonies he was in before-it seemed I could not endure.19

It did not suffice to tell others merely who had died, but the manner of their going also received a good deal of attention in the Nauvoo letters, as was common with many letters of the period.

The Saints in Nauvoo knew death by its close proximity as well as by its actuarial prevalence. While there was a powerful intimacy with death and a fascination with the spiritual aspects of it in the first half of the nineteenth century, the Saints seemed to diverge from their cultural surroundings. The letters and diaries of many non-Mormons of the period show a capacity to accept death without questioning. However, many sister Saints did not accept death with the providential resignation manifested in many other letters of the period. Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs recorded this prayer and plea in her diary:

Disease continues to prey upon the children. O Lord, how long shall we labor under these things, even children suffering so sore? Wilt thou hasten the time in thine own way when the Saints shall have power over the destroyer of our mortal body. Not that I would complain at thy hard dealings, O Lord. All things are right with Thee. But, oh, the weakness of human nature.20

The realities of the situation at Nauvoo may never be known, but historians have estimated that deaths may have averaged over two hundred sixty-three a year for the period of 1843-44.21

The national mortality rate was 13.5 deaths per one thousand persons. The ratio for the state of Illinois for the decade of the 1840s was identical to the national figure. Nauvoo was quite a different story, however. For the years when figures are available, the mortality estimate for the city at its lowest was 19.5 per one thousand people in 1845. At its highest, in 1844, it was nearly 26 per thousand.

Some may assume that such high mortality rates caused parents, especially mothers, to withdraw their affection from young children to buffer themselves from possible losses. However, Nauvoo letters and diaries paint a different story. In fact, the anniversary date of a child's birth was sometimes noted many years later.

Emmeline B. Harris [Wells] lost a five-week-old son named Eugene in 1844. Thirty years later, she noted in her diary:

The anniversary of Eugene's birth-he would have been thirty today. . . . It seems almost like a dream when I consider and reflect upon it; if he were here how much happiness he might bring to me. What a rock to lean upon! What a shelter and protection his strong arm might be for his nervous and delicate mother!22

In Utah years later, joyful memories of life in Nauvoo surfaced-social activities and interaction that helped sustain the Saints during difficulties.

The Nauvoo community was concerned about relationships between men and women. Courtship and marriage were an important aspect of not only personal life but also of the community itself. In a society so dependent upon family for support and survival, especially in old age, marriage was considered the only option for young men and young women.

In one significant aspect, Nauvoo was unlike most frontier communities of the period. While men usually significantly outnumbered the women in similar towns, the numbers in Nauvoo were fairly equal. It was not uncommon for a girl between the ages of fourteen and sixteen to be married. For example, in June 1843, Artemisia Sidnie Myers, fourteen years of age, married Warren Foote, age twenty-five.

One young couple, Martha Jane Knowlton and Howard Coray, met each other in Nauvoo at an outdoor Church service. Howard was not yet twenty-three years old and had been a Church member only a few months when Joseph Smith asked him to clerk for him. During a playful wrestling match, Joseph broke Howard's leg. Joseph tried to do everything to help the young clerk and gladly responded when asked to bless him. In the blessing he promised Howard "that [he] should find a companion." Soon thereafter, while attending a church service Howard decided to "take a square look at the congregation and see who there was; that, possibly, the fair one promised might be pres-ent." Looking intently at all the young ladies, he soon hesitated:

My eyes settled upon a young lady, sitting in a one-horse buggy. She was an entire stranger to me, and a resident of some other place. I concluded to approach near enough to her to scan her features well and thus be able to decide in my own mind, whether her looks would satisfy my taste-she had dark brown eyes, very bright and penetrating; at least they penetrated me. . . . I was decidedly struck.

Following the close of the meeting, Howard made an approach since the young woman was with an acquaintance of his. They were introduced-she was Martha Knowlton of the Bear Creek settlement. The meeting was unforgettable: "I discovered at once that she was ready, off hand, and inclined to be witty; also, that her mind took a wider range than was common of young ladies of her age. This interview, though short, was indeed very enjoyable."23

Martha and Howard were married shortly thereafter on 7 February 1841 in Nauvoo.

Following courtship and marriage, the community was still very interested in promoting the relationship between husbands and wives.

The men of the community were admonished to "never give [their wives] cause to repent the confidence . . . reposed in you." A faithful husband, one editorial suggested, never joked about marriage, gave up all male acquaintances of whom his wife disapproved, focused his social attentions at home, and treated his spouse with wisdom, gentleness, and love. "Never," the newspaper stated, "witness a tear from your wife with apathy or indifference."24

In Nauvoo, the power to perform marriages was apparently granted to any worthy Mormon elder, because the community's newspapers and official ledgers abounded with references to weddings conducted by scores of historically obscure men.25

An ordinance passed at Nauvoo in February 1842 established city-wide regulations for marriages. A minimum age of seventeen for males and fourteen for females was established. Anyone under those ages was required to obtain parental consent to marry. Officially, power to perform marriages was bestowed upon the mayor, alderman, justices of the peace, judges, and ordained ministers of the gospel.26

One study indicates that an average of slightly over one hundred marriages per year were performed in Nauvoo for 1843 and 1844, not including priesthood-sealed marriages that were not of public record.

The traditional marriages performed in Nauvoo were very much like any other Protestant ceremony. Charlotte Haven described one such wedding in a letter to her family in New Hampshire:

Then the bridal party entered and seated themselves in four chairs placed in the center of the room. Mr. S. handed the license to the Prophet, who read it aloud. The four stood up, the guests keeping their seats. In a few simple words not very different from any other Protestant marriage ceremony, Mr. B-, a lawyer of Carthage, and Miss W-, a niece of Sister Emma, were united for time only. A prayer was made by Hyrum Smith, another Latter-day hymn was sung, wedding cake, apple pie, and pure cold water was passed around.27

The wedding party continued following the couple's departure, and dancing, eating, and playing games took place until one o'clock in the morning.

Bathsheba W. Smith recalled her 1841 wedding to George Albert Smith fondly:

On the 25th of July, 1841, I was united in holy marriage to George Albert Smith, the youngest member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and first cousin of the Prophet (Elder Don Carlos Smith officiating at our marriage). . . . Two days after we were married, we started, carpet bag in hand, to go to his father's, who lived at Zarahemla, Iowa Territory, about a mile from the Mississippi. There we found a feast prepared for us. . . . [M]y husband's father, John Smith, drank to our health, pronouncing the blessings of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.28

Their marriage, in spite of numerous periods of separation while George performed his missionary duties and other severe trials caused by external persecution, was full of love and reciprocal respect. Other women were not as fortunate, however. Sabra Granger Gribble published the following in the local newspaper: "Whereas John Gribble has taken off my bed and board, [and] having had to pay his debts to this date: Notice is hereby given that I will pay no more debts of his contracting."29

Sabra, who signed the notice "Sabra Granger," attempted to expose her husband's false claim of abandonment and set the record straight. Her husband had filed a similar notice earlier. Cyrus Boley published a notice that his wife left him without cause; later Martha published a refutation in the Nauvoo Neighbor.

Another sister Saint who was abandoned by her husband was Emmeline Woodward Harris. Emmeline married the son of the local presiding elder, James Harris, on 29 July 1843 in Massachusetts. She migrated to Nauvoo with her in-laws and new husband in March 1844. In the dissension that occurred following Joseph's death, Emmeline's in-laws left Nauvoo. Before they left, however, they tried unsuccessfully to entice Emmeline and her husband to leave Nauvoo and the Church.

James and Emmeline's first son was born in September, following the elder Harris's departure. The baby died just five weeks later from "chills and fevers." The series of events shook James's faith, and he deserted Emmeline and went to New Orleans to find employment.

Emmeline was shocked by the unexpected events and became depressed as her life unraveled. She wrote, "When will sorrow leave my bosom! All my days have I experienced it, oppression has been my lot; when, O when, shall I escape the bondage?" She thought her life seemed strangely similar to the Victorian romance novels being read at the time. Emmeline continued, "Is not my life a romance? Indeed it is a novel-strange and marvelous." She had arrived in the city of the Saints as a newlywed full of expectations of what the future had in store for her:

Here am I brought to this great city by one to whom I ever expected to look for protection and left dependent on the mercy and friendship of strangers. Merciful Providence, wilt thou long suffer this news. I forever be unhappy? Will the time never come when happiness and enjoyment will be the lot of this lump of clay?

For a moment, thought Emmeline, even death "would be a comfort," but "again when I think of the gospel I feel resigned to the lot God has assigned me, but what has life ever been to me from the days of my childhood?" During this time of reflection, Emmeline reviewed the struggles she encountered from the time she was in school. She was persecuted for friendship, and when "Mormonism began to flourish, were they not harassing me on every side?" Her guardian, "who pretended so much respect for me," did not wish her to associate with her own mother and sister, "because they were Saints of the Most High God, or, as he called them, Mormons." Emmeline married, not only to escape the persecution but also, as she wrote, "He with whom I was to be connected was my lover in truth; I loved him and I believed his professions to be true."

Thinking "all danger would be past, but alas, misery presses me heavier and more heavy," she pled for comfort and consolation, "O God, my Heavenly Father, assist me; do not let it always be thus." She reminded him of the promises she received of "days of joy and gladness." She continued her prayer of supplication, "O Lord, impart thy Spirit. I grow sick at heart; in vain does the sun shine bright, my heart is faint, my soul longs."30

Four days later, Emmeline confided in her diary, "This day like all others is full of trouble. Sorrow and affliction are my attendants." She reminded God, "Once I could have filled this book with expressions of happiness, but, alas, sorrow is my portion. I behold those around me enjoying the society of their dearest friends while I am cut short." As all who suffer such tragedies, Emmeline wondered what was the cause of such sorrow. "Why is it? Is it because of my sin and wickedness, or is it a trial of my patience, Heavenly Parent?"

In the depths of despair Emmeline sought God in humble prayer and supplication, "In the name of the Holy Son, Jesus, do I beseech thee," she prayed. "Have mercy and forgive and grant me the desire of my heart." She had no mother or sister to advise her. Although she had friends, "dare I unbosom my heart to them? No, no, I know them not."31

By 27 February a new hope arose in Emmeline's heart that James would return to her. She wrote in her diary:

Last night there came a steamboat up the river. O how my youthful heart fluttered with hope. With anxiety my limbs were affected to that degree. I was obliged to lay aside my work. I rely upon the promise he has made me, and not all that has yet been said can shake my confidence in the only man I ever loved, but hope returned and was renewed in my bosom. I watched the boat and looked out at the door. I walked a few steps out of the yard. . . . I saw a person approaching. My heart beat with fond anticipation. It walked like James. It came nearer, and just as I was about to speak his name, he spoke, and I found I was deceived by the darkness.32

On 28 February Emmeline wrote, "Today I am alone and I have time for reflection." She could not believe that James had forgotten "all his promises, all his vows." Finally, she prayed, "O God, if he is situated so that he cannot return, allow him to write to me that I can know something about his whereabouts." A few letters arrived, but soon she lost contact with James again.

In 1888, Emmeline returned to her childhood home in New England following the death of her former mother-in-law and discovered that James had died in Bombay, India, in 1859. She also found a trunk full of letters he sent her in care of his mother, who did not forward them.33

Sometimes women deserted their husbands, an indication that in spite of divorce laws, some women were willing to make it alone instead of subjecting themselves to situations they felt unbearable. In a September 1842 issue of the Wasp, for example, Nathaniel Whiting placed the following notice: "Whereas my wife, Casander J. Whiting, eloped my bed and board about one year ago, without any just cause or provocation, and has not returned; this is, therefore, to forbid all persons trusting her on my account, as I shall pay no debts of her contracting."34 In several cases, these notices reflected more concern about the personal property taken by the estranged spouse than the separation itself. While offering a substantial reward for returned property, several men offered one cent for their wife's return.

These few examples demonstrate the effects of combined stresses, including frontier living conditions and marriage itself. As may be expected, sometimes young women and wives chose to deviate from the society and family pressures of acceptable courtship and marriage in Nauvoo. Some eloped with visitors to the city.

During the difficult period when the Saints made the decision to abandon Nauvoo and flee west for safety in 1846, several women in the city made decisions that affected their marriage relationships. A Sister Cox wanted to leave with the Saints, but her husband decided to remain, took custody of the children, and forced her to leave the house before she could prepare for the intended journey. Another woman, Eliza Robinson Wells, a nonmember spouse of Daniel H. Wells, made the choice to stay, following her husband's conversion and decision to follow the Saints west.

An obvious impact on marriage in Nauvoo was the death of a spouse. For example, on 9 August 1844, Sister Clifton's husband was run down by a riverboat while fishing. She and other family members attempted to "raise his body [from the river] by firing large guns, but without success."35 Life without a spouse caused not only emotional trauma and pain but often severe economic deprivation as well. A widowed woman with small children was forced to totally support herself and family.

For the vast majority of Saints living in Nauvoo, their faith and commitment to the gospel was an additional reason to promote happiness within a marriage and reconciliation during times of stress.

The letters, diaries, and reminiscences reflect an unbounding sense of affection and concern between husbands and wives, especially during the most difficult periods.

While at least one contemporary religious society, the Shakers, denied the sanctity of marriage, most Christians accepted marriage as part of the eternal scheme of things. Latter-day Saint women and their spouses departed from the traditional Protestant view of marriage, however. They not only accepted marriage as ordained of God but also believed it to be necessary for one's exaltation in the eternal world to come. This cherished belief came as a result of continuing revelations given through Joseph Smith in Nauvoo.
