Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, Women of Nauvoo ( 1992)

7 The Relief Society—Sisters Unite

The Church was never perfectly organized until the women were thus organized.

-Joseph Smith

The Nauvoo Relief Society had its beginnings when several female members of the Church decided to make clothing for the men working on the temple in Nauvoo. It was truly a grass roots movement that began at a meeting held in the parlor of Sarah M. Kimball in the spring of 1842.1 Sister Kimball recalled:

A maiden lady (Miss Cook) was seamstress for me, and the subject of combining our efforts for assisting the temple hands came up in conversation. She desired to help, but had no means to furnish. I told her I would furnish material if she would make some shirts for the workmen. It was suggested that some of the neighbors might wish to combine means and efforts with ours, and we decided to invite a few to come and consult with us on the subject of forming a Ladies Society. The neighboring sisters met in my parlor and decided to organize. I was delegated to call on Sister Eliza R. Snow and asked her to write for us a constitution and by-laws and submit them to President Joseph Smith prior to our next Thursday meeting.

Eliza "cheerfully responded" and drafted a constitution similar to other female benevolent societies of the period, and then presented it to Joseph Smith for his approval. The Prophet, while pleased about their willingness to serve, announced his intentions of organizing the women after the same pattern as the priesthood. Sarah M. Kimball recalled his words, "This is not what you want. Tell the sisters their offering is accepted of the Lord, and he has something better for them than a written constitution."2 He did not want them to simply copy a middle-class model of contemporary women's benevolent societies and Protestant auxiliaries; he wanted them to expand their vision, which they gladly did as much from their own experience as from Joseph's prodding.3

The chance meeting and conversation in Sarah M. Kimball's parlor demonstrate an informal influence in Mormon society as sisters within the Church brought about their own kind of innovations through informal structures.4

Joseph asked them to meet with him on the following Thursday at his store. The Prophet explained that, unlike other contemporary organizations, the Society was not to have a written constitution. The voice of the Society's presidency and the decisions of the members, as recorded in the minutes, would serve as a living constitution.

This historic meeting occurred on Thursday afternoon, 17 March 1842, when twenty women met in the upper room of Joseph Smith's Red Brick Store in Nauvoo to organize, under the direction of the Prophet, the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo.5

The twenty women present on this historic day were Sarah M. Cleveland, Margaret A. Cook, Elvira Annie Cowles, Desdemona Fulmer, Phebe Ann Hawkes, Elizabeth Jones, Sarah M. Kimball, Martha Knight, Sophia R. Marks, Philinda Myrick, Sophia Packard, Nancy Rigdon, Athalia Robinson, Bathsheba W. Smith, Emma Smith, Eliza R. Snow, Leonora Taylor, Phebe M. Wheeler, and Elizabeth Ann Whitney.6 One source indicates that a baby was also present on this historic day.7

An additional eight women-Abigail Allred, Thirza Cahoon, Cynthia A. Eldredge, Sarah S. Granger, Sarah Higbee, Marinda N. Hyde, Keziah A. Morrison, and Mary Snyder-who were not in attendance were also accepted into membership, making a total of twenty-eight official members at the founding meeting of the first Relief Society. The Society's minutes, private diaries, letters, and autobiographies of the sisters in Nauvoo reveal a great diversity among this first organized group of sister Saints.

One study suggests that in attendance on this first day were sisters of financial abundance and of the poorest circumstances in Nauvoo. Some of the women were well educated for the time, while oth-ers had had much less opportunity. Along with the older, mature sisters were several teenagers and young women. The group consisted of married women, others who were separated or widowed, and several single women. A few members were recent converts, while several had joined a decade earlier. Among those listed as founding members could be found the names of the leading women of the Church and community, while others were less well known.8

During this organizational meeting, Joseph instructed the Relief Society sisters that they should

elect a presiding officer to preside over them, and let that presiding officer choose two counselors to assist in the duties of her office-that he would ordain them to preside over the Society-and let them preside just as [the] Presidency presides over the Church.9

It should be remembered that during this period of Church history, no attempt was made to differentiate between the terms ordain and set apart. John Taylor, who was present at the organizational meeting, later recalled:

On the occasion of the organization of the Relief Society, by the Prophet Joseph Smith at Nauvoo, I was present [when] Sister Emma Smith was elected president and Sisters Elizabeth Ann Whitney and Sarah M. Cleveland [were chosen as] her counselors. . . . The ordination then given did not mean the conferring of the priesthood upon those sisters, yet the sisters hold a portion of the priesthood in connection with their husbands. (Sisters Eliza R. Snow and Bathsheba W. Smith stated that they so understood it in Nauvoo and have looked upon it always in that light.)10

During this first meeting, Joseph continued:

Let this presidency serve as a constitution-all their decisions be considered law, and acted upon as such. If any officers are wanted to carry out the designs of the institution, let them be appointed and set apart, as deacons, teachers, etc. are among us. The minutes of your meeting will be precedent for you to act upon-your constitution-and law.

The recorder noted that Joseph "suggested the propriety of electing a presidency to continue in the office during good behavior, or so long as they shall continue to fill the office with dignity etc.-like the First Presidency of the Church."

Sister Elizabeth Ann Whitney motioned and Sister Sophia Packard seconded that Emma be chosen president, which was "passed unanimously." Elizabeth Ann Whitney and Sarah M. Cleveland were then chosen as counselors, Eliza R. Snow as secretary, and Elvira Annie Cowles as treasurer.

Joseph's reflections on this meeting and Emma's call to serve are noted in his history:

I gave much instruction, read in the New Testament and Book of Doctrine and Covenants concerning the elect lady, and showed that the elect meant to be elected to a certain work, etc., and that the revelation [Doctrine and Covenants 25] was then fulfilled by Sister Emma's election to the presidency of the society.11

After John Taylor "ordained" the presidency, Joseph continued.

President Smith then resumed his remarks and gave instruction how to govern themselves in their meetings-when one wishes to speak, address the chair-and the chairman responds to the address. Should two speak at once, the chair shall decide who speaks first; if anyone is dissatisfied, she appeals to the house. When one has the floor, [she] occupies [it] as long as she pleases, etc. Proper manner of address is Mrs. Chairman or President and not Mr. Chairman, etc. A question can never be put until it has a second. When the subject for discussion has been fairly investigated, the chairman will say, are you ready for the question? etc. Whatever the majority of the house decide upon becomes a law to the society.

In his closing comments, Joseph exhorted the sisters to "not injure the character of anyone-if members of the society shall conduct [themselves] improperly, deal with them and keep all your doings within your own bosoms; and hold all characters sacred."

It is evident that those sisters assembled at this first meeting also shaped their own destiny as the discussion turned to a formal name. John Taylor suggested that the organization's name incorporate the term Benevolent instead of Relief. Emma disagreed and debated Joseph and John Taylor on the point, saying that she did "not wish to have it called after other societies in the world."

Eliza R. Snow added, "As daughters of Zion, we should set an example for all the world, rather than confine ourselves to the course which had been heretofore pursued." Joseph and John Taylor both conceded the point and the society name remained as originally suggested by the sisters.

The society's minutes indicate that Joseph's original donation of a five-dollar gold piece was supported by additional contributions at that meeting to a total of $10.62. Later, the Prophet donated a building lot for the society.12

The minutes of the early Relief Society are filled with historical, doctrinal, and practical gems. The sisters not only discussed their duties to the poor and needy but also spoke of spiritual gifts, such as speaking in tongues and healing the sick. On 19 April, the women met in a testimony meeting where the sisters stood one by one to share their feelings and express their spiritual experiences. Sarah Cleveland said, "As the Prophet had given us liberty to improve the gifts of the gospel in our meetings, . . . [she] desired to speak in the gift of tongues, which she did in a powerful manner," after which a second woman interpreted. The minutes, kept by secretary Eliza R. Snow, declared the meeting "interesting."13

A letter written by Ellen Douglas on 2 June 1842 refers to the early meetings and types of instruction received during this initial period of organization:

There is now in this city a female charity society of which I am a member. We are in number eight or nine hundred. Joseph Smith's wife is the head of our society, and we meet on a Thursday at ten o'clock, where we receive instructions both temporally and spiritually.14

Within a two-year period, 1842-44, vital links were established among the sisters and the Relief Society, the work with the poor and sick, the exercise of spiritual gifts, and temple worship.

The importance of the Relief Society's organization is further emphasized by the Prophet's statement that "the Church was never perfectly organized until the women were thus organized."15 The founding meeting of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo was held in the most important building in the city during this period, Joseph Smith's store.16

During Joseph's lifetime, the Relief Society increased in membership from the original twenty-eight women to thirteen hundred and forty-one sisters. At the second meeting, an additional forty-four sisters applied for membership. Soon, branches of the society were organized in the adjoining Mormon communities such as Macedonia.

Seventeen-year-old Talitha C. Avery recalled, "There was no society for the young people at that time, so I, as did all the other girls, who wished to and were worthy, joined the Relief Society." She recalled the times when Joseph came to those early meetings where he "talked to us and gave us such good counsel."17

The dramatic increase in membership required that the society meet in diverse locations because the Red Brick Store was no longer large enough to accommodate them. The eighth meeting of the Relief Society on 26 May was the last in the Red Brick Store in 1842. General meetings were then conducted in the grove near the temple during the summer months of that year.

Between September 1842 and June 1843, no formal society meetings were held; however, their work continued. Eventually, the society began to meet in the private homes of its members in each ward, the geographical-political boundaries of the city. During its second year, 1843-44, only fourteen society meetings were reported, most of them in private homes. The sisters again adjourned for the winter, reconvening in March 1844. A "Young Ladies Relief Society of Nauvoo," an auxiliary of the women's Relief Society, was also organized during this period for young women.

The growth and ward division of the society, however, did not end the significance of the Red Brick Store. The three final meetings of the Nauvoo Female Relief Society were held in the store on 14 October 1843, 9 March 1844, and 16 March 1844.

Several factors led to the demise of the Nauvoo Female Relief Society, including Emma's personal opposition to plural marriage and her use of the Relief Society in combating the spread of this doctrine among Church sisters. Following the crisis created by Joseph Smith's death and the exodus to and settlement of the Great Basin, few society meetings were held until the organization was revived in Utah by Brigham Young in 1867.18

The society flourished in Nauvoo for nearly two years and saw a brief revival in Utah in the 1850s. President Brigham Young's efforts to reinstitute the society in 1867 resulted in an organized sisterhood that still exists in the LDS Church today.

The final meeting of the Nauvoo Female Relief Society occurred on 16 March 1844, just two years following its organization. Appropriately, the closing meeting of the society was held in the "room over [the] Brick Store," the place where the first Relief Society was organized.19
