Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, Women of Nauvoo ( 1992)

8 Charity — Women with a Mission

The best measure or principle to bring the poor to repentance is to administer to their wants-the society is not only to relieve the poor, but to save souls.

-Joseph Smith

One aspect of Joseph's charge to the sisters of the newly formed Relief Society was announced during the founding meeting. The Prophet said that the society "should provoke the brethren to good works and look to the wants of the poor, searching after objects of charity, and in administering to their wants-to assist, by correcting the morals and strengthening the virtues of the community." He remarked:

This is a charitable society, and according to your natures; it is natural for females to have feelings of charity and benevolence. You are now placed in a situation in which you can act according to those sympathies which God has planted in your bosoms.1

Several weeks later, Joseph announced in the Times and Seasons the formation of the Relief Society:

A society has lately been formed by the ladies of Nauvoo for the relief of the poor, the destitute, the widow, and the orphan; and for the exercise of all benevolent purposes. . . . There was a very numerous attendance at the organization of the society and also at their subsequent meetings of some of our most intelligent, humane, philanthropic, and respectable ladies; and we are well assured from a knowledge of those pure principles of benevolence that flow spontaneously from their humane and philanthropic bosoms, that with the resources they will have at command they will fly to the relief of the stranger, they will pour oil and wine to the wounded heart of the distressed; they will dry up the tears of the orphan, and make the widow's heart to rejoice.2

At the ninth meeting, Joseph told the sisters, "Said Jesus, ÂYe shall do the work, which you see me do.' These are the grand key words for the society to act upon."3 On 9 June 1842, he advised the women, "If you would have God have mercy on you, have mercy on one another." He continued, "The best measure or principle to bring the poor to repentance is to administer to their wants-the society is not only to relieve the poor, but to save souls."4

Joseph deeded a city lot to the society, on which he hoped they would build homes for the poor. He promised to give them a house frame for the lot.

Under Emma's direction, the sisters of the Relief Society were engaged in many projects and activities beyond their traditional roles as care givers. They formed a very successful labor market in an effort to help women in the community find employment. Often goods were purchased directly for those in need instead of giving outright donations. Orphans, including motherless children, found homes; food commodities donated weekly helped feed several needy families; several children of widows received funds to pay for school tuition; elderly women's gardens were plowed and planted; destitute Saints found shoes at their doors; and others found bedding. The sisters even organized a boycott of persons who did not pay poor widows what was owed them.

Eliza R. Snow published a poem about the society's goals in the Times and Seasons, a few weeks following its founding:

The Female Relief Society of Nauvoo-

What Is It? It is an Institution form'd to bless The poor, the widow, and the fatherless- To clothe the naked and the hungry feed, And in the holy paths of virtue, lead. To seek out sorrow, grief and mute despair, And light the lamp of hope eternal there- To try the strength of consolation's art By breathing comfort to the mourning heart. To chase the clouds that shade the aspect, where Distress presides; and wake up pleasures there- With open heart extend the friendly hand To hail the stranger, from a distant land. To stamp a vetoing impress on each move That Virtue's present dictates disapprove- To put the tattler's coinage, scandal, down, And make corruption feel its with'ring frown. To give instruction, where instruction's voice Will guide the feet and make the heart rejoice- To turn the wayward from their recklessness, And lead them in the ways of happiness. It is an Order, fitted and design'd To meet the wants of body, and of mind- To seek the wretched, in their long abode- Supply their wants, and raise their hearts to God.5

By August 1843, each Relief Society group in the city wards appointed several sisters to "search out the poor, and suffering, and to call on the rich for aid and thus as far as possible relieve the wants of all."6 Their efforts to relieve suffering among the community included providing not only physical help but spiritual sustenance as well. With Joseph Smith's approval, the sister Saints not only took care of the poor but also blessed their fellow sisters through the gifts of the Spirit.7

On several occasions, the society investigated reports of moral misdeeds of those in the community. The first to be considered was Clarissa Marvel, who was "accused of [telling] scandalous falsehoods on the character of President Joseph Smith without the least provocation."8 A member of the society, Agnes Coolbrith Smith, Don Carlos's widow, responded in the young girl's defense, "Clarissa Marvel lived with me nearly a year and I saw nothing amiss of her." Unknown to Agnes at the time, her name was also in the rumor mill.

After a discussion among the sisters, they finally agreed that someone should talk with Clarissa about the accusation. No one volunteered for this unpleasant task, however. Sister Emma acknowledged that Clarissa was an orphan and needed friends, but, said she, "We intend to look into the morals of each other, and watch over each other." Eventually, the issue was resolved when Clarissa stated that she was not involved in any talk that was derogatory to the characters of Joseph Smith or Agnes Smith.9

Gossip and rumors were a part of even the best communities and societies. When another ingredient was added, the introduction of new teachings such as plural marriage, a powder keg was the result. The local paper ran a "recipe" for a common disease called "Scandal":

A complete cure for a terrible disorder of the mouth commonly called, "Scandal":

Take a good nature, one ounce; of an herb called by the Mormons "mind your own business," one ounce, to which add of the oil of benevolence, one drachim and of brotherly love, two ounces. You must mix the preceding ingredients with a little charity for others, and a few sprigs of "keep your tongue between your teeth." Let this compound be allowed to simmer for a short time in a vessel called circumspection, and it will be ready for use.

Symptoms: The symptoms are a violent itching in the tongue and roof of the mouth when you are in company with a species of animals called "Gossips."

Applications: When you feel a fit of the disorder coming on, take a teaspoonful of the mixture, hold it in your mouth, which you must keep closely shut till you get home.10

Gossip continued, in spite of the society's effort to stop it. Most of the time it centered around plural marriage. One Saint noted a rumor that "an introduction of principles that would soon be, that the ancient order of God that was formerly, would again have its rounds, as it was in the days of old Solomon and David. They had wives and concubines in abundance, as many as they could support. The secret whisperings were that the same will eventually be again."11

In almost all the acts of the society during this period, President Emma Smith led out. She was fondly remembered years later in Utah by the sisters who recalled the great good she accomplished as president of the first Relief Society. Emmeline B. Wells, an associate of Emma at the time, recalled:

Sister Emma was benevolent and hospitable; she drew around her a large circle of friends, who were like good comrades. She was motherly in her nature to young people, always had a houseful to entertain or be entertained. She was very high-spirited, and the brethren and sisters paid her great respect. Emma was a great solace to her husband in all his persecutions and the severe ordeals through which he passed; she was always ready to encourage and comfort him, devoted to his interests, and was constantly by him whenever it was possible. She was a queen in her home, so to speak, and beloved by the people, who were many of them indebted to her for favors and kindnesses.12

Other duties fell upon the sisters of the society, including an effort to intercede in the Prophet's defense. The society circulated a petition that was signed by its members "for the protection from illegal suits then pending against the Prophet Joseph Smith."

Emma Smith took Amanda Barns Smith and Eliza R. Snow to see Governor Thomas Carlin in Quincy in July 1842. Eliza Snow noted in her diary on 29 July:

Just returned from Quincy, where I visited the governor [Thomas Carlin] in company with Mrs. Emma Smith who presented him a petition from the Female Relief Society. The governor received us with cordiality, and as much affability and politeness as his excellency is a master of, assuring us of his protection, by saying that the laws and constitution of our country shall be his polar star in case of any difficulty. He manifested much friendship, and it remains for time and circumstance to prove the sincerity of his profession.13

Joseph appreciated their help, and on 31 August he attended their meeting to thank them personally for their efforts in his behalf:

The Female Relief Society have taken a most active part in my welfare against my enemies, in petitioning to the governor in my behalf. These measures were all necessary. . . . If these measures had not been taken, more serious consequences would have resulted. I have come here to bless you. The society has done well; their principles are to practice holiness. God loves you, and your prayers in my behalf shall avail much. Let them not cease to ascend to God continually.14

During the first meeting of the second year of its existence, society treasurer Elvira Annie Cowles Holmes reported that about five hundred dollars was received and nearly four hundred dollars expended during the first year of the society's existence. An official report appeared in the Times and Seasons on 1 August 1843.

While the sister Saints reached out to those in need, not all were impressed by their acts of charity; some saw them as being less than Christian because of their beliefs.

An English clergyman, Henry Caswell, visited Nauvoo during a North American trip in 1842. He reported a visit to a Church service where he saw "many grey-headed old men . . . and many well-dressed females." The choir was made up of men and women. When the meeting ended, he "arrived at a small, but neat, tavern where I called to get dinner. An old woman, apparently the mistress of the house, was seated by the fire, devoutly reading the Book of Mormon, from which she scarcely lifted her eyes as I entered." Within a short time Caswell found his way across the river to his lodgings and reported, "I felt happy to be once more among Christians."15

Another gentleman living at an Indian trading post, Eben Weld, wrote family members about his brother's life in Nauvoo:

I received a letter from brother [John Fuller Weld] last July stating that he had lately been married in Nauvoo. But did not inform me whether she was one of his spiritual ones or of another kind. She was very impertinent to enquire through him how many papooses I had and wives.16

Charlotte Haven was not as harsh about the sister Saints, but she found many of them too zealous for her temperament. While these few observations seem judgmental, others wrote and remember the acts of kindness and help offered to them and their families as signs of honest and sincere efforts by the sister Saints in Nauvoo to make life on the harsh frontier a little more like heaven than it otherwise would have been.
