Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, Women of Nauvoo ( 1992)

9 A Key is Turned — Ancient Covenants Restored

I now turn the key to you, in the name of God, and this society shall rejoice, and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time-this is the beginning of better days to this society.

-Joseph Smith

During the weeks following the organization of the Relief Society on 17 March 1842, the Prophet Joseph met with the sisters in the upper room of his store on eight other occasions, teaching and giving them instruction. Years later, Bathsheba W. Smith, an original member of the society and later its fourth general president, remembered those early sessions with Joseph in the Red Brick Store. "The sisters flocked to our meetings every week," she reminisced, "and the Prophet Joseph met with us as long as he could."1

Mercy Thompson, another member of the society in Nauvoo, remembered her feelings while attending the meetings. She said, "I have been present at meetings of the Relief Society and heard [Joseph] give directions and counsels to the sisters, calculated to inspire them to efforts which would lead to celestial glory and exaltation, and oh! how my heart rejoiced."2

The diaries, personal letters, and later reminiscences of the women in Nauvoo reveal that, along with their American sisters, the sisters in Nauvoo judged themselves and were judged by society by certain notions of womanhood. While womanhood as defined by middle-class values included four cardinal virtues-"piety, purity, submissiveness, and domesticity"-working-class women understood womanhood quite differently.3

In Nauvoo the vast majority of women made a financial contribution to their family economy. As the contemporary records reveal, their home production of goods such as quilts and straw hats, services provided to boarders, and outside interests such as teaching school significantly augmented a precarious family budget.

Outside the realms of family economy, however, Joseph expanded the Saints' worldview by lifting "a portion of the veil of eternity," as it were, and aroused in the Saints' hearts a desire to move beyond contemporary Protestant categories of self-definition.4 While it is certain that many women in Nauvoo already had begun to see themselves in a new light, the catalyst for such changes was the Prophet.

This widening of views began in a historic meeting of the Relief Society on 28 April 1842 in the upper room of Joseph's Red Brick Store. The Prophet attended this, the sixth meeting of the newly organized group, and noted in his journal, "At two o'clock I met the members of the ÂFemale Relief Society,' and after presiding at the admission of many new members, gave a lecture on the Priesthood, showing how the sisters would come in possession of the privileges, blessings and gifts of the Priesthood."5

Joseph presented to the women assembled in the Red Brick Store an important sermon on the blessings that awaited them in the temple, then under construction in Nauvoo. Bathsheba W. Smith recalled that Joseph himself offered the invocation to this meeting. She said that in his prayer "his voice trembled very much." "According to my prayer," the Prophet told the society membership, "I will not be with you long to teach and instruct you, and the world will not be troubled with me much longer."6

Another participant, Nancy N. Tracy, recalled that during this prayer "he was full of the Spirit of God. His whole frame shook, and his face shone and looked almost transparent."7

Joseph Smith spoke prophetically during this sermon:

He said as he had this opportunity, he was going to instruct the society and point out the way for them to conduct, that they might act according to the will of God-that he did not know as he should have many opportunities of teaching them-that they were going to be left to themselves-they would not long have him to instruct them-that the Church would not have his instruction long, and the world would not be troubled with him a great while, and would not have his teachings.8

From this time forward, Joseph indicated that his time in mortality was near an end and hastened to fulfill his vision of the kingdom.

In just over two years, the Prophet was killed, but not before he left the blueprint for the restoration of the temple covenants to those whom he had prepared, including many sisters of the Relief Society.

Eliza R. Snow's minutes demonstrate that following Joseph's statements regarding his early death, he presented a plan of action that would prepare the Saints to receive all the blessings God had promised them.

She also noted:

He exhorted the sisters always to concentrate their faith and prayers for, and place confidence in, those whom God has appointed to honor, whom God has placed at the head to lead [Church leaders]-that we should arm them with our prayers-that the keys of the kingdom are about to be given them [Church leaders], that they may be able to detect everything false.9

Joseph completed his work by preparing the Saints for his departure. These preparations included organizing the Relief Society with its unique mission.

One aspect of that mission was to prepare the sisters to receive their temple blessings.10 Elder George A. Smith indicated that Joseph may have intended to include the sisters in temple worship in Kirtland several years earlier, but "the Saints had a great many traditions which they had borrowed from their fathers" about women's role in religious ritual.11

Joseph indicated that the "keys of the Priesthood" (presumably referring in this case to the fulness of the priesthood) would be given both to the sisters of the society and to the members of the Church. The "keys" referred to were given in the endowment as the term took on greater meaning than before. The society minutes were amplified by Church leader and historian George A. Smith when published for the first time in Joseph Smith's history, as represented by the italicized additions in the following paragraph:

He spoke of delivering the keys of the Priesthood to the Church, and said that the faithful members of the Relief Society should receive them in connection with their husbands, that the Saints whose integrity has been tried and proved faithful, might know how to ask the Lord and receive an answer; for according to his prayers, God had appointed him elsewhere.12

Sources indicate that Joseph gave the endowment to leaders of the Church before the temple was completed, beginning on 4 May 1842.13 Before his death, too, he sealed upon the Apostles' heads "every key, every power, and every principle" that he had received from heavenly beings.14 His presentiments about his early death caused him to perpetuate these ordinances and keys in this way.

One of the blessings reported as a result of the endowment was the enhancement of the power of prayer. Bathsheba W. Smith recalled that Joseph "said that we did not know how to pray to have our prayers answered. But when I and my husband had our endowments in [December 1843], Joseph Smith presiding, he taught us the order of prayer."15 On another occasion she said, "[He also] showed us . . . how to detect them when true or false angels come to us."16

From Joseph's comments, it is clear that he intended, even before he first gave these ordinances to the brethren, for women to receive the same rights and privileges in the endowment. He also promised the sister Saints "better days" and an increased knowledge of the Lord's plan, and he gave them the power to prepare for the great blessings that awaited them in the temple. The Prophet stated at their meeting on 28 April 1842, "I now turn the key to you, in the name of God, and this society shall rejoice, and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time-this is the beginning of better days to this society."17

The 28 April 1842 meeting in the Red Brick Store was most memorable. The minutes for this day's meeting concluded with this reflection, "The Spirit of the Lord was poured out in a very powerful manner, never to be forgotten by those present on this interesting occasion."18

Six days following this meeting, nine individuals met in the same upper room of Joseph's store. Those who attended this special meeting received their temple blessings from Joseph, becoming the first in this dispensation. These leaders, including Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, were able to carry on this sacred work within the completed Nauvoo Temple following Joseph Smith's death. However, the work in the temple could only begin after women were also given the same blessings. It was obvious that Joseph saw the Relief Society organization as a means to prepare the sisters of the Church for temple worship, just as the Church's priesthood quorum prepared the brethren.

Shortly following this introduction of sacred priesthood ordinances, Bishop Newel K. Whitney spoke to the society and exuberantly addressed the sisters about the blessings that awaited them: "Rejoice while contemplating the blessings which will be poured out on the heads of the Saints. God has many precious things to bestow, ever to our astonishment, if we are faithful." The society's secretary noted that Bishop Whitney then "rejoiced at the formation of the society, that we might improve our talents and . . . prepare for those blessings which God is soon to bestow upon us."19

Reynolds Cahoon confirmed Joseph's intention of using the Relief Society as a means to prepare the sisters for temple ordinances when he spoke to the Relief Society in 1843: "You knew no doubt [that] this society is raised by the Lord to prepare us for the great blessings which are for us in the House of the Lord, in the Temple."20

In the 30 March 1842 minutes, Eliza R. Snow recorded:

Pres. Joseph Smith arose-spoke of the organization of the society. Said he was deeply interested that it might be built up to the Most High in an acceptable manner-that its rules must be observed-that none should be received into the society but those who were worthy. Proposed that the society go into a close examination of every candidate.

The minutes continue:

The society should move according to the ancient priesthood, hence they should be a select society, separate from all the evils of the world, choice, virtuous, and holy.21

Several of the sisters received their blessings under Joseph's direction before his death and before the temple was completed. They constituted, along with several men of the Church, the "Quorum of the Anointed"-a group of twenty-four couples and several individual men and women who received the temple endowment ordinances during Joseph Smith's lifetime.22

In May 1843, the way was opened for the first women to receive the blessings of the temple in the "Quorum of the Anointed." During the next weeks several sister Saints were sealed to their husbands in the "new and everlasting covenant of marriage."

During this period of spiritual and emotional outpouring, Joseph prepared Emma for her duties as the administrator of temple blessings to her sisters. As the "elect lady," she was responsible to administer the blessings of washings and anointings to her sister Saints. Sometime on or before 28 September 1843, Emma became the first woman in the new dispensation to receive the blessing of the endowment.

Soon the "Quorum of the Anointed" greatly expanded its membership and increased the frequency of meetings-some fifty-four meetings were held before Joseph's death in 1844. Still, the number of men and women participating was kept to a minimum until the temple was completed. Elizabeth Ann Whitney recalled that Joseph had been told by an angel that he was "only to reveal [the ordinances] to such persons as were pure, full of integrity to the truth, and worthy to be entrusted with divine messages."23

The expansion began on 1 October 1843 when Elizabeth David Durfee and Mary Fielding Smith received their blessings. Seven days later, Harriet Adams, Elizabeth Ann Whitney, Clarissa Smith, and Lucy Mack Smith were given the special blessings promised to the sister Saints in April 1842. Women were quickly brought into the "Quorum of the Anointed" during the next few weeks and months.

On Saturday morning, 23 December 1843, Phebe Woodruff walked with her husband to Emma's home at the corner of Main and Water. Along with Permelia D. Lott, Lucy Morley, Fanny Murray, Sally Phelps, Bathsheba W. Smith, Catherine Spencer, Phebe received her blessings, administered by Emma. The women then joined the brethren in a meeting of the "Quorum of the Anointed" at the Red Brick Store, which included participating in Joseph's prayer.24

By late December some fifty individuals met every Saturday and Sunday evening for prayer. Besides praying for the sick and those in need, time in the meetings was taken up by Joseph's lectures on various gospel themes and explanations of the sacred ordinances. In some cases, the sacrament was administered and brief testimonies were offered.

Meetings were held regularly during the winter, bringing much joy and comfort. On 27 January 1844, for example, Joseph met with the group. One participant noted:

The ["Quorum of the Anointed"] met for a meeting in the evening at Joseph's store. [We] had a number of prayers and exhortations upon the subject of holiness of heart. Brother [Willard] and Sister [Jennetta] Richards were present. They had both been unwell for a number of days before, but were able to attend meetings this evening and seemed to enjoy themselves well. They had received blessings by the prayer of faith.25

These meetings continued during the spring and early summer before Joseph's death in late June 1844.

The thirty sister Saints who received these ordinances were Mary Harriet Adams, Thirza Cahoon, Lois Cutler, Elizabeth Davis Durfee, Hannah Fielding, Marinda Nancy Hyde, Vilate Kimball, Jane Law, Permelia Lott, Mary L. T. Lyman, Rosannah Marks, Mary Catherine Miller, Lucy Morley, Fanny Young Murray, Sally Phelps, Jennetta Richards, Agnes Smith, Bathsheba W. Smith, Clarissa Smith, Emma Smith, Jane Bricknell Smith, Lucy Mack Smith, Mary Fielding Smith, Catherine Spencer, Leonora Cannon Taylor, Mercy Fielding Thompson, Elizabeth Ann Whitney, Phebe Woodruff, Phebe Woodworth, and Mary Ann Young.26

Following the completion of the Nauvoo Temple, a large number of Relief Society sisters worked side by side with the brethren to help administer the temple blessings to over five thousand Saints.

Sixteen-year-old Mary A. Phelps married Charles C. Rich in January 1845 and recalled her opportunity to participate in the ordinances of the temple:

As soon as possible, the temple was opened and dedicated to the Lord. They opened it to all the worthy Saints, and gave their endowments, sealings, and ordinances to just as many as it was possible. . . . There were Saints working in the temple every day except Saturdays, and a greater part of the night, giving endowments until the first of February. . . . The Spirit of the Lord was greatly manifested during that winter, and we all enjoyed the privilege of having our endowments and sealings. I received all these blessings in the Nauvoo Temple in common with my husband and family.27
