Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, Women of Nauvoo ( 1992)

10 The City of Joseph — Sisters Mourn

It pains me to write such a painful tale, but the Lord has comforted our hearts in a measure.

-Bathsheba W. Smith

Jane and William Law, prominent members of the Church and former members of the "Quorum of the Anointed" (they were dropped from this quorum on 7 January 1844), became disenchanted with the doctrinal developments in Nauvoo. By 28 April 1844, William organized the Reformed Church of Jesus Christ and gathered around him hundreds of fellow dissidents. These former brother and sister Saints published the vitriolic Nauvoo Expositor on 7 June 1844. The paper contained accusations of corruptions within the Church. They published several affidavits, including one by Jane Law, in an effort to incite apostasy from within and intensify persecution from without by the non-Mormon residents of Hancock County.

The newspaper described Joseph Smith as "one of the blackest and basest scoundrels that has appeared upon the stage of human existence since the days of Nero and Caligula," and his followers as "hell-deserving, God-forsaken villains."1

The Nauvoo city council met in the wake of the paper's publication and, acting under a liberal interpretation of its charter, declared the Expositor a public nuisance and ordered it destroyed.

Unaware of the real danger of this situation, Bathsheba W. Smith wrote her husband, who was away on Church business, a long letter and spoke briefly of the recent difficulties in Nauvoo:

There has been some excitement in town, but I do not feel [an] alarm. The Lawites had got their printing press going. Had printed one paper, and a scandalous thing it was. The City Council examined its lease and found it a [nuisance]. The [city] authorities went and burnt and destroyed the press. This made the Lawites mad. They tried to get a mob but failed. Joseph and those that were concerned in it had been tried, but were cleared. The Laws and a good many have gone and are going off.2

The dissidents left the community but also issued charges against the council and city mayor, Joseph Smith. This led to the issuance of a complaint on the charge of riot. Eventually, Joseph Smith surrendered to officials in Carthage, Illinois.

Non-Mormon women in Hancock County were aware of the tense situation existing in the county. Sarah Gregg, a resident of Carthage, wrote to her husband on 18 June 1844:

My dear Thomas:

My hand trembles, not from fear, though in the midst of wars alarms, but from fatigue. . . . Oh! my dear husband you have no idea what is passing here now. To see men preparing for battle to fight with blood hounds, but I hope there will be so large an army as to intimidate that "bandit horde" so there will be no blood shed. Brothers and brother-in-laws are wide awake and determined to defend their liberty or die.3

What Sarah Gregg was unwilling to see among her brothers was a thirst for blood, the blood of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Another Hancock County resident understood that it was the Latter-day Saint leaders who stood in jeopardy of freedom, not the citizens of Carthage. Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs, who was sealed to Joseph sometime earlier, wrote on 24 June 1844:

A day long to be remembered. This day Joseph, Hyrum, John P. Green, Dimick [Huntington], and others started for Carthage to be met at the Mound. [They] returned about noon accompanied by a number by the governor's orders. Took the cannons and all the U.S. arms, also the before mentioned prisoners and left this place, in the afternoon. O God, save thy servants, save them for Jesus' sake.4

While on the way to Carthage, a fifteen-year-old sister was called upon to help Joseph in his time of need. Mary Rich recalled:

At this time I was fifteen years old. When he found he had to go to Carthage, he wanted a man by the name of Rosecrantz, who was well acquainted with the governor, to go with him. He sent word by Mr. Rosecrantz, asking me if I would go and stay with Mr. Rosecrantz's sick wife while he went to Carthage with him. I went to stay with Mrs. Rosecrantz, and as they were going, they called at the gate with their company of about twenty men, and Joseph Smith asked me if I would bring them out a drink of water. I took a pitcher and glass and went out and gave them a drink. "Lord bless you," Joseph told me.5

Within a short time Joseph and Hyrum left the home and were placed in the county jail where they were later murdered. Zina Diantha characterized the day as "the ever to be remembered awful day of the 27th of June 1844":

Thus in one day about three or four o'clock [it was 5:00 P.M.] fell the Prophet and Patriarch of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, the kind husbands, the affectionate fathers, the venerable statesman, the friends of mankind, by the hand of a ruthless mob mixed with dissenters.6

When the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum Smith were returned to Nauvoo the day following their murders, some Saints came to the Mansion Home to view their beloved leaders' remains. Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs recorded her experience:

This afternoon the bodies of the martyrs arrived in town. . . . I went into this house for the first time and saw the lifeless, speechless bodies of the two martyrs for the testimony which they held. Little did my heart ever think that mine eyes should witness this awful scene.7

Joseph and Hyrum's widows were devastated. Emma was five months pregnant at the time. The martyrs' mother could not be consoled; Sarah M. Kimball held her hand for a long time before the grieving woman spoke, "How could they kill my boys! O how could they kill them when they were so precious! I am sure they would not harm anybody in the world; . . . there was poor Hyrum, what could they kill him for-he was always mild."8

A few days later, Zina Diantha Huntington Jacob's diary entry stated: "It is Sunday, a lonely heart-sorrowful day. Also it rains."9

The feeling and the emotional state of many Saints during this fateful period has been preserved in several extant letters and diaries from the women of Nauvoo. The events of 27 June 1844 were the hardest the Saints had yet experienced.

Fifteen-year-old Mary A. Phelps's father took her to the Mansion House early in the morning before the bodies were prepared for the public viewing:

He told me that if I would get up I could go down, as he had gotten permission for me to see Joseph and Hyrum Smith as they lay at their home. I went down, saw them, and laid my hand on Joseph's forehead. The blood was oozing out of the wound in his shoulder, and the sheet that was around him was stained with blood. Still he looked very natural; Hyrum had been shot in the face and therefore did not look very natural.10

Vilate Kimball provided a detailed view of the confusion and intense emotional atmosphere following the martyrdom. In a letter dated 30 June 1844, Vilate wrote her husband, who was absent from Nauvoo on Church business in the month of June:

Never before, did I take up my pen to address you under so trying circumstances as we are now placed, but as Brother Adams, the bearer of this, can tell you more than I can write I shall not attempt to describe the scene that we have passed through. God forbid that I should ever witness another like unto it. I saw the lifeless corpses of our beloved brethren when they were brought to their almost distracted families. Yea, I witnessed their tears, and groans, which was enough to rent the heart of an adamant. Every brother and sister that witnessed the scene felt deeply to sympathize with them. Yea, every heart is filled with sorrow, and the very streets of Nauvoo seem to mourn. Where it will end the Lord only knows. We are kept awake night after night by the alarm of mobs.11

Another letter was sent to missionary George A. Smith by his wife, Bathsheba, on 6 July 1844:

We have had strange times since you left. You will no doubt hear, before this reaches you, of the death of our beloved brethren Joseph and Hyrum Smith. They were killed at Carthage on the 27 of June and on the 28, they were brought home, and such a day of mourning never was seen. It pains me to write such a painful tale, but the Lord has comforted our hearts in a measure. . . . Brother John Taylor was wounded but is getting better, is quite weak but quite cheerful. Brother Willard Richards was not hurt. They were both in jail at the time of the massacre. I will not write any more on that subject as I expect you will hear all the particulars before this reaches you.12

Writing to non-Mormon family members in the East, Hortensia Patrick Merchants lamented, "Truly, it is trying and grievous, that we cannot worship God according to the dictates of our own conscience, unmolested."13

While the sad news of the martyrdom spread quickly, some sister Saints had mixed emotions: their beloved prophet and patriarch were dead, but their husbands and fathers were saved. Writing to her nonmember parents in England, Jennetta Richards noted her husband's presence at Carthage Jail and his miraculous escape:

Mr. Richards [her husband] and Mr. Taylor were with Hyrum and Joseph in the room at the time. . . . Mr. Taylor and Mr. Richards were not prisoners, but were only there as company. . . . Mr. Richards was not wounded, only a ball passed under his left ear, seared his neck, and took a little off the tip of his ear. . . . I think I never can praise my Heavenly Father sufficiently for his mercies to me in preserving and restoring Mr. Richards safe and sound again. It seemed to me as though the children realized it in a great measure, they made so much work with him when he came home.14

Fourteen-year-old Eliza Clayton went to the jail on the day following the martyrdom. She recalled:

I went with my sister Lucy to the jail; we found the doors and windows open and everything in confusion, as though the people had left in great haste. We went upstairs to the room in which the Prophet and his brother had been shot. Everything seemed upset. There were some Church books on the table and portraits of Joseph and Hyrum's families on the mantle piece, blood in pools on the floor and spattered on the walls, at the sight of which we were overcome with grief and burst into tears.15

Mary Ann Barzee Boice and her husband lived outside of Nauvoo, "a few miles from Carthage," at the time of the martyrdom. When news arrived of the death, Mary Ann and her husband went to Nauvoo "but got there too late to see their bodies." They returned home and, as they passed through Carthage, her husband wanted to go to the jail. Mary Ann remembered that her husband "wanted me to go up in the jail and see where they were slain. But I felt that I could not look upon the scene. However, he went in."16

In the 1 July 1844 issue of the Times and Seasons, an issue totally outlined in black, several articles and reports relating to Joseph and Hyrum's death were published. Among those items was a poem by Eliza R. Snow telling the awful tale in poetry. The last few lines, however, suggest the desire of many in Nauvoo at the time of trouble:

All hearts with sorrow bleed, and ev'ry eye Is bath'd in tears-each bosom heaves a sigh- Heart broken widows' agonizing groans Are mingled with the helpless orphans' moans! Ye Saints! be still, and know that God is just- With steadfast purpose in his promise trust. Girded with sackcloth, own his mighty hand, And wait his judgments on this guilty land! The noble martyrs now have gone to move The cause of Zion in the courts above.

The death of the Prophet and Church Patriarch added to the sorrow of some sister Saints who were torn by the apostasy of family members during the period. Elvira Annie Cowles Holmes, the thirty-year-old daughter of former Nauvoo stake presidency counselor Austin Cowles, was sealed to Joseph sometime earlier. Her father withdrew from his Church position when the revelation on eternal marriage, which included provisions for plural marriage, was first read to the Nauvoo high council the year before. "He opposed this law and preached against it," she recalled.

Austin Cowles became a prominent leader in the new opposition Church in April 1844 and was one of the major supporters of the Expositor. Elvira Annie felt the heartache of being forced to choose between her father and the Church she so dearly loved. Her marriage to Joseph Smith only increased the gulf between her and her parents.

Now as a sorrowing widow, she faced life without support from her estranged father and mother.17

Eliza Dana Gibbs arrived in Nauvoo-a city of sorrow and distress-just shortly after the martyrdom, having heard the news on the way. Within a short time, she, her husband, and her sister, Mary, were taken ill with the ague. Mary died, and "the cares of her family devolved on me, but the care of the babe was of short duration for it died about a month after her mother, a sweet little angel too beautiful for this wicked world."

She recalled, "Those were days long to be remembered, as indeed were all the days of Nauvoo, filled up with the bitter trials and deep sorrow and mourning, but the Lord strengthened us to struggle through as he did many others."18

Following a public funeral, the two widows, Emma and Mary Fielding Smith, held a secret burial under the cover of darkness and began immediately to worry about their families' economic security. Emma was the mother of three children-Joseph III, Frederick Granger Williams, and Alexander Hale-and was pregnant with a fourth child, David Hyrum, who was born in November 1844. Mary was the legal guardian of five children: John, Jerusha, Sarah, Joseph Fielding, and Martha Ann (the last two were her own children).

During the next few days and weeks, the Church attempted to understand what had happened. Joseph's death received national attention as word spread from Nauvoo. The New York Herald published an extra to announce the death of the Mormon leaders. The editor, writing in a harsh obituary, stated, "The death of the modern mahomet will seal the fate of Mormonism. They cannot get another Joe Smith. The holy city must tumble into ruins, and the Âlatter day saints' have indeed come to the latter day."19

Joseph's death caused great grief but helped crystallize many feelings of those in Nauvoo who were debating the doctrinal innovations revealed by the Prophet.

During the succession crisis, many of Nauvoo's women stood firmly to the commitment to finish one aspect of the martyred prophet's work-the Nauvoo Temple. Later, several recalled the experience of Joseph's mantle falling on Brigham Young. Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs said:

Never can it be told in words what the Saints suffered in those days of trial; but the sweet spirit-the Comforter-did not forsake them; and when the Twelve returned, the mantle of Joseph fell upon Brigham. When I approached the stand (on the occasion when Sidney Rigdon was striving for the guardianship of the Church), President Young was speaking. It was the voice of Joseph Smith-not that of Brigham Young. His very person was changed. The mantle was truly given to another. There was no doubting in the minds of the vast assembly. All witnessed the transfiguration, and even today thousands bear testimony thereof. I closed my eyes. I could have exclaimed, "I know that is Joseph Smith's voice!" Yea, I knew he had gone. But the same Spirit was with the people; the Comforter remained.20

Brigham Young and the rest of the Twelve Apostles took control of the civic and ecclesiastical departments of the community and Church. By and large the trying experiences surrounding these events left a committed and faithful group in the city, the dissenters having abandoned Nauvoo. A feeling of normalcy and unity once again returned to Nauvoo as the Twelve undertook an accelerated building pace of homes, shops, and the temple.

Contemporary accounts continue to speak of parties, marriages, births, sickness, death, poor living conditions, and progress on the temple.

A place of gathering in the city was the Masonic Hall (cultural

hall), where numerous activities, including plays and concerts, were held.

The hall was completed and dedicated in 1844, just before Joseph and Hyrum's deaths. A reader of the Nauvoo Neighbor wrote this letter to the editor:

Mr. Editor, taking it as it is, I would ask where are we to go for music, if we do not find it in Nauvoo? I will boldly assert, nowhere. Witness the concert the other evening at the Masonic Hall; got up for the most laudable and praiseworthy purpose. The music in its selection was of the most varied character, and the electrifying feeling that was manifest proved to demonstrate that Nauvoo can furnish us with ladies and gentlemen whose instrumental and vocal powers are of no unpolished order. The stringed instruments, the trumpets, flutes, and clarinets, which formed the band, and particularly the flute and violin solos, not only gave a magic charm but struck the numerous and admiring audience with amaze at the consummate skill they exhibited. We could mention several gentlemen whose talent for music was of the highest order. The songs, too, and glees drew forth the most unbounded applause. . . . The ladies will ever be remembered for their sweet, soothing, lively, and harmonious voices, for their graceful appearance, and their choir selection of their pieces.21

Among the new activities available to the men and women in Nauvoo was the possibility of having their "images fixed" through the process of photography. For all but a select few, it was the first time to experience this most recent and amazing invention.

The daguerreotype process came to Nauvoo through Lucian Foster, a convert from New York. He established a daguerreotype studio on Parley Street. Several images were made of people who lived in the city and a few more of the city itself, especially the temple. One of these images still in existence, a family portrait, freezes in time a portion of the life in Nauvoo-the daguerreotype of Willard, Jennetta, and Heber John Richards.

On 26 March 1845, Lucian Foster's daguerreotype studio was alive with activity. Willard Richards wrote in his journal, "10 a.m. went to Foster's daguerreotype with Jennetta and Heber John."22 It is an unusual view, unlike many of the daguerreotypes of the day. Jennetta and Willard strike a loving pose, instead of the strict, stilled views we expect from the period.

For Willard Richards, this view became an important treasure, as his beloved companion, Jennetta, fell ill on 21 May and died on 9 July 1845, just a few months after they had their likeness made.

Jennetta Richards asked for the Twelve to come to her home and pray for her, as she felt that she could not live long. "We also prayed for my wife [Vilate Kimball], who is very sick," Heber C. Kimball noted. Heber continued, "Returned home and found Sister Whitney. She anointed my wife and sang in tongues; I also sang and the Lord blessed us."23

By the 20th, Vilate "was better and had a good night's rest," but Jennetta Richards grew worse during the next few days and weeks.24 Willard Richards wrote:

Wednesday July 9 [1845]. At day light dressed. . . . [Jennetta] very weak. [I] kneeled, prayed, and laid hands on her three times. . . . I gave her encouragement as I felt. She said, "How can I die under such progress?" About sunrise [I] sent for Levi [Richards] and about six a.m. sent for Elder Heber C. Kimball, who came and laid on hands and prayed; she revived. [I] sent for Father John Smith, John Taylor, and George A. Smith. Heber Kimball, John E. Page, Levi Richards, and myself . . . prayed and went into her room, anointed and prayed for her and felt encouraged. At fifteen minutes past ten a.m., Jennetta stopped breathing. . . . Sister Wilcox and Lucy Clayton watched, and I slept in [the] room on the floor.25

On the following day, 10 July, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles met at the Richards home for their weekly meeting to console their fellow Apostle. Several sisters-including Sisters Durfee, Sessions, Clayton, and Wilcox-dressed Jennetta in her temple clothing and put her in the "coffin about sunset."

Whether Willard planned to bury his wife in the local cemetery is not known, but his young son Heber John, named after their first child, who died a few months after his birth, asked, "Pa, will you bury Ma in the garden; if you do I can bear it. If you do not, I cannot bear it." Willard gladly complied with the young boy's desire.26 On the following day, Willard recorded in his diary:

Friday July 11. At dinner Rhoda Ann [nearly two years old] spoke out very pleasantly and said, "Ma is gone away. She is gone to see Uncle Joseph and Hyrum and my little brother." I wept for joy to think of the happy meeting of Jennetta and Heber John. About sunset [we] laid the coffin in a pine box in a vault in the southwest corner of the door yard. One foot east and north of the fence covering eight feet four inches long and four feet wide. Rhoda Ann called it the play house. [I threw] a dahlia on the head of the coffin in the vault and said, "I will come and fetch it with [you]."27

A few days following the burial, Willard went to the Seventy's Hall to see William Major's uncompleted painting of Jennetta. Later, when Rhoda Ann accompanied her father to visit the artist, she pointed out her mother's profile, "though not half done."28

Several contemporary portraits of members of the Nauvoo community survived the exodus of the city, including the one of Jennetta Richards, completed after her death with Ann Fox King sitting in for the artist to finish the work. Besides Majors, Sutcliffe Maudsley was active in Nauvoo capturing visual images of the Saints. Maudsley's portrait paintings of Emma Smith and Mary Fielding Smith are examples of such work.

Other families were enjoying the celebrations of life with marriages and births of children. Nancy Tracy had a baby on 15 March 1845, and a few weeks later experienced a wonderful manifestation:

I was aroused from my slumbers one night, hearing such heavenly music as I had never heard before. Everything was so still and quiet when it burst upon my ear that I could not imagine where it came from. I went up and looked out of the window. The moon shone bright as I looked over at the temple from whence the sound came. There on the roof of the building heavenly bands of music had congregated and were playing most beautifully. The music was exquisite!29

Mary M. Kimball delivered a "daughter just at sunset by Sister Billings and Sister [Patty] Sessions, who are [the] most skillful midwives in Israel." Vilate Kimball and Sylvia Sessions Lyon assisted in the delivery. Heber C. Kimball continued his journal entry, "The God of Israel was with us, and his name shall have all the glory, and may peace rest down on thine handmaidens, that they may always be [blessed] in all such cases, from hence forth all their days and thy name shall have all the glory."30 Other celebrations included musicals, plays, and parties.

George A. and Bathsheba W. Smith attended a gathering at Mary Ann and David Yearsley's home in 1845:

Went to Brother David D. Yearsley's with my wife. The party consisted of about fifty. . . . Elders Orson Pratt, Willard Richards, John E. Page, John Taylor, Amasa Lyman, and their wives, besides Father and Mother, and many others composed the party. . . . Six widow Smiths were present, to wit: Aunt Lucy, widow of Joseph Smith, Sr.; Mary, the widow of Silas Smith; Mary, the widow of Hyrum; Agnes, the widow of Don Carlos; Lavira, the widow of Samuel Harrison Smith; [Emma, widow of Joseph].31

Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs reflected upon the general state of affairs in Nauvoo at the time: "The Church is in prosperous circumstances, for there appears to be the most union that has ever been. The faithful are determined to keep the law of God. O Father, bind us as a people together in the bonds of love that we never shall separate. The temple prospers."32

While the Saints enjoyed a period of unity, a dark cloud began to descend upon the city in the summer and fall of 1845. The uneasy peace that existed between the Saints and their enemies following the murders of Joseph and Hyrum Smith was ending.

The Saints' situation became increasingly unsettled in 1845 and early 1846. The Nauvoo city charter was revoked by the Illinois state legislature on 24 January 1845 and left the Saints without a judicial system, city government, militia, or any significant legal protection from the armed mobs in the county. It was at this time that the Saints voted to rename Nauvoo "the City of Joseph" in honor of their fallen leader.

As early as 1845, state officials advised the Twelve Apostles that the Saints should leave the state if they wanted to avoid more bloodshed. Illinois governor Thomas Ford, claiming that the martyred Prophet had informed him before his death that he intended to take the Saints west, told Church leaders in the City of Joseph, "It would be good policy for your people to move to some far distant country. Your religion is new and it surprises the people as any great novelty in religion generally does. I do not foresee the time when you will be permitted to enjoy quiet."33

The governor simply counseled the Saints the painfully obvious: abandon Nauvoo or be destroyed by their enemies in Hancock County. This, however, was not news to the Saints, as Joseph Smith had made plans before his death to move the Church headquarters from Illinois to a "place prepared" in the West.34

The summer of 1845 passed fairly harmlessly, but during September a number of violent acts against the Saints and their property occurred in the outlying settlements. Church leaders signed the following statement, noting their intentions of departing Nauvoo during the next year:

We, the undersigned members of a council of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints assembled at the house of John Taylor, in the city of Nauvoo on the evening of the twenty-fourth day of September 1845, do hereby express our determination, to remove, in connection with as many of the members of the Church as will hearken to our advice on the subject from this county and state as soon as property can be disposed of, and the necessary preparations made . . . as early as next spring, in April or May. . . . As we wish for peace, at any sacrifice which is in our power to make consistent with honor and virtue.35

It is certain that Church leaders wanted to avoid the suffering encountered during the Missouri exodus in 1838-39.

Non-Mormon Nancy Hunter, who taught school in Hancock County briefly in the summer of 1845, wrote her fiance, John Aiton, from her home in Theoplis, Illinois, in September. She noted, "When I consented to go to Augusta I forgot, or rather it never occurred to my mind, that it was in Hancock County and that I should be fellow citizen with the Mormons." Nancy continued,

Well, when I had been there but three weeks and going on very pleasantly, a disturbance broke out between the Mormons and old settlers, and Augusta, as well as Carthage and Warsaw having rendered itself peculiarly obnoxious to the Mormons during the disturbance last season, the people being very much excited on account of threats made last year and now renewed all except two or three families, left Augusta. This of course broke up the school, and as there was nothing more for me to do at present I came home when Andrew came after me.

Nancy told John she thought he may have seen "an account of the [Hancock County] affairs in the papers." She informed him that many "false and exaggerated reports circulated, but the truth is quite bad enough." For certain, she maintained, "the Old Settlers cannot and will not long remain in the same county, perhaps not in the same state with the Mormons. But how [the Mormons] are to be disposed of remains yet to be decided." She continued, "Many Anties are so enraged that they would not stop at bloodshed."36

A few days following Nancy Hunter's letter, the anti-Mormons held a series of meetings in Carthage and Quincy, Illinois, and adopted the "Quincy Convention," demanding the removal of the Mormons by May 1846.

A young woman living in Nauvoo, Irene Hascall Pomeroy, reported the situation in a letter to her mother in September 1845: "The Twelve had issued a proclamation that if they will let them alone . . . and do what they can to prepare us for journeying, all that follow the Twelve will go where they will not bother [the] United States with Mormon religion. . . . I think probably they will cross the Rocky Mountains to a healthier climate."37 She was planning for her parents' arrival in Nauvoo and wanted to keep them informed of their plans, hoping they would arrive before the Saints' departure in the spring of 1846.

Bathsheba W. Smith recalled, "The fall of 1845 found Nauvoo, as it were, one vast mechanic shop, as nearly every family was engaged in making wagons. Our parlor was used as a paint shop in which to paint wagons."38

Church leaders were again under attack and subject to prosecution by legal means. Many went into hiding as they continued to conduct the affairs of the kingdom and prepared for the mass exodus. As a precaution, police were posted at major intersections and at the homes of Church leaders.

Even during this difficult time, the young women of Nauvoo found means to entertain themselves. Helen Mar Kimball wrote:

The pleasure of having John Kay and Howard Egan [men who stood guard at the Young home] was always anticipated by the young people. They were very entertaining-Egan with his interesting yarns and anecdotes, and the singing by John Kay it would be useless for us to try to describe, but suffice it to say, his voice (a baritone) was most magnificent, . . . and many an evening we were thus entertained, as we circled around the "ingle side," and the hours flew by so swiftly that midnight was often there before we knew it.

Helen recalled one occasion when John Kay stood guard the "forepart of the night at the house of President Young." During the evening she and her friends gathered, and "when the moon shone brightly," she and her brother William would hitch the horses so that a dozen friends could join them on a ride to the Young family's residence.

Vilate Young, Helen's friend and the daughter of Mary Ann and Brigham Young, coaxed John Kay to join them in a drive in the moonlight:

[We] drove for an hour or more around the same block; for the sake of keeping him with us, and each time would drive closely to the President's gate, to satisfy him that all was right. The young people were incapable of feeling the weight which rested upon our fathers and mothers.39

The winter was cold as the sister Saints prepared for their departure. Irene Hascall Pomeroy wrote a letter to her cousin Ophelia M. Andrews a few days before Christmas 1845, and after the first paragraph she noted, "My blue ink is frozen." She continued with another ink and thanked her cousin for sending her a letter and "a catalogue for which" she was "greatly obliged."40

Soon scores of Saints from outlying communities arrived in Nauvoo, seeking safety from the increasing mob activity against their property and themselves. These attacks became bolder and bolder when it became evident that neither the Saints nor the state would intercede. People were encouraged to share living quarters, and others were forced to obtain shelter in the most unsuitable places in the city.

While the sister Saints prepared to move again, this time to some unknown location in the West, one anonymous sister wrote a song, "Early This Spring We Leave Nauvoo."

Early this spring we leave Nauvoo And on our journey we'll pursue. We'll go and bid the mob farewell And let them go to heaven or hell. So on the way to California: In the spring we'll take our journey Far above Arkansas' fountains pass Between the Rocky Mountains. The mobocrats have done their best, Old Sharp and Williams with the rest. They've burnt our houses and our goods And left our sick folk in the woods. Below Nauvoo on the green plains, They burnt our houses and our grains. And if fought, they were hell bent To raise for help the government. The old settlers that first cleared the soil, They thought they would take a spoil. And at first they did begin, But not much money did bring in. Old Governor Ford, his mind so small, He's got no room for soul at all. If heaven and hell should do their best, He neither could be damned or blessed. Backenstos, his mind so large Upon the mob, he made a charge; Some three or four he did shoot down And left them dying on the ground. The old state marshall came to town And searched our temple up and down. He told the Saints that he had come And brought a writ for Brigham Young. Old Major Warren came to town- He rode our city up and down And searched for hogs like a good fellow, And at last was found in Hibbard's cellar. So out of the way, you old state marshall, You can't get the Twelve Apostles; So out of the way, old Major Warren, You can't come it over the Mormons. Now since it's so we have to go And leave the City of Nauvoo, I hope you'll all be strong and stout, And then no mob can back you out. The Temple shining silver bright And Christ's own glory gives the light; High on the mountains we will rear A standard to the nations far.41

Family and friends living in the East were naturally concerned about their family members in Nauvoo during this period of great agitation. Recent convert and Nauvoo resident Wealthy Richards received a letter from family member Mary E. Dewey in Massachusetts sometime in early 1846 expressing such a concern. "I want you to write me a letter and let me know how you feel about the Mormons leaving Nauvoo and going beyond the Rocky Mountains." Of course, the real question Mary was asking was, "Are you going with them?"

Mary asked Wealthy's forgiveness for being so inquisitive, but reassured her that it was because everyone at home felt "interested in your welfare whether present or absent." In particular, Wealthy's father wanted her to write back and tell him about the situation in Nauvoo since there were so many rumors about life there. Mary emphasized the situation back home: "We cannot take up a paper without seeing something about [life in Nauvoo]."42

While family members showed their concern, and the sister Saints responded to these concerns through letters, others sought a place to live in the overcrowded city.

Eliza Dana Gibbs and her husband struggled to find accommodations during this difficult period as the Saints from outlying areas sought "refuge and shelter until every house was filled to over-flowing." The Gibbs family, along with many others, sought any kind of shelter possible. "There was not a house or room" to be "rented for any price, and we had to take shelter in a place that was little more than a shelter," Eliza noted.

It was clapboard on the outside but not plastered inside, and the clapboards were so old and warped that we could stick our hands through between the boards all around the sides of the house. Mother was quite aged and she had to sit in the big arm chair, wrapped in a bedquilt and hold Josiah close to the fire to keep from freezing.

Eliza Dana Gibbs's husband was forced to flee the city before the dawn of day without his family, being warned by an "outsider" about midnight. Eliza "had to get out of Nauvoo the best way" she could, "without any assistance." Her strong will soon prevailed, and Eliza succeeded in "getting away and joining" her husband in Montrose, across the river.43

One sister, in anticipation of her family's removal from Nauvoo, "obtained stones from the temple yard" and had "initials cut on them." A Brother Wilcox came to the home and "dug down at the end of each grave [in the yard] and placed the stones down almost to the coffins, then covered all over and dug up the rose trees we had planted there, and smoothed off the ground, and no stranger could tell where they were."44

The need to properly identify the grave was possibly based on the fact that many Nauvoo Saints were unable to locate family graves in the local cemetery. For example, the Stout family went "to the burying ground to seek for the grave of [their] little Lydia." In spite of their efforts, which included digging, they failed in their attempt to find the grave.45

In the local paper, sisters were given a suggested checklist for the upcoming journey. Among the recommended items were flour or other bread or bread stuffs in good sacks; sugar; cayenne pepper; black pepper; mustard; rice; cinnamon; cloves; nutmeg; salt; dried apples, beans, beef, bacon, peaches, pumpkin; seed grain; and soap. Women were expected to collect and make all items for their families.46

The time came for the sister Saints who built Nauvoo to leave their homes and gardens, but not before they completed the temple and received the great blessings promised to them for their sacrifices.
