Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, Women of Nauvoo ( 1992)

11 Handmaidens of the Lord — Sisters in the Temple

A messenger was sent; . . . we were to present ourselves [at the temple] that evening. The weather being fine we preferred to walk; and as we [walked] a solemn covenant we entered into-to cling to each other through time and, if permitted, throughout all eternity, and this vow was solemnized at the holy altar.

-Helen Mar Whitney

In the midst of persecution and preparations to leave for an unknown place, the temple on the hill remained a beacon to the Saints as they looked up and watched its progress. Its completion and dedication dominated the Saints' personal and public lives in prayers, sermons, donations, work, and, most important, anticipation for the day when they could enter the holy edifice and receive the blessings promised the faithful.

Since Joseph publicly announced the construction of the Nauvoo Temple on 3 October 1840, work on it occupied the Saints' attention and resources for nearly six years. Much of the city's energy during this time went into building the temple. Two types of tithing existed in Nauvoo: one on financial increase or earnings and one on an individual's time. Each member was expected to donate one out of every ten days to the building of the temple.

The sister Saints sacrificed their time, talents, and possessions in a remarkable way as they provided food, clothing, and shelter for the construction workers. They contributed jewelry, watches, and other family possessions to the temple committee or converted these "in-kind" donations into cash for the temple tithing (a special donation beyond the regular tithing on income). A Sister Stead donated a day's work of washing clothes, which a surviving ledger reveals was estimated to be worth almost thirty-eight cents, and Sister Marm donated two days' work washing.

Mercy Fielding Thompson, like many sisters in Nauvoo, wanted to help in any way she could. She sought the Lord in prayer for help in the matter, and the response was clear and precise, "Try to get the sisters to subscribe one cent per week for the purpose of buying glass and nails for the temple."1

With the support of Joseph Smith, Mercy and her sister, Mary Fielding Smith, went about drumming up support among the women of Nauvoo. Later, she enlisted the aid of the sister Saints in the British Isles by publishing a notice in the Millennial Star. By April 1845, about one thousand dollars was donated to the temple fund.2

Maybe the most novel means of raising funds for the temple was Sarah M. Kimball's effort, following the birth of her son. "My husband came to my bedside," Sarah recalled, "and as he was admiring our three-day-old darling, I said, ÂWhat is the boy worth?'" Hiram Kimball, her successful non-Mormon merchant husband, hesitated and said, "Oh, I don't know; he is worth a great deal." Sarah suggested the sum of at least one thousand dollars, to which Hiram agreed. Sarah quickly claimed her half and told him that she wanted to donate it to the temple fund.

Later, Hiram Kimball related the incident to Joseph Smith, who promptly stated, "I accept all such donations, and from this day the boy shall stand recorded, Church property." The Prophet jokingly gave Hiram Kimball two options-he could either pay five hundred dollars to the Church and retain possession of his son or receive five hundred dollars and give the boy to Joseph as Trustee and Trust.

Mr. Kimball graciously deeded the Church a piece of property well worth the amount Sarah wanted to donate to the temple fund.3

As funds and goods were donated to the temple fund, work proceeded quickly. One of the first official ceremonies conducted at the temple site was the cornerstone laying on 6 April 1841. A sister living nearby the temple site recalled:

One day I looked over toward the temple and saw a large crowd gathered with some two or three women present, so I thought I would go over. I put on my bonnet and shawl and made my way over. Brother Joseph was there and seemed busily engaged over something. Finally, he looked up and saw us women. He said for the brothers to stand back and let the sisters come up. So they gave way, and we went up. In the huge chief cornerstone was cut out a square about a foot around and about as deep lined with zinc, and in it Brother Joseph had placed a Bible, a Book of Mormon, hymn book, and other Church works along with silver money that had been coined in that year.4

Eventually, the Saints celebrated the laying of the final stone on the temple. Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs recorded the events of that day on 24 May 1845: "This memorable day the sun arose clear in the east. This morning was serene and silent. The sun and moon were at about equal heights in the horizon, as if to rejoice with the Saints in praises to the Most High." She continued her lengthy diary entry:

The Saints went (all that knew it) to the Temple at 6:00 in the morning. The Twelve and the workmen, some brethren, the band with the banner of liberty floating in the gentle breeze, the last stone was laid on the temple with shouts of hosannah to God and the Lamb, Amen, and joy filled every bosom and thanks to our God that had preserved us. President Brigham Young made some remarks very appropriate. This is the seventh day even on which God rested from all his works and the Jews still keep it. O may Israel in these last days keep all thy statutes. O praise the Lord for all his goodness, yea, his mercies endureth forever. Exalt his holy name for he hath no end. He hath established his word upon the earth, no more to be thrown down. He will remember all his covenants to fulfil them in their times. O praise the Lord forever more, Amen.5

Helen Mar Kimball Whitney recalled this day as "one of the most interesting incidents within my recollections."6 Helen quoted a contemporary source:

The singers sang their sweetest notes, and their voices thrilled the hearts of the assemblage; the music of the band . . . never sounded so charming; and when President Young placed the stone in position, [he] said: "The last stone is now laid upon the temple, and I pray the Almighty, in the name of Jesus, to defend us in this place, and sustain us until the temple is finished and we have all got our endowments."7

The sister Saints joined with the brethren and shouted, "Hosanna! Hosanna! Hosanna, to God and the Lamb, amen! amen! and amen!" This was repeated three times by those attending the service.

Work on the interior continued, and eventually the first public meeting was scheduled to be held and convened in the completed lower assembly room on 5 October 1845. Helen Mar Kimball Whitney recalled, "I was present with the choir on this occasion, also at conference the three following days [6-8 October]. The choir and orchestra occupied a gallery at the west end, opposite the stand."8 Irene Hascall Pomeroy attended this first conference meeting in the temple and wrote to her mother and father in New England, "We went to conference every day (three days). O! such a glorious meeting. It was in the temple. There were five thousand people present."9

On 21 November the painters finished their work in the upper rooms in the attic, which were dedicated on 22 November 1845. It was here that the long-awaited blessings would be given to worthy Saints.

The next few days and weeks found the Saints busily preparing the temple for the commencement of administering the temple ordinances. Men and young boys went around the community in their wagons picking up potted plants and evergreens from the homes of the sisters for the "garden room" at the temple. Sisters gave up rugs and carpets, which were laid down in the attic story of the temple on 29 November by several men and Vilate Kimball, Elizabeth Ann Whitney, Sarah Whitney, and Bathsheba Smith.

Several women met at the temple and made a cotton veil for the main endowment room, which was hung on 5 December. Helen Mar Kimball Whitney recalled,

We sat in Father's room [Heber C. Kimball's office in the attic], next to Brigham Young's [office], who, with his brother [Joseph Young] came in and sang some hymns-Sister [Mary Ann] Young assisting them. Uncle Joseph sang "The Upper California," and the rest joined in the chorus.10

The celestial room occupied the largest space on the attic floor. It was a "very large and spacious room, perfectly light, all nicely furnished." Two "splendid tables and four splendid sofas" were placed in the center of the room. Beneath the curtained, semicircular window on the east wall stood a third table with "the celestial and terrestrial globes" placed on it.

A number of mirrors and paintings-including portraits of Church leaders and their wives-hung on the east and north walls. On the north wall was a map of the world, and placed near it was a beautiful marble clock. Several maps of the United States, including a street map of Nauvoo, were placed on the west partition of the room.

The sister Saints made the larger area a "celestial room" through the sacrifice of their own furnishings. One observer noted that the room had a "very splendid and comfortable appearance."11

Following the assassination of Joseph and Hyrum, Church leaders decided that for the safety of the members of the anointed quorum, few meetings would be held and only a few new members would be admitted to the group until the temple was completed. Several priesthood leaders, however, did meet regularly for prayer. The sisters of the group waited for the opportunity to participate regularly in the special prayer meetings again and looked forward to the temple's completion.12

As the temple's attic area was being readied for the administration of the ordinances, Brigham Young announced that beginning Sunday morning at nine o'clock, the anointed quorum "will assemble for prayer and council. Our wives will come and partake with us. The sacrament will be administered and [we] will spend the day in those things that the Spirit shall teach." Heber C. Kimball noted in his journal that this announcement "gave great joy" to the sisters.13

The anticipated Sunday arrived as snow began to fall upon the men and women who walked up the bluff to the temple. The group included Mary Ann Young, Vilate Kimball, Elizabeth Ann Whitney, Marinda N. Hyde, Mary Ann Pratt, Leonora Taylor, Bathsheba Smith, Clarissa Smith, Lois Cutler, Thirza Cahoon, Permelia D. Lot, Lucy Morley, Catherine Spencer, Mary Miller, Mary Fielding Smith, Mercy R. Thompson, Agnes Smith, Sally Phelps, and Phebe Woodworth.

The meeting began after the Saints dressed in white. Following prayer and a hymn, a few spoke and then the sacrament was blessed and passed to those in attendance. "Great solemnity rested upon the brethren and sisters; great union in our meeting," one participant noted.14 Those present were informed that they should meet at the temple every Sunday to repeat this experience.

The administering of ordinances in the new temple started on 10 December when "Sisters Mary Ann Young, Vilate Kimball, and Elizabeth Ann Whitney commenced administering [initiatory] ordinances in the Temple" at 3:00 P.M. Heber C. Kimball noted in his journal that this event reminded him of Joseph Smith's words, "The sisters are always first in all good works."15

By 4:25 P.M. everything was ready for the administering of the ordinances of the endowment.

Among those privileged to participate on that first day were the three sisters mentioned above and Nancy Marinda Hyde, Mary Ann Pratt, Leonora Taylor, Bathsheba W. Smith, Mariah Louisa Lyman, Mary Page, Clarissa Smith, Mary Catherine Miller, Sally Phelps, Lois Cutler, Thirza Cahoon, Phebe Woodworth, Catherine C. Spencer, Agnes M. Smith, Mercy R. Thompson, and Mary Smith.

Several couples, two men, and two single women (Mary and Agnes Smith-widows of Hyrum and Don Carlos Smith) were administered to during the afternoon and evening. The first day's work, including preparations for the following day, ended at 3:30 A.M. on the 11th.

Several more sisters received their blessings on the second day, including Mother Lucy Mack Smith. The martyred Prophet's sister Sophronia and her husband also received their temple blessings at the time. The anxiety of the Saints wishing to receive these special blessings was so great that the temple was thronged with those wishing to enter. On 18 December, Brigham noted, "In consequence of the great pressure of business during the past week, it was decided to devote Saturday to the purpose of washing" the temple clothing utilized. However, when "all those officiating in the ordinances [felt] that the work should not cease, it was determined that the clothes should be washed during the night."16

The sister Saints were busily preparing to attend the temple. Irene Hascall Pomeroy sent a letter to her cousin on the day before Christmas. She reflected on the activities of the Saints during the week, "The Temple still progresses. Hundreds have received their endowments."17

In preparation for administering one of the most important ordinances, the "sealing" of a husband and wife (eternal marriage), Mary Ann Young, Vilate Kimball, Elizabeth Ann Whitney, Eliza R. Snow, Mary and Agnes Smith, Mercy R. Thompson, and Sarah Ann Whitney completed working on the cushions and upholstery of the new altar.18 On the following day, Brigham Young noted in his journal:

[7 January 1846] This afternoon, the new altar was used for the first time, and four individuals and their wives were sealed. The altar is about two and one-half feet high and two and one-half feet long and about one foot wide, rising from a platform about eight or nine inches high and extending out on all sides about a foot, forming a convenient place to kneel upon. The top of the altar and the platform for kneeling upon are covered with cushions of scarlet damask cloth; the sides of the upright part or body of the altar are covered with white linen.19

On the same day, 7 January 1846, young Samuel Richards, who was laboring on the temple construction to finish the building for completed dedication, received the invitation to come to the temple to receive his own blessings. On 20 January he began serving as an endowment worker, helping the other Saints to receive their blessings. Three days later, he noted in his journal, "Father John Parker's family received their endowments, his daughter Mary being my intended wife. After which I obtained permission of President Joseph [Young] for her to have the privilege of spending her time in the temple also."

Mary received the call and accepted the assignment to work with her fiance in the temple. On 29 January Mary stayed late following the conclusion of her labors in the temple to be "sealed upon the altar, husband and wife for time and all eternity by Amasa Lyman at twenty-five minutes to nine, witnessed by Phinehas Richards and C. W. Wandell and recorded by F. D. Richards (No. 541)."

The newlywed couple continued their labors in the temple for the next two days, and finally on 31 January they left the temple and went to Mary's home and "spent the night" together for the first time.20

Mary's delayed honeymoon was occasioned by the pressure to give everyone who was worthy an opportunity to receive these ordinances. By early January, Church leaders decided to "continue the administration of the ordinances of endowment night and day."21 Many of the temple workers stayed all day and all night in the temple, obtaining only a few hours of sleep before continuing their labors. The Saints were determined to receive their blessings before they left the city. Irene Hascall Pomeroy wrote her mother that old "Mrs. Pond's mother is well, [but] does not wish to leave this place until she gets her endowments in the temple."22

The intense physical and emotional stress caused by mob action, preparations for the exodus west, the completion of the temple, and the everyday concerns of living on the frontier were released in various ways. During the spiritually charged period of December 1845 and January 1846, the Saints took time to refresh their minds and bodies through social recreation in the temple. William Clayton , as scribe, recorded such experiences in Brigham Young's manuscript history on 30 December 1845 and 2 January 1846. The work in the temple began at 8:10 A.M.; some twelve hours later, the endowment services ended for the day.

The labors of the day having been brought to a close at so early an hour, viz.: eight-thirty, it was thought proper to have a little season of recreation, accordingly Brother Hanson was invited to produce his violin, which he did, and played several lively airs accompanied by Elisha Averett on his flute, among other some very good lively dancing tunes. This was too much for the gravity of Brother Joseph Young who indulged in dancing a hornpipe, and was soon joined by several others, and before the dance was over several French fours were indulged in. The first was opened by myself with Sister Whitney and Elder Heber C. Kimball and [Vilate]. The spirit of dancing increased until the whole floor was covered with dancers [as we] danced before the Lord.

The dancing continued for several hours, followed by more singing. Sister Elizabeth Ann Whitney was invited to sing and invoked "the gift of tongues, sang a beautiful song of Zion in tongues. The interpretation was given by her husband, Bishop Whitney and me," Brigham had recorded.23 Another participant noted, "Altogether it was one of the most touching and beautiful exhibitions of the power of the spirit in the gift of tongues, which was ever witnessed."24 Brother Brigham and Heber followed Elizabeth and spoke in tongues themselves.

On Friday, 2 January 1846, the labor of administering the endowment continued all day. Following the close of the services, Brigham Young invited those present to stay and enjoy a concert of instrumental and vocal music and dancing. Brigham Young, William Clayton noted, "alluded to the privilege which we now have of meeting in this house, and said that we would worship God in the dance, as well as in other ways."25

At another meeting, Brigham defended the Saints' right to dance in the temple:

Now as to dancing in this house-there are thousands of brethren and sisters that have labored hard to build these walls and put on this roof, and they are shut out from any opportunity of enjoying any amusement among the wicked-or in the world-and shall they have any recreations? Yes! Where? Why, in the Temple of the Lord. That is the very place where they can have liberty-and we will enjoy it this winter and then leave it.26

Helen Mar Kimball, just a few days before her marriage, "with quite a number of young friends, had the privilege of receiving the holy ordinances" on New Year's evening.27 The day was rainy, one diarist noted:

The ground [is] soft, and the mud very deep. A heavy mist rests on the low ground under the bluffs, the sunlight is very dim being nearly shut out the day, heavy clouds, which overspread the whole face of the sky, and everything around wears a gloomy and dismal aspect-but notwithstanding the unfavorable appearance of things the brethren and sisters [assembled] together in the house of the Lord to receive their endowments.28

Helen, along with her young friends, knelt down in the celestial room following the services "in thanksgiving to God for His great mercy and goodness to us in granting us this opportunity of meeting together in the House of the Lord." They prayed to God that

He would continue to bless us . . . and that we might be enabled to continue in Nauvoo in peace until all the faithful Saints had received their endowments, and that when the time to leave here should arrive that we might have those things that we need to enable us to go away in comfort.

Following the prayer, Helen witnessed the marriage of two friends. Many of those in attendance remained in the temple and participated in a marriage supper in the young couple's honor.

The wedding celebration continued until 2:30 A.M., when the sisters "retired to the side rooms, [with] the brethren stretching themselves upon the floor or on the sofas." Those in attendance were soon in the embrace of "tired nature's sweet restorer, balmy sleep," with the exception of the newlyweds, who with "a few of their friends, who, being unable to close their eyes in sleep from the abundance of their joy, passed the short hours of the morning in agreeable conversation."29

A month later, Helen Mar was summoned to the temple again: "At twilight on the 3rd of February 1846, a messenger was sent by my father." The messenger informed "Horace K. Whitney and myself . . . we were to present ourselves [at the temple] that evening." She continued:

The weather being fine we preferred to walk; and as we passed through the little graveyard at the foot of the hill a solemn covenant we entered into-to cling to each other through time and, if permitted, throughout all eternity, and this vow was solemnized at the holy altar. Though gay and high minded in many other things we reverenced the principles taught us by our parents and held them sacred, also the covenants which we had . . . made at [the temple].

On the following day, Helen Mar's parents hosted a "wedding party" for their new son-in-law and daughter:

President Brigham Young and Bishop Newell K. Whitney were invited with members of their families and a few of our most intimate friends to attend . . . given at my father's house in honor of our marriage. . . . We had no glittering surroundings, nor had we any use for rich and costly gifts, but we had what is better, warm and loving hearts, that were knitted together by past scenes of sorrow and suffering. It was the pure and genuine friendship that could neither be bought or sold.

The party, which included music and dancing, lasted until midnight, "when the music ceased and the blessings of God were invoked upon us all and all of His people, of whatever nation they might be."30 The newlyweds made their final preparations, and then with Church leaders left Nauvoo for the wilds of Iowa.

Before they left, however, the Saints wanted to complete the temple and dedicate the entire building to the Lord. As a result, Brigham announced to the Saints on 24 January 1846, "We shall drop all political operations and church government, and by so doing I propose that all the Saints lay down their property to be used in building the Temple, the Nauvoo House and helping the poor away [from Nauvoo]."31

Finally, Church leaders announced that Nauvoo must be evacuated before their enemies "hedged up the way" before their escape into the wilderness. Those unable to receive their temple blessings were promised that other temples, even bigger than this one in Nauvoo, would be built. On 3 February, Brigham went to the temple to inform those Saints waiting at the door that he "was going to get [his] wagons started and be off." He noted:

I walked some distance from the Temple supposing the crowd would disperse, but on returning I found the house filled to overflowing. Looking upon the multitude and knowing their anxiety, as they were thirsting and hungering for the word, we continued at work diligently in the house of the Lord. Two hundred and ninety-five persons received ordinances.32

Brigham went home and helped Mary Ann prepare for their departure. On Friday, two days later, Brigham went back to the temple and helped administer the ordinances to many more brothers and sisters. Finally, Brigham met in the temple for the last time on Sunday, 8 February 1846:

I met with the Council of the Twelve in the southeast corner room of the attic of the Temple. We knelt around the altar, and dedicated the building to the Most High. We asked his blessing upon our intended move to the west; also pled him to enable us some day to finish the Temple, and dedicate it to him, and we would leave it in his hands to do as he pleased. . . . We asked the Lord to accept the labors of his servants in this land. We then left the Temple.33

When the brethren and sisters stopped administering the ordinances of the endowment and headed west across the Mississippi River in February 1846, approximately 6,000 persons had received their temple blessings, as many as 295 in a single day.

Construction work, including plastering and painting the interior, continued until the temple was completely done. It was dedicated in a private service on 30 April and in several public services beginning on 1 May 1846.

Even before the dedication services began, the Church offered to sell the temple to the Catholic Church, hoping to receive much-needed funding to "help the poor Saints to move west."34 Negotiations between the Catholic and Latter-day Saint representatives stalled, however. Nevertheless, rumors of the sale were widespread. Nancy Hunter, a non-Mormon Illinois resident, wrote this to her fiance in Minnesota:

Now methinks were I an inhabitant of Hancock County, I would much rather the Mormons would have possession than the Catholics. Doubtless they have deep designing well laid plans and when once they get a foothold, there is no telling what they may do connected as they are with a foreign power.35

Eventually gutted by an arsonist fire in 1848, the temple was sold to the French-Icarians for one thousand dollars, but before they could restore the building, the walls were toppled by a tornado in 1850. By order of the city council, the remaining west facade was razed.

Not all of the women in Nauvoo rejoiced in the blessings given in the temple. One woman's derogatory statements were published in a local newspaper,36 and another woman wrote with her husband an anti-Mormon tract about the temple.37 For the vast majority of women in Nauvoo, however, the temple was worthy of every sacrifice, the endowment proved to be an uplifting experience, and participation in the sacred ordinances helped sustain them during their flight to freedom across the Mississippi River and ultimately to the Great Basin. Martha Jones Thomas summed up her feelings about the temple when she wrote:

We esteemed it a privilege to work on the House of God . . . until it was finished. We were then called to the house to receive the blessings the Lord has in store for the faithful, which amply paid them for all their labors. Those days were grand and glorious. . . . The Saints were in the depths of poverty, but we rejoiced in building the House of the Lord.38

Mercy Thompson recalled years later what Joseph Smith had said following Emma's administration of initiatory ordinances: "They will bring you out of darkness into marvelous light." For Mercy and many other sister Saints, the instruction and blessing received in the Nauvoo Temple did indeed bring them "out of darkness into marvelous light."39
