Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, Women of Nauvoo ( 1992)

12 Into the Wilderness — Women Pioneers

We started west in the spring with an old wagon, one yoke of oxen, one cow and all the things we could load in the wagon. We felt to rejoice that we escaped with our lives.

-Mariah Pulsipher

The family of Julia Ann Hooker Shumway arrived at the Nauvoo ferry crossing on 4 February 1846.1 As they waited in nearly zero-degree weather at the foot of Parley Street with an ox-drawn wagon, they must have considered the beautiful city they were leaving behind and the uncertain destination of their journey ahead. Soon they began their famous trip across the Mississippi River, the first of many who would follow in the next days, weeks, and months.

The crossing occurred with the help of flat-bottomed ferry boats, designed to carry one wagon and propelled by paddle wheels. Later, during a brief period the river froze, which allowed the wagons to cross the river on the ice.

Many sister Saints in Nauvoo picked out only those items from their homes that they thought would be necessary for the long march west, leaving many personal treasures and furnishings behind. One item that many sisters fortuitously took was paper or journals and ink. For some it may have been the last few cents they owned which purchased these items. For others, it was a gift from a friend.

Patty Bartlett Sessions began a "day book" in February 1846, just two days before leaving her home to cross the river for Iowa. She wrote on that day, "A Day Book given to me Patty Sessions by Sylvia Lyon this 10th day of Feb. 1846. Patty Sessions her book. I am now fifty one years six days old. February 10, 1846, City of Joseph, Hancock County, Illinois."

She continued her first entry, "My things are now packed ready for the west, have been and put Richard's wife to bed [as a midwife she had delivered a baby] with a daughter. In the afternoon put Sister Harriet Young to bed with a son." On the following day, she made herself a "cap, and in the evening went to the [Seventies] Hall to see the scenery of the massacre of Joseph and Hyrum Smith."

On 12 February, Patty and husband bade her older married children and "friends good-bye and started for the west," seeking refuge from the rising storm of anti-Mormon activity in Hancock County.

The first night on the trail was pleasant, providing a time to relax from the busy rush of leaving the city. She noted on 13 February, "attended prayers in our wagon and have eaten our own breakfast." On Valentine's Day, Patty wrote:

This morning it snows. Sister Oakly has set up all night because her wagon did not get across the river. I gave her and Mariann and Carlos Murray some breakfast. We are now ready to leave the bank of the river [and] go to the other camp. Three o'clock-we have arrived to the other camp on Sugar Creek. It has just [stopped] storming. The ground covered with snow and water and is very bad underfoot. Attended prayer in Father John Smith's tent.

The following day was Sunday, and time was taken to write letters to family members still in Nauvoo and to visit other sisters in the camp. The Sessions did not yet have a tent. On 19 February she noted, "It snows hard, the wind blows and no tent yet." Soon cloth arrived for the flaps, but "no twine to sew it with." On 23 February canvas arrived, and Patty began to sew it for the tent. Two days later, she trudged through the snow to "put Jackson Redding wife [Jane Whiting Redding] to bed."

A few days later, John Scott's wife had a miscarriage, and Patty helped all she could to care for and comfort her. When one of the companies moved from Sugar Creek on 28 February, Patty and her husband went along. Within a few days they lost their cow, and Patty was forced to take over driving the wagon as her husband went to look for it. On 6 March Patty backtracked ten miles to help her daughter. She wrote, "I go back ten miles" to see Sarah Ann, who was "sick." Two days later, Sarah Ann delivered a son. Patty's children's families were now catching up with them. By 9 March, Patty and her family were sixty miles from Nauvoo: "Everyone together . . . but our cow."2

Escaping Nauvoo did not, however, end the persecution. Many Saints found shelter and employment in several communities in an effort to prepare for the journey west.

In Farmington, Iowa, several Latter-day Saint families sought refuge. Eliza Dana Gibbs recalled,

They would take [a] man if they knew he was a Mormon and hang him up to a tree or anything that would answer their purpose in the street in open daylight. They would hang him until nearly dead before taking him down. One old gentleman by the name of McBride, an old revolutionary soldier, died in consequence of the hanging. They would also cut holes in the ice in the river and hold them in the water until nearly dead.3

A young teenager, Mary Ann Stearns, reported that she left the city on 14 February 1846. She wrote:

Our teams crossed the Mississippi and started westward, six emigrant wagons . . . [including] a one-horse wagon . . . with little Parley driving old Dick. Mother had arranged for her wagon quite comfortably. Grandfather Frost had made some chests to fit the wagon in which were packed all that was in wisdom to take with us and on which our bed was made. . . . Most of our provisions were in the big wagon, but mother had a goodly supply cooked and along with us ready for immediate use.

Though time does change some things, not so for all-the children "commenced calling for [the goodies] as soon as we had gotten fairly started." Soon the family crossed the river on a ferry boat, when "it commenced snowing." As they "traveled along we passed camp after camp of the Saints just by the roadside, sitting around the campfire with the snow coming down in great flakes." Mary noted the conditions of those huddled around the fires:

Women and children with damp and drabbled clothing, men wading around caring for the cattle that were to be their propellers to a place of safety, mothers trying to prepare food for their families over the blazing log heaps, a sight fit to daunt the stoutest heart, but no, every one of our acquaintances that we greeted in passing had a cheering word and a smiling countenance.

One sister, a sixty-year-old woman, Mother McArthur, was never forgotten by young Mary. She was "seated by her campfire with an umbrella over her head and the bread pan in her lap, making some of her good biscuits," Mary vividly recalled. Her husband, standing close by, asked the family, "Won't you stay to dinner?" The family, however, continued its journey through the snowfall. Sister McArthur, "with smiling face said, ÂWe'll overtake you before long.' "4

Widowed Mary Fielding Smith, the legal guardian of John, Jerusha, and Sarah Smith (children of Hyrum and Jerusha Barden) and the parent of two children herself, Joseph F. and Martha Ann, left the city alone to face the difficult march west. Martha Ann recalled the difficult experience when they left later in the year:

We left our home just as it was, our furniture, and the fruit trees hanging full of rosy cheeked peaches. We bid goodbye to the loved home that reminded us of our beloved father everywhere we turned.

I was five years old when we started from Nauvoo. We crossed over the Mississippi in the skiff in the dusk of the evening. We bid goodbye to our dear old feeble grandmother [Lucy Mack Smith]. I can never forget the bitter tears she shed when she bid us goodbye for the last time in this life. She knew it would be the last time she would see her son's family. We did not realize this so much at that time as we have since.5

Eliza Marie Partridge Lyman did not dare brave the cold the first few nights after her departure: "We went to John Tanner's [who lived on the Iowa side of the river] and stayed several days as the weather was very cold and we were not in a hurry to camp out till we were obliged to. After a few days we left Father Tanner and joined the camp of Saints on Sugar Creek."6

Before moving on to the Sugar Creek encampment, Eliza Marie and her sister-wives, Diantha and Caroline, waited for their husband to return. Amasa Lyman went back across the river to visit another wife who remained. While at the Tanners', Eliza Marie wrote, "I cut and made a dress for Sister Tanner." In the evening Brother Lyman returned to his family, "bringing his wife Maria with him, I was heartily glad to see her," Eliza Marie wrote. A special bonding between them began already and would only increase on the journey west.7

While many Saints made their preparations to leave Nauvoo, Louisa Barnes Pratt wondered what to do, as her husband, Addison, was on a Church mission in the Pacific Islands. Without his support and without any other relatives in town, she felt overwhelmed by the call to leave Nauvoo and asked Church leaders for advice. Brother Brigham responded cheerfully, but clearly, "Ox team salvation is the safest way."

Louisa questioned why "those who had sent my husband to the ends of the earth did not call to inquire whether I could prepare myself for such a perilous journey." She was told:

"Sister Pratt, they expect you to be smart enough to go yourself without help, and even to assist others." The reply awakened in me a spirit of self-reliance. I replied, "Well, I will show them what I can do."

Determined to go it alone, Louisa outfitted a wagon and drove out of Nauvoo feeling "comparatively happy."8

Eliza R. Snow left Nauvoo with Hannah Hogaboon and Stephen Markham in February 1846. Eliza wrote in her diary,

We left our home and went as far as Brother Hiram Kimball's where we spent the night and through the generosity of Sister [Sarah] Kimball and mother [Lydia] Granger, made some additional preparations for our journey.9

On 13 February, the following day, Eliza crossed the Mississippi River, where she found her brother Lorenzo encamped in a tent next to Mary Ann Yearsley's family. "We lodged in Brother Yearsley's tent which before morning was covered with snow."

14th After breakfast I went into the buggy and did not leave till the next day. Sister [Hannah Hogaboon] Markham and I did some needlework though the melting snow dripped through our cover.10

During the next few days in camp, Eliza spent time writing in her diary and composing poems. "My dormitory, sitting room, writing office, and frequently dining room," she wrote, "was the buggy in which Mrs. [Hannah] Markham, her little son, David, and I rode." On 19 February, a "snowstorm commenced in the night and continued through the day." She "amused" herself by writing the following:

The Camp of Israel A Song for the Pioneers, No. 1 Altho' in woods and tents we dwell Shout, shout, O Camp of Israel No christian mobs on earth can bind Our thoughts, or steal our peace of mind. Chorus Tho' we fly from vile aggression We'll maintain our pure profession- Seek a peaceable possession Far from Gentiles and oppression. We better live in tents and smoke Than wear the cursed gentile yoke- We better from our country fly Than by mobocracy to die. We've left The City of Nauvoo And our beloved Temple too, And to the wilder we'll go Amid the winter frosts and snow. Our homes were dear-we lov'd them well Beneath our roofs we hop'd to dwell, And honor the great God's commands By mutual rights of christian lands. Our persecutors will not cease Their murd'rous spoiling of our peace And have decreed that we must go To wilds where reeds and rushes grow. The Camp-the Camp-its numbers swell Shout, shout O Camp of Israel! The King the Lord of hosts is near His armies guard our front and rear.

During one particularly cold evening, Eliza's feet were frostbitten, "which occasioned me considerable inconvenience for several weeks." On 28 February, the first company of some six to seven hundred Saints moved out from the temporary camp. They were able to travel only four miles because of the condition of the road. Eliza wrote:

We traveled four miles and put up for the night when the prospect, at first sight, was dreary enough. It was nearly sunset-very cold, with four or five inches of snow on the ground, but with brave hearts, strong hands, and plenty of spades and shovels, the men removed the snow, and suddenly transformed the bleak desert into a joyous town of cloth houses with log-heap fires, and a multitude of cheerful inhabitants. The next day the Nauvoo Band came up, and its stirring strains were wafted abroad and reechoed on the responsive breeze.

Eliza wrote another poem, "Let Us Go."

Let us go-let us go to the wilds for a home Where the wolf and the roe and the buffalo roam- Where beneath our own vines, we in peace, may enjoy The fruits of our labors, with none to annoy. Let us go-let us go where our Rights are secure- Where the waters are clear and the atmosphere pure- Where the hand of oppression has never been felt- Where the blood of prophets have never been spilt. Let us go-let us go where the Kingdom of God Will be seen in its Order extending abroad- Where the Priesthood of heaven, unopposed will go forth In the regeneration of man and of earth.

Eliza knew that her situation was better than that of many of the sisters who came out of Nauvoo. They "walked all day, rain or shine, and at night prepared supper for their families, with no sheltering tents," she wrote. These sisters made "their beds in, and under, wagons that contained their earthly all." She continued her narrative:

Frequently with intense sympathy and admiration I watched the mother when, forgetful of her own fatigue and destitution, she took unwearied pains to fix up in the most palatable form . . . food, and as she dealt it out, was cheering the hearts of her children, while, as I truly believe, her own was listed to God in fervent prayer that their lives might be preserved, and, above all, that they might honor him in the religion of which she was an exile from the home once sacred to her, for the sake of those precious ones which God had committed to her care.11

The prayers were always answered, but not in the way these mothers hoped for. One sister lost her four-year-old daughter, little Mary. The mother cried out, "Oh, I can never leave her here in this lonely place." The grief-torn sister was consoled when someone suggested that the body be taken back to Nauvoo to be laid by "loved ones and then it would not seem so terrible." When they returned to the city, it was "as still as death, and few persons seen on the streets. . . . The little grave was soon ready, and the little pilgrim was laid to rest until the resurrection's morn."12

Eliza Snow's diary continued as her company arrived at the small community of Farmington on 3 March 1846, "Camp moved in a body eight miles which was on the bank of the Des Moine [River]." The journey became somewhat easier, as they were slowed down for several days by "mud and water" on the trail during the first few days. "We passed through the town of Farmington where the inhabitants manifested great curiosity and more levity than sympathy for our houseless situation."

During the evening while in camp, Eliza was "agreeably surprised by Sister [Elizabeth Ann] Whitney's appearance in front of the buggy where I was seated eating my supper." She rejoiced at the opportunity of visiting with a friend from Nauvoo, "having been before this time separated from all old associates."13

It was about six weeks since the first sister Saints left Nauvoo, and now on the trail they met together on 5 April 1846 to refresh themselves physically and spiritually. Eliza noted:

At four o'clock, according to the instruction that each tent should meet together in their several divisions and partake of the sacrament, we attended to the ordinance for the first time since we left the City. My heart was made to rejoice in the privilege of once more commemorating the death of him whom I desire to behold. Roll on ye wheels of time! Hasten thou long anticipated period when he shall again stand upon the earth.14

A few days later Heber C. Kimball walked past Eliza's "study" and, after the usual greetings, she told him that she wanted to be considered as one of his children. He consented, and immediately "I told him that I should claim a father's blessing." He responded positively to the request. Eliza demanded it then and there at her buggy. He replied, "Now?" She informed him that she was ready, and he then said, "A father's blessing shall rest upon you from this time forth." Eliza finished her daily entry, "From this time I call him father."15

Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs was pregnant when she left Nauvoo in February 1846. A few weeks later on 22 March, Zina delivered a baby boy, whom she named Henry Chariton, after the name of his father and the river beside which he was born. Her personal history recounts the events:

We reached the Chariton River between three and four weeks after leaving Nauvoo. I had been told in the Temple that I should acknowledge God even in a miracle in my deliverance in woman's hour of trouble, which hour had now come. We traveled one [morning] about five miles, when I called for a halt in our march. There was but one person with me-Mother Lyman. There on the bank of the Chariton River, I was delivered of a fine son. Occasionally the wagon had to be stopped that I might take breath. Thus I journeyed on. But I did not mind the hardship of my situation, for my life had been preserved, and my babe was so beautiful.16

Ten days later, Eliza Marie Partridge Lyman arrived at the Chariton River:

Started early in the morning, traveled twelve miles, came to the Chariton river, too, in the rest of our loading and crossed over. We went on to the bluff on the opposite side and camped for the night. Two brethren from Brother Pratt's came, met us before we crossed the river with seven yoke of oxen to help us on the rest of the way to their camp, a distance of seven miles on the west side of the east fork of Shoal Creek. At the river we came across Henry Jacob's wagon in the mud. His wife Zina, sick in bed on top of the load, so near the wet cover she could hardly raise her head, a babe in her arms, but a few days old, and no other wagon near or friend to do any thing for her except her husband.17

It was in trials that the Nauvoo sisterhood blossomed as they reached out to touch each other's lives.

Many sister Saints did not leave in February for several reasons. Diantha Farr was married to William Clayton on 9 January 1845, and now as her husband crossed the river with three wives, five children, and his mother, young seventeen-year-old Diantha was left in the city in the last stages of pregnancy.

On 16 March 1846, nearly a month following her husband's departure into the wilderness, Diantha wrote:

My beloved, but absent William:

It rejoiced my heart to hear a word from you, but it would have given me more joy to have had a line from you, but I am thankful for a little. You know that is the way to get more. To tell you I want to see you is useless, yet true you are constantly in my mind by day and I dream about you almost every night. As to my health it is about the same as when you left, only a little more so. I often wish you had taken your house along, for it looks so lonesome. It seems a long time since I saw you, but how much longer it will be before I can have the privilege of conversing with you face to face it is yet unknown to me. Father is going as fast as he can. He wants to get away soon after conference if possible. Mother sends her best respects to you. Often says how lonesome it seems. Don't you think William will come tonight. I expect it would cheer her heart as well as mind to hear your voice once more. Dear William, write as often as you can send, for one line from you would do my heart good. I must draw to a close for I am in haste. I will try to compose myself as well as I can. I never shall consent to have you leave again. Farewell, Farewell.18

Just shy of one month later, William Clayton camped at Locust Creek on 15 April. He was tired, having been on watch the previous evening, but news arrived from Nauvoo-good news about his young wife. In a letter delivered to a nearby pioneer camp, William learned that Diantha delivered a "fine fat boy" fifteen days earlier on 30 March.

Clayton wrote in his diary:

Wednesday, [April] 15th. . . . This morning Ellen Kimball came to me and wished me much joy. She said Diantha has a son. I told her I was afraid it was not so, but she said Brother Pond had received a letter. I went over to Pond's and he read that she had a fine fat boy on the 30th [March], but she was very sick with ague and mumps. Truly I feel to rejoice at this intelligence, but feel sorry to hear of her sickness.

During the evening William Pitt's band played, and at the conclusion Clayton invited some of his fellow band members to come to his tent to celebrate the birth of his son. "We had a very pleasant time," Clayton noted, "playing and singing until about twelve o'clock and drank health to my son. . . . This [early] morning I composed a new song-ÂAll Is Well.' " He concluded his diary entry:

I feel to thank my Heavenly Father for my boy and pray that he will spare and preserve his life and that of his mother and so order it so that we may soon meet again. O Lord bless thine handmaid and fill her with thy Spirit, make her healthy that her life may be prolonged and that we may live upon the earth and honor the cause of truth. In the evening I asked the President if he would not suffer me to send for Diantha. He consented.19

Another sister Saint still in Nauvoo was Irene Hascall Pomeroy. Irene asked her family, including her father, mother, and brother-all living in the East-to bring supplies to Nauvoo as they began their preparations to go west. She moved from her home and in January was living at Lorin Farr's home, next to the Woodruff home. Among the unusual items requested were her "paint brushes and that piece of green paint" she gave her brother. She also asked them to visit a neighbor, and if his "fig tree is alive I want you [to] press a leaf for me."20

During the late spring and early summer, converts still arrived in the city for a short rest before beginning their trek across Iowa. Ursulia B. Hascall left Boston on a ship bound for New Orleans with her son, Thales. She and her son were seasick most of the time, and then Thales "caught the measles on board ship." She arrived at the mouth of the Mississippi exhausted and hungry. Ursulia wanted to travel "steerage passage" to conserve the little funds she had, but found the boat "crowded with all kinds of human beings, horses, and dogs. No place for us there." They spent four dollars for a cabin and began their last leg of the journey to Nauvoo.

After several delays, Ursulia and Thales arrived at one of the docks along the river at Nauvoo. "I saw Irene [her sister] come bounding across lots, you may guess the rest, I found her babe much handsomer than I expected." She argued that the baby girl did not have "one homely feature." In Nauvoo the tired and hungry travelers found lots of food, including pork, dried mackerel, veal, sugar, and "a box of raisins." She told her sister and brother-in-law that they all expected to begin their journey west in about two weeks.21

The Hascall-Pomeroy families left Nauvoo on 30 May with a "good wagon" at four o'clock in the afternoon. "[We] went down to the Mississippi River [and] found a boat to convey us across."

Ursulia wrote her sister's family on 19 September 1846 and described their departure with three yoke of oxen, and "with flour enough to last us one year, ham, sausages, dry fish, lard, . . . hundred pounds of sugar, sixteen of coffee, ten of raisins, rice with all the other items we wish to use in cooking."

Ursulia described the wagon as "long enough for both our beds made on the flour barrels, chest, and other things." She and her son slept at the back, and her sister, son-in-law, and granddaughter slept at the front, "if we camped too late to pitch our tent." The wagon was painted red. They attached a "hen coop on the end with four hens" in it. The canvas was painted also so that "the heaviest showers and storms do not beat through only a few drops now and then."

They camped the first night some three miles from the river. Before retiring they had a dinner which consisted of bread, milk, and a piece of pie. Within a few days they commenced their "journey in earnest." She continued, "It was not many days before we bid adieu to the last house we expected to see." They traveled for "hours and saw nothing but the wide expanse of heaven and the waving prairie grass, not a tree or a bush."22

In Nauvoo, Jane Snyder Richards prepared to leave her home on 10 June 1846. At the time of her departure she was nearly eight months pregnant. While on the road west, Jane was left with her sister-wife, Elizabeth McFae Richards, when their husband began his missionary journey to England.

Jane gave birth to a son, who died shortly after birth, a few days following her husband's departure. A midwife came to her assistance, and upon completion of her duties asked rather gruffly, "Are you prepared to pay me?" Jane responded, "If it were to save my life, I could not give you any money, for I have none; but if you see anything you want, take it." At this point the woman rummaged through the wagon and took a beautiful woolen bedspread, saying, "I may as well take it, for you'll never live to see it." The woman hurriedly left Jane with a dead baby at her side and went back to her position in the wagon company.

Jane's only child, a two-year-old daughter named Wealthy, was also ill and died shortly after their arrival at the Mormon staging ground. Elizabeth also was sick during the entire period and relied upon Jane to assist her. During all these afflictions Jane stated that she only lived because she could not die.23

Another sister Saint who remained in Nauvoo during the spring, Martha Haven, wrote to her mother in Sutton, Massachusetts, in July 1846, just as she was preparing to go west with her husband, Jesse. Abigail Hall, her mother, visited her briefly in Nauvoo. Martha's letter begins, "The joy of meeting and the pain of separating have passed, and I am again alone." She wrote from Nauvoo:

I have been anxious to hear from you, to know how you got home. I should have written long before this had I known where to have told you to direct your letters. We think soon of going to Farmington, Iowa. We shall probably stay there till fall; so direct your letters there till you hear to the contrary. My health has been growing poorer since you left. Have been to meeting but once since I went with you.

Her husband "talks of boxing our things ready for the wilderness." She reported to her mother, "We have sold our place for a trifle to a Baptist minister. All we got was a cow and two pairs of steers, worth about sixty dollars in trade." She continued, "I feel thankful that I have had the privilege of having a visit from my dear Mother. I can tell you I felt lonesome enough after I got home from the river the day you started."24

Sarah Leavitt and her family left Nauvoo, but soon her husband became ill. As Sarah and her daughters tried to comfort him, he began to sing, "Come, let us anew, our journey pursue, Roll around with the year, And never stand still till the Master appears." Sarah recalled that he "sang that hymn as long as he had strength to sing it and then wanted Elisa [one of his daughters] to sing it. He died without a struggle or a groan." A grave was prepared, and the family said good-bye as they turned their faces west. Sarah, taking command of the situation, noted, "A few days later we all started for the bluffs."25

Finally by the end of summer in 1846, several vigilante groups stepped up pressure on the remaining Saints in Nauvoo to force their exodus. The majority of Saints evacuated the city by fall 1846. Many were camped along the trail leading to Winter Quarters, where Brigham Young established a temporary Church headquarters. While many Saints made their way to the Indian lands of Nebraska, a few hundred Mormons remained in Nauvoo.

Several sister Saints remained in the city, including Joseph and Hyrum's sisters, Lucy Millikin, Sophronia McCleary, Catherine Salisbury, and their mother, Lucy Mack Smith. Emma also stayed behind. When mob violence increased, she left Nauvoo and traveled 120 miles to the north to Fulton City, where she stayed for five months before returning to the city. "I [have] no friend left but God and no place to go but home," she noted.26 Sarah Kimball remained behind with her husband, but several years later finally made the trek west to Salt Lake City.

Among those who still found themselves in the city were recent converts who had just arrived in Nauvoo and were now without funds to continue their trip west. Eventually, the anti-Mormons attacked them in what has become known as the Battle of Nauvoo, a week of skirmishes in which several Mormons were killed, including Captain William Anderson, his son Augustus, and David Norris.

After four days of fighting in the streets, the defenders surrendered. These Saints were then forced to cross the river to Montrose, where they were critically short of supplies and shelter. As many as seven hundred refugees were camped along the banks of the Mississippi River. Many had neither wagon nor tent to protect themselves from the elements. Food was scarce, and many starved or died from exposure during the next few days.

Jane Johnston recalled that as she approached the river to cross to Iowa during the speedy retreat, a mob surrounded her wagon and demanded that she give them any weapons she had in her possession. "I then had a pistol in my bosom," she said, "which I drew out and told them it was there, and that I would use it before I gave it up." The mob retreated, but threatened to return at night and throw her into the river.

Jane crossed the river with her family; her husband was in Canada at the time. Lacking provisions and shelter, Jane received a half bushel of corn meal and a half dozen cucumbers, borrowed a tent, and "had women that were being delivered of child put in it." She continued her story:

I was the mid-wife, and delivered nine babies that night. We had nothing to sweeten anything until the Lord sent honey dew, which we gathered from the bushes until we got all the sweets we wanted. I also boiled maple juice and got cakes of maple sugar.27

Widow Mary Field hurriedly packed her wagon and took her six children down to the main ferry. Her daughter recalled:

We hurried to pack some food, cooking utensils, clothing and bedding, which was afterward unpacked and strewn over the ground by the mob as they searched for fire-arms. A sympathetic member of the mob offered to carry mother's baby down to the ferry. Mother had some bread already in the kettles to bake. Of course she did not have time to bake, so she hung it on the reach of our wagon and cooked it after we crossed the Mississippi River.

Mary continued her story about the hasty exodus from Nauvoo following the Battle of Nauvoo:

The suffering and sadness of that camp I shall never forget. It is impossible to describe the cries of the hungry children, the sadness of others for the loss of their loved ones. What a terrible night of misery. We didn't even have a light, except a candle which flickered out in the wind and rain as it was carried from one place to another.28

When news of this situation reached Brigham Young, he sent supplies to relieve their suffering and to bring them to the main staging grounds at Winter Quarters. Twenty wagons, seventeen oxen, forty-one cows, and several volunteers arrived on 6 October.

On 9 October, before starting their movement westward, these Saints witnessed what to them was a miracle sent from God. Even as the Lord had fed the children of Israel in the wilderness with manna, a flock of quail landed in the Saints' camp. The birds were exhausted and easy to kill. These birds provided much needed nourishment for the camp.

A second rescue mission was sent from Winter Quarters, arriving in late October to assist those still remaining. The majority of those who wanted to go west were evacuated to Winter Quarters by November 1846.

Many sisters were unable to keep a daily record of their escape from Nauvoo, but later in Utah, they recalled their experiences and had them recorded in autobiographies or reminiscences. Mariah Pulsipher remembered,

We started west in the spring with an old wagon, one yoke of oxen, one cow, and all the things we could load in the wagon. We felt to rejoice that we escaped with our lives. We traveled on with a small company through mud and storm, stopping along the way as the men could find work.29

These sister Saints, along with their families, made their way across the river and into the wilderness of Iowa with at least one hope. "The universal desire [of the Mormons] seems to be to get away to a land of peace," reported an adept editor of the Illinois State Register to the people of the state that was unable to protect these citizens from their enemies.30
