Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, Women of Nauvoo ( 1992)

13 A Time to Remember — The Nauvoo Legacy

The society has done well-their principles are to practice holiness. . . . By seeing the blessings of the endowment rolling on and the kingdom increasing and spreading from sea to sea, we will rejoice.

-Joseph Smith

A crucial and unsung legacy of sister Saints in Nauvoo was the support system they supplied to their fathers, brothers, husbands, and sons; they helped make Nauvoo and its men successful. Men and women worked together on the necessities for immediate survival, but the women did almost all the domestic chores, freeing men to go hunting and fishing, plan political campaigns and run for office, or go on Church missions and attend priesthood quorum meetings.

The universal trials of frontier life-neverending work, sickness, poverty, and death-exacted a heavy price from the sister Saints gathered together on the banks of the Mississippi River. Nevertheless, their efforts, trials, and stories had a tremendous impact beyond Nauvoo. The social organizations in Utah, both formal and informal, took their forms from those developed in Nauvoo during the seven years of sojourn (1839-46).

Following the Saints' departure from their city in 1846 and during the next several decades, sister Saints participated in many causes in their new wilderness home in Utah. They brought with them a tradition of participation in the Church. The sister Saints in New York, Ohio, Missouri, Illinois, and Winter Quarters received personal revelations, prophesied, spoke in tongues, and performed various Spirit-directed activities in formal and informal settings.

These same sister Saints prayed and voted, along with their male family members, in Church meetings and elsewhere; in Nauvoo they participated in sacred temple ceremonies and ritual. The involvement of women in diverse enterprises in Nauvoo was quite remarkable for the time. The Relief Society, unlike many of the women's benevolent societies of the day, went beyond the responsibilities of taking care of the poor in Nauvoo and contributed in various practical ways to the community, including the building of the temple.

The Utah pioneer woman's activity in many spheres increased following the Civil War period as women found opportunities to channel their energy in improving the quality of life in the state and the nation. Zina Diantha Huntington Jacobs Young, for example, studied obstetrics and was a midwife in Utah.

Before 1850, most women in America continued to "adhere to an interpretation of evangelical womanhood which stressed invisible influence."1 The sisters in Nauvoo, on the other hand, were involved in administrative and spiritual service and leadership among the women of their communities as they administered their society and programs in Nauvoo and later in Utah.

The Nauvoo generation of sisters had a long-lasting effect upon the Church's women's organizations in Utah. The first five Relief Society presidents-Emma Smith, Eliza R. Snow, Zina Diantha Huntington Young, Bathsheba W. Smith, and Emmeline B. Wells-all participated or associated with the sisters who were members of the Nauvoo Female Relief Society.2 While each had their own distinctive administrative style, unique talents, and vision of the sisterhood, all were profoundly influenced by the Nauvoo experience, an experience that helped shape the sister Saints' experience during the next one hundred and fifty years.

There were other legacies of Latter-day Saint women who lived in the frontier of the Mississippi Valley from 1839-46. Joseph empowered the sisters in Nauvoo when he said, "I now turn the key to you in the name of God." They paved the way for social, political, economic, religious, and personal advancement, not just for the few Anglo-Saxon Mormon women gathered together in Nauvoo but for all women throughout the world from that time forward. A moral order was established that would call into question previously conceived ideas about the role and status of women, especially those clothed in religious language.3

The shackles of false traditions that disenfranchised women since the earliest time, except in those rare moments when people of God experienced Zion in all its characteristics, were now to be removed in dramatic ways.

The organization of the first Relief Society in Nauvoo preceded the convention of 1848 in Seneca Falls, New York, which has been generally identified as the beginning of the women's movement in America.

Women Church leaders noted this correlation on several occasions. Sarah G. Kimball wrote, "The sure foundations of the suffrage cause were deeply and permanently laid on the 17th of March 1842."4 Emmeline B. Wells noted that women's formal and informal participation in religious activities in Nauvoo initiated

one of the most important eras in the history of woman. It presented the great woman-question to the Latter-day Saints, previous to the woman's rights organizations, . . . not in any aggressive form as woman opposed to man, but as a co-worker and helpmeet in all that relates to the well-being and advancement of both, and mutual promoting of the best interests of the community at large.5

Initially a large area of responsibility for the sisters in Nauvoo was simply a formalization of labors commonly performed by women in the community and family circles. Mormon women provided for the poor, comforted the bereaved, and cared for the sick, all of which figure largely in their writings. Nevertheless, a seed was planted in Nauvoo and nurtured by the sisters following their exodus west that had profound theological and social ramifications.

The teachings and vision of the sisters in Nauvoo sparked strong feelings of the possibility of a new and brighter day for women. This was especially true in the "blessing meetings" at Winter Quarters and in Salt Lake City, which was a feature of the sisters' religious life in Kirtland, but expanded in Nauvoo. "Altho' thrust out from the land of our forefathers and from the endearments of civiliz'd life," wrote Eliza R. Snow in late spring 1847, "this is truly a glorious time with the mothers and daughters in Zion."6

The sisters were empowered in Nauvoo through the blessing received in their call to serve in the community.

Eventually, during the 1867 reinstitution of the Relief Society in the various units of the Church in Utah, additional activities beyond the traditional roles assigned to women were rapidly introduced. The sisters increased their roles in economic, political, and commercial activities. They built and owned Relief Society halls; ran cooperatives; raised silk; bought, stored, and sold grain; and collectively supported the medical education of women as doctors and nurses, eventually establishing their own Deseret Hospital in Salt Lake City.

One scholar of the women's movement noted recently:

One of the interesting anomalies of nineteenth-century women's history is the fact that one of its most vocal feminist groups comprised the Mormon women of Utah defending their territorial right to vote and their religious practice of polygyny, called "plural," or "patriarchal" marriage. Utah was the second territory in the United States to grant female suffrage. . . . Utah women were the first to vote in the country.7

Mormon women understood their positions, and when the women's rights controversy stormed during the late 1860s and early 1870s, Eliza R. Snow proclaimed that Mormon women in Utah enjoyed more "rights than any women in the world."8

Within two years of obtaining the franchise, the sisters in Utah established the Woman's Exponent, a newspaper owned, managed, supported, and produced by women for women. The Woman's Exponent, the second women's periodical in the trans-Mississippi West, provided jobs for the sisters in Utah as editors, business agents, and compositors, and served as an outlet for dozens of women who wanted to write poetry and prose. It carried the news of the day and discussed women's rights issues throughout the nation. Its masthead declared for "The Rights of Women of Zion, and the Rights of Women of All Nations."

The 1870s saw doors open wider for women in Utah.9 In 1872 Georgie Snow and Phoebe W. Couzins were admitted to the Utah bar, and within two years Elizabeth Stowe Higgs and Anna King were seated on the jury at a coroner's inquest, the first female jurors in the territory and the nation.10 By this time it was reported that Utah developed a "respectable class of professional and highly literate women," and another visitor marveled that "they close no career on a woman in Utah."11

Romania B. Pratt Penrose, the first Utah woman to earn her M.D., and Ellis Shipp, who in 1878 also became a medical doctor, helped prepare the way for the establishment of the Deseret Hospital in Salt Lake City. Susa Young Gates published another women's periodical, Young Woman's Journal, beginning in 1889.

Ironically, it was the violation of the traditional stereotype as housekeeper that apparently aroused a great deal of the antipolygamy criticism. It is certain that Mormon women were in "double jeopardy" as they attempted to hold fast to their beliefs on one hand while attempting to fulfill their vision of self-definition, often misunderstood and certainly misrepresented by many non-Mormons.12 When the sisters in Utah defended their religious practices, such as plural marriage, they challenged the contemporary view of dependent womanhood, urging a vision of more competent womanhood. An editorial in the Woman's Exponent stated: "We have left the petted slave in the Greek household, to go onward and forward. We have left the idle toy and the painted doll. . . . God lead us to find the true Woman in the free American home.13

In 1891, the women of the Church joined the National Council of Women, and within the year the Relief Society changed its name to the "National Women's Relief Society." When Utah was admitted as a state into the Union, women voted, and Dr. Martha Hughes Cannon was elected a state senator.

In 1898 the first full-time independently authorized single women missionaries were called, Amanda Inez Knight and Lucy Jane Brimhall. During the same year the Relief Society Nurse School was organized in Salt Lake City. On Susan B. Anthony's birthday, the sisters from Utah presented her a black dress made of Utah silk.

Another legacy from Nauvoo, manifested in Utah during the nineteenth century, was the establishment of a community of women, the presence of sisterhood, cooperation, and female bonding.

It is true that as in all aspects of Church organization, times have changed the nineteenth-century women's groups as they attempt to fulfill a mission in an ever-expanding Church with new challenges and focuses.14 One of the significant benefits of any study of history is the amazing realization that people and societies change, that life a short time ago was very different.

The diaries, letters, and other primary documents from Nauvoo deepen this realization. Nevertheless, while the form and function of the early Church women's organizations have been modified over time, the spiritual heritage of Nauvoo and early Utah still remain a vitalizing link among the Saints, especially those who seek their spiritual roots among the teachings of Joseph Smith and the lives and thoughts of the early sister Saints on the Illinois frontier along the banks of the Mississippi River.

In 1881, Sarah M. Kimball, an original member of the Relief Society and at the time its general secretary, prepared a time capsule to be opened in 1930, the one hundredth anniversary of the establishment of the Church. When opened, a message from her was found which stated:

Hon. Secretary: This is dedicated to you with the fond hope and firm belief that you are enjoying many advantages and blessings that were not enjoyed by your predecessors. May God abundantly bless you and your labors. (Signed) Sarah M. Kimball, Sec. Relief Society, Salt Lake City, April 1st, 1881.

This was the hope of sister Saints ever since Joseph had said that they would see "better days." Sarah M. Kimball hoped for the same thing when she prayed that the next generation of women would be "enjoying many advantages and blessings that were not enjoyed by [our] predecessors."15

Another participant in the Nauvoo experience, Elizabeth Ann Whitney, wrote in 1878:

The [1842] Relief Society was small in numbers, but the Prophet foretold great things concerning the future of this organization, many of which I have lived to see fulfilled; but there are many things which yet remain to be fulfilled in the future.16

Zina Diantha Huntington Young, Jane S. Richards, and Bathsheba W. Smith wrote to the sisters "throughout the world" a letter of greetings in preparation for celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the Relief Society. They said on that occasion:

It will be fifty years on Thursday, March 17, 1892, since Joseph Smith the Prophet organized the Relief Society in Nauvoo, Illinois, by divine inspiration. . . . This most momentous event for women, causes us to view with wonder the past, with gratitude the present, and with faith the future.17

While the legacy of the sister Saints in Nauvoo is to be remembered and celebrated, it was the future to which these sisters looked, a future in which "many things yet remain to be fulfilled" for the women of the Church and the world. As the Prophet Joseph Smith said, "The society has done well-their principles are to practice holiness. . . . By seeing the blessings of the endowment rolling on and the kingdom increasing and spreading from sea to sea, we will rejoice."18

During an early meeting of the sisters in Nauvoo, Lucy Mack Smith shared her vision of the sisterhood she expected to enjoy with them then and in the future, a vision that remains with the sister Saints today: "We must cherish one another, watch over one another, comfort one another, and gain instruction . . . that we may all sit down in heaven together."19
