(Scripture Reading Exercise.)

THE FACT OF THE ATONEMENT IN THE NEW TESTAMENT SCRIPTURES--(Continued).

ANALYSIS.

III. The Testimony to the fact of the Atonement (Continued).

5. The Book of Mormon as a Witness:

(a) The Testimony of the Christ to the Nephites.

(b) The Testimony of Christian Institutions.

(1) The Ordinance of Baptism.

(2) The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.

IV. Testimony of the New Dispensation Scriptures--Doctrine and
Covenants.

V. The Only Adequate Gospel Sermon--Jesus Christ.

REFERENCES.

References same as those in Lesson X, with the citations in the body of this Lesson, and the contexts of the texts, which should be fully considered.

SPECIAL TEXT: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God. * * * I have come into the world to bring redemption unto the world, to save the world from sin." (The Christ to the Nephites: III Nephi ix:15, 21.)

DISCUSSION.

1. The Testimony of the Book of Mormon to the Atonement: The third book of Nephi, in the Book of Mormon, may well be called the "Fifth Gospel,"[A] the beginning of the New Testament of the Nephite scriptures. In it is detailed the account of the Christ's visit to the western hemisphere and the circumstances attendant upon the establishment of his Church among the Nephites. The voice of God, which was heard after the great destruction which swept over the land during the entombment of the Christ, said:

    "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God. I created the heavens
    and the earth, and all things that in them are. I was with the
    Father from the beginning. I am in the Father, and the Father in
    me; and in me hath the Father glorified his name. I came unto my
    own, and my own received me not. And the scriptures concerning my
    coming are fulfilled. And as many as have received me, to them have
    I given to become the Sons of God; and even so will I to as many as
    shall believe on my name, for behold, by me redemption cometh, and
    in me is the law of Moses fulfilled. * * * For behold, I have come unto
    the world to bring redemption unto the world, to save the world
    from sin."[A]

2. The Testimony of the Resurrected Christ: Then again, upon his appearing among the Nephites after his resurrection and his post-resurrection ministry in Palestine, the Christ said:

    "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified should come
    into the world: and behold, I am the light and the life of the
    world; and I have drunk out of that bitter cup which the Father
    hath given me, and have glorified the Father in taking upon me the
    sins of the world, in the which I have suffered the will of the
    Father in all things from the beginning. * * * And it came to pass
    that the Lord spake unto them saying: Arise and come forth unto
    me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye
    may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that
    ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole
    earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world."[A]

3. Evidence of the Atonement in the Symbol of Baptism: Convincing as testimony to the fact of the Atonement is the Christian institution of baptism, the formula of which is given in the Book of Mormon. In it is shown the authority of the Christ in this ordinance of salvation, since in addition to the Holy Trinity being named as authorizing the ordinance, the administrator specifically declares that he has authority from Jesus Christ for performing it. The ordinance itself, providing as it does for the immersion of the candidate, symbolizes the Christ's death and burial for the sinner; and also in bringing forth the baptized from the watery grave, symbolizes the resurrection--all which is done that forgiveness of sin might be granted to those who thus palpably manifest that they do most solemnly accept the Atonement of the Christ of which his baptism is a most beautiful symbol--of his death, burial and resurrection.[A]

4. Evidence of the Atonement in the Symbol of the Lord's Supper: The Christ also established the sacrament of the Lord's Supper among the Nephites and constituted it the symbol of the Atonement. After breaking bread and blessing it, he gave it to his Nephite disciples and said: "This shall ye do in remembrance of my body, which I have shown unto you, and it shall be a testimony unto the Father that ye do always remember me, and if you do always remember me, ye shall have my spirit to be with you."[A] So also with the wine which he blessed and gave them to drink, adding, "Ye shall do it in remembrance of my blood, which I have shed for you, that you may witness unto the Father that ye do always remember me."[B]

What may be called the "New Testament"[A] part of the Book of Mormon, then, no less than the New Testament of the Bible testifies to the fact of the Atonement. The same may be said of the immediate scriptures of the New Dispensation, the Doctrine and Covenants.

6. Testimony of the New Dispensation Scriptures--Doctrine and Covenants: In a revelation to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, given in June, 1829, the Lord said: "Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God: For behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore he suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him. And he hath risen again from the dead, that he might bring all men unto him, on conditions of repentance."[A]

Again, in a revelation to Martin Harris, given through Joseph the Prophet, in March, 1830, the Lord said: "Therefore I command you to repent--repent, lest I smite you by the rod of my mouth, and by my wrath, and by my anger, and your sufferings be sore--how sore you know not! how exquisite you know not! yea, how hard to bear you know not! For behold, I, God, have suffered these things for all that they might not suffer if they would repent, but if they would not repent, they must suffer even as I. Which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit: and would that I might not drink the bitter cup and shrink--Nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished my preparations unto the children of men."[A]

The declaration that Jesus Christ made an atonement for man is frequently repeated as follows:

    "I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who was crucified for the sins
    of the world, even as many as will believe on my name, that they
    may become the sons of God, even one in me as I am in the Father,
    as the Father is one in me, that we may be one."[A]

    "I am Christ, and in mine own name, by the virtue of the blood
    which I have spilt, have I pleaded before the Father for them; but
    behold, the residue of the wicked have I kept in chains of darkness
    until the judgment of the great day; which shall come at the end of
    the earth."[B]

Again:

    "Listen to him who is the Advocate with the Father, who is pleading
    your cause before him, saying, Father, behold the sufferings and
    death of him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold
    the blood of thy Son which was shed--the blood of him whom thou
    gavest that thyself might be glorified; wherefore, Father, spare
    these my brethren that believe on my name, that they may come unto
    me and have everlasting life."[A]

7. The One Adequate Gospel Discourse (Brigham Young): Perhaps this branch of our treatise--the fact of the atonement--cannot be more fittingly closed than by quoting a passage from one of the discourses of Brigham Young, setting forth the impossibility of a man adequately preaching a gospel discourse in this our mortal life; and holding that Christ alone, in his creative work under the Fathers direction, in his earth-life, death, resurrection, and the final presentation of the finished work to his Father--this alone is the adequate gospel sermon:

    "There is but one discourse to be preached to all the children of
    Adam; and that discourse should be believed by them, and lived up
    to. To commence, continue, and finish this gospel sermon, will
    require all the time that is alloted to man, to the earth, and
    all things upon it, in their mortal state; that is my idea with
    regard to preaching. No man is able to set before a congregation
    all the items of the gospel, in this life, and continue these
    items to their termination, for this mortal life is too short.
    It is inseparably connected, one part with the other, in all the
    doctrines that have been revealed to man, which are now called the
    various doctrines of Christianity, of which all the professors of
    religion believe a portion; but severally reject, or desire to
    reject, other portions of the truth: each sect or individual taking
    to themselves portions of the Bible, portions of the doctrine of
    salvation, that are the most pleasing to them, rejecting all the
    rest, and mingling these doctrines with the tenets of men.

    "But let a gospel sermon be preached, wherein all the principles
    of salvation are embodied, and we will acknowledge, at the end of
    the mortality of this earth, and all things created upon it--at
    the closing up scene, at the final consummation of all things that
    have been from the commencement of the creation of the world, and
    the peopling of it, unto the latest generation of Adam and Eve,
    and the final finishing up of the work of Christ--I say, we shall
    acknowledge that there is the gospel sermon, and that it could not
    be preached to finite beings in one short life.

    "Christ is the author of this gospel, of this earth, of men and
    women, of all the posterity of Adam and Eve, and of every living
    creature that lives upon the face of the earth, that flies in the
    heavens, that swims in the waters, or dwells in the field. Christ
    is the author of salvation to all this creation; to all things
    pertaining to this terrestrial globe we occupy.

    "He has redeemed the earth; he has redeemed mankind and every
    living thing that moves upon it; and he will finish his gospel
    discourse when he overcomes his enemies and puts his last enemy
    under his feet--when he destroys death, and him that hath the power
    of it--when he has raised up this kingdom, and finished his work
    which the Father gave him to do, and presents it to his Father,
    saying, 'I have done the work, I have finished it; I have not only
    created the world, but I have redeemed it; I have watched over it,
    and I have given to those intelligent beings, that you have created
    by me, their agency, and it has been held with perfection to
    every creature of intelligence, to every grade of mankind; I have
    preserved inviolate their agency; I have watched over them, and
    overruled all their actions, and held in my hand the destinies of
    men; and I have finished up my gospel sermon,' as he presents the
    finished work to his Father.

    "It takes just such a character as the Savior, to preach one gospel
    discourse; and this was commenced with the commencement of all men
    upon this earth or any other; and it will never close until the
    winding up scene, and all is finished, and the kingdom is presented
    to the Father."[A]
