Author and Dates: The book of Joshua is named for its leading character. The book's author, however, is not explicitly mentioned. A number of features point to a date of origin in the late second millennium B.C.

Purpose: To teach Israel how to live in the land that God has given them.

Outline:

I. The promised land conquered (1-12)

-Jericho taken and cursed. Rahab spared (6)

II. The promised land distributed (13-22)

III. The promised land to be kept in covenant obedience (23-24)

Major Characters: God, Joshua

Book Summary: The book of Joshua shows that the Lord did fulfill his promises to Abraham (Gen. 13:15) and Moses (Ex. 3:8) in giving Israel the Promised Land. Thus, this book is a lesson on the faithfulness of God and his promises (cf. 21:43-45; 23:14). At the same time, the book of Joshua sets the stage for the beginning of a new era in God’s dealing with his people—namely, the history of Israel’s failure to trust God and live up to their covenant obligations as his people (cf. 23:15-16). This had been characteristic of Israel in the past as recorded in the Pentateuch and this characterizes the historical books that follow.

Themes:

The partial conquest, distribution, and settlement of the promised land.

The dangers of idolatry.

Israel’s need for continuing covenant faithfulness to the one true God.

JUDGES

Author and Dates: The earliest the book of Judges could have been written is after the monarchy of Israel was established (1020 B.C.). However, it could have been written as late as the exile (586 – 538 B.C.). The book's author is not explicitly mentioned.

Purpose: To support the monarchy and give reasons why they needed a king (a king described in Deut 17). To inspire God’s people to resist their selfish impulses and trust God as their need for a king becomes apparent.

Outline:

I. Faltering conquest (1:1-2:5)

-Joshua’s victory was only partial (Josh. 15:63, 16:10, 17:13, 24:16-20)

-The conquest was incomplete and idolatry increased (Judges 2:12,14)

II. Cycles under the rule of “the Judges” (2:6-16:31)

-cycle of oppression, retribution, mercy, deliverance, sin…. -Samson (13-16)

III. Anarchy was rampant under Levites: religious and moral disorder (17-21). Major Characters: God, Angel of the Lord, Othniel, Ehud, Deborah, Gideon, Abimelech, Jepthah, Samson, and Levites

Book Summary: The book of Judges is a fascinating collection of stories containing humor, tragedy, and irony. Following the successful endeavors of Joshua, the next generations are faced with the challenge of continuing the acquisition of the Promised Land. But in contrast to the faithfulness that marked Joshua’s generation, the present Israelites proved far more fickle. Several narratives are strung together with a rich diversity of characters.

Each story is comical and tragic. Despite God’s abiding presence and faithfulness, the Israelites choose to abandon God’s ways and seek their own desires. Each narrative records the great consequences of their actions and their plea to God for help. Revealing their folly and faithlessness, God continually rescued Israel from their self-afflicted plight.

Two central lessons are found in the book of Judges: First, the welfare of the nation depended directly on a knowledge of God’s will, the Torah; Second, God would punish his people for their unfaithfulness to his covenant.

Themes:

The Nature of Humanity - humanity is capable of great goodness as well as the greatest shame

The Abiding Presence of God - God is always with his people, despite the appearance of his absence

Consequences - Acts of infidelity do render consequences despite God’s grace and forgiveness

God’s Constant Rescue of his people.

RUTH

Author and Dates: The book of Ruth records events during the time of the Judges (pre-1020). It was probably written either at an early or late stage in David’s reign. The book supported David against those who insinuated that David was not a fully loyal and qualified Israelite king because of his foreign ancestry.

Purpose: Through a wonderful story of redemption, the book of Ruth served to establish the legitimacy of David’s kingship despite his foreign ancestress.

Outline:

I. Naomi’s Bitterness (1)

II. Ruth Discovers Potential Redeemer (2)

III. Boaz agrees to be Redeemer (3)

IV. Boaz Acquires Right to be Redeemer (4:1-12)

V. Naomi’s Blessing (4:13-17)

VI. Ruth's Genealogy (4:18-21)

Major Characters: Naomi, Ruth, and Boaz

Book Summary: The book of Ruth is a story of romance, redemption, and loyalty. The story begins with the character Naomi who has lost her husband and two sons, leaving her destitute in a foreign land. The suffering is overwhelming as she turns bitter and angry against God. Nevertheless, Ruth the Moabitess, her daughter in-law, forgoes the safety and provision of her own extended family and pledges her allegiance to Naomi. As they struggle to survive, Ruth is discovered by Boaz, a relative of Naomi, who falls in love with Ruth. Boaz acquires the right to become her husband and delivers Ruth and Naomi from their plight. The book concludes with a genealogy that demonstrates that King David, and eventually Jesus, descends from the foreigner Ruth.

The book of Ruth tells the story of God’s faithfulness to his people in a specific case, as a Moabite woman becomes part of his story of redemption.

Themes:

Loyalty – The power of loyalty in relationships is dramatically portrayed.

Redemption – The salvation and deliverance of individuals who cannot save themselves.

Providence – God’s direction of people’s lives despite the difficult times.

Transformation – From bitterness and disappointment to faith and contentment

1 & 2 SAMUEL

Author and Dates: Samuel records events that took place sometime between 1100 B.C. and 970 B.C. The final form of the book did not take shape until after Solomon’s reign 940 BC and could have undergone revision as late as the exile (586 B.C.).

Purpose: To teach Israel that they should hope in the Davidic line, despite the trouble caused by David’s shortcomings. To instruct the readers to trust in God’s anointed leaders, despite apparent shortcomings, as they develop their own heart for God.

Outline:

I. The role of Samuel: Foundation of the Kingdom (1 Sam 1-1 Sam 7) II. The Failures of Saul’s Kingdom (1 Sam 8-1 Sam 15)

III. David’s kingdom (1 Sam 16- 2 Sam 20)

-David’s ascent to the throne (1 Sam 17- 2 Sam 4)

-David’s kingship and its glory and accomplishments (2 Sam 5-9) -David’s kingship and its weakness and failure (2 Sam 10-20)

IV. Future of the Kingdom (2 Sam 21- 2 Sam 24)

-final reflections on David’s reign

Major Characters: Samuel, Saul, David, Jonathon, Bathsheba, Joab, Absalom, and Nathan

Book Summary: The book of Samuel tells the story of Israel’s transition from Judges’ rule to kingship. Samuel, the great prophet, plays a key role as God’s messenger and leader. Samuel anoints Saul as the first king of Israel but his life is characterized by fear and failure. The need for a king "after God’s own heart" becomes apparent and is eventually satisfied by David.

The book provides the most comprehensive account of David’s life, both his victories and struggles, politically as well as personally. David’s trust and reliance upon God define his rise to the throne. However his sin complicates his reign as difficulties are experienced in his relationships that threaten to undo him. The book calls for a complete trust in David as well as his royal line, a call that comes directly from God as he promised to deliver His people through such a figure. But it also warns of the conflict, pain, and loss that follows sin and disobedience.

The book of Samuel takes God’s story into the monarchy, especially by means of the story of King David, a man of faith even while a man of weakness. God’s covenant with David is fulfilled finally in the ultimate Son of David, Jesus of Nazareth.

Themes:

Kingship - God’s People are to be led by a king.

Loyalty - Trusting the Davidic line.

Retribution - Blessings and curses for acts of obedience and disobedience.

God’s Presence - God dwelling among his people – the Ark of the Covenant, Jerusalem, with his

people.

1 & 2 KINGS

Author and Dates: 1 & 2 Kings describe the period of the monarchy in ancient Israel (970–586 B.C.). While the books do not specify an author, they could not have been written before the sixth century b.c., since 2 Kings 25:27–30 describes the release of King Jehoiachin from prison in Babylon in 561 and the books must therefore date from some time after that.

Purpose: The nation deserved the exile, but restoration was possible through full repentance.

Outline:

I. Failure and hope in Solomon years (1 Kings 1-12)

II. Failure and hope in the Divided years (1 Kings 12- 2 Kings 17)

-Jeroboam and Rehoboam- northern kingdom (“Israel”) and southern

kingdom (“Judah”)

-Israel is exiled (2 Kings 8- 2 Kings 17)

III. Failure and Hope in Judah’s final years (2 Kings 18-25)

-Babylonian exile of Judah

Book Summary: The book of 1 & 2 Kings describes God’s faithfulness to his people despite their sin. Despite ending with the judgment of exile, there was still hope in God’s promises at the end of 2 Kings. God had made an eternal promise to David (2 Sam. 7:16) and at the close of the book the writer notes that the house of David was not only still intact but even flourishing in the house of the king of Babylon (2 Kings 25:28). This is meant to encourage God’s people to be hopeful and trust that God will ultimately fulfill all his promises.

Themes:

The decline and eventual dissolution of the monarchy in Israel

The fateful national consequences of Israel’s disloyalty to God

The role of the prophets in speaking for God’s to his people

The expulsion of God’s people from the land
