PROVERBS

Author and Purpose: To teach importance of wisdom. To give “prudence to the simple, and knowledge and discretion to the young” (Prov 1:4), and to make the wise person wiser (Prov 1:5). These collections of proverbs originating with Solomon, and various wise men, were gathered and arranged for later generations by someone otherwise unknown.

Outline:

I. Preamble: purpose and theme (1:1-7)

II. Superiority of the Way of Wisdom (1:8- 9:18)

III. Proverbs of Solomon (10-22)

IV. Saying of the Wise (22-24)

V. More proverbs from Solomon (25-29)

VI. The words of Agur and Lemuel (30-31)

VII. Poem to the virtuous woman (31)

Book Summary: The book of Proverbs is made up of six collections of proverbs, that is, wisdom sayings on how to live wisely in the world. The book provides practical guidance to help God’s people follow in the ways of the Lord and to live fruitful and beneficial lives.

Theme:

The key theme of Proverbs is described at the book's beginning (1:1–7). The book is supposed to

instill wisdom in God’s people. Wisdom is rooted in the fear of the Lord and it works itself out in

covenant life in the everyday situation and relationships.

ECCLESIASTES

Author and Dates: The early-daters place the book around 930 B.C. because they believe it to be written by Solomon. However, its language and topics make it more likely that it was written to Israelites living under the rule of Persia somewhere in the 400s or 300s B.C.

Purpose: To teach that the life lived by purely earthly and human standards is futile, but the God-centered life is the cure. Life not centered on God is meaningless and purposeless. Without God, nothing else can satisfy (Eccl 2:25). With God, all of life and God’s gifts are to be gratefully received and enjoyed to the fullest (Eccl 2:26 and 11:8). Ecclesiastes takes a solemn look at the unpredictability of the world and the frustration that it can cause in our lives. The author concludes that a life devoted to God is the only meaningful and enjoyable existence humanity can have.

Outline:

12:7)….themes are wisdom, pleasure, folly, enjoyment, time, justice, human effort, religious words, wealth, life-span, death, piety, women, kings, and memory. -Solomon’s Quest for Meaning in Life (1:12-2:26)

-Further Quest for Meaning in Life (3:1-6:12)

-Advice on Meaning in Life (7:1-11:10)

-Advice on Death and Dying (12:1-12:7)

Major Characters: Qohelet ("The Teacher" or "The Preacher") -- the author of the book.

Book Summary: The outlook of "The Teacher" is critical and even somewhat cynical at times. His perspective and his advice do not seem to square with the more optimistic book of Proverbs, and his utterly pragmatic approach to life can seem to some readers as almost faithless. However, Ecclesiastes simply takes a very honest look at the way the world operates, observing that God's promises and God's wisdom do not always come to pass in the ways we expect. Just like the Teacher, we know that the wicked often prosper, the righteous often suffer, the wise man and the fool alike die.

We also agree that nothing -- whether it be riches or power or fame or success or entertainment -- nothing which the world offers can ultimately satisfy us. In light of all this evidence, it is a testimony to the Teacher's faith that he never once questions God's goodness, power, or wisdom. Rather, he wants to know what difference our decisions could possibly make in the seemingly chaotic universe. He attempts to answer the ultimate question -- what is the meaning of life -- and concludes that only a life with God has any value or purpose. For the Israelites living in a tempting, thriving, strange Persian culture, this book is a startling reminder that there is only one pursuit that is worthwhile.

Theme:

Meaninglessness: Everything in the world, in and of itself, is worthless and empty.

Death is the one and only certainty in life. When done for oneself, work is toil that wastes life away.

When done for God it can be a fulfilling act of worship. When sought after as a goal pleasure is

elusive, and never satisfies. But enjoyment is a by-product of a life dedicated to God. Regarding

wisdom: even a prudent, examined life sometimes yields pain rather than pleasure, and poverty

rather than riches. It is not a magical formula that brings happiness and fulfillment. True wisdom

includes understanding that the curse of sin brings frustration to the whole creation (Romans 8:20).

The book of Ecclesiastes fits into the biblical story as a constant reminder of the brevity of human

life in light of eternity.

SONG OF SONGS

Author and Dates: The Song of Solomon is almost impossible to date with any precision or assurance. The fact that it mentions Solomon (3:6-11; 8:10-12) assures us that it could not be written before his kingship, around 930 B.C. We know that Solomon's reign was characterized by renewed interest in wisdom and the arts, so it is plausible that it was written at that time. The latter section speaks of Solomon in the past tense, however, so it may well have been written some time later.

Purpose: To put sexuality in the context of pure love and not the extremes of sensuous lust or asceticism. To put sexuality in the context of the covenant of marriage. The Song of Songs is a poem that explores the composition of true love, and beautifully illustrates the virtues of healthy sexual relationships.

Outline:

I. Anticipation (1:1-2:7)

II. Found, and Lost (2:8-3:5)

III. Consummation (3:6-5:1)

-Wedding processional (3:6-3:11)

-Passionate expressions of love (4:1-5:1)

IV. Lost, and Found: Conflict and resolution (5:2-6:13)

V. More expressions of love (7:1-8:4)

VI. Affirmation (8:5-8:14)

Major Characters: The Lover, the Shunnamite Woman (the Beloved), the Daughters of Jerusalem (their friends).

Book Summary: This poem describes, in vivid and erotic metaphors, the pursuit and enjoyment of love between a man and a woman. At certain times in the Church's history the material was actually considered inappropriate for pious souls, and therefore was read as one grand metaphor of the love God has for His people. While this is certainly an application we can make from the book, there is no denying that the physical relationship between a man and a woman is at the heart of this magnificent piece of poetry, and that sexuality is an essential component of God's intentions for humanity. In this book we receive a picture of the context in which sexual love is to be enjoyed to the glory of God, its creator.

Themes:

Love: It is more than, but certainly not less than, physical. It is based on honor and intimacy, and

should indeed be a representation of the love God has for us (Eph. 5:22-23).

The Garden: The picture painted in the Song resembles the pristine purity and shamelessness of

Eden.

The Senses: The Song describes the intimacy between the Lover and the Beloved with every sensory

faculty man possesses: sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and touch.

ISAIAH

Author and Dates: Isaiah the prophet’s ministry was from about 740 to 687 B.C.

Purpose: Judah should gain hope from Isaiah’s ministry during the Assyrian crisis that Israel will be restored after the Babylonian captivity.

Outline:

I. Overview of Isaiah’s ministry (1-6)

-God has (with Assyria) and will (with Babylon) punish Judah, but there is hope for restoration

-Judah should expect judgment and eventual restoration as Isaiah predicted for Judah.

II. Isaiah’s response to Assyrian Crisis (7-39)

-Isaiah is saying “My prophecies about an Assyrian invasion came true. My threat of a Babylonian exile will also come true.”

-Judah should learn that Isaiah’s prophecies concerning Assyrian have come true and that the Babylonian threat is real.

III. Isaiah’s response to Babylonian crisis (40-66)

-Babylon will destroy Judah, but God’s people will be restored. There will be release from captivity.

-Judah should take heart that the Babylonian crisis will end with restoration

Book summary: The book of Isaiah describes God’s sovereign majesty and redemptive love for his people. The book of Isaiah looks forward to Israel’s judgment, to her redemption from exile through a second exodus, and, through her coming Servant King, to the fulfillment of the Abrahamic covenant that includes the nations in God’s salvation. The book ends with a picture of the final redemption of Israel and the nations in a new heaven and new earth, where God and his people meet in glory.

Themes:

God’s holiness opposes all human hypocrisy and pride (1:10–17; 2:10–17; 10:33–34; 13:11; 16:6; 23:9; 28:1–4; 58:1–12; 66:1–4).

God’s wrath is to be feared (5:25; 9:12, 17, 19, 21; 10:4–6; 13:9, 13; 30:27; 34:2; 59:18; 63:1–6; 66:15–16, 24)

God’s judgment will ultimately end with a joyful triumph of his grace (1:9; 6:1–12:6; 35:1–10; 40:1–2; 49:13–16; 51:3; 54:7–8; 55:12–13)

God’s servant is the only hope for the world. He is the promised Davidic king (4:2; 7:14; 9:2–7; 11:1–10), the servant of the Lord (42:1–9; 49:1–13; 50:4–9; 52:13–53:12), the anointed preacher of the gospel (61:1–3), and the lone conqueror over all evil (63:1–6).

God's faithfulness ought to motivate God’s people toward faith and obedience (56:1–2; 62:1– 64:12).

JEREMIAH

Author and Dates: Jeremiah ministered during the fall of Assyria and rise of Babylon, which places his ministry in the several years surrounding 600 B.C.

Purpose: Jeremiah was written to warn God's people of the danger of placing trust in anything other than Him, but also to comfort God's people that God will not abandon them no matter how far they have strayed.

Outline:

I. Oracles Concerning Judah (Jeremiah 1-25)

II. Biographical Narrative #1 (Jeremiah 26-29)

III. Book of Comfort (Jeremiah 30-33)

IV. Biographical Narrative #2 (Jeremiah 34-45)

V. Oracles Concerning Foreign Nations (Jeremiah 46-51)

Major Characters: God, Jeremiah, Baruch the Scribe, King Josiah, and King Jehoiakin.

Book Summary: Jeremiah was called to minister to the last surviving tribe of Israel, Judah, in a time of political and spiritual decay. He was born during an age of blessing and restoration as King Josiah reinstituted God's law in the land and freed them from the oppression of Assyria, but succeeding kings forsook God's law, presumed upon God's mercy, and suffered under the heavy hand of Babylon. Jeremiah exhorted God's people to repent of their dependence upon alliances with foreign countries and to renew their faith in the God who promised to defend and prosper them.

When those warnings fell on deaf ears, he warned of the destruction that would certainly fall upon Judah as a consequence of their disobedience, but reminded them that God would not abandon them forever. Even when the capital city of Jerusalem fell to the Babylonians, Jeremiah preached hope that God would indeed restore Israel to its former glory.

In the same way, Christians face some menacing obstacles and suffer through seasons of faithlessness. Despite the disappointment, pain, and destruction our sin may yield, we know through Jeremiah's ministry that God does not abandon His people but rather promises to restore us when we return to Him. In the midst of Jeremiah's preaching, he also recounts in detail some of the significant events in his own life, particularly the persecution that he suffered because of his unwelcome message. In this book we have a vivid depiction of the life of a reluctant but faithful prophet in a dark season of Israel's history. Moreover, we have a fellow minister that we can relate to and learn from as we are called to preach a sometimes unpopular message to a stubborn people.

Themes:

Sovereignty: Jeremiah stresses God's ultimate control over the chaotic world events occurring in his

day.

God's Word: Jeremiah was not a bold orator, but God promised to give him His words to say. Judah

was overconfident in their standing before God and forgot that they were called to listen intently to

His word delivered through His prophets.

Sin: Jeremiah is called the weeping prophet, and spends much of his ministry lamenting Judah's

continuing sin.

Holiness: The reason why Judah's sinfulness disturbed Jeremiah so deeply was because He had a

profound sense of God's holiness, his perfection in righteousness, justice, and mercy.

Covenant: Jeremiah uses many different images for Judah to illustrate that she is in an intimate

relationship with God: His bride, His vineyard, His flock, and His inheritance.

The Un-Moses: Jeremiah, like Moses, was called by God but hesitated because of his lack of oratory

skill. Moses was called to intercede for his people through prayer and save them from judgment;

Jeremiah was commanded to stop interceding for his people because judgment was imminent. Moses

left Egypt, but at the end of Jeremiah's life he returned to Egypt. This displays Israel's failure to

reach their full destiny as the people of God.

Hope: Even when facing the direst circumstances, Jeremiah asserted God's faithfulness and

encouraged Judah to hope for a bright future.
