Author and Dates: Although many of the OT books are hard to date, the book of Ezekiel contains many references to kings and world events so that we can know with some precision when He ministered. Ezekiel probably grew up listening to the prophecies of Jeremiah, and began his own ministry in the middle of the deportation of Israelites to Babylon, around 593 BC. For the next 20 years he continued to minister to these fellow exiles, until approximately 570 BC. He died without seeing Israel's restoration.

Purpose: Since Ezekiel’s judgment prophecies concerning Judah and the nations have taken place, therefore Judah should maintain hope in Ezekiel’s restoration prophecies and priestly reconstruction program. Through his ministry to Israel in dark times, Ezekiel encourages us to remember that God will never abandon His people even though it sometimes seems that He has. He will certainly keep His promises to bless those who trust in Him no matter how imperfectly we serve Him.

However, he also reminds us that there is no one but ourselves to blame for our dreary circumstances, and brings conviction to our self-righteous and indignant souls. He calls us to quit playing the blame game, admit our own guilt before God, and renew our trust and dedication to Him so that we can hope in Him with a clear conscience.

Outline:

I. Judgment against Judah (1-24)

-The judgments against Judah have come true (ie., Jerusalem fell as Ezekiel predicted)

II. Judgment against nations (25-32)

-The judgments against the nations have come true (ie., The nations feel as Ezekiel predicted)

III. Future Blessing for Judah: Restoration and reconstruction (33-48)

-Judah will be restored as Ezekiel predicted

Major Characters: Ezekiel and God.

Book Summary: The glorious capital of Jerusalem, the only remaining Israelite city, has fallen to the Babylonian armies. The richest, most prominent, most intelligent, and most powerful in Jerusalem are taken as slaves to serve in Babylon, and the peasants are left to eke out an existence in the devastated ruins. Ezekiel was one of those deported to Babylon, and God called him to be a "watchman" for His people there, keeping them informed of God's movements and intentions, explaining to them the reasons for their plight, and renewing their hope in God's promises in spite of them.

Ezekiel does so, but in some very unorthodox ways. He often speaks in fables and allegories. He has extraordinary visions and dreams. He falls into trances, loses his ability to speak for a time, and engages in other strange behaviors such as tying himself to the ground for many days, shaving his head and burning the hair, cooking his food over human dung, just to name a few. Psychologists have diagnosed Ezekiel as schizophrenic, epileptic, catatonic, psychotic, narcissistic, masochistic, and paranoid. However, Ezekiel was not mentally deranged, just radically committed to communicating the seriousness of God's message so that Israel (and we) would pay special attention.

The book of Ezekiel tells of the final failure of God’s people as constituted by the first covenants, and looks forward to their being reconstituted by a new covenant that includes a true Shepherd and the gift of the Holy Spirit.

Themes:

God's Faithfulness and Mercy: Even after Israel's Promised Land had been taken, their freedom

revoked, and the displeasure of their God communicated, Ezekiel encouraged Israel to hope in God's

mercy, and faithfulness to His promises. He foresaw restoration because He knew God would never

abandon his people.

Repentance: However, God had allowed circumstances to get this bad in order to express His

peoples' need to repent.

God’s Wisdom: Ezekiel's experience of God seems to many modern readers as bizarre and fanciful.

His life reminds us that the life of faith requires eyes that see beyond the physical realm, and that

God's wisdom is above our wisdom. He often uses the foolish things of the world to shame the wise,

and sometimes calls us to use extreme and unpopular measures in order to communicate His gospel

to the world.

DANIEL

Author and Dates: Daniel lived and ministered to the exiles during the period of Israel's captivity under Babylon, sometime between 586 and 538 BC.

Purpose: Those outside the land should learn from Daniel’s life how to remain devoted and have influence as they hope for the full restoration of Israel. The book of Daniel teaches us how to live a life faithful to God even when we are surrounded by a pagan culture.

Outline:

I. Stories of Daniel: Modeling behavior in captivity (1)

II. Stories and Visions of Babylon’s Future (2-7)

II. Visions of Israel’s Future Destiny (8-12)

-What has happened to restoration program?

-What is ahead for Israel?

Major Characters: Daniel (Belteshazzar), Hananiah (Shadrach), Mishael (Meshech), Azariah (Abednego), King Nebuchadnezzar, King Belshazzar, and King Darius

Book Summary: The first half of the book of Daniel contains historical accounts of Daniel's life. It begins with the story of Daniel's own capture and deportation to Babylon, and his courage to live a holy life in the midst of their pagan rituals. His superior way of life earns him great respect in the Babylonian government. God, having blessed him with this position of honor and influence, gave him many visions which enabled him to help King Nebuchadnezzar know the future and rule more effectively. The book goes on to describe the arrogance and godlessness of Babylon's kings, who attempt to kill Daniel's friends Shadrach, Mechech, and Abednego in a furnace for worshiping their God rather than themselves. God, however, spares their lives.

Daniel is given visions to warn the King that God's judgment was coming upon him. They, however, do not repent and Babylon falls to the Medes. Darius, King of the Medes, instituted a policy where all Babylonians were required to pray to him and him only. Daniel refused to break the first commandment of Moses, and was thrown to the lions, but God preserved his life as well. The last half of the book is full of visions which predict the downfall of the Medes to the Persians, the Persians to the Greeks, and the Greeks to the Romans. They predict that only at that time will God fully restore them (the time of Jesus -- Coincidence? I think not). Daniel is a book full of courageous acts and fantastic visions that show Christians how to live in a non-Christian environment. It encourages us to hold on to our beliefs and act them out in spite of the customs of our society. It comforts us that our hope in Christ's salvation and is sure, but that our faith must endure awhile longer.

Themes:

Wisdom: It has often been suggested that Daniel is, in a sense, a wisdom book, since it so often

teaches and displays how a wise man's lifestyle brings blessing upon him.

Good vs. Evil: Daniel paints the history of the world as a battle between two Kingdoms -- the

Kingdom of God (envisioned as God's throne room) vs. The Kingdom of Man (envisioned as a

beast) -- see Daniel 7. Daniel also asserts in no uncertain terms that the Kingdom of God will have

victory over the Kingdom of man.

Patience: Israel would have liked Daniel to tell them that their freedom was around the corner, but he

predicted a succession of Kingdoms before Israel's deliverance would occur. Likewise, our hope of

salvation and blessing are sure, but not necessarily imminent.

HOSEA

Author and Dates: Hosea ministered during the early years after Israel became a divided kingdom, with Jeroboam II ruling in the North and Uzziah (and later Hezekiah) ruling in the South. This dates his ministry somewhere around 750-700 BC.

Purpose: Judah may receive God’s judgment as Israel did, but Judah should still never lose hope of full restoration of God’s people. To illustrate God's unfailing love to his people even in the midst of their faithlessness.

Outline:

-Judah should learn, from Hosea’s experience, God’s justice against infidelity. But they should have hope in God’s tender love.

-Israel’s Unfaithfulness (4:1-6:3) God executed justice just like God warned against Israel. But there is hope for restoration.

-Israel’s Punishment: Prophetic Historical Reflections (6:4-10:15) Judah should learn by comparison with Israel’s past how severely God judges, but also how God loves.

-Judah should contemplate how Israel’s experience warns and encourages them to be faithful.

Book Summary: Hosea ministered to the Northern Kingdom of Israel during a time when a long season of prosperity and peace was coming to an end. Jeroboam II was succeeded by a number of short-lived and inept rulers, and foreign nations were beginning to encroach on Israel's freedom. Rather than depending on God, they sought out alliances with pagan kings to provide themselves with safety and security, and Hosea speaks out against their hasty abandonment of God's commands and promises. Even so, he continues to reassure them that God is faithful to them even in their faithlessness.

Themes:

Hosea dramatically illustrates how committed God is to His people despite their lack of commitment

to Him, and His strong desire to bring them back into right relationship with Him. He describes

Israel's relationship to God both as a Wife to her Husband and as a Child to his/her Father. Hosea

emphasizes God’s unfailing love for his people, even when he must punish them for their

faithlessness. Hosea also lays out the prospect of hope beyond the judgment.

JOEL

Author and Dates: The book of Joel gives us very few clues as to when it was written or when the historical events in the book took place. This could be because it was used often in the worship of Israel, perhaps as a lament for times of disaster. Best guess? Either just before the fall of the Northern Kingdom (around the same time as Hosea, 750 - 720 BC) or just before the fall of the Northern Kingdom (around 625-600 BC).

Purpose: Judah should learn of their judgment, repentance, and hope from Joel’s ministry. To open the eyes of God's people to His warnings and rebukes concerning their persistent sin.

Outline:

I. Invasion and destruction: need to repent because of fear of judgment (1:1-2:15)

-The Plague of Locust (1)

-Coming Day of Judgment (2:1-2:14)

II. Hope and restoration: repent in hope of future restoration (2:15-3:21)

-Salvation from the Locusts (2:15-2:27)

-Salvation from the Day of Judgment (3)

From Judgment to Salvation in Joel -

Book Summary: Joel takes a very hard stance against Israel's stubborn and persistent rebellion against God, and points out that there are signs of God's displeasure that are being ignored (i.e. A plague of locusts) at the risk of much greater devastation and destruction.

Themes:

Sin: Joel does not candy-coat the severity of sin against a Holy God, and warns the people of God

that He will not tolerate it forever.

Repentance: God’s judgment on sin provides a need for the repentance of God’s people.

Judgment: At times in human history, God's people become prideful and arrogant, assuming upon

God's blessing and protection. Although God's love can certainly be counted upon through thick and

thin, Joel shows that God's love can come in some very tough forms, in order to dissuade us from

our sinful ways.

AMOS

Author and Dates: Amos ministered to Northern Israel even before Hosea, during the prosperous early years of the divided kingdom, around 800-750 BC.

Purpose: Judah should learn that judgment is coming against Judah unless repentance takes place. To call God's people out of the complacency and pride that so often follow peace and prosperity.

Outline:

I. God’s people judged with the nations (1-2)

-God will judge God’s people more severely than the other nations.

II. Announcements against God’s people (3-6)

III. Visions against God’s people (7:1-9:10)

IV. God’s people are blessed above all nations (9:11-9:15)

-Judah should hope and learn that Israel will rise in a future restoration.

Book Summary: Amos warns Israel that the material prosperity which they are enjoying does not necessarily mean that God is well-pleased with them, and attempts to keep them from falling away from their calling as God's people. He tries to remind them that being the chosen people of God does not place them above the law, but more squarely under it! But they do not listen, and the book ends with a dialogue between God and Amos about the discipline God will invoke to get their attention.

Themes:

Social Justice: True religion and social justice must go hand in hand. One of Israel's greatest sins

during this prosperous time was that of discriminating against the less-fortunate. A wealthy upper

class had formed, and they displayed no heart for the poor, but rather looked down upon them as

inferior. This was in direct opposition to God's intentions for blessing them.

Judgment and Salvation: As with all the prophets, we see in Amos a dual theme which stresses the

danger of rebelling against God and bringing forth His discipline, and at the same time reassures

God's people that the discipline is not condemnation, but that God ultimately desires repentance and

restoration. God is the Lord over all the nations of the earth.

OBADIAH

Author and Dates: Obadiah gives us little clue as to when he wrote his book, but it seems that it must have occurred after Jerusalem fell to the Babylonians in 586 BC -- probably soon after.

Purpose: To illustrate that God will not be pleased with the mere avoidance of sin, but desires rather an active display of mercy, especially towards our immediate neighbors and fellow believers.

Outline:

I. Edom Summoned to Court (v.1)

II. Sentencing (v. 2-9)

III. Accusations (v. 10-14)

IV. The Day of the Lord (v. 15-21)

Book Summary: Obadiah, the shortest book of the Old Testament, consists of only one judgment oracle against the neighboring country of Edom. The Edomites were descendants of Esau, Jacob's older brother, and were thus "cousins" of Israel. Yet when Israel was in trouble and needed Edom's military support, Edom refused. Therefore Obadiah communicates God's displeasure at their unwillingness to lend aid to the people of God when they were in great need. "Am I my brother's keeper?" Cain asked God. Both in that story and in this one, God's answer is a definite "YES!"

Themes:

Sins of Omission: Much of what we hear about sin comes in the form of "don'ts." Obadiah's harsh

message to Edom affirms that being faithful to God is very much more like a list of "do's." Edom

didn't do the do's, and that's just as bad as if they did do the don'ts.

God's Universal Reign: God was not simply the God of Israel, and He is not now simply the God of

the Church. He is the God of the Universe, and all peoples of all nations are under His rule and His

law.

JONAH

Author and Dates: We learn from 2 Kings that Jonah was a prophet to the Northern Kingdom during the reign of Jeroboam II, 786 - 746 B.C. The book of Jonah is unique among the prophetic books of the Old Testament. Rather than being a collection of the oracles of the prophet, it relates episodes in his life. In the Old Testament, the prophet Jonah is mentioned outside the book only in 2 Kings 14:25, Matthew 12:38-41, Matthew 16:4 and 17, and Luke 11:29-32. Although the prophet lived in the eighth century BC there is dispute on the correct dating of the book. It is written in the third person, and no author is identified any where in the Bible.

Outline:

Part One

I. First Commission and Jonah's Response is to Flee (1:1-16) II. God's Response to Jonah and Jonah Repents (1:17-2:10)

Part Two

III. Second Commission and Jonah's Response is to Obey (3:1-10) IV. God's Response to Jonah and Jonah Resents (4:1-11)

Purpose: The purpose of the book of Jonah is to show God's people that His plan is exceedingly compassionate (God is gracious) and exceedingly certain (God is sovereign). In other words, “salvation belongs to the Lord” (Jonah 2:10). This is the central theme of the book of Jonah: that God loves in freedom. We should desire to understand, accept, and love God’s sovereign grace, rather than oppose it or be resentful of it. The book of Jonah stresses the freedom and primacy of God and God’s initiative and grace toward humanity. Christians, applying the theology of Jonah to the person and work of Jesus, could claim that Jesus Christ is the freedom of God acting in love toward humanity.

Book Summary: The story of Jonah is one of the most well-known Bible stories of all. Jonah is a narrative about God’s compassion for some hated Gentiles by way of a Hebrew prophet who wanted nothing to do with them. The reluctant prophet, Jonah, is commanded to go and preach to the Ninevites, Israel's sworn enemies, so that destruction might not fall upon them. Jonah would love nothing more than to see Nineveh destroyed, but he knows that God is compassionate and will forgive them if they repent, therefore he boards a ship heading the other direction away from Nineveh.

God's wrath follows the ship, until Jonah is thrown overboard by the other sailors and swallowed by a giant fish. While in the belly of the fish, he repents of his own disobedience and is delivered back onto shore, at which point he preaches against Nineveh's sin and commands them to repent. They do, in wholehearted fashion, and God relents from destroying them. The book ends with Jonah waiting in vain for Nineveh to be destroyed, bitter that God would show such kindness to a people who are at war with His own.

Themes:

MICAH

Author and Dates: Micah's ministry began during the fall of Northern Israel at the hands of Assyria, around 722 BC, and continued through Hezekiah's reign in the Southern Kingdom, until about 700 BC.

Purpose: Micah preaches against substituting empty religious practices in place of real, vibrant spiritual life.

Outline:

I. Words of Judgment for Israel (Micah 1-3)

II. Words of Hope for Israel (Micah 4-5)

III. More Words of Judgment for Israel (Micah 6:1-7:7)

IV. More Words of Hope for Israel (Micah 7:8-20)

Book Summary: The book of Micah alternates between oracles of doom on Judah and Israel for their idolatry and social injustices and of future hope because of God’s covenant mercies. Having witnessed God's judgment upon the Northern Kingdom, Micah warns Judah that she is in danger of the same catastrophic demise unless her people seek the God of their forefathers in a real and meaningful way. If they do, God will surely protect them from such an end, but even if they refuse God will continue to seek them and restore them after they are judged for their sins.

Themes:

Judgment: God has given us many examples of people who refused to repent of their wicked ways

and brought God's wrath upon them. Micah uses one such event to teach and warn his people about

the very real possibility of it occurring to them.

Hope: God continues unwavering in His commitment to His people even when they rebel.

Experience: Micah calls on Israel to be observant to what God is doing around them, to learn from it

and apply it to their own lives.

Religion vs. Faith: Micah teaches us that our faith is not mere ritual or outward conformity to certain

rules, but is an inward disposition toward God.

NAHUM

Author and Dates: Nahum wrote of the decline of Assyria sometime between 660-620 B.C., just before their fall at the hands of the Babylonians.

Purpose- Judah should acknowledge God’s destruction of Nineveh and blessing for Judah. To display God's unwillingness to see His people mistreated and oppressed.

Outline:

I. Opening Hymn: God to punish Nineveh (1:1-1:8)

II. The Divine Warrior (1:9-1:15)

III. Oracles and Taunts against Nineveh and Judah is blessed (2:1-3:17) IV. Woe to Nineveh: Concluding Dirge (3:18-3:19)

Book Summary: Nahum is the book that Jonah wished he could write. God's use of Assyria as a punishment for Israel's sin was over, as was his patience with Assyria's own evils. Nahum envisions God as a mighty warrior coming to conquer the enemies of His people and protect them from any other would-be oppressor.

Theme:

Divine Warrior: Nahum draws on very common Old Testament imagery of God as a great warrior-

king coming to the rescue of His helpless, lamenting citizens. Those who have set themselves

against God's people will not escape the destruction at His hands. Nahum emphasizes God’s

sovereignty over all the nations.

HABAKKUK

Author and Dates: Habakkuk ministered to the Southern Kingdom just before the exile, when their unrepentant sinfulness was at its height, around 625-604 B.C.

Purpose: Judah should learn how to react to Babylonian troubles through Habakkuk’s experience. To encourage God's people to live by faith, not by sight, and not to compromise their beliefs in order to conform with what seems to fit the circumstances.

Outline:

I. Habakkuk Complains and God responds: Lament and response concerning Judah (1:1-1:11)

-exile is because of evil and rebellion

II. Habakkuk Complains and God’s Oracles against Judah’s oppressors: Lament and response

concerning Babylon (1:12-2:20)

-take joy in or hope for future defeat of enemies (Babylon)

III. Psalm of Faith: Prayer, praise, and submission (3:1-3:19)

-trust God under Babylonian troubles

Book Summary: Habakkuk laments to God that Judah has turned away from His commandments, and wonders why there is no justice in the land, and no punishment for wickedness. God responds by telling Habakkuk that justice will come through the Chaldeans, who were poised to overthrow Judah. This causes Habakkuk to lament again, because he does not understand why the Chaldeans, a people even more wicked than Israel, would be given such a victory. God calls Habakkuk to have faith in Him, that Israel will in time be restored unto righteousness and their enemies would be punished, which causes Habakkuk to break into a song of faith and praise.

Themes:

Righteousness: God does not dole out blessings and punishments based on every person's level of

righteousness at any point in time. Rather He always acts in such a way as to purify His people and

conform them to His righteousness.

Faith: One of the Apostle Paul's favorite bible verses is Habakkuk 2:4, "The righteous shall live by

faith." Habakkuk and Paul found strength to persevere on the same principle: live by faith in God's

promises, not by what you see in the world.

God is a Redeemer God who will bring about the deliverance of his people, while they live in hope

and trust in him alone.

ZEPHANIAH

Author and Dates: Zephaniah ministered around the same time as Habakkuk, during the last and darkest days of Judah's existence just before 600 B.C.

Purpose: Judah should look soberly at the impinging doom of Babylonian aggression, but also take heart in restoration promises. To assert that God has indeed set a day when He will come and rid His creation of the sin and evil that is practiced, and restore His people to their rightful place in that new world.

Outline:

I. Judgment against nations and especially Judah (1:1-2:3)

-Judah should fear upcoming judgment (through Babylon)

II. Judgment against foreign nations (2:4-2:15)

-Judah should be relieved to her of upcoming judgment against her enemies and her eventual possession of these nations

III. Oracle of Salvation for Judah (3:1-3:20)

-Judah should fear her judgment but rejoice in the promise of restoration

Book Summary: Habakkuk laments to God that Judah has turned away from His commandments, and wonders why there is no justice in the land, and no punishment for wickedness. God responds by telling Habakkuk that justice will come through the Chaldeans, who were poised to overthrow Judah. This causes Habakkuk to lament again, because he does not understand why the Chaldeans, a people even more wicked than Israel, would be given such a victory. God calls Habakkuk to have faith in Him, that Israel will in time be restored unto righteousness and their enemies would be punished, which causes Habakkuk to break into a song of faith and praise.

Themes:

Day of the Lord: The prophets often refer to this "Day" as the future time of global judgment and

restoration of God's people unto righteousness and blessedness. Zephaniah heard rumblings of this

event as Judah's enemies closed in around her.

Remnant: The prophets also referred often to a group of people who would remain true to God

through thick and thin, whom God would exalt as the faithful remnant, and who would constitute the

new People of God after His enemies were destroyed.

The purpose of divine judgment is salvation. The focus of the message of salvation is the hope of the

return from Babylonian captivity.

HAGGAI

Author and Dates: Haggai gave us very detailed information about the dates of his ministry by linking it to the second year of King Darius of Persia, and also to the annual festivals of Israel. His first oracle was delivered on August 29, the second on October 17, and the last two on December 18 -- all in the year 520 B.C.

Purpose: Continue the reconstruction of the temple with the expectation of restoration blessings. To emphasize the centrality of religion and corporate worship among God's people.

Outline:

I. Call to build: The Absence of a Temple (1:1-1:15)

II. The Glory of the Temple (2:1-9)

III. Call to continue: The Purity of the Temple (2:10-19)

IV. The Coming Messiah: Zerubbabel’s power (2:20-23)

Book Summary: Babylon had been overthrown by the Persians, and King Cyrus of Persia had given the Israelites freedom to return to their land nineteen years earlier. Although many stayed in Babylon because of the lives they had established for themselves there, many returned to Jerusalem to re-establish homes and businesses. Haggai ministered to those returnees who, despite their labor, were suffering from crop failure. Haggai encouraged the restored people that their future was indeed bright, but advised them to set God's work in order before they attended any further to their own. Following Haggai's instructions, the people set out to rebuild the temple.

Theme:

The Temple—When God was angry with Israel, he told His servant Moses to go on and enter the

land of promise without Him. Moses refused, knowing that it was God's presence that made the holy

land holy, and that without Him in their midst they could look forward to no special blessing.

Haggai, too, realized that God's temple was the highest priority for Israel's success, and quickly

made provisions so that God would again have a dwelling-place among His people. In the New

Testament, God calls us His temple (1 Cor 3:16; 6:19; 2 Cor 6: 16) and promised that He would

dwell wherever His people gathered (Matthew 18:20). And just as Israel's primary responsibility was

to build a glorious temple for their God, so we are called to build His Church not with pure gold and

precious stones but with pure hearts that praise and serve Him.
