ZECHARIAH

Author and Dates: Zechariah ministered during the same time period as Haggai, about 20 years after the Israelites were released from their captivity in Babylon, around 520 - 518 B.C.

Purpose: The restored community should remain faithful to the Davidic program despite disappointments because God will one day bring it to full realization. The reconstruction has stopped (Ezra 4:24) and the people were in need of exhortation (Ezra 5:1). Zechariah is telling his audience, “Those who returned to the land before you acknowledged their need to repent and moved forward; you must continue for you have the same need.” To reassure God's people that the injustices in the world will be rectified by God's messiah -- a deliverer-king that God will send to accomplish all the promises that He has given to His people.

Outline:

I. Message about temple reconstruction: Zechariah’s exhortations to Joshua and Zerubbabel

about protection and success came true according to obedience (1-8)

-Call to Repentance (1:1-1:6)

-Visions (1:7-6:8)

-Priestly Ruler: Crowning of Joshua (6:9-6:15)

II. Message about Israel’s future trials and her future King/restoration (9-14)

-Trust Zechariah’s visions of the future as God unfolds trials and eventual glory through the coming king.

-Coming and Rejection of Messiah (9-11)

-Coming and Redemption of Messiah (12-14)

Book Summary: Zechariah deals with Israel's complaint that they have experienced God's chastisement for their sin, but the surrounding nations have gone unpunished. Zechariah assures them that the other nations will indeed experience God's wrath and Israel will be vindicated. The people have questions concerning religious practices (especially fasting) in light of their new life in the Promised Land, and Zechariah advises them on the purpose of the law and religious duties. In order to inspire the Israelites and give them hope, Zechariah describes in remarkable detail the coming King who would bring full blessing and freedom to God's people.

Themes:

Messiah: Zechariah focuses on a political / religious leader who will deliver Israel from all her sins,

troubles, and enemies, and is quoted in several places throughout the passion narratives of the

gospels as well as in the book of Revelation.

God’s Spirit: The book of Zechariah reminds us that God’s presence by his Spirit is at the heart of

the restored people of God.

MALACHI

Author and Dates: Malachi is the last of the Old Testament prophetic books to be written, covering events that occurred around 475-450 B.C. when Israel was becoming disillusioned about the prospects of renewed freedom and glory for the nation. Purpose: Malachi challenges those that feel like God is unfaithful to them, showing that it is actually they who are being unfaithful to God.

Outline:

I. Disputation #1: Does God Love Israel? Malachi 1:2-5 II. Disputation #2: Has Israel Defiled God? Malachi 1:6 - 2:9 III. Disputation #3: Has Israel Been Unfaithful? Malachi 2:10-16 IV. Disputation #4: Is God Tired of Israel's Prayers? Malachi 2:17 - 3:5 V. Disputation #5: Has Israel Robbed God? Malachi 3:6-12 VI. Disputation #6: Has Israel Spoken Out Against God? Malachi 3:13 - 4:3

Book Summary: In 539 B.C., Israel was allowed to return to the Promised Land. In the years immediately following, Israel had high hopes that the glory and power of God would again be displayed through them, and that they would return to a time of freedom, peace, and prosperity even greater than that of Solomon. Generations later, Israel began doubting that they would see such a restoration, and complained that God was not following through on His promises.

Malachi is a running series of disputations between Israel and God wherein God makes an accusation, and Israel denies it. Then God goes on to illustrate how his statement or accusation is true and accurate, displaying that He has indeed been faithful, and it is Israel who is the unfaithful one. God gives them several examples of His love and faithfulness, and then points out that Israel has been unfaithful through their idolatry, improper worship, marital infidelity, failing to tithe, questioning God's righteousness, and making light Him.

Themes:

God's Faithfulness: Malachi asserts that God has not abandoned Israel, rather Israel has abandoned

Him. Through the several disputations in the book, Malachi asserts that every aspect of God's

character attests to His faithfulness: love, benevolent rule, infinite power, fatherhood, justice,

unchangeableness, and truth all serve as proof of His faithfulness to Israel.

First fruits: One of the ways Israel was unfaithful to God was through halfhearted worship. They

failed to offer to Him the best of what He had freely given them. Instead, they offered Him

blemished and defiled animals for sacrifice, and they withheld their monetary gifts.

MATTHEW

Author and Date: Matthew probably wrote his gospel right around the time of the destruction of Jerusalem at the hands of the Romans, in the mid to late 60s AD.

Location: Although it is hard to say with any degree of accuracy, most scholars suggest Antioch in Syria as the most likely place where Matthew wrote this gospel. Antioch had a large Jewish population, and was one of the first centers of outreach to the gentile world. This fits the character of Matthew's gospel nicely.

Purpose: Written to Jews to show the reality and significance of the person and work of Jesus Christ. Matthew was written primarily to Jewish Christians who were being persecuted because of their faith in Jesus as Messiah, persuading them that, in Jesus, God is fulfilling the promises made to the nation of Israel, and encouraging them to follow God in this "new thing" called Christianity.

Outline:

I. The Person of Jesus (Matthew 1:1 - 4:16)

II. The Proclamations of Jesus (Matthew 4:17 - 16:20)

III. The Passion of Jesus (Matthew 16:21 - 28:20)

Summary of book: In the gospel of Matthew, Jesus is presented as the Son of God and the King of the Jews. Jesus is Immanuel, God with us, who preaches the gospel of the kingdom to all peoples—both Jew and Gentile. The entire book is composed of five large blocks of teaching (5:1-7:29; 10:11-42; 13:1-52; 18:1-35; 24:1-25:46). Jesus’ origins (1-2) and his preparation for ministry (3:1-4:11) are described at the beginning of the book. The story concludes with the Passion of the Christ: the trial, crucifixion, and resurrection of Jesus, (26-28), as well as the commissioning of his disciples to take the gospel to the nations.

Themes:

Cost of Discipleship: Matthew vividly expressed the sacrifices involved in being a follower of

Christ, showing his audience that he understood their situation, yet still affirmed that the Kingdom of

God is worth any price. (Mt 13:44-46)

Fulfillment: Matthew's gospel contains more prophetic fulfillment language than any other gospel,

showing that Jesus is the culmination of Israel's hopes and dreams, convincing his audience that the

time of waiting is over and the time for proclamation was at hand. (Mt 13:16-17)

Progress: Jesus' preaching about the nature of the Kingdom was radically different from the

teachings of that day, and Matthew made it clear that God was doing something new, and something

better than Israel had ever seen before. (Mt 9:16-17)

The Church: Matthew is the only gospel to use the word "Church" (ekklesia), and he uses it two

different times. He is committed to the idea that Christians should gather together for worship and

encouragement. (Mt 18:19-20)

Authority: Matthew, as do the other gospels, explain Jesus' miracles and teachings as powerful and

authoritative. But Matthew puts extra emphasis on Jesus' authority over all things, encouraging his

readers that nothing can stand in the way of God's forward-moving Kingdom. (Mt 16:18; 28:18)

MARK

Author and Date: Mark probably wrote his gospel in the late 50s or early 60s AD, when Nero was beginning his persecution of Christians in Rome.

Location: Rome seems the most likely situation in which Mark wrote his Gospel. Peter is known to have been situated at Rome, so Mark would probably have spent much time there with him. The gospel is almost certainly intended for a gentile audience like Rome, since Mark felt the need to explain most of the Jewish customs and idioms mentioned in the book. Purpose: To describe the life of Christ with apocalyptic thrust and intensity. The gospel of Mark is the first and shortest of the four gospels. He was not an apostle himself, but was a disciple of Peter and was a missionary with both Peter and Paul. His gospel reflects the action-packed, speedy, urgent nature of the gospel ministry and shows us how Jesus calls us to a life of active faith.

Outline:

I. Preliminary Ministry (Mark 1:1-15)

II. Galilean Ministry (Mark 1:16 - 8:26)

III. True Nature of Ministry (Mark 8:27 - 10:52)

IV. Ministry in Jerusalem (Mark 11:1 - 13:37)

V. Passion Narrative (Mark 14:1 - 16:8)

Book summary: Mark’s gospel is concerned with the question and the identity of Jesus as the messianic Son of God. This picture is modeled on the suffering servant Messiah who is vividly described in Isaiah 53, the one who would come to deliver his own people but whom they would reject and scorn. Mark’s gospel begins with the statement that Jesus is the “Christ, the Son of God” (Mark 1:1). At his baptism, Jesus is confirmed to be the messianic Son of God by a voice from heaven, “This is my Son… listen to him!” (9:7). At the end of the book, the Roman centurion states “Surely this man was the Son of God” (15:39). The importance of Jesus’ final week is evidenced by the fact that Mark 11-16 is devoted soley to Christ’s final seven days in Jerusalem.

Themes:

Urgency: Mark includes very little of Jesus' teaching in his gospel. It moves very quickly from

event to event, and describes them vividly but succinctly. One gets the sense from reading Mark that

Jesus and his followers were always on the move, zealous to accomplish his purposes (Mark 1).

Secrecy: Although all gospels mention Jesus hushing the recipients of his miracles, Mark includes

many more incidents than any other. Time and time again, Mark records Jesus ordering people not to

speak of his miraculous acts of healing. Much of his ministry was discreet, just as God often works

in mysterious and unseen ways in our lives (Mk 3:11; 5:35-39).

Incompetence of the Disciples: Mark is harsh in his depiction of the disciples, making frequent

mention of their confusion, bickering, and selfishness. On the one hand, this shows the futility of

trying to understand everything God is doing, and encourages obedience even before total

comprehension. On the other hand, this encourages others who want to serve Christ, but don't feel

adequately prepared or trained. The disciples were not especially gifted or especially attentive, yet

they changed the world because they believed Jesus' message and received His Spirit (Mk 8:14-20;

9:31).

The Way: Mark uses the word "way" unusually often in his description of Jesus' travels, and many

of the most significant events and discussions in the book happen "along the way" to somewhere or

other. Mark seems to be saying that the journey of faith is as important as the destination, and that

God is leading us down a particular path in order to prepare us for the next curve in the road (Mk

1:2; 8:27; 9:33; 10:32,52; 12:14).
