Author and Date: This gospel was the first of Luke's two-part narrative of early Christianity. The second in the series is Acts. Therefore, the gospel must have preceded the book of Acts. It is thought that Acts was written about 63 AD because the narrative of Acts ends with events that date only up to about 62 AD. Therefore Luke must have been written prior to that, but after Mark (late 50s-early 60s AD). It is likely that Luke wrote his two volumes within a short time span, so somewhere around 62 AD is a good guess for the writing of Luke's gospel.

Location: Luke was from Antioch, but traveled with Paul all over modern-day Southern Europe and the Middle East. It is written to "Most excellent Theophilus," a title usually ascribed to high-ranking Roman officials, which would suggest that it was sent to some Roman center of government like Rome or Antioch. Moreover, the emphasis Luke places on relationships between Jews and Greeks, rich and poor, etc., Make the diverse population of Antioch as likely a candidate as any.

Purpose: To stress the anthropological inclusiveness of the gospel. Luke is obsessed with the gospel going to all kinds of people (children, women, the poor, and disenfranchised). The gospel of Luke was written, as its introduction states, "since I myself have carefully investigated everything from the beginning, it seemed good also to me to write an orderly account for you, most excellent Theophilus, so that you may know the certainty of the things you have been taught." He records many historical facts that the other gospels do not, providing us with the most complete record of Jesus' birth and childhood. Luke places special emphasis on Jesus' social ministry -- to the poor, the oppressed, the lower class, the gentiles, the women, and the children. He shows that the gospel of the Kingdom should undo the inequalities present in society today, and gives hope to those who have little.

Outline:

I. Christian Beginnings (Luke 1:1 - 4:13)

II. Jesus in Galilee (Luke 4:14 - 9:50)

III. Jesus' Journey to Jerusalem (Luke 9:51 - 19:44)

IV. Jesus In Jerusalem Luke (19:45 - 21:38)

V. Jesus' Passion (Luke 22 – 24)

Book Summary: The so-called infancy narratives in Luke 1:1-2:52 are unique to Luke. These passages include both the foretelling and the birth of John the Baptist and Jesus (1:5-25; 1:26-38; 1:57-66; 2:1-21). Luke’s gospel emphasizes God’s fulfillment of his promises to his people. “The year of the Lord’s favor” had certainly come with Jesus’ compassionate ministry of deliverance for and acceptance of the poor and the helpless. Luke’s gospel makes clear that the good news of the kingdom is for all—Jew and Gentile alike. Jesus is the one promised in the OT (cf. Luke 24), who will live, die, and be raised to life to save his people.

Themes:

God's Passion: Luke uses very emotional terms in describing God's relationship to His people, and

their response to Him. There is more mention of singing in this gospel than any other, and God's

tenderness and compassion is highlighted (1:78; 7:34; 12; 15:7-10).

The Poor: It is instructive to compare the Sermon on the Mount as it appears in Matthew (5-7) and

Luke (6). Although Matthew's account is more extensive, Luke's is much earthier. Where Matthew

says "Blessed are the poor in spirit," Luke records "Blessed are the poor." Luke emphasizes Jesus'

concern for people's physical needs and station in life, as well as their souls and eternal destiny.

Those who have little in this life, Jesus promises much in the next, because of his compassion for

them and his desire to correct the inequalities and injustices that people suffer in this life (4:18-19;

7:22; 12:16; 14:21; 16; 19:9).

The Outcast: Matthew's description of Jesus' birth includes a visit from some very rich, very noble

wise men from the east. Luke, in contrast, tells the story of the shepherds in the field coming to see

the baby Jesus. And throughout his gospel Jesus is not a haughty ruler-type, but the common man's

messiah, a servant leader. Luke emphasizes Jesus' tendency to hang out with the unfavorable in

Israelite society. The prostitutes, the drunkards, and the tax collectors received more attention from

Jesus than did the Pharisees and scribes. Luke shows that Jesus did not come to be honored, or

respected, or successful. He came to show that God does indeed love ALL of His people, even

though the religious establishment does not (2:8; 4:27; 13 - 14; 15:1,11; 18:13; 22:37).

The Foreigner: Israel had come to resent foreigners, and who could blame them? First the

Babylonians, then the Persians, then the Medes, then the Greeks, and now the Romans, all took their

turn at lording it over them and ruling them harshly. But Luke makes sure that his audience

understands that Jesus didn't come to destroy the enemy, he came to win them over. That the

Kingdom of God isn't about geographical boundaries, it's about loyalty to the one true King of all the

lands, Jesus. Therefore he emphasized the essential unity of all national and ethnic groups, and God's

love for every one of them (3:6; 3:38; 4:26-27; 7:9; 10:30; 13:29; 17:15).

Women: Luke makes it a point to show the prominent role that women played in Jesus' ministry.

This was very countercultural, as women were not even allowed to be trained by a rabbi in these

days. It serves as one more example of God's heart for the oppressed, and of the universal scope of

the gospel: it was for all men, and all women, excluding no one from the reach of God's love (2:38;

7:36; 8:1-3; 10:38; 15:8-10; 18:1-5; 23:27-31; 24:1-11).

Children: Not only does Luke give us the most information about Jesus' own childhood, but his is

the only record of this wonderful saying of Jesus: "Let the little children come to me, and do not

hinder them, for the kingdom of God belongs to such as these." (10:21) Luke defines the gospel

again as for the humble, the meek, the small, and the uninitiated -- even the little children, who

cannot fully understand, but can still believe with all their heart that Jesus is the savior of the whole

world.

Jesus’ Miracles: Luke records several miracles of Jesus in his Gospel (4:33-35, 38-39; 5:1-11, 12-13;

18-25; 6:6-10; 7:1-10, 11-15; 8:22-25, 27-35, 41-42, 43-48; 49-56; 9:12-17; 38-43; 11:14; 13:11-13;

14:1-4; 17:11-19; 18:35-43; 22:50-51).

JOHN

Author and Date: John's gospel was the last of the four to be written by a good margin. The many references to being "thrown out of the synagogue" (9:22; 12:42; 16:2), the incorporation of certain themes from Greek philosophy, and the testimony that John lived a very long life, probably point to the decade of the 80s AD -- a time when Christians were no longer allowed in synagogues and were dispersed all over Asia minor after the sack of Jerusalem by Rome.

Location: All of the gospels were written in hopes that they would reach the widest possible audience, but each was written with a particular group in mind. Early Church fathers testify that John wrote this gospel in Ephesus, and may have intended it for people in that city, or he may have intended it specifically for the many Jewish Christians living in Alexandria, Egypt, a center for Greek philosophy.

Purpose: To give an intimate portrayal of Jesus Christ. John wrote his gospel to Jewish Christians who were suffering from a "Jesus" gap. They had fled their homeland after Rome sacked Jerusalem and were now living in foreign lands, trying to maintain their faith while interacting with a pagan culture. Moreover, he wrote to a generation who had been born after Jesus' ascension to heaven, a generation who knows Jesus only through third- and fourth- hand reports. John wrote a gospel focused on Jesus himself in order to bridge that gap and reintroduce his audience to the Messiah, the God-man, Jesus.

Outline:

I. Introduction (John 1)

II. Jesus Discloses Himself through Signs (John 2-10)

II. Transition (John 11-12)

IV. Jesus Discloses Himself through Passion (John 13-20) V. Conclusion (John 21)

Book Summary:

John’s gospel is the story of Jesus, the Messiah and the Son of God. John describes how Christ’s incarnation and death on the cross made God known and secured eternal life for all those who believe in him (cf. 20:30–31).

Themes:

The Divine Messiah: More than any other gospel, Jesus' divinity is asserted and emphasized (1:1;

8:52).

The Rejection of Jesus by Israel: John includes many confrontations between Jesus and "the Jews,"

and testifies that "his own did not receive him." In this way, the gospel may serve as a rebuke and

final warning to certain Jewish people who had yet to receive Jesus as their messiah, or to encourage

gentiles that Christianity is not just for the Jews (1:10-11).

The Trinity: John records much more information than any other gospel writer concerning the

relationship between the Father and the Son, and also speaks at great length about the Holy Spirit's

role in Jesus' ministry.

Light and Darkness: One of John's favorite metaphors for Jesus' ministry is Light in the darkness,

representing the truth and life Jesus brings to a wayward and dying world

(1:5; 8:12).

ACTS

Dates: As mentioned in the summary of Luke, Acts is usually dated around 63 or 64 A.D. because it ends with Paul in prison at Rome. Theoretically, Paul's release from prison would have served Luke's purpose in writing, and would have been included if the book was written after his release around 64 A.D. Location: Luke was from Antioch, but traveled with Paul all over modern-day Southern Europe and Asia Minor. Like his gospel, this letter is addressed to Theophilus, probably an important Roman official of some sort, which would likely place him in Rome. The fact that the letter ends with Paul under house arrest in Rome, combined with Luke's frequent references to Roman courts finding no fault with him, might have served the purpose of a testimony in Paul's upcoming trial. If not, perhaps it was a more general appeal to Roman authorities arguing that Christians are law-abiding citizens unworthy of the persecution they suffer at Rome's hand.

Purpose: To stress the geographical inclusiveness of gospel. The book is outlined by the geographical spread of the gospel - “…throughout Judea, Galilee and Samaria…”- “….as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch…”- “…throughout the region of Phrygia and Galatia…”-“…over to Macedonia…”-“to Rome.” The Purpose of Acts resembles closely the purpose of the gospel of Luke, as it is was written by the same author as a companion volume to that gospel. Just as the gospel of Luke vividly displays the gospel demolishing social barriers, Acts chronicles its demolition of geographical barriers as it spreads throughout the Roman Empire.

Outline:

I. The Gospel in Jerusalem (Acts 1 – 5)

II. The Gospel in Judea and Samaria (Acts 6 – 12)

III. The Gospel in Asia Minor (Acts 13 – 15)

IV. The Gospel in Europe (Acts 16 – 19)

V. The Gospel in Rome (Acts 20 – 28)

Book Summary:

The message and mission of Jesus recorded in Luke and the message and mission of the church

recorded in Acts are unified. Both Luke and Acts are addressed to the same man, Theophilus, who was probably some sort of governmental official. His title of “most excellent” is used for governors in other places in Acts (cf. Felix and Festus in 23:26; 24:3; 26:25). Would Theophilus align his life with the Mission of God or would he foolishly try to oppose God’s purpose?

Themes:

The Unhindered Gospel: Although Acts chronicles Peter, Paul, and many other ministers of the

gospel meeting various obstacles on their missions, the spread of the gospel will not be thwarted.

Even persecution and incarceration of the apostles only serves to spread the gospel further (6:7;

9:31; 12:24; 16:5-6; 19:20; 28:30).

Leadership: As the church grew and spread, the apostles had to implement a leadership structure to

insure a distributed yet unified church government (1:21-26; 6:3).

Fellowship: Another challenge for the growing church in Acts was maintaining relationships. Luke

emphasizes the gathering together of believers for worship and fellowship, and the sacrifices made

for the needy brothers among them (2:42-47; 4:32-36).

Confronting Culture: As the church moved out into a pagan culture, it was confronted with new

ideas and new challenges. The apostles made an effort to understand these foreign cultures and

express the gospel of Jesus Christ in a culturally relevant way. At the same time, they vigorously

defended God's good news, and attacked ideas and systems that contradicted or confused it (2:1-18;

17:22-23).
