Author and Dates: Although a precise date cannot be placed on this letter with any certainty, Paul definitely penned it at the end of his third missionary journey, somewhere around 57 AD. Eight years before, Claudius had expelled Jews from Rome because of their fierce debates over a man named "Chrestus," which relegated the Jewish Christians which started this church into an inferior social position. In light of these circumstances, it is no wonder why Paul felt the need to explain the role of both gentiles and Jews in God's family.

Location: Because of the lengthy and detailed personal information at the end of this letter, it is plain that Paul was writing from the city of Corinth, about to leave for Jerusalem (15:22-33). He is writing to the church in Rome, as not only the title but also his remarks in 1:7,15 and 15:24,28 suggest. We know of no apostles who planted the church in Rome. It seems that a large dispersion of Jews converted at Pentecost settled in Rome and began an evangelistic church there tht saw many Roman converts. This would explain much of the confusion which the young church suffered trying to define what specific beliefs, rituals, and behaviors marked the true people of God.

Purpose: To declare power of the Gospel and the life that results.

Outline:

I. Righteousness of God and Unrighteousness of Humanity (Romans 1 – 4) II. The Salvation of God (Romans 5 – 8)

III. The People of God (Romans 9 – 11)

IV. The Result of Grace (Romans 12 – 15)

Book Summary: The Book of Romans is a very theologically sophisticated letter that was written to a church formed by dispersed Jews converted to the faith at Pentecost. Paul discussed at length and in great detail God's view of both gentiles and Jews, suggesting that this Jewish-Christian church in the very heart of pagan culture and the entire Gentile world had stirred up much confusion and argument as to whom exactly God had called to be his people. Paul argues that both Jews and Gentiles alike are sinners, deserving of God's wrath, but receiving instead his undeserved mercy and grace, and should therefore live together in humility, service, and selflessness.

Themes:

Sin: A full 75% of Paul's uses of the word "sin" occur in this one letter. Paul stresses the fact that,

even though the Gentiles were not given the Law of God, they were nevertheless guilty of breaking

it because it was evident in the world around them and in themselves. Moreover, the Jews were not

exempt from God's judgment because they were blessed with the Law; on the contrary, the Law was

given to them to give them a more acute sense of their own sinfulness (Rom. 1-2). Not only did Paul

assert that both Jew and Gentile alike were lawbreakers, but that they were alike under the curse of

their common ancestor Adam. As our representative before God, Adam chose for his entire race a

life of independence from and rebellion against God and His Will, and all humankind live with the

consequences of that decision (Romans 5).

Faith in Christ: Paul stresses time and time again that righteousness is not achieved through human

effort, but through faith in Christ. Only because of His righteousness, and His willingness to include

us under His umbrella of righteousness, we are acceptable before God (Romans 4, 10, 1:17).

The Flesh and the Spirit: Paul recognized that the Holy Spirit which Christ had sent to empower His

disciples caused a miraculous and fundamental change in those people whom God had chosen to

further his gospel. Even so, there remained a vestige of the old, evil, rebellious nature that was in

constant conflict with the Spirit (Romans 7).

Grace: Paul asserts that we are saved not on the basis of our own merits, nor on any other basis but

His own good pleasure. It is because He, in his mysterious wisdom, chose to die for his enemies, and

bless those who cursed him, that we are saved. Thus there is no room for pride or boasting in our

salvation, since we contributed nothing to it. Moreover, we need not suffer the insecurities of

thinking that the gift must be earned or repaid, since God freely gave it to us out of the overflow of

His love, unconditionally (Romans 9).

Israel: One of the complaints Paul seems to be addressing in this letter is, "Why did God abandon

the Jews?" He counters that God has not at all gone back on His promises, but that all His promises

were pointing to this very day when those who were Jewish by blood but not by faith were cut off

from the people of God, and those who were children of God by faith, but not by bloodline, were

grafted in. The promises of God directed toward the people of God always referred to those who

were faithful to Him, and not to a particular nationality or ethnicity.

1 CORINTHIANS

Author and Dates: The apostle Paul wrote this letter. He was not one of the original twelve and was formerly named Saul (Acts 13:9). Paul had formerly been a zealous Pharisee (Acts 23:6; 26:5; Phil. 3:5) and persecuted the church (Acts 8:3; 9:1-2; 22:3-4; 26:9-11; 1 Cor. 15:9; Gal. 1:14,23; Phil. 3:5). He was converted and appointed to his apostleship by direct encounter with the risen Christ on the road to Damascus (Acts 9:3-19; 22:6-16; 26:12-18). Paul was one of the church’s earliest missionaries, and was especially commissioned to evangelize the Gentiles (Acts 9:15; 15:12; 18:6; 22:21; Gal. 2:9). He planted churches all over the Mediterranean world and authored more New Testament books than any other writer: Romans; 1 & 2 Corinthians; Galatians; Ephesians; Philippians; Colossians; 1 & 2 Thessalonians; 1 & 2 Timothy; Titus; Philemon.

Paul started the church at Corinth in the latter part of 49 AD, ministering there for 18 months before he continued on his missionary journeys. Other apostles visited Corinth and ministered to the saints there, and the Corinthians began to appreciate these men more than Paul, their absent founder. Therefore Paul began communicating to them through letters toward the end of his ministry in Ephesus, probably in early 55 AD.

Location: Corinth was a very large and wealthy port city throughout its history, being located very strategically in the area that joins the Peloponnesus to the mainland of Greece. However, it was destroyed by Rome in 146 BC and not rebuilt until 29 BC. It quickly regained its wealth and popularity, but with a completely new class of people. The city was so infamous for its sexual impropriety that "to Corinthianize" became the slang for having sex. In the letter, it is obvious that some of this kind of behavior crept into the church.

Purpose: The Corinthians did not like Paul at all and challenged his authority and desired “more than” the gospel. Paul is responding to this desire for “more than” the gospel. "First" Corinthians was actually the second letter that Paul had written to the Church at Corinth (5:9). The first, as best we can tell, was badly misunderstood by the Corinthians. Therefore, Paul wrote them another letter clarifying his previous letter. He had received reports from friends (1:11) who had been in Corinth, including questions they had and problems they were experiencing. This letter is Paul's response to those questions (see chapters 7 and 8). Paul, with this letter, was trying to help encourage and lead a church that was going astray.

Outline of 1 Corinthians

I. Divisions in the Church (1 Cor 1–4)

II. Immorality in the Church (1 Cor 5–6)

III. Answering Questions (1 Cor 7–8)

IV. Christian Freedom (1 Cor 9–10)

V. Worship (1 Cor 11–14)

VI. Reminder of the Gospel (1 Cor 15)

VII. Closing Remarks (1 Cor 16)

Book Summary

The letter was probably written circa A.D. 54-56 from Ephesus during Paul’s third missionary

journey. Paul wrote to the church in the city of Corinth, the capital city of the Roman province Achaia. Paul had planted this church during his second missionary journey only a few years earlier. The original audience in Corinth contained members from all levels of society, but consisted mostly of people who were neither rich, wise, nor of noble birth. The original audience had sat under the ministry of Paul, Apollos, and Peter. Subsequent to the ministries of Paul, Apollos, and Peter, the Corinthian church had begun to place improper value on worldly wisdom, including Greek philosophy. Paul wrote the letter largely to discuss the problems he saw in the Corinthian church, although he also included praise for certain things the church was doing well.

Themes:

Freedom from Sin: The Corinthian Church rationalized their own sinfulness by presuming upon

God's grace and pridefully assuming God's favor. Paul, conversely, tells them that God has freed his

people from slavery to sin so that they might be free from its destruction and free to love others

rather than self.

Unity and Peace: The Corinthian church had split itself through factions and arguments. Different

groups claimed different church leaders, and brothers litigated against brother in the Roman court

system. Paul chastises the Corinthians for their selfishness and pride, which was jeopardizing the

unity of Christ's body and Christ's testimony to the world (chapters 1, 3, 7, 11).

2 CORINTHIANS

Author and Date: Allowing for the new developments which Paul addresses for the first time in 2 Corinthians, as well as the visits which Paul's ministry partners made to the city after 1 Corinthians was delivered, this letter must be dated at least a year after 1 Corinthians was written -- probably sometime in 56 AD.

Location: Corinth was a very large and wealthy port city throughout its history, being located very strategically in the area that joins the Peloponnesus to the mainland of Greece. However, it was destroyed by Rome in 146 BC and not rebuilt until 29 BC. It quickly regained its wealth and popularity, but with a completely new class of people. In this growing metropolis stood the church at Corinth. They were a zealous group of Christians, but the glamour of big-city life rubbed off on them and caused a number of recurring problems that Paul dealt with in his letters.

Purpose: 2 Corinthians was actually Paul's third (some say fourth) letter to the church at Corinth. His first addressed certain issues of church discipline, and his second (our 1 Corinthians) was a more broad corrective for several problems and misunderstandings in that church. He had intended to visit Corinth after 1 Corinthians was written, but decided against it after having heard about recent developments there. The Corinthian church had corrected many of the specific problems which Paul addressed, but their underlying worldliness remained unchanged. They became dazzled by certain traveling evangelists who were preaching a gospel different from Paul's, and discrediting Paul's ministry. 2 Corinthians is Paul's defense of his character and his message in order to keep the Corinthians from following these false apostles in their heresies.

Outline:

I. Reasons for Writing (2 Cor 1 – 2)

II. Paul's Defense of His Ministry (2 Cor 3 – 6

III. Paul's Exhortations to the Corinthians (2 Cor 6 – 9)

IV. Paul's Critique of the False Apostles (2 Cor 10 – 13)

Theme:

True Leadership: Certain self-styled "super-apostles" had infiltrated the Corinthian church,

discredited Paul and his ministry, and began preaching a different gospel. Over and over Paul asserts

that apostleship is not a matter of written recommendation, lofty pay scales, or rhetorical skills, but a

matter of calling, love, humility, and sacrifice. Paul demonstrates that Christian ministry is to be

typified by humble servanthood.

GALATIANS

Author and Date: This letter was probably written by Paul in 48 AD, when the questions about what would be required of Gentile believers to enter the community of God was hotly debated, but not yet settled at the Jerusalem Council (Acts 15).

Purpose: Paul's letter to the church at Galatia served as a warning to that church, and serves today as a warning for us, not to lose the heart of the gospel.

Outline:

Introduction (1:1-5)

Accusation (1:6-10)

Divine Nature of Paul's Gospel (1:11-2:5)

Authoritative Nature of Paul's Ministry (2:6-16)

God's Spirit is Received by Faith, not Ritual (2:17-4:8)

Ritual-Based Religion is contrary to God's Plan (4:9-5:12) How to Live in God's Freedom (5:13-6:10)

Summary (6:11-18) Book Summary: The church at Galatia had been getting some bad teaching from Jewish Christians (Paul calls them Judaizers) who did not understand the concepts of grace and freedom. They were teaching that God still required everyone to observe certain rituals and statutes in order to be accepted by Him as a father. Paul reminds the Galatians that they were accepted by God in the beginning not through rituals or obedience to strict behavioral codes, but through faith in Him which is given by the Spirit. He then asks them why they think God would suddenly change the rules! The book serves as a wonderful reminder that God loves us because He chose to love us even when we were totally unlovable. This great news can give us rest and peace since we don’t need to worry about earning it or losing God’s love.

Themes:

Christian Liberty: Paul vehemently defended the idea of salvation by faith. He refused to allow the

Judaizers to convince the Galatians that God would not accept them or bless them unless they

involved themselves in Jewish rituals, especially circumcision.

The Gospel: Paul takes great pains in this letter to show the Galatians that the gospel that he

preached was not something he made up, nor was it something he heard from others, but something

that God Himself taught him. Paul's gospel was God's gospel, and should not be warped or

exchanged for any contradictory teaching.

Ethnic Diversity: Galatians, more than any other letter, stresses that Christian faith breaks the

boundaries of ethnicity. There is no one cultural construct that is best fit for God's good news.

Rather, the gospel can be accepted and applied in any cultural context, and this should not be done

mechanically but with wisdom and sensitivity.

EPHESIANS

Author and Date: The most likely imprisonment that Paul refers to in this letter is his Roman custody, which dates the letter's composition around 60 AD.

Location: Paul's house arrest in Rome is chronicled in Acts 28:14-31, and this seems to be the circumstances in which the letter to the Ephesians was written.

Purpose: To expand the horizons of the Ephesians by emphasizing God’s eternal purpose, grace, and mysteries. Like Romans, the letter to the church at Ephesus addresses very lofty and widely applicable theological issues. This makes it extremely difficult to determine a specific purpose for the letter. It seems that Paul, having just written a letter to the church at Colosse, is moved to write the church at Ephesus as well and send the two letters by the same messenger (Tychicus: Eph 6:21; Col 4:7). His themes are broad and general, but certainly not lacking in application. Like Romans, Ephesians has become one of the church's most treasured books, displaying the universal and timeless relevance of the theological issues with which Paul and his churches were wrestling.

Outline:

I. Greetings (Eph 1:1-2)

II. God's Purpose in Christ (Eph 1:3-23)

III. Christ's Accomplishment: Relationship with God (Eph 2 – 3)

IV. Christ's Will: Relationships with each other (Eph 4 – 6)

V. Conclusion (Eph 6:21-24) Book Summary: After describing the glorious calling to which God has called his people (Eph. 1-3), Paul describes how God’s people are to live out this calling in everyday life (Eph. 4-6). The main goal of the believer is to display the glory of Christ by showing love toward others in and outside the church.

Themes:

Sovereignty: Paul emphasizes God's initiative in bringing His people to Himself. In a grandiose run-

on sentence (1:3-14) he rejoices in God's sovereign choice to rescue us from our own evil devices

and the security that comes from knowing that the Almighty "works out everything in conformity

with the purpose of his will."

Christ's Supremacy: Jesus is presented as our elder brother and ruler, both an intimate friend and a

powerful king (1:15-23).

Equality: In light of the fact that we are God's people based on His choice and not our inherent

worth, Paul stresses the fact that we have no business judging others or looking down upon them,

nor must we feel inferior to those who would do so to us. God has placed all His children on equal

footing, and sees them all as equally lovely. (2:11-22; 4:1-6)

Relationships: Although we are all one in Christ, and equally loved, God calls us in our various

relationships to model His gentleness and humility. Whether in positions of power or powerlessness,

authority or servitude, in whatever role God has placed us in we are to honor Him by honoring the

authority of our superiors and using our authority to benefit others (5:21-6:9)

Spiritual Warfare: Ephesians 6 is probably the most well-known passage of Scripture calling us to

acknowledge the presence and influence of spiritual forces at work in our lives.

PHILIPPIANS

Author and Date: Philippians was one of the last letters Paul wrote, having penned it from Roman custody sometime around 61 AD. Paul's house arrest in Rome is chronicled in Acts 28:14-31, and this seems to be the circumstances in which the Philippians came to Paul's aid, and the circumstances in which Paul wrote his letter.

Purpose: Paul wrote the letter to encourage the Philippians in the middle of their suffering. Paul's primary motivation for writing this letter to the church at Philippi was to thank them for their generous financial gift they had sent to him while he was imprisoned in Rome. Like modern support letters, he includes not only his gratefulness, but also a report on his own condition and greetings to his close friends among them. However, as an apostle in the church, he takes this opportunity to encourage them as they faced persecution, internal struggles, and heretical teachers. To further these hopes, he recommends to them the faithful brothers—Timothy and Epaphroditus—who could ministry to them in a more specific and ongoing fashion.

Outline:
