Themes:

Joy: Paul writes the church about joy and how it can be found in the darkest and most painful seasons of life. Throughout the 104 verses of the letter, the key words that appear include “joy” or “rejoice,” “in Christ,” and “Gospel,” which appears more than in any of Paul’s other letters. Together, they reveal that the secret of our joy is the Gospel of Jesus Christ and it going out even through our pain, trial, and affliction. Thus, joy as presented in Philippians is less a feeling based upon our circumstances and more in experiencing the comfort and forgiveness that comes from faith in Jesus Christ and what he did for us. As illustrations of a life lived for joy, Paul includes the story of Jesus’ joy in suffering (2:6–11), along with his own (3:4–14). According to Paul, because of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, joy is possible in the midst of loneliness (1:1-11), suffering (1:12-18), death (1:19-30), humility (2:1-11), temptation (2:12-30), conflict (3:1-11), exhaustion (3:12-4:1), anxiety (4:2-9), and poverty (4:10-23). The Greek for “joy” is related to the noun charis, "grace, favor" or "that which delights." “Joy” (chara) means "the experience of gladness" or "rejoicing and merriness" and is similar its verb form (chairo), which means "rejoice, be merry." Sometimes Christians act as if Christianity were a sorrowful religion. It is not. It is a religion of joy and love. The leading thought of the letter is joy and gratitude for being in joint-participation in the furtherance of the Gospel of Jesus Christ (1:5-7). The words "rejoice " and “joy” appear sixteen times in the Letter. This epistle of joy rises to two great spiritual peaks in 2:5-11 where Paul presents the kenosis (the self-emptying or self-humiliation of Christ) and in 3:10-14 when he reveals the drive to know the resurrection and the call of God in Christ. The Judaizers, with their legalism and meanness, have followed Paul to Philippi and there is an echo in chapters one and three of their opposition to Paul and the message of the Gospel that brings joy.

Thanksgiving: Paul showed his gratitude to the Philippians for their generous gift to him (1:3-11), and then demonstrated through his own example why the Philippians should be thankful and joyful as well, no matter what their circumstances, because of God's generosity toward them (2:12-18 and 4:4-19).

Gospel: In Philippians, Paul has mentions the Gospel frequently: "the fellowship in the gospel" (1:5), "confirmation of the gospel" (1:7), "progress of the gospel" (1:12), "defense of the gospel" (1:17), "worthy of the gospel" (1:27), "striving for the faith of the gospel" (1:27), "service in the gospel" (2:22), "labor in the gospel" (4:3), and "the beginning of the gospel" (4:15).

“In Christ” and “in the Lord”: One of the characteristic phrases in Paul’s writings—and John's writings (Gospel of John, John 1, John 2, John 3, and Revelation)—is "in Christ" or "in the Lord," the common Greek prepositional phrases are en Christo or en kurio. Here the preposition

en is used to designate a close personal relation in which the object of the preposition is viewed as the control influence. We see this phrase again and again in Philippians.

Fellowship and Unity: The effect of the Gospel for human relationships is fellowship, unity, and selflessness. Koinonia is another keyword in Philippians. "Partnership" (NIV), "sharing" (NRSV), and "fellowship" (KJV) is the Greek noun koinonia, "close association involving mutual interests and sharing, association, communion, fellowship, close relationship." It is used often to describe relationships with God and with others in the Christian community, as it does here. It sometimes edges into the meaning of "participation, sharing," as in 3:10 "sharing his sufferings" and in the Lord's Supper (1 Corinthians 10:16). The Philippians, beloved as they are by Paul, have some bickering and dissention going on. You can see this thread going throughout the short letter, sometimes subtly, by inference, and sometimes head-on. Read these verses and discuss the topic of fellowship and unity.

COLOSSIANS

Author and Dates: The most likely imprisonment that Paul refers to in this letter is his Roman custody, which dates the letter's composition around 60 AD, the period in which he also penned Ephesians and Philemon

Location: Paul's house arrest in Rome is chronicled in Acts 28:14-31, and this seems to be the circumstances in which the letter to the Ephesians was written. Colosse was a dying city. Several hundred years before, it had been a thriving metropolis, but the booming neighboring cities of Laodicea and Hierapolis diminished its economic importance. The church at Colosse was founded by Epaphras, a convert of Paul's. Perhaps it was the fact that this church was started by a young Christian rather than Paul himself made is especially vulnerable to false teachings like the one Paul is thwarting.

Purpose: To declare in extremely positive terms the superiority of Jesus Christ over other tempting powers.

Outline:

I. Introduction (Col 1:1-14)

II. The Supremacy of Christ (Col 1:15-23)

III. Paul's Labors (Col 1:24-2:7)

IV. False Piety (Col 2:8-23)

V. True Piety (Col 3:1-4:6)

VI. Concluding Greetings (Col 4:7-18)

Book Summary: Paul's letter to the church at Colosse was to dispel errant teachings that had confused and misled many of the believers there. We don't know exactly what group was spreading this misinformation, but two particular aspects of the letter itself shed some light on the nature of the heresy, and suggest that some form of Jewish mysticism was being disbursed among the Colossians.

Themes:

The Supremacy of Christ: Probably in response to heretical teachings concerning angel worship or

the exaltation of the Old Testament mediators, Paul emphasizes the qualitative difference between

the Christ and the other significant messengers of God (1:15-20)

Wisdom: It seems that the false teachers were claiming some kind of secret knowledge of God, a

knowledge that Paul speaks against. The simple beauty of the gospel is not something reserved for

profound thinkers, but is for all men. It is not something to be hoarded in secret, but proclaimed (2:1-

8).

Regulations: Part of the false teachers' doctrine included many strict rules and regulations about

what must or must not be handled, eaten, or engaged in. Paul dismisses such false piety as an offense

to Christ, who fulfilled the law in our stead and offers instead the Spirit to show us divine love, and

lead us into spiritual maturity. Rules have no power to curb the sinful nature, but the knowledge and

experience of God do. (2:20-23)

1 THESSALONIANS

Author and Date: Many of the details in this letter correspond to accounts in Acts that place Paul in Corinth during the time of composition. This would suggest that the letter was written around 51 AD, making 1 Thessalonians one of Paul's earliest canonical writings.

Location: Thessalonica was the capital and largest city of Macedonia. Acts 17:19 tells us that Paul visited this city and began his ministry in the Jewish synagogue, but broadened his outreach to Gentiles as well. He was not able to stay long, thus the Thessalonian church was still quite young and untrained, and made some errors in applying Paul's teachings to their lives. Moreover, they may have felt a bit abandoned as Paul fled the persecution that they undoubtedly had to endure.

Purpose: Paul's first letter to the church at Thessalonica deals mostly with questions about what happens after we die and the nature of Christ's return. It seems that some confusion or misinformation about the last days were negatively affecting the church at Thessalonica, and Paul wrote this letter and another later letter in order to correct certain false doctrines about the second coming.

Outline:

I. Intro / Thanksgiving (1Th 1:1-10)

II. Defense of Paul's Ministry (1Th 2 – 3)

III. Doctrinal and Practical Corrections (1Th 4:1-5:22)

IV. Conclusion (1Th 5:23-28)

Book Summary: In this letter, Paul demonstrates loving concern for his friends in Thessalonica who were enduring suffering for the sake of the gospel. Paul calls them to pursue holiness in the area of sexual relationships because God’s will for them is their sanctification. Paul calls them to be ready for the return of Christ, who will bring the present story to a glorious end.

Themes:

Paul's Ministry: Like in Galatians, Paul finds himself needing to justify his actions and his ministry,

and insists that his behavior and his preaching testify to his pure motives and divine calling (2:5-12,

17-20).

The End: Paul has to clarify some of the teachings that the Thessalonians had misunderstood. It

seems that the Thessalonians may have gotten a bit excited about preaching the end of the world, as

Paul has to remind them to mind their own business, lead a quiet life, keep their day jobs, and not

preach and wait too zealously for an imminent return of Christ (4:11-12; 5:1-11).

Resurrection: Another misconception that the Thessalonians had was that Christians would not have

to die. They figured that Jesus would soon return and gather all those who believed in Him, and

when members of their own church started to die, they didn't know what it meant. Paul revisits the

doctrine of the resurrection to assure them that, when he returns, Christ will gather all those who

believed in Him, both alive and dead (4:13-18).

2 THESSALONIANS

Author and Date: This letter is very similar to 1 Thessalonians both in style and content. This would suggest that the letter was written not long after the first, later in 51 AD.

Location: Thessalonica was the capital and largest city of Macedonia. Acts 17:19 tells us that Paul visited this city and began his ministry in the Jewish synagogue, but broadened his outreach to Gentiles as well. He was not able to stay long, thus the Thessalonian church was still quite young and untrained, and made some errors in applying Paul's teachings to their lives. They appreciated Paul's first letter, but sent further questions with the bearer of the letter, Timothy.

Purpose: Paul's second letter to the church at Thessalonica is very similar to the first—that is, it again deals mostly with questions about the end times. It seems that Paul's first letter raised more questions than it did answers, and the response that Paul received from the Thessalonians prompted him to write another letter and address their concerns.

Outline:

I. Intro / Thanksgiving (2 Th 1:1-12)

II. Doctrinal Correction (2 Th 2)

III. Practical Instruction (2 Th 3)

IV. Conclusion (2 Th 3:16-18)

Book Summary: Paul reassures his readers that Jesus Christ alone holds the key to the future and his people ought to trust in Him alone to defeat the enemy once and for all. In the meantime, believers are to love one another and serve one another.

Themes:

The Second Coming: Paul again has to clarify some of the eschatological (end-times) teachings that

the Thessalonians had misunderstood, along with some unfounded rumors that were being spread. It

seems that someone tried to convince them that Jesus had already returned, and Paul instructed them

more precisely about God's plan (2:1-12).

Diligence: The Thessalonians were still counting on Jesus to return in the very near future. In light

of this firm belief, they had evidently quit their jobs and spent their time looking into the sky. While

not discouraging them from waiting on the Lord, he exhorted them to work hard, be self-sufficient,

and be a model of diligence and responsibility for their neighbors, rather than being idle and lazy and

hoping that Jesus would rescue them from their daily business. (3:6-15)

1 TIMOTHY

Author, Date, and Location: Sometime soon after Paul left Ephesus for Macedonia, in the early 60s AD. Timothy was in Ephesus when he received this letter. For information on that city, see the summary sheet on the book of Ephesians. It seems that they were having problems with false teachings about the role of law in the Christian life, and a lack of leadership to deal with the problems.

Purpose: Written to legitimate young Timothy’s leadership and to direct the young church. Paul wrote this letter to his trusted but inexperienced friend and co-worker Timothy because he was afraid he wouldn't be able to return to Ephesus in time to help Timothy deal with the doctrinal and organizational issues that were cropping up at the time.

Outline:

I. Confronting False Teachers of the Law (1Tim 1)

III. Prayer for Leaders (1Tim 2:1-7)

III. Proper Conduct for Christian Leaders (1Tim 2:8-3:16) IV. Exhortation to Confront False Teachers (1Tim 4)

V. Dealing with Different Kinds of People (1Tim 5:1-6:2) VI. Final Warnings (1 Tim 6:3-21)

Book Summary: Paul wrote this letter as a manual for the young pastor Timothy. Paul emphasizes the importance of sound doctrine that leads to godly living and warns him of the inherent dangers of church life in a fallen world, especially false teachers and false doctrine. Thus the church and its leadership should prepare themselves for the work of the ministry by choosing competent leaders and avoid deceitful ones.

Themes:

The Gospel: Paul refers to it as a precious object placed in Timothy's trust, and commissions him as

its guardian and pupil at the same time.

Leadership: At this stage in the Church's history there were still many organizational questions to be

answered, and Paul offers his advice as a guide for Timothy's own "leadership development

program."

False Teachings: Paul is very descriptive when referring to the damage false teachings can do to the

spiritual well-being of a Christian, or a church. He also gives practical guidance as to the best way to

address and eliminate it.
