2 TIMOTHY

Author and Date: This was Paul's last known letter, written just before his death in 67 AD

Location: Paul was in jail in Rome when he wrote this letter, facing an imminent execution.

Purpose: Paul wrote this letter to his trusted but inexperienced friend and co-worker Timothy from a Roman prison that he was convinced he would never leave. It expresses the concerns of a man contemplating the end of his life, but the ongoing vitality of his life work.

Outline:

I. Paul's Concern for Timothy (2 Tim 1:1-14)

II. Paul's Instructions for Timothy (2 Tim 2)

III. Paul's Description of the Last Days (2 Tim 3)

IV. Paul's Charge (2 Tim 4:1-8)

V. Paul's Final Requests (2 Tim 4:9-22)

Book Summary: In times of trouble, Paul encourages Timothy to passionately and unashamedly devote himself to the ministry of the gospel. Paul exhorts Timothy to continue in his ministry despite the opposition of false teachers. He is to remain faithful until the end. As the final canonized letter from Paul, 2 Timothy functions like the Apostle’s last will and testament of the Apostle. Paul is entrusting in this letter the things that are precious to him, namely the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of David (2:8).

Themes:

Relationships: Paul's main concern throughout this letter is for his friends and co-workers, and for those

who have fallen away from the faith. Whether helpful or hurtful, the relationships he had formed

throughout his life and ministry are at the forefront of his mind during his last days on earth.

Perseverance: Paul recounts his sufferings at the hands of the enemies of the gospel, yet does not

steer Timothy away from that path. Rather, he encourages Timothy that the trials, though certain,

cannot thwart the gospel ministry, and calls him to endure such opposition staunchly.

Fear and Shame: In light of such persecution and adversity facing Timothy, Paul calls him to cast

out all fear, uncertainty, doubt and shame, and instead be bold, joyful and confident in the promises

of Christ.

TITUS

Author and Date: Probably around 63-65 AD, in the period of active ministry between his two imprisonments.

Location: Crete, an island in the Mediterranean Sea, was notorious for their immoral lifestyles. Although we have no record of Paul ministering there (he made a stopover there on his way to Rome in Acts 27, but did not stay long) it seems that he and Titus spent some time there on another occasion, introducing them to the Christian faith. Purpose: Paul wrote this letter to his trusted friend and co-worker, Titus, in order to organize the church that he and Paul had established there, and to encourage Titus to continue his good work despite the harsh words of Jewish teachers concerning Titus' uncircumcision (Titus was a gentile).

Outline:

I. Greetings (Titus 1:1-4)

II. Leadership Qualities (Titus 1:5-9)

III. False Teachers (Titus 1:10-16)

IV. Dealing with Diverse Groups of People (Titus 2:1-3:2) V. False Teachings (Titus 3:3-11)

VI. Concluding Remarks (Titus 3:9-15)

Themes:

Leadership: Like 1 Timothy, Paul's goal is to help the church at Crete function more smoothly and

effectively, and give it structural protection against the challenges it faced. He does so by outlining

the character traits of qualified "elders," governors of the truths of the faith.

Flexibility: In the fledgling church, there were all kinds of new situations that had to be handled in

unique ways. Paul describes all kinds of different people groups and situations that needed to be

handle in very specific ways, and his advice to the leaders of the Cretan church do not exactly match

those he gave to the Ephesian church through Timothy. This illustrates the fact that, as Christians,

we are not given a comprehensive, inflexible code by which we live, but rather principles of

goodness, love, and righteousness that we apply with wisdom to each individual circumstance.

False Teachings: Everywhere Paul went, and in almost every letter he wrote, he combats the false

teachings spread (in most cases) by Judaizing Christians who import much of the old system's laws,

codes, rituals, and regulations into the new system of grace and spirit. In this book, it is especially

important for Paul to disarm these teachers, since their attack was personal—Titus was himself an

uncircumcised gentile.

PHILEMON

Author and Date: Philemon lived in Colosse, and this letter was probably sent to him along with the letter to the church there, around 60 AD.

Location: Paul was under house arrest in Rome when Onesimus came to see him.

Purpose: Paul wrote this short letter to his friend Philemon because one of his slaves, Onesimus, had run away and sought refuge with Paul. During his stay with Paul, he became a Christian, and Paul gently instructs Philemon how he might want to handle this interesting situation.

Outline:

I. Greetings (v 1-3)

II. Thanks and Prayer (v 4-7)

III. Paul’s Plea for Onesimus (v 8-21)

IV. Conclusion (v 22-25)

Themes:

Two Worlds: Onesimus had become a "new man in Christ," and thus called for a new kind of

relationship with his owner.

Appeal not Command: Paul used a well-known style of Roman rhetoric to persuade Philemon to

treat Onesimus well, as his brother.

Divine Intention: Although Philemon undoubtedly viewed Onesimus' actions as unjust and

rebellious, Paul sees it as divinely ordained, in order to bring Onesimus into the family of faith.

HEBREWS

Author: Although some include the Book of Hebrews among the Apostle Paul's writings, the certain identity of the author remains an enigma. Missing is Paul's customary salutation so common to his other works and the suggestion that the writer of this epistle relied upon knowledge and information provided by others who were actual eye-witnesses of Christ Jesus (2: 3) makes Pauline authorship doubtful. Some attribute Luke as its writer; others suggest Hebrews may have been written by Apollos, Barnabas, Silas, Philip, or Aquila and Priscilla. Regardless, Hebrews speaks with the same canonical authority as the other sixty-five books of the Bible.

Date: The early church father Clement quoted from the Book of Hebrews in 95 A.D., however, internal evidence such as the fact that Timothy was alive at the time to epistle was written and the absence of any evidence showing the end of the Old Testament sacrificial system that occurred with Jerusalem's destruction in 70 A.D. indicates the book was written around 65 A.D.

Purpose: Written in the context of suffering to Alexandrian/Hellenistic Jews. Because of severe suffering some were thinking about “going back” to their former beliefs and practices. Many of the early Jewish believers were slipping back into the rites and rituals of Judaism in order to escape the mounting persecution. This letter, then, is an exhortation for these persecuted believers to continue in the grace of Jesus Christ.

Outline:

I. Introduction (1:1-3)

II. The Supremacy of God’s Son (1:4-4:13)

III. The Supremacy of the Son’s High Priesthood (4:14-10:18)

IV. Final Exhortations to Perseverance (10:19-12:29)

V. Concluding Practical Exhortations and Greetings (13:1-25)

Book Summary: The writer of Hebrews continually makes mention of the superiority of Christ in both His person and work. In the writings of the Old Testament, we understand the rituals and ceremonies of Judaism symbolically pointed to the coming of Messiah—the rites of Judaism were but shadows of things to come. Hebrews tells us that Christ Jesus is better than anything mere religion has to offer. All the pomp and circumstance of religion pales in comparison to the person, work, and ministry of Christ Jesus. It is the superiority of our Jesus that remains the theme of this letter.

The writer of Hebrews gives ample encouragement to believers, but there are five solemn warnings: there is the danger of neglect (Hebrews 2:1-4), the danger of unbelief (Hebrews 3:7-4,13), the danger of spiritual immaturity (Hebrews 5:11-6,20), the danger of failing to endure (Hebrews 10:26-39), and the inherent danger of refusing God (Hebrews 12:25-29). In Hebrews we find a magnificently rendered portrait of Jesus Christ—the Author and Finisher of our great salvation (Hebrews 12:2).

Themes:

Jesus is a great and faithful high priest

Warning to nelievers to persevere

Holiness is to be pursued in the Community of Faith

JAMES

Author: The author identifies himself as James. He was probably the brother of Jesus and the leader of the Jerusalem council. James the brother of John was put to death by Herod Agrippa I about AD 44 (Acts 12:2). But James the brother of Jesus (Gal :19) was still alive and became a leader of the church in Jerusalem (Acts 12:17), presiding over the conference in Jerusalem (Acts 15:13021) and writing the message from the conference tot he Gentiles churches (Acts 15:22-29). He was still the leading elder in Jerusalem on Paul’s last visit (Acts 21:18-25).

At first, James did not did not believe in Jesus and even challenged him and misunderstood his mission. Like the other brothers of Jesus, James once disbelieved Jesus’ claims to be the Messiah (John 7:6), but he was won by a special vision of the risen Christ (1 Cor 5:7) and was in the upper room before Pentecost (Acts 1:14). Nevertheless, James met a violent death that was described by the Jewish historian Josephus. Ananus, the high priest, ordered James to be stoned. James’ death, however, came at the hands of the priests who threw him from the roof of the temple, and after he survived the fall he was beaten to death by people with clubs.

Date and Location: The book of James was written between AD 48-50 to believers in Christ among the Jewish Diaspora.. James was stoned about AD 62. As leader of the Jerusalem church, James wrote as a pastor to instruct and encourage his dispersed people in the face of their difficulties. The book is addressed to “the 12 tribes which are of the Dispersion” (James 1:1). As the leading elder of the great church in Jerusalem and as a devout follower and half-brother of Jesus, the message of James had a special appeal to the widely scattered Jewish Christians.

Purpose: This epistle of James is one of the most instructive writings in the New Testament. Being chiefly directed against particular errors at that time brought in among the Jewish Christians, it does not contain the same full doctrinal statements as other epistles, but it presents a summary of the duties of believers.

Outline:

I. Trials, Temptations, and Christian Maturity (1:1-18) II. True Faith is Seen in its Works: Listening and Doing (1:19-27) III. True Faith is Seen in its Works: Favoritism Forbidden (2:1-13) IV. True Faith is Seen in its Works: Faith and Deeds (2:14-26) V. Taming the Tongue (3:1-12)

VI. Two Kinds of Wisdom (3:13-18)

VII. Warning Against Worldliness (4:1-17)

VIII. Warning to Rich Oppressors (5:1-6)

IX. Waiting Patiently in God (5:7-11)

X. Applying Spiritual Principles (5:13-20)

Book Summary: James is the New Testament counterpart of the Old Testament’s wisdom tradition. The first thing we are to do with our faith, according to James, is to wisely live by it, especially when we undergo trials and temptations.

Themes:

The letter is concerned mainly with the practical aspects of the faith, consisting of statements and

advice and counsel for everyday conduct and life. There is little reference to any of the central

doctrines of the faith. The letter discusses true faith, true living, and true wisdom. In the very first

verse he places Jesus on the same level as God (“the Lord Jesus Christ”). In 2:1 he presents Jesus as

the object of faith: “as you believe in out Lord Jesus Christ, who is the glory.” Here Jesus is

referred to as the Shekinah glory of God. James refers to Jesus as “Lord” frequently (James 1:1,

2:1, 3:9, 5:11, and 5:14). This refers to the ascended Christ who is full of glory.

The book of James does not refer to the cross or resurrection, but he alludes to the murder of Jesus

(James 5:6) and his second coming (James 5:8). The main aim of the letter is to strengthen the faith

and loyalty of scattered Christians in the face of persecution from those who were oppressing them.

It is the picture of early Christian life in the midst of difficult social conditions. The glory of the

New Testament is that the revelation of God meets our problems today because it did meet those

problems of the first century. James is concerned mainly with the ethical and social aspects of the

gospel that the followers of Christ may base their lives on.

James and Paul use the same words (faith, works, justify), but they mean different things by them.

James and Paul do not contradict each other. Paul talks about “justifying” meaning that Christians

are “declared righteous” before God because of Jesus’ work. James talks about “justifying” meaning

that Christians are to demonstrate the gift of this righteousness before others. Paul is referring to the

reception of righteousness. James is referring to showing that true faith exists in us by displaying the

proof of it, which is good works.

James is answering the issue of obedience (James 2:14). Paul is answering the issue of salvation and

redemption (Romans 1:17). Both refer to Abraham. Paul points to Gen 15 when Abraham is

justified before God. James points to Gen 22 when Abraham is justified before humans. We are

saved by faith alone, but a saving faith will not be alone.

1 & 2 PETER

Purpose: To encourage Christians in their suffering. 1 Peter 5:12 sheds light on the overall purpose of the epistle. Peter sees Christians in danger of persecution (1:6) and not prepared for it (4:12). In the light of this he aimed to do two things: to encourage and to testify to the true grace of God (5:12) in which he urged his readers to stand. These two purposes are intertwined as Peter gives encouragement by declaring God’s gracious acts in Christ, made known and mediated by his Spirit.

Author: In the four lists of the twelve apostles in the New Testament (Matt. 10:2-4; Mark 3:16-19; Luke 6:13-16; Acts 1:13), Peter is always mentioned first. “Peter’s original name was apparently the Hebrew Simeon (Acts 15:14; 2 Pet. 1:1): perhaps, like many Jews, he adopted also “Simon”, usual in the NT, as a Greek name of similar sound. His father’s name was Jonah (Mt. 16:17); he himself was married (Mk. 1:30), and in his missionary days his wife accompanied him (1 Cor. 9:5). The fourth Gospel gives Bethsaida, just inside Gaulanitis, and a largely Greek city, as his place of origin (John 1:44), but he had also a home in Capernaum in Galilee (Mark 1:21ff.). Both places were at the lakeside, where he worked as a fisherman, and in both there would be abundant contact with Gentiles. His brother’s name is Greek. Simon spoke Aramaic with a strong N-country accent (Mark 14:70), and maintained the piety and outlook of his people (cf. Acts 10:14), though not trained in the law (Acts 4:13; literacy is not in question). It is likely that he was affected by John the Baptist’s movement (cf. Acts 1:22): his brother Andrew was a disciple of John (John 1:39f.).

Peter was one of the first disciples called; he always stands first in the lists of disciples; he was also one of the three who formed an inner circle round the Master (Mk. 5:37; 9:2; 14:33; cf. 13:3). His impulsive devotion is frequently portrayed (cf. Mt. 14:28; Mk. 14:29; Lk. 5:8; Jn. 21:7), and he acts as spokesman of the Twelve (Mt. 15:15; 18:21; Mk. 1:36f.; 8:29; 9:5; 10:28; 11:21; 14:29ff.; Lk. 5:5; 12:41). At the crisis near Caesarea Philippi he is the representative of the whole band: for the question is directed to them all (Mk. 8:27, 29), and all are included in the look that accompanies the subsequent reprimand (8:33).

On any satisfactory interpretation of Mk. 9:1 the transfiguration is intimately related to the apostolic confession which precedes it. The experience made a lasting impression on Peter: 1 Pet. 5:1; 2 Pet. 1:16ff. are most naturally interpreted of the transfiguration, and, for what they are worth, the Apocalypse and Acts of Peter show that their authors associated the preaching of this subject with Peter. In a measure, the disastrous boast of Mark 14:29ff. is also representative of the disciples; and, as Peter’s protestations of loyalty are the loudest, so his rejection of the Lord is the most explicit (Mk. 14:66ff.). He is, however, specially marked out by the message of the resurrection (Mk. 16:7), and personally receives a visitation of the risen Lord (Lk. 24:34; 1 Cor. 15:5).

Location: Peter wrote his epistle to Christians scattered throughout the region of Asia Minor, that is, modern-day Turkey (cf. 1 Peter 1:1-2). The letter of 1 Peter is addressed to Christians residing in Pontus, Cappadocia, Galatia, Asia, and Bithynia, a vast area of approximately 129,000 square miles. As a comparison, the state of California covers about 159,000 square miles.

Outline:

First Peter

I. Salutation (1:1-2)

II. The Identity of the People of God (1:3–2:10)

III. The Responsibilities of the People of God (2:11–4:11) IV. The Responsibilities of a Church and its Elders in the Midst of Trials (4:12–5:11) V. Concluding Remarks (5:12-14)

Second Peter

I. Greeting (1:1-2)

II. The Certainty of Salvation (1:3-21)

III. False Teachings (2:1–3:16)

IV. Conclusion (3:17-18)

Book Summary: Those who originally received this letter were Christians who were in danger of losing their way. Their new-found faith had severed the ties which had bound them to their non-Christian relatives and neighbors and was itself being tested because they were facing suffering. This situation was probably not what they had expected when they had first heard the gospel, and it is an experience faced by every generation since then.

Peter met their needs by reassuring them of the gospel. Father, Son and Holy Spirit work together to bring us a new life (1:3–5; 2:2; 4:1–6) in which the past is forgiven (2:24; 3:18), the present is protected (1:5) and motivated (4:2), and the future assured (1:4, 7). This is a way of life to be lived out in practical terms (1:13–16) and in everyday relationships (2:16; 3:1, 7). It equips the followers of Jesus for living in the real world of the here and now (4:1–4) and for that world of eternal glory for which Jesus is even now preparing us (5:10).

So Peter’s response to the question of suffering is that it is a part of the journey of faith. It tests the seriousness of our discipleship (1:7), joins us to our fellow-Christians (5:9), and will be vindicated on the day of judgment (4:16–19). Though believers are ‘strangers’ and ‘scattered’ in this world (1:1), they are part of the pilgrim people of God (2:5, 9), journeying to the Father’s home (1:4). They look forward to the day when Jesus will return for his own (1:7; 2:12; 5:4). These are truths which can motivate today’s Christians to live for God’s glory, just as they encouraged Peter’s original readers. Peter writes as one whose heart has lost none of the fire of love stirred up by the Master at the Sea of Tiberias (cf. Jn. 21:1, 15–19 with 1 Pet. 1:8). In this letter there is all the vividness of the personal recollections of a follower of Jesus Christ.

Themes:

Peter wrote with a practical purpose, and would no doubt have been surprised if asked about the

letter’s theological content. He did not write to set out a theology (as Paul did in Romans or Colossians) but, as a pastor, he based his advice on his knowledge of the character of God. So the doctrines set out in the letter are those that provide a motive for Christian living.

Doctrine of God—In 1:1–2 Peter clearly sets out the practical relationship between the three persons of the Trinity. God is sovereign, and so can be trusted (4:19). He is holy, and so is to be copied (1:15–16). He is a Father, and so his children must live up to the family name (1:17), and the fact that he has redeemed his people is a ground for assurance (1:18–21).

Doctrine of Christ—Christ is sinless, obedient and prepared to suffer to the limit. This is an example for us (2:21–24). He died and rose again, so we must die to sin and live by his risen power (2:24; 4:1). His work is described in terms of redemption (1:18–19), reconciliation and being the sin offering and the substitute (3:18), and he was predestined for this very purpose by the Father’s love (1:20–21). He is also the foundation of God’s church, providing the ground of faith and hope, and inspiring to holiness and love (2:16; 1:21–22).

Doctrine of the Holy Spirit—The Holy Spirit is seen as the agent of sanctification (1:2), the author of Scripture (1:11), the enabler of Christian ministry (1:12) and the encourager of Christians undergoing persecution (4:14).

Doctrine of Scripture—The authority of Scripture is stressed by the way Peter appeals to the OT to support his teaching (e.g. 1:24–25; 2:6–8; 3:10–12; 4:18). Its source is seen to be in the guiding of the writers by the Holy Spirit (1:11; cf. 2 Pet. 1:21) and its enduring quality is underlined by a quotation from Is. 40:6–8 (1:23–25). Scripture is also pictured as a seed, by which the new birth is effected in human lives as people hear and respond to the preaching of the

gospel (cf. 1:23 with 25), and as the means of Christian growth (if 2:2 is translated ‘milk of the word’).

Doctrine of the church—Peter has a high regard for the corporate nature of the people of God, entered into by the individual believer at his or her new birth (2:2–5; cf. 1:22–23). The church is God’s building, on the foundation of Christ himself (2:4–8), and as such it is the inheritor of the blessings promised to Israel (2:9–10). Its twofold function is to offer worship to God and witness before people (2:5, 9). Already in Peter’s day the church had a corporate eldership, seen as a responsible and sacred office (5:1–4), but also encouraged the development and use of spiritual gifts by each member (4:10–11).

Doctrine of the last days—Peter writes as one who looks forward to the great unveiling in the last days, and he uses the Greek root apocalyp—(‘revelation’) to describe the return of Christ. So he reminds his readers that the unseen Christ is never far away, and points them to the glories they will share when Christ is revealed. Their salvation will be fully realized and they will enter into their full inheritance (1:5). Their faith will be finally honored (1:7; 4:13), and the full extent of God’s grace discovered (1:13). Christ’s glory will be shared (5:1) and faithful service rewarded (5:4). The expectation of Christ’s return is a most compelling argument for holy living and careful stewardship now (4:7–11, 17–18).

1 JOHN

Author and Date: The author of the Gospel of John is the same John who wrote 1 John, 2 John, and 3 John. There is hardly a new thought in 1 John that is not already found in the Gospel of John. There is similarity between these two in vocabulary, syntax, style, and ideas. The author of 1 John is John son of Zebedee-the apostle and the author of the Gospel of John and the book of Revelation. He was a first cousin of Jesus. The letter is difficult to date with certainty. But, it was probably written around AD 90.

Location: In light of John’s substantial ministry in Ephesus, the epistles were probably written to churches located in or around Asia Minor. 1 John mentions no addressee and contains no specific greetings or thanksgivings that usually are found in first century letters. However, we may infer from John’s frequent reference to “my dear children” that he is addressing first or second generation Christians. Also, the lack of direct quotes form the OT seems to point to a predominantly Gentile audience rather than Jewish Christians.

Purpose: False teachers were trying to mislead the first-century Christians by denying, among many things, the true humanity of Jesus Christ. The view that Jesus was not truly human was a belief of false teachers called Gnostics. There are two passages in which the false teachers are specifically rejected (1 John 2:18 and 1 John 4:1-6). The Gnostics also claimed superior knowledge of the truth. But nine times John describes what it means to know the truth (2:3, 2:5, 3:16, 3:19, 3:24, 4:2, 4:6, 4:13, 5:2).

Outline:

A.Fellowship with God (1:5-2:6)

B.The New Commandment (2:7-17)

C.The Christian and antichrists (2:18-29)

A.Divine Sonship (2:29-3:10)

B.Love one Another (3:11-18)

C.Confidence in God (3:19-24)

A.Testing the Spirits (4:1-6)

B.God is Love (4:7-21)

C.Faith’s Victory (5:1-5)

D.The Witness to the Son (5:6-12)

Book Summary: This epistle is a discourse upon the principles of Christianity, in doctrine and practice. The design appears to be to refute and guard against erroneous and unholy tenets, principles, and practices, especially such as would lower the Godhead of Christ, and the reality and power of his sufferings and death, as an atoning sacrifice; and against the assertion that believers being saved by grace, are not required to obey the commandments. While the Gospel of John was written to prove that Jesus was God, 1 John was written to prove Jesus was a real human too. John was also encouraging his readers in the truth and life of Christ. John had two main purposes in mind: 1) to expose false teachers and 2) to give believers assurance of their salvation. In keeping with his purpose to combat the Gnostic false teachers (who taught that the spirit is entirely good and flesh or matter is entirely evil), John struck at their lack of morality. By giving his eyewitness testimony to the incarnation, he wanted to confirm his readers’ belief in the incarnate Christ.

Theme:

A major theme in 1 John is “Light and Darkness.” In view of the “light and darkness” teaching in 1

John, we can say that the “new age” has started as night is yielding to day and light is subduing

darkness. The Gnostics of the time taught that light and darkness were two equal forces. But in

John’s letter, “light” is the “world of God”- the redeemed world, and darkness is the “world”- the

world of humans who lie in the realm of the evil one (1 John 5:19). But the light is already and

presently overcoming the darkness and will be complete when Jesus returns. The world of darkness,

which is in rebellion toward God, is being subdued by the world of light that is the ransomed people

of God.

2 JOHN

Author and Date: The apostle John is the author this letter. He most likely wrote the book at about the same time as 1 John (about AD 90). Note these obvious similarities between 1 John and 2 John (2 John 5 and 1 John 2:7; 2 John 6 and 1 John 5:3; 2 John 7 and 1 John 4:2-3; 2 John 12 and 1 John 1:4).

Purpose: During the first two centuries of the early church, the gospel was taken from place to place by traveling evangelists and teachers. Believers customarily took these missionaries into their homes and gave them provisions for their journey when they left. Since the Gnostic false teachers also relied on this practice, the book of 2 John was written to urge discernment in supporting traveling teachers. Audience: There is no way to tell if “the elect lady” is a specific woman or a church. The obvious way of taking it is that it written to a woman of distinction in one of the church, like “the co-elect lady in Babylon” (1 Peter 5:13)—Peter’s wife who traveled with him (1 Cor 9:5). Some think that it refers to a specific church to which the letter was sent. The letter refers to the elect woman and her children. This can mean real children (like in 1 Tim 3:4) or the spiritual children of the church (like in Gal 4:19 and Gal 4:25 and 1 Tim 1:2). It is more consistent to take this reference as referring to the local church as a whole. Feminine personifications of the church abound in the writings of the apostles (1 Peter 5:13, 1 Cor 11:2, Ephesians 5:25-29).

Outline:

Book Summary: 2 John is all about living in the love of God in accordance with the truth of Jesus Christ.

Theme: John writes of how important it is for Christians to love one another. To love means to obey God’s commandments, and God’s commandments in turn tell us to live lives of love. John emphasizes the importance of the teaching that Jesus is God’s Son—both God and man. Christians should separate themselves from those who teach that Jesus is not God’s Son.

3 JOHN

Author and Date: This letter was probably written about the same time as 1 John and 2 John. A comparison of 2 John and 3 John suggests that the apostle John was the author of both letters. John functioned as an elder in his later years, and he begins both 2 John and 3 John with that title. John uses identical phrases in both books: “love in the truth” (2 John 1 and 3 John 1) and “walking in the truth” (2 John 4 and 3 John 4).

Purpose: Traveling teachers sent out by John were rejected in one of the churches in the province of Asia by the leader, Diotrephes. This man had gone so far as to excommunicate members who showed hospitality to John’s messengers. John wrote to Gaius, his friend and a leader in the church. He writes to praise and thank Gaius for his help and to give him encouragement. He also reproves Diotrephes for not cooperating and for rebelling against John’s leadership. In a later visit John will deal with him personally.

People: We do not know which Gaius this is. There are three friends of Paul with this name: Gaius of Corinth (1 Cor 1:14), Gaius of Macedonia (Acts 19:29) and Gaius of Derbe (Acts 20:4). Gaius was a very common name in the time of the letter’s writing. It is possible that 3 John 9 is referring to 2 John and, if so, then both letters went to individuals in the same church (one to a loyal woman and one to a loyal man). Three persons are described in 3 John. Gaius is the dependable layman in the church, Diotrephes is the dominating official, Demetrius is the kind messenger from Ephesus with the letter. Outline:

Book Summary: This letter is very similar to 2 John, with one difference: where 2 John deals with general principles, 3 John gives concrete examples in the life of a specific congregation. John encourages his readers to walk in Christ, brotherly love, and to avoid false doctrine.

JUDE

Author: The author identifies himself as Jude. He was most likely Judas, the brother of Jesus. Jude or Judas was a very common name. In the New Testament we have Judas Iscariot and Judas son or brother of James (John 14:22 and Luke 6:6), Judas of Galilee (Acts 15:22), Judas of Damascus (Acts 9:11), Judas Barsabbaas (Acts 15:22). Jude calls himself a slave of Jesus, just as James did, and he adds that he is also a brother of Jesus. Jude and James both seemed to not emphasize being called the brothers of Jesus. Maybe to them it claimed too much authority.

Date: The letter of Jude is similar to 2 Peter. Compare Jude 3-18 to 2 Peter 2:1-18. The letter was probably written about AD 65. Some interest arises from a comparison of Jude and 2 Peter. Jude 3-18 is almost identical with 2 Peter 1:5 and 2:1-18. One or the other writer certainly had before him the work of the other. It is probable that Jude found that a part of Peter's epistle expressed his ideas so well that he modified it somewhat and inserted it in his letter. It is more likely that Jude would thus honor an apostolic letter of the renowned Peter than that Peter would borrow from Jude. If this is so then the epistle of Jude was written between A. D. 65 and 70, or shortly before the siege of Jerusalem.

Purpose: Jude started as a personal letter from a leader in the apostolic church to one or more of the congregations dispersed throughout the Roman Empire. The dangers facing the church at this time were not those of persecution but of heretics and distorters of the faith and false teachers. Although Jude was eager to write to his readers about salvation, he thought he must instead warn them about certain immoral men circulating among them who were perverting and using the grace as an excuse to sin. Apparently these false teachers were trying to convince believers that being saved by grace gave them permission to sin. The recipients of Jude are unknown, but they were probably Jewish because of the many OT references: the exodus, angels, Sodom and Gomorrah, Cain, Balaam, Korah, and Enoch.

Outline:

Book Summary: The book of Jude warns readers against the clever devices of the false teachers among them. Their false teaching may be new, but their error is as old as time. Jude warns his readers to remain faithful to the doctrine they have already been taught and to look to God the Father and the Lord Jesus who are be able to strengthen them amidst the last days.

Themes: This epistle is addressed to all believers in the gospel. Its design appears to be to guard believers against the false teachers who had begun to creep into the Christian church, and to scatter dangerous tenets, by attempting to lower all Christianity into a merely religious outward profession. They taught their disciples to live in sinful courses, at the same time flattering them with the hope of eternal life.

REVELATION

Author and Date: Revelation was written between 65-95 A.D. by John (1:1, 4, 9), traditionally identified as the apostle, the son of Zebedee.

Purpose: Written to help explain the significance of the kingdom of God and its history. Written in the context of suffering to give hope for future by describing the drama of redemption.

Outline (7 parallel sections):

I. Christ and the seven lamp stands (1-3)

II. The seven seals (4-7)

III. Christ vs. Dragon and his allies (12-14)

IV. The seven bowls of wrath (15-16)

V. The fall of the dragon’s allies (17-19)

VI. Victory through Christ (20-22)

Book Summary: Revelation is a Christian prophecy, filled with Old Testament language, written in apocalyptic style and imagery and put into letter form. It deals with the suffering and ultimate salvation of God’s people and reminds that God’s wrath will come upon his enemies. Revelation concludes with a vision of the future restored paradise in the new heavens and the new earth where God’s people will dwell securely in God’s presence forever (22:1-5).

Themes:

God is sovereign over the course of history.

The Church’s salvation is secure.

The glory of Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God and the Lion of Judah.
