Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

Preface

To pick up a book expecting to confront an author and to find instead a man is a delight. "The living man is more than the book." But even among his own, Brigham Henry Roberts is best known for his books. A prolific historian of the American West, he also figured colorfully in its history; and many of the seventy-two hundred pages of history he wrote mirrored his own tortuous life experience and his multiple careers. He was a child stone sawyer, a boy plainsman, a silver mucker, a schoolteacher, a missionary, a scholar-journalist, an editor, a playwright, an orator, a defense attorney, a theologian, an essayist, a pamphleteer, a congressman, a historian, a soldier-chaplain, a husband, a father, a member of the third highest quorum of his church, a Seventy.

xHis kaleidoscopic life, patterned with struggle, pivoted on a movement outside himself that commanded his energies -a movement which he called "the New Dispensation of Jesus Christ." It was this movement, more than any other, that brought a measure of unity to his various roles. Indeed his life replicated the history of the Church, and he became both in history and in doctrine one of its classic interpreters. As a boy in Great Britain, stymied by his illiteracy, he cried out, "Will I ever read books?" Eventually he was to author thirty major volumes and over one thousand pamphlets, articles, tracts, and sermons. Together, all the editions of the historical and doctrinal volumes he compiled, edited or wrote have sold seven hundred thousand copies. And a half century after his death Roberts remains one of the most read and often cited Mormon authors, though more within than without the Church. No one was more surprised than he at this prodigious accomplishment.

From the age of twenty, B. H. Roberts was much in the public eye, but the legend which accumulated about him has tended to obscure realities of his life. His inner world was often opaque, even to the most perceptive of his family and few intimate friends. Apparently he kept only sporadic and fragmentary journals. Extensive files, which include personal papers, notes, and manuscripts, are well preserved in the LDS Church Archives, but most of them cover every sort of history except his own. Many scrapbooks of clippings are scattered. Many of the most intimate of his family letters have been lost.

At age seventy-six, Roberts dictated what he called "biographical notes." These were autobiographical snippets, written in the third person with student detachment. By that time, his memory was somewhat dimmed by age and diabetic decline. In some instances, he himself had earlier chronicled the same events with more detail and accuracy than he could command in the last months of his life. Many episodes were scantily sketched, even some of those that mattered most to him. These notes-some three hundred pages double-spaced in pica type-do not constitute a full or factual biography.

xiiixixiiRoberts was reluctant to publish these or any memoirs. His life had been controversial, he had been widely caricatured, and opinions of him had frequently clashed. His own version of events, he well knew, would implicitly challenge other perspectives. The possibility of increasing misunderstanding through a candid narrative weighed upon his mind. But expecting that his prodigious literary output would increase interest in himself-for he was, and to this hour remains, the most prolific interpreter of Mormonism's first century-he jotted in a notebook, again in the third person impersonal, "in his case, as in all others, indeed, in no case more than his, some knowledge of the man is essential to a knowledge of the writer."
