Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

Acknowledgments

Dr. William E. Berrett first placed on my desk the typescript volumes of B. H. Roberts's "Biographical Notes." He had recommended to the family that I undertake this biography. He has been a generous and helpful aid in seeing the book through. Georgia Roberts Maury, B. H. Roberts's last living daughter, met with me often and furnished me with valuable scrapbooks, clippings and letters. With patience, candor, and wit, she helped me through many of the hardest questions of Roberts's life and personality. Her leads were always productive and even her guesses as to dates, events, and persons in Roberts's life were helpful. It is a sorrow to me that she did not live to see the project completed.

xivAmong the libraries which have provided me continual access and assistance are: the Huntington Library in San Marino, California; the Harvard Houghton Library; the Utah State Historical Society Library; the LDS Church Historical Department Archives; the University of Utah Marriott Library, including the Widtsoe Collection; and the BYU Special Collections Library, where I have had the competent aid of Chad Flake and Hollis Scott.

Helpful suggestions on different portions of the manuscript have been made by Leonard Arrington, Gustive O. Larson, Kent Nielsen, D. Michael Quinn, Peter Crawley, Knight T. Roberts, Betty S. Hinckley, Elsa Cook, James Christiansen, Steven Walker, Ralph Finlayson, Clifford Wallace, Randy Paul and Robert Miller. Among the General Authorities who contributed insightful reminiscences are Elders Joseph Fielding Smith, Hugh B. Brown, Marion G. Romney, Gordon B. Hinckley, Alvin R. Dyer, Franklin D. Richards, G. Homer Durham, S. Dilworth Young, Henry D. Taylor, and Joseph Anderson. None of these persons, of course, is in any way accountable for the contents of the volume itself. I am also grateful to Commissioner Jeffrey Holland, who awarded me the annual Sydney B. Sperry Lectureship and the James E. Talmage Lectureship where I could present segments of my research.

A special thanks goes to Dianne Higginson, who undertook the grim task of reducing the thousand pages of manuscript to six hundred. To her goes the credit for successful literary surgery, but not the blame for defects that remain.

Many typists have endured endless rewritings, including Ellen Holsinger, Linda Field, Denise Harris, Nancy Matthews, Linda S. Miller, and Margo B. Allred.

1 Finally I must acknowledge the absolute loyalty of my wife, Ann Nicholls Madsen, who has patiently avoided asking the goading question, "When will you be finished?" with quiet faith that it would be done when it was done.
