Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

1 Family Politics

My childhood was a nightmare; my boyhood a tragedy " [^1] Thus B. H. Roberts summed up his first years on this planet-years which condition but [he felt) do not fully determine the character of man. A carefree childhood was wrenched away from him and maturity was forced upon him. But bitter as that was, he rarely spoke of it as an evil. In looking back upon his formative years, Roberts considered them not so much a wounding-though wounds there were-but as the "crouch for the spring," a preparation for his deep sense of mission. Roberts's life depicts a principle that became the core of his religious outlook: "For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things." [^2] To him opposition came early, continually, and trip-hammer hard.

2 When he had become a national figure, his voice familiar, his writings in wide circulation, he wrote an essay entitled, "What Is Man?" and gave a Christ-centered meaning to Walt Whitman's "Before I was born out of my mother, generations guided me.' [^3] To Roberts, this statement encompassed more than a racial or "collective unconsciousness"; it pointed to an individual consciousness in a pre-mortal state. "For myself," he wrote, "I believe that character primarily is based upon the nature of the spirit, the extent of its development, the amount of growth it had before it tabernacled in the flesh." [^4] He felt that this innate, natural individuality comes with us to this earth and is never completely obliterated by the blows of life. His religious psychology and autobiography are blended in this statement:

In spite of indifferent parentage and vicious environment some characters arise that are truly virtuous and great; and that purely by the strength of that intelligence and nobility to which their spirits had attained in the heavenly kingdom before they took bodies upon earth. Their grandeur of soul could not all be suppressed by environment in this life, however inauspicious for their development. As the sun struggles through clouds and mists that at times obscure his brightness, so these spirits, stirred by their innate nobility, breaking through all disadvantages attendant upon ignoble birth and iron fortune, rise to their native heights of true greatness. [^5]

B. H. Roberts was born March 13, 1857, in Warrington, Lancashire, England. Thus his first home was not far from the headquarters of the British Mission, though at the time of his birth that name and address was of no concern to any of his family. [^6]

His mother, Ann Everington, who was born in Thorpleton, Norfolk, England, December 18, 1828. [^7] is remembered as a serene, Anglo-Saxon girl whose ancestors had been in Norfolk for many generations. They were recalled as a "serious, thoughtful and studious family." Family lore described Ann as "very fair-blue eyes set far apart-light hair with glints of gold, and the fresh complexion of a young English girl." The only photo known to the family reveals her as a young mother with an open, high-cheeked face and steady eyes, with a small boy by her side. This, her only son who reached manhood, almost exactly replicates her features.

3 Orphaned at an early age, Ann learned to sew for hire. She became a professional seamstress at a hat shop. Her temperament (as her children recall it) was serious and thoughtful, even sober at times. Her principled character, her endurance, her propensity for things spiritual and her inclination to think deeply about the issues of life, and her love of great books were ingrained (whether by heredity or environment) in her son.

Five years after her marriage to Benjamin Roberts, her life was shaken and transformed by the re-revealed gospel of Jesus Christ. While walking to deliver "finished pieces" to some English gentry, she was attracted by a huddle of people on a busy corner and by the lilt of a man's tenor voice-"a clear beautiful voice"-singing a hymn. In music and speech, she first heard the good news that was to quicken tens of thousands of other British converts. A missionary (whom family tradition records as Elder Orgile) confronted the crowd with the announcement: "God has raised up a prophet in these days, and established the Gospel of Jesus Christ in its fulness, as it existed in the days of the ancient apostles." [^8]

No written account has yet captured the pull and power of that appeal to "a universal want"-a hunger to overcome the "contrast between the gospel of the apostolic time and the present state of [our] nominal Christianity." [^9] Ann felt a summons to Isaiah's "mountain of the Lord's house," a kinship with the newly manifested Christ who once again brought hope, new promise, and the tangible immediacy of present revelation. Her response was whole-souled. "Zion!" The word itself had for her a vibrant color and tone.

4 That night she probed and pondered biblical passages from Isaiah, John, and Paul with new understanding, yet with a sense of familiarity. Her soul began to be illumined, and the tremor of light lasted. The next evening at a similar meeting she asked for literature. Several Mormon meetings and much prayerful reading followed, increasing both her conviction and her apprehension, for her husband labeled the whole affair "utter foolishness!" Quietly, despite his protests, she continued her study and prayer. Finally she could wait no longer. Contrary to Ben's wishes, yet hopeful that her own spiritual rebirth would hasten his, she asked for baptism. Leaving her bed at three o'clock in the morning, she went to the Irish Sea and, while a small group of Saints looked on, was immersed in its cold waves and then confirmed on shore and given the gift of the Holy Ghost. She spent the rest of the night, while her husband slept, trying to dry her clothing on a chair near the fireplace. In the morning Ben noticed her damp clothes, suspected the worst, and exploded, "Ann, I believe thee's been dipped." "Well, what of it?" she replied. "I have joined the true Church." His initial shock soon subsided. Presently, softened by the new happiness and serenity of his wife, Ben moved from mere tolerance to a placating gesture of love for her by himself submitting to baptism. [^10] Ben's baptism took place in August 1857, when Ann was twenty-nine and her son Harry less than five months old. [^11]

"It had been said of her," Roberts wrote of his mother, that she was a "natural-born Israelite," which was one factor in her unquenchable fire of assurance of the truth of the gospel-"total and nothing doubting. [^12] This was not so with Ben. Religion in any form seemed to him oppressive. Born in Chilton, near Woolwich, Kent, [^13] he was the son of an ironmonger whose mode of life was secular, comfortable, independent, and permissive. As a boy Ben was "jovial, and good-natured," but seemingly without a keen sense of responsibility, religious or otherwise, and he had a passionate drive for self-education which was later all but insatiable in his son.

Ann described Ben as a sunny, genial, handsome man, proud of his six-feet-and-one-inch height. She told her daughters she had been quite "swept away" by their father, attracted by his temperamental dissimilarities to herself. B. H. Roberts remembered his father's "pleasing character and genial good nature," but more especially his physical prowess. 3. few anecdotes are known about him.

5One "family misunderstanding" left an unforgettable impression on little Harry: Ben came home, found no supper prepared (perhaps there was no food in the house) and stood in the pantry door impatiently hurling and twirling the plates across the room; "a wonderful feat," young Harry thought. On one summer Sunday morning, when Harry was sickly, his father stealthily opened the window, captured a pigeon, wrung its neck, plucked and dressed it, and dropped it in the pot for soup for him-a gesture Harry naturally remembered with thanks and admiration. He also recalled lot more likely had heard his mother say) that Ben would not tolerate cruelty. Two blacksmith bullies were verbally tongue-lashing and pummeling an apprentice. Ben warned them to lay off. When his protests were ignored, Ben knocked first one and then the other down, and then in tandem "gave both a sound beating" until each promised to leave the apprentice alone. Another time, in the midst of a street riot in Liverpool, Ann was clinging to her husband when a big fellow accosted him with, "I believe you are an Irishman." "Perhaps I am," replied Ben defiantly. "Then down you go," said the brawler, and swung. Ben, in steady nonchalance, neither let go of his wife nor broke his pace, but with one blow flattened the man.

Ben was restless and inclined to wander, traits which his son apparently took for his own. Though travel was a vocational necessity for Ben, he freely chose that necessity. He moved from county to county as blacksmith and ship plater, restless and eager; and so much the worse for responsibilities.

Shortly before he joined the Church, Ben had been hired by a nobleman (in family tradition, the Duke of Nottingham) as trainer for the Duke's string of racing horses, shoeing, grooming, and pacing them for many months prior to exhibition at fairs and racetracks. While Ben was away from his family his letters were short in news but shorter in money, so Ann was left for months at a time to hold the family together as best she could. He often squandered his earnings in drink and, Ann suspected, on heavy betting. Once or twice he returned home with luxuriant racing wins and lavished them on the family. More often he would stumble in penniless, thick-tongued and limp from liquor.

6As the children came, Ben's times away from home lengthened and his self-control weakened. Mother Roberts's resourcefulness, if not her endurance, was pushed to the breaking point. She was forced to do fine sewing to earn even enough for staples. To further complicate matters, Ben moved the family about, and these uprootings were equally hard on her purse and her health. Birth certificates show that between 1849 and 1860 Ann bore Ben six children in five different towns: Mary was born in Woolwich, Kent; Annie in Poplar, Middlesex; twin girls Amy and Sarah (who died after three days) in Liverpool, Lancashire; Harry in Warrington, Lancashire; and Thomas in Burslem, Stafford-shire. [^14] Of the four surviving children, only three were healthy: Mary, who was called Polly; Annie; and Harry. Thomas, who suffered with hydrocephalitis, was an invalid.

On top of these difficulties, Ben became spiritually estranged. This was hastened by harsh treatment from local Church-branch authorities. The provocation was less a flaw in conduct than in his hostility toward being questioned. (Just such a tendency would emerge in his children. B. H. Roberts later called it "a wild craving for independence.")

Conversion to the Church had for a time diminished Ben's wanderings. During this period, Mary recalled, they "lived a bit more comfortably." He often accompanied his family to church. With the other British Saints, he paid his tithing faithfully each week-though it were like the widow's mite-in the spirit of consecration. One week, due to illness, Ben had not worked, and so paid no tithing. When he explained his circumstances, the elders assured him all was right. But on successive Sundays he failed to attend church, and the anxious local authorities called upon him. Their visit offended him and he drove them out of the house. The gap of misunderstanding widened and an elders' court was convened. Ben was no Ananias, and Ann was certainly no Sapphira, but when Ben refused to appear-out of defiance more than of guilt-he was excommunicated. [^15] Mary's recollection of the sequel was that "from then on Father began to grow indifferent-and to stay away from home for long periods-and once more our life was made miserable." [^16]

There is pathos in the fact that Roberts would vaguely remember his father's singing familiar road ballads, among them "Old Dog Tray" and "Old Horse," but would vividly remember a complete refrain about the home:

I've a darling little wife, She's the comfort of my life, And her, I always will adore.

I am sitting by the fire, With my children by my side, And what can a poor man ask for more.

Ann was indeed a comfort to Ben, but rarely were any of his family by his side. Timorously he had joined the Church; the "spirit of gathering" never permeated him, and he became a spiritual casualty. Underneath the ripples of frustration was a tide of "certain unconquered intemperate habits." Alcohol pulled him like a fever, increasing estrangements with his family and the Church. Much later B. H. Roberts said in bald retrospect, "If my father is alive, he is drunk; if he is dead, he died drinking."

In April of Roberts's fifth year his father sent Ann a check, the largest check in years, and summoned his family once more to join him. In the face of another projected uprooting, the question for Ann Everington Roberts was: Shall the money be used to rejoin Ben, or to follow the promptings of my heart and faith and take my family to the high mountains of the New World? In a religion dedicated to the unification and glorification of families, the pain of her decision was double-edged. This same paradox is imposed in the New Testament. "He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me." And, "Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as it is fit in the Lord." [^17]

Mother Roberts went to the headquarters of the European and British missions of the Church for counsel. There is no record of who counseled her or what was said, whether she was advised for or against emigration. In any case she returned home "encouraged" to attempt the impossible. Since there was not enough money to transport the entire family across the Atlantic and the plains, she decided to take Annie and the ailing infant Thomas. Harry and Polly would be left in the care of relatives or of faithful Latter-day Saints; "trusting the Providences of God," that in due time she would earn enough to summon the rest of the family halfway around the world to join her in the Zion of the Rockies.

8If for the mother there was anguish in this decision, it was tempered with high hopes. The children did not dispute her resolve; indeed, Roberts later wrote of it in heroic terms as "a tremendous undertaking," and praised his mother for "facing" up to it. Seeking homes for Harry and Polly-"just for a while"-during the final days of preparation Ann pleaded with a distant relative named Martin Pie, who operated a kiln for burning chinaware. Polly, at eleven, could at least partly earn her board and keep in that trade by carrying bricks on her head; and later she would be able to cut intricate designs in the chinaware and hand-roll them to smoothness, so the Pies took her in. But Harry, only five, was deemed too young for productive labor, and Ann was obliged to seek guardians for him elsewhere. In her convert idealism she settled on a Brother and Sister John Tovey, who had recently joined the local branch of the Church in Warrington, having just come from Scotland. She knew little of them, and no one cautioned her "Beware the volunteer." "At the pair's solicitation," Roberts's notes say, Ann became convinced of the quality and suitablehess of their lives, and she committed her son to their charge. [^18]

Two days before Ann's departure, young Harry and the baby Thomas were alone in her kitchen. Here Roberts's notes are graphic:

As she stepped from dining table to pantry door weeping, I, with childish sympathy, plucked her gown and in my broad Lancashire dialect said, "Muther, what op?" And "Why art crying?" Mother knelt on the floor beside me and with her arms about my shoulders told me of the intended journey to America-Zion, and how I would have to be left behind with a Brother and Sister Tovey, and Sister Mary with some distant relatives by the name of Pie. And it was only now a day or two when this separation would take place. As she held on to me telling the story, sobs and tears became more profuse; at last, folding me in her arms, she sought of me brokenly a promise that when I grew up to be a man I would come to her in "Zion." Freeing myself from the embrace, I stood erect in the middle of the floor, and with childish solemnity promised her, "I will come." [^19]

He did not know, however, that he would have to grow up to be a man by the age of ten.

9This was Roberts's earliest recorded instance of what the scriptures call a "covenant," with all its Hebrew-Christian overtones, and more. It may have been the first man-size promise of the boy Roberts, but it would not be the last; later promises would not only bend the twig but wrench the oak.

Mary records the pangs of farewell:

Mother left Staffordshire in 1862. B. H. and I went to see them off. Mother climbed up the steps to the elevated train. As the train pulled out, B. H. and I stood looking after it with tears in our eyes. We dreamed of a promise-we looked forward to the time when our mother would be able to send us enough money for tickets to the land across the sea. No one can imagine my feelings as I turned and slowly descended the platform with my small brother. We were to face a future which we could only hope was bright. I seemed alone and friendless. [^20]

So did the small brother.

Mother Roberts eventually reached the Rockies with her daughter Annie. But baby Thomas contracted sea fever on the voyage and wasted away until he died and was buried exactly halfway across the plains. In Utah, Ann set about making a meager living, but because of the bartering, bare-survival economy of the new territory she soon found that accumulating the price of reuniting the family was an almost hopeless task. [^21] "My mother could not foresee the hardships that were caused for herself by leaving Father [Benjamin] in England," Mary later wrote. Yet one searches the record, whether written or oral, in vain for traces of regret. In his youth, as in later years, Roberts bristled when he was referred to as an "abandoned waif" or as an orphan. He would not admit that he felt abandoned or neglected. Even as a boy it was important to be, or at least to appear, shockproof.

Ben found it otherwise. A family trunk preserves a letter which registers his reaction. Some three weeks after Ann sailed on the John Bright, having passed the point of no return, she wrote her husband from shipboard. When Ben received the letter, smarting from the rude shock, he went to London to visit Ann's sister, about which visit she later wrote the following to Ann:

10He was in a fearful order. He said he was tricked-and by a woman. If a man had so deceived him he would mind it. He said he was very sorrowful to think he had sent you so much money as he had done; for if he had known what you were up to he would have stopped your gallop you may depend on it. And you [had] taken all the children with you. I told him if you had left one child behind you I would never forgive you neither in this world nor in that to come! [^22] He said you had the impudence to write him after you were on board ship and to tell him that he might take another wife. But he thought he had wife enough. I told him he might think himself well off. You had left him no encumbrance to trouble him. I have not seen him since. [^23]

Anticipating years of family separation, Ann may have had mixed fears that Ben would locate the children, make hostages of them, or (hope against hope) bring them with him to America. Mary remained convinced that "Mother sincerely believed that Father would follow the family." [^24] But so far as is known, Ann stayed with the realistic recognition that, lest her plans be blocked, the children's whereabouts must remain secret.

The intensity of Ben's wrath may have been the seal of his estrangement, or it may have been the surest token of love. But neither Ann nor her children ever saw or heard from him again. Ann lived to be eighty-three, a long endurance, never being reunited with her first husband. She clung to the faith that their relationship, though torn, tormented, and traumatized, might yet become divinely sealed and perpetuated beyond the grave. She taught her children that glorious marriages-if the partners are Christlike-are made by heaven, or by heaven remade prior to resurrection.

Did Ben remarry? Did he have other children? Did he ever conquer the patterns of alcoholism? Did the substructure of his spirituality rise to mastery? To this day his descendants wonder, and Ann wondered for the rest of her life. When no word came, she finally considered remarriage. A kindly and industrious convert, John William Nichols, whom she had first met on the plains, married her in the Salt Lake Valley in February 1863. (Nichols's own wife and children had died with Rocky Mountain spotted fever.) Two years after his marriage to Ann, John was killed in a threshing machine accident.

11Ann later married Seth Dustin, a strapping railroad construction man, a widower with three large, roughhewn sons. That marriage too was temporary. As soon as his boys were raised, the father disappeared. In 1886 Ann married John Wickersham Wooley, and it appears that both partners viewed this as a marriage of "fortune." The name Ann Everington Wooley (omitting Roberts, Nichols, and Dustin) is on her gravestone. But B. H. Roberts in his own late years would strike it with a cane and vow out of his deepest reading of his mother's soul to change it back to the original name-Roberts. By the ordinances of the Church, and of the temple, that was eventually done. [^25]

Thus in boyhood Roberts was stripped of his own blood father and of two stepfathers; his mother was three times widowed-once separated by her own initiative, once by a husband who abandoned her, and once by death. As a missionary in England, during fitful ramblings in London, Liverpool, and the countryside-ramblings which he ascribed to his romantic nature-the adult B. H. Roberts would nourish the notion that he might see his father's face and be recognized in turn. Even in late years something akin to that half-hope remained in his mother. At a cost much out of proportion to her resources, she mailed to England two pieces of a broken portrait of Ben to have it expertly retouched. [^26] Careful repair was attempted but it remained an indistinct and unflattering portrait. She hung it in a place of honor in her home, and her son was familiar with its presiding presence. Later it became the prized wall-hanging in Roberts's own study. Though he tended to shun photographers, B. H. Roberts requested that a photograph be made of him in his study with the image of his father on the wall in his background. And in that same spirit he named his own first son Ben. "I have taken the very first opportunity to redeem my father's name, and hope the time will come when through the gospel we shall be able to be a savior in his house." [^27]

12If all of his life Roberts was in a subliminal way searching for a father, it seems clear he searched only for Ben. But through the years that old photograph was his only link with his blood father. Whatever surrogate parents he had-a teacher here, a mature friend there-he felt as did his sister Mary: "I loved and honored my father. I am sorry I could not have spent more time with him." [^28] One way to interpret his whole life is that emotionally he never really recovered from his desert of denial. Another is that the aching patriarchal void pervasively sensitized him, for as he wrote to his mother at age twenty-three, "Still I was not friendless for he who has promised to be a father to the fatherless, was one to me." [^29] A lasting sorrow was that, as a nearly fatherless child, he was unwittingly a somewhat childless father-too often geographically and spiritually distant from his own flesh and blood.

But the negative aspects of the "broken home" can be overstressed. Roberts surely matured more rapidly than had he lived in a "normal" home. He may have been drawn more closely to his mother both in affection and in a desire to be "the man of the family." And he escaped the "shadow" of his father's influence. Sociological studies, though they are sparse and inconclusive, do not conclude that every child brought up by a single parent is inevitably handicapped or stunted.

From age five to nine, Harry Roberts was in the strange and itinerant world of the John Tovey family. During this period there was for him, despite his youth, no real home, no secure ties to children of his own age, and not even a visit with the Pie family. Apparently there was little play or normal diversion; he refers only once in his notes to anything frivolous-"dog-paddling" around, probably alone, in the shallow canals of Wolverhampton. Roberts later summed up these months and years as a series of "broken harmonies."

13The Toveys had a shady past to hide and to hide from. As part of that subterfuge, they often called themselves the "Gaileys." Their marriage had been childless, and their care of the Roberts boy was, for the most part, wooden, severe, and cold. Mrs. Tovey had a brother who was then, or had been, in prison-an abrasive fact that had a way of turning up in the high-pitch rhetoric of arguments. Despite their conversion, which seemed in other ways sincere and even exemplary, the Toveys were both compulsive drinkers. Evening after evening they dragged Harry with them to country taverns and city pubs. There he curled up under the tab]es, miserable and forlorn, as the Toveys drank themselves into a stupor. Such time as he spent in their "wretched home"- which was no more than a rented and dilapidated flat-was hardly more congenial. Young Harry had been traded from an occasionally indulgent father, who did most of his drinking in absentia, to a desperately poor foster father, who dragged Harry into it.

The appearance of Mother Tovey often had a frightening effect on impressionable Harry. To him she seemed (sometimes she pretended to be) a witch. Her teeth were gone, her nose was sharp, and she walked with a double-jointed wobble. To encourage the boy to close his eyes in sleep she would fold her arms in a "spooky style" and "rock to and fro and moan and blunder." It was not at all hard, especially with his fiery imagination, to believe as he sat with her on a mossy log or walked alongside her in the obscuring fog that she was indeed a magical woman, a "spooky queen." [^30]

John Tovey was a stone sawyer by trade, but he was only sporadically employed. Sometimes he ran a makeshift bakery, where the profits were mostly children's pennies. During the summers the trio usually wandered through the countryside begging. This was the England of Charles Dickens's time, where the sweatshop and the use of children as chattels were cruel, but common, ways of coping with hard times. Roberts has left a glimpse of his occasional role in the stone craft:

I would be quite useful in sifting the sand and carrying it to the sloping board above the slashes cut into the sandstone by the moving backward and forward of a heavy steel blade, set in a frame something like a bucksaw, but much larger and heavier. This, pushed across the sandstone with the sand of the sloping board above the slash washed into the crevices by the dripping of water from the spigot of the keg, cut the stone into the desired slabs. It was my business through the day to keep the board supplied with sand and the water in the keg. Both water and sand were carried upon the head and this continued through a number of years, pressed my head between the shoulders until it amounted almost to a deformity. [^31]

14The hunched-neck "deformity" lasted into his early teens and was a prod to his lifetime disposition for a military posture and bearing which made him seem taller than he was. Biographer Lon J. Haddock referred to him as "the little quarry sand boy.' [^32] He was indeed little, but he was not weak nor was he shiftless. Not only did he work with sand and water, but he also hand-polished marble slabs for mantelpieces, hearthstones, table tops, and other interior uses. Marble slabs one to two inches thick were sawed up, then given long rubbing treatments with sandstone and finally with the finer-grained snake-stone until their sheen satisfied the maker. To the boy Harry the work was not an altogether grim nor burdensome thing, and it no doubt taught him disciplined use of his energies. He never lost respect-even a zest-for manual labor, [^33] and called himself "a hearty son of rustic toil." [^34]

Out of the shop during evenings or on Sundays, the boy showed vocal skill; during his mature years editors would ascribe the baritone richness of his speaking voice to the moist ocean air of Britain because "no such smooth resonant tone ever had its cultivation in the dry air of the mountains." [^35] However that may be, he was indeed already developing his singing voice in two strangely opposite outlets: Church hymns with congregations on the Sabbath and tavern solos the rest of the week. The missionary songs (such favorites as "Israel, Israel, God Is Calling" and "Ye Elders of Israel") were sung in open-air preaching services on Sunday. But on week nights the Toveys commandeered him to sing raucous saloon songs for coppers. He was required to perform, accompanied by Tovey's violin, while standing on a table or chair, his head thrown back "with great gusto and dramatics"; [^36] he then self-consciously watched the hat passed for pennies used for another drink, for the Toveys left no coppers for him. After Harry turned nine, the novelty of off-color lyrics sung through fledgling lips apparently faded, and the Toveys gave up the ritual. But a vivid memory of these crude tunes bubbled up to his consciousness the rest of his life.

15The Toveys, as recent converts, were a curious mixture of gospel advocacy, endurance, and relapse; they struggled, apparently in vain, against vagabond habits and dispositions. There were frequent fits of anger in which Harry became a bone of contention. Sometimes they fought over his possession and sometimes over his punishment, as if he were a tool or a piece of money, alternately clutching at him and "kicking and cuffing him about." As he grew older their battles for control of his energies sometimes led to "temporary separation." [^37] During one such contest in a public market place, the boy, disgusted, tried to escape the scene by running out of earshot. The couple faltered in pursuit, and then Mrs. Tovey shouted, "Stop thief!" A policeman outran the crowd, collared the boy, and dragged him back. When the couple explained awkwardly that he was not a thief but a runaway chattel, the policeman gave them a stern reprimand which, whatever else its effect, did not increase Harry's sense of security.

Once Mr. Tovey won temporary monopoly on the lad. During a violent quarrel in their little cake and pie shop (most of their customers were ragamuffin children), Tovey swung a chair at his wife. The blow drew blood at her temple, and she sank to the floor. Fear replaced fury, and Tovey impulsively poured flour on the wound, making an already ugly scene grotesque. Panicked, he took the boy by the hand and fled, thinking, as Harry later believed, the old lady had died. They were soon enough all together again, however.

There is no exact record of where they went when they traveled in their gypsy mixture of odd-jobbing and begging. The poet-historian Orson F. Whitney writes that there were "wanderings" in the pottery districts of Staffordshire and also in the midland counties. [^38] Their meanderings most likely led to Birmingham, Manchester, Warrington and Wolver-hampton. Occasionally the trio met a friendly member of the Church; but never in all the foraging about did the boy see his sister.

16A fleeting reference in Roberts's own notes mentions Wolverhampton, where he says the Tovey quarters were on "Old Horsefair Street." Here he saw Norman horse parades with striking horses done up with beribboned manes and bobtails. He was perhaps as impressed with their riders as the mounts. Later the admiring boy would become admired for his horsemanship. Also in Wolverhampton he was a standby witness to Sunday preaching services held outdoors, often in the Old Clock Square. The speakers stood between two cannons. A scrapbook notation says that in Warrington, his birthplace, he saw many Roman relics. [^39] The artifacts of Rome taught him something about pre-Christian Rome; those of war gave an impressionistic sense of the Siege of Sevasto-pal and the Crimean War. Early he absorbed a strong family pride in his Uncle Richard Roberts, [^40] who had been with the famous "Six Hundred" in the Crimea. As an adult he made a distinction between a warrior and a soldier. And he learned that the message and power of Christ has often had its most profound reception in blood-soaked territory.

Life with the Toveys was barren and food scanty. Harry's bed was the blanketless bare floor. Continual hunger made one meal very memorable: "the first feast I ever attended!" was probably at a stoneworker's celebration. Beefsteak, rolls and ale gorged the boy's tummy and pockets alike. Glorious! He took pockets full to Mother Tovey, feeling joy in this "rude service."

Though exposed to a great deal of verbal history so common in English conversation, to the spirit of sacrament services, and to the sound of the Bible and modern scriptures read aloud by Mrs. Tovey, Roberts remained illiterate, longing to read, to write, to learn. There was, because of poverty and the itinerant life pattern, no opportunity for school.

17During Harry's ninth year [^41] the Toveys became tired of their little chattel of mixed usefulness. There had been little or no communication from Ann Roberts; doubtless, Harry's foster parents wondered what duration of "parenthood" to expect, and Harry was becoming harder to handle. Standard practice was to send such boys to a workhouse, where they were apprenticed to trades until they reached their twenty-first birthday. Accordingly, Harry was taken by Mrs. Tovey to such an institution and his name placed on the books as a shoemaker's apprentice. Though it may have seemed a welcome alternative to Harry, it somehow clashed with the memory of his promise to his mother. That night he was placed in the corner of the upstairs room of an old tumble-down house, where there was neither bed nor bedding and only a few pieces of day clothing:

On this night, following the registering for an apprenticeship, after sleeping sometime, I awoke and was strangely awake, eyes staring out into the darkness which was only relieved by the dim lights from the streets coming in through the windows and patterning the windows on the opposite walls. Restless, I tossed from side to side; then presently a calmness, then a voice was heard saying: "If you are apprenticed to the shoemaker's trade tomorrow you will never see your mother in America." Then stillness and the recurring question in my disturbed mind, what should be done? How much time elapsed during these questions I did not know. But presently I found the resolution formed in my mind that I would run away. [^42]

This "soul voice" seemed to him "a voice outside of myself." It had authority and gave direction and was a voice that spoke not only to his mind but to his soul and his whole being as well. The "stillness"-that vibration of silence and calm that preceded and followed it-was one of the ways he afterward distinguished such inspired impressions from the ordinary flow of ideas.

Wearing his few raggedy clothes and carrying a pair of clogs (wood-bottomed shoes with iron rims), he stole down the stairs, out onto the brick sidewalk. He walked the main streets "without objective," until he glimpsed a flare of furnaces near the edge of the city. Here, warmed by the slag, he spent the rest of his first runaway night. From that point on there is no record of how far or how long he wandered. A family friend who heard him recount the story decades later recalls his saying it was three months. His daughters say it was at least several weeks, a somewhat aimless, scrappy period of plodding through lanes and streets in anonymous mixings and withdrawals, through towns he could not later identify. He ate discarded crusts and peelings, slept in doorways and coal bins, inquiring everywhere, to no avail, for Mormon elders. Looking back, he called himself a "gamin." [^43]

18Accounts differ on the immediate outcome. His own notes say he was discovered by the Toveys who were "hunting for me." His daughter Adah's version is that after a time he was overcome by loneliness and "retraced his steps back to where he had lived with the Toveys." How long, after all, can a nine-year-old go it alone? In any case, upon his return, the Toveys' pressure toward apprenticeship had, to his relief, been temporarily discarded.

But Harry's early on-table tavern singing had convinced Tovey that he had "good rhythm" and therefore the talent to be a drummer boy. In a tavern one night, John Gailey (as John Tovey preferred to be known) "patched up" an affair with a British Army officer, who was wearing narrow striped ribbons of red, white and blue in his hat. A shilling passed between them as evidence of enlistment, and a ribbon was fastened to Harry's coat. It was agreed that the boy would be delivered to the barracks the next morning; perhaps, as one tradition has it, to be sent overseas after training at a British barracks. Again that night the impression came to Harry to run away; again the same resolution, but now a new plan. He would seek out a friendly old Scottish shoemaker whom he had met during a church meeting on one of John Tovey's preaching tours.

Of this second runaway, he later told his own children, "I had to beat the dogs to the garbage." His predicament is reminiscent of Jack London's "people of the abyss," who foraged for scraps of food in the smelly rubbish and back-door grime of London. He took furtive naps in stalls and porches, and on cold nights sometimes huddled against a horse or other animal in a stable. This, if nothing else, was the source of a lifetime dislike of cold water and an oft-repeated phrase to fellow missionaries and fellow soldiers that few knew how to interpret, "I would rather sleep with a wet dog than a man."

It took him some weeks to locate the home of the old shoemaker who, despite all the boy's pleading for secrecy, notified the Toveys and put him back in their custody. Decades later, his sister Mary wrote, "Whenever I asked him where he went and what he did, he would answer something like this: 'Well, I'm here, sister, so why worry about the past?'" [^44]

19The tenacity of his will to survive, alone against the world as a little child, immunized him from frantic worry. Faith in Christ, it is said, is being at home at sea, trusting in overarching purposes. (His prayerful pleadings made him conscious of what he called the hand and voice of God.) He was, spiritually speaking, a boy Crusoe, receiving the education Rousseau prescribed for Emile. "Perhaps," he finally wrote, "there was no more fruitful period of mind training than came to me in those hectic days of my early boyhood." [^45]

His prayers, germinations of faith, consisted of three earnest requests reminiscent of the repetitious plaints of a hand organ: to stay alive, to reach Zion, to be again with his mother. In adult life he taught that as long as one prays one does not die spiritually.

The influence of hours of Sabbath oratory by Tovey fed Harry's soul. [^46] Tovey could neither read nor write, but his wife drilled him in passages of scripture, sustaining the premises and promises of divine restoration. Tovey vocalized these proof texts over and over until he had them memorized, then his wife marked their location for him in the Bible. Harry, from hearing him practicing, perhaps had fragments of the passages memorized as well. Each Sunday after services, persons gifted or at least willing to preach went to public squares, to street corners, or out into the fields-wherever listeners would assemble-and bore witness of the faith. Hecklers were abundant. Tovey coped with his hecklers by turning to the Bible, running his fingers along the verse like a blind man fingering braille, pretending to read (a strategy which Harry thought "not quite honest") and effectively quoting the biblical answer. The boy listened well.

Other mind training came to little Harry as Mrs. Tovey read aloud to him with verve and skill. At times the poverty of the Toveys was so abysmal that they owned only "a violin, a Bible, and a bundle of clothing." But the Bible is a whole library; and the Toveys also owned or borrowed newspapers and some Church periodicals and books.

20Harry could neither read nor "cipher." But he begged Mrs. Tovey to read aloud to him. "It soon became something of a passion with me." He was stirred by the Church's British journal (which was published for more than 130 years) the Millennial Star. He listened, often entranced, to its biblical echoes. But his favorite passage was from an anti-Mormon work by Samuel M. Smucker, biographer of Catherine II and Nicholas of Russia, who wrote what Roberts considered "the fairest anti-Mormon account" of the life of Joseph Smith. Again and again he begged Mother Tovey to read it aloud. It fired his visualizings and stirred haunting chords in his budding sense of discipleship.

It is conjectural that he sometimes pored over the lithographic engravings of the great West in Linforth and Piercy's Route from Liverpool to the Great Salt Lake Valley, a book that lured many Saints from England to the Rockies in the spirit of gathering. [^47]

Before the age of ten, Harry had experienced many of the things he would feel in maturity, learning by experience what it means to testify of Christ and to be greeted by mob violence, for often Tovey was forced to flee while little Harry, small enough to escape notice, dragged back to their hovel the chair which had been the portable speaking platform.

Thus, without benefit of either the schoolroom or the Sunday School room, he was educated "by ear" in the history of the restored Church. His notes acknowledge the religious magnetism of hero worship when Mrs. Tovey read to him the account of the Carthage Jail and how John Taylor parried the guns of assassins with only a cane until four balls ripped through his body, ending his vain attempt to defend his brethren, Joseph and Hyrum, in their martyrdom. Martyrdom, as the supreme enactment of Christlike love, was etched upon his mind from boyhood on, the chiaroscuro of light and shadow of personal destiny; more than once in the years to come he was close enough to breathe the scent of a martyr's death.

21But among the varieties of religious experience it was the sense of divine life, not death, that came early to him. One experience superseded all others. During his ninth year, he and Mrs. Tovey were traveling alone through the rough countryside in green lanes "hedged with blackthorn with occasional trees stretching up in the midst of the hedges." Mr. Tovey had gone ahead of them seeking a job. At midday the boy and Mother Tovey sat down beside a deeply cut road at the foot of a hedge. A breeze wafted two or three pages of a newspaper close by, and Harry rushed to gather them for Mrs. Tovey to read to him aloud. She started to read but, subdued by the heat of the day, soon lapsed into snoring sleep.

I sat alone with the paper and my thoughts, marveling at the miracle, that a paper could speak to one only if he had the power to read it. On this thought my mind dwelled and after some time elapsed I spoke out loud: "Will the time ever come when books and papers will speak to me? Will I ever read books?" Then a peculiar silence, and the soul-voice said, "Aye, and you'll write them too." Then all things seemed to be swallowed up in an immense and wonderful silence. I had no inclination to move or disturb the silence. It seemed as if the whole universe had become an ear, and a voice, and a slight trembling shook my frame as I listened to what might be called the very vibrations of silence. So I sat entranced a long time. How long I did not remember. But I was immersed in that silence until my old lady companion groaned, and awoke, and the journey was resumed. I made no reference to my strange experience, never through the many years, and for many years it was forgotten. [^48]

Understandably his "literacy lag" made Harry more dependent on listening. As a result his auditory memory became prodigious. He had a lifetime preoccupation with the shape and sound of words, especially spoken words which he had learned by oral imitation. This interest matured into a gift for narrative; and his speaking influenced his writing more than his writing his speaking. He resisted wholly abstract concepts. The words he spoke were vital and couched in visual images. Strangely, that very vitality would be held against him by malevolent critics.

Notes

Chapter 1

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
[^23] 23 Mrs. William Reed to Ann Roberts.
[^24] 24 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^25] 25 Late in their lives, on 3 May 1928, B. H. and Annie Brynie, a half-sister, and Mary arranged for the temple sealing of Ann Everington and Benjamin Roberts and all of the children including the twins and baby Thomas. See BHR Temple Book.
[^26] 26 Roberts kept one sample of his father's handwriting from the original wrapping of the photo given his mother. It is preserved in the family collection.
[^27] 27 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 1 September 1883, Roberts Family Collection.
[^28] 28 Research has failed to establish where and when Ben died. The marriage date is 15 June 1848 (he was twenty-two) in Poplar, Middlesex, England; from the Book of Remembrance of Haven R. Day.
[^29] 29 B. H. Roberts to Ann Everington, 21 April 1880, Roberts Family Collection.
[^30] 30 Mrs. Charles H. Wilcox recorded these impressions from a conversation with B.H. Roberts at his home prior to his call to the Eastern States.
[^31] 31 BN, p. 10.
[^32] 32 See Juvenile Instructor 49 (February 1914): 85.
[^33] 33 Fifty years later, as chairman of "Vocations and Industry" in the youth program of the Church, he wrote, "We shall take the ground that no vocation of honest industry need be ignoble or debasing in its effects, but by properly correlating it with the general welfare of human life can be in effect both honorable and glorious." Improvement Era 15 (October 1912): 1083.
[^34] 34 Liahona 12 (20 October 1914): 364.
[^35] 35. Salt Lake Herald, 8 January 1899.
[^36] 36. So Roberts later told his children.
[^37] 37. BNG, p. 8.
[^38] 38 See History of Utah, 4:689.
[^39] 39 In a notebook under "Roberts, B. H." is this handwritten note: "Warrington-Town of, my birth place. Warrington, at the head of tide water on the Mersey River. It was a station of Romans (Veraterium) in the time of Agricola - (69-84 A.D.) and many Roman relics have been found in the neighborhood."
[^40] 40 Beniamin's father's brother.
[^41] 41 N. B. Lundwall, Roberts's secretary for twelve years, recalls him saying this incident occurred when he was seven.
[^42] 42 BNG, p. 16. Roberts spoke in later years of this spiritual impression (which one tradition says was repeated three times) as evidence that "the promptings of the Spirit of God" can come early - several years, in his case, before his official baptism and confirmation in 1867.
[^43] 43 The word gomin - rather than urchha - was endeared to Roberts through the Victor Hugo story of Gayroche who, in the midst of battle, went along the pavement gathering unfired cartridges from the corpses of fallen men, gaining strength at each step.
[^44] 44 Memoirs, p. 4.
[^45] 45 BN, p. 18a.
[^46] 46 Apparently Tovey's periodic alienations from the LDS Church did not interfere with his desire to preach.
[^47] 47 This was republished by Harvard University Press in 1962. The book was originally issued in fifteen separately stitched parts from July 1854 to September 1855.
[^48] 48 BN, p. 20.
