Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

2 The Voyage: Zigzag to Zion

At some Church meetings during the winter of 1865, Harry heard rumors of arrangements for his voyage to America. Afterward he learned that President Brigham Young had sent word to the mission and branch authorities, probably at the request of Harry's mother, to set up a "great search" for "the Roberts boy." The search was thorough, but it took a year to make connections; missionaries finally found Harry and brought him to his sister Polly at the Pies' home in Staffordshire. Considering the Latter-day Saint propensity for keeping track of each other-a church-community in which it is difficult to get lost-this delay is mute evidence of the unpredictable ramblings of the Toveys. Harry soon learned he was to participate in the Perpetual Emigration Fund, which would pay his passage on the condition that he work out his fare and contribute to the fund as he was able after arriving in America. [^1]

23Before sailing, Polly received a letter from her mother saying that she had sent with a plainsman gloves for Harry and a shawl for her, some homemade quilts and a little cash for each of them, and that he would deliver these items in person to the children on their arrival in New York.

On April 31, 1866, the voyage from Liverpool began. Three trivial mistakes in his notes are perhaps revelatory of Harry's lifetime impressions. One is his overestimation of his sister's age as they met. He says she was nineteen; in fact, she was barely sixteen. They had not seen each other in the intervening years and she had become a woman; one suspects he could almost see his mother in her. Nor again did he accurately discern the cause of Polly's tears as she hugged members of the Pie family before the ceremony of weighing anchor, for she had felt genuine rapport with them-it had been a satisfying second home-and she was crying at leaving them behind. Harry felt nothing but high excitement and supposed her tears arose from the threat of the sea. Seeking to comfort her, he stamped firmly upon the open deck and announced, "Polly, this ship won't sink!" [^2] He erred, too, in his estimate of the length of the voyage: he says it was six weeks. Other records show it was actually nine. This boyish estimate, apparently carried all through life, may reflect his solid satisfaction in being on the way at last after more than four years of marking time.

24One observation which later life confirmed and recon-firmed was his view of the composition of the more than one thousand Latter-day Saint converts who thronged the decks of the S.S. John Bright. It was, he says, just as Charles Dickens had described an earlier set of Mormon immigrants about to set sail. (Roberts cites Dickens's notable passage from The Uncommercial Traveler in Roberts's A Comprehensive History of the Church. [^3] Dickens went on board the Amazon expecting (indeed planning) to "bear testimony against them if they deserved it, as I fully believed they would"; instead, he found them "the pick and flower of England" and "so strikingly different from all other people in like circumstances whom I have ever seen, that I wonder[ed]. ... Fine handsome children... only two with marks upon their neck that were probably scrofulous" (i.e., tubercular). He was struck with "their perfect order and propriety of all their social arrangements..." and concluded that "some remarkable influence had produced a remarkable result, which better known influences have often missed." [^4]

Roberts describes his own shipmates as varied, but often skilled, and of the working class-the common people, the kind of people "who heard Jesus gladly. " [^5]

If Dickens, three years later, had gone to Liverpool and interviewed this freckled, not quite "fine and handsome" boy in depth, he would have found one of his own cardboard characters come alive, a new twist on the Oliver theme. Here was an authentic victim of the back streets; an urchin given over, from the best of motives, into the hands of some religious Fagins not yet gone straight; a boy who by scrounging had kept barely enough life in body to be sufficiently alert in spirit to cling to a promise to his mother, thus narrowly avoiding the obscurity of apprenticeship in shoemaking or drumming or who knows what. Many emotional doors had been slammed in his face, while others were prematurely opened. He was a boy whose identity could hardly be clear to himself yet who felt, as he later put it, "whirled along" by something divine. The lengthy separation from his mother (by an ocean and a long prairie) and the psychic and geographic chasm from his father made him a loner. (Can any man-in literature or in psychological casebooks-ever recover from such a love-wanting boyhood?) Already life had bumped him up against a whole catalog of characters, some more threatening than Dickens's. And in imagination, which for him was often an instrument of the soul, he knew of modern men of Christ, hearing of them with an ear already spiritually selective, men who ignited and captivated his sense of the holy just as much as the familiar prophets of the Bible did. But they were alive, real, and in a distant place called the New Zion. He was on his way there. And he had it in him, though he knew it not, to become one of them.

25It might have meant much to Roberts to learn that a future Briton (originally from Austria), celebrated at Oxford and Cambridge as a logician, would see in the finest Mormon countenance more, even, than Dickens. Though Ludwig Wittgenstein believed that religion was "not a matter of proving things," he defined its essence as a stoic feeling, a feeling of absolute safety. [^6] Moreover, he observed that "doubt and belief as well as certainty, like feelings, emotions, pain, etc., have characteristic facial expressions." It is understandable then that as Norman Malcolm records, "He praised one of Dickens' sketches-a ship crowded with English converts to Mormonism about to sail for America. Wittgenstein admired the calm resolution of these people as portrayed by Dickens. [^7] Such feelings of safety, such strength of face as Roberts could muster this day, had not come from a congenial home life.

Details of departure stayed with Harry: there were in Liverpool "great public meetings," "great rejoicings," "tearful farewells." On the last day of April 1866, [^8] all of a forenoon was spent with small dinghies carrying passengers and some visitors out to the ship. The three decks were assigned by nationality-English, Welsh, Scottish. Harry considered it "good fortune" that he and Polly were under the main open deck. Once aboard, the people burst unitedly into songs of farewell:

Yes, my native land I love thee, All thy scenes, I love them well- Friends, connections, happy country, Now I bid thee all farewell. Yes, I leave thee, glad I leave thee, Far in distant lands to dwell. [^9]

As he boarded ship, Harry was sure he would never wish to be back in England. But later when he saw some Canadian redcoats at Niagara Falls-proud, immaculate, stately-he felt a nostalgic tug of heart. The homesickness faded, but his loyalty to Britain burned with a lucid flame for a lifetime, flaring higher as he became immersed in British literature, political thought, and philosophy.

Now on shipboard he could hum with approval the hymn:

O Babylon, O Babylon, we bid thee farewell, We're going to the mountains of Ephraim to dwell.

26It was a "strong congregational chorus," and in the idiom of latter-day revelation it was also a prayer; "the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me." (D&C 25:12.) They sailed at sundown.

Mary records that during all her years with the Pies, and on the voyage, she had only one dress to wear. Harry, too, had no change from his bedraggled outfit: "a pair of barn door trousers, a cut-me-down jacket made from the old trousers of an English policeman; a hat supposed to be jaunty, with Scottish plaid and black streamers," which he heartily despised, and the clogs.

Three days out from the coast of Ireland, the ship ran into a rollicking storm. The hatches were closed and the people "mowed up below decks"; most of the passengers were nauseated, panting for fresh air, pounding sea biscuits, and sipping water that was fast becoming putrid. While others were confined and seasick, Harry was simply gloomy. Toward the storm's decline, he was one of the first out on deck. He grasped two rings near a hatch, lay down on his back and dared the high choppy waves to wash up over the rails and drench him. "The joy within my soul rose to meet the boisterous ocean and I remember it as an experience of supreme exultation. [^10] He would one day mark and memorize this passage in Byron.

And I have loved thee, Ocean! And my joy Of youthful sports was on thy breast to be Borne, like thy bubbles, onward: From a boy I wanton'd with thy breakers-they to me Were a delight; and if the freshening sea Made them the terror- 'twas a pleasing fear, For I was as it were a child of thee, And trusted to thy billows far and near, And laid my hand upon thy mane-as I do here. [^11]

27Early in the voyage Harry learned that a crewman whom the youngsters fearfully dubbed "Blackeye" was charged to oversee them and to intervene at any scent of mischief or danger. He first felt the mate's heavy-handed discipline through the seat of his barn door trousers. Harry had invaded the verboten rattlings, the network of ropes that went up to the fast cross-beams, when, catlike, Blackeye swung up hand over hand and, with a rope, cut him severely across his backside. Friendlier sailors, as a favor to the boy-seaman (according to daughter Adah), tattooed a blue anchor on his right forearm which he proudly displayed. Spiritual maturity, and the accompanying increased understanding that the body is a temple, was to bring regret for this disfigurement, which to the boy had seemed a brave and manly thing.

Apparently Polly was Harry's main companion, and he rarely conversed with or came to know many others. On board the same ship was Alfred Lambourne, who became a distinguished painter and poet laureate of Utah. His paintings of the Hill Cumorah in New York and of Adam-ondi-Ahman in central Missouri, vast and dramatic in conception, reflected with the brush something of the same sweep that Roberts was to signify in the spoken and written word, and would eventually grace the foyer of the Salt Lake Temple. [^12] Both he and Roberts came to be known among their intimates as "cheerful pessimists." [^13]

Two future friends became antagonists in a strange encounter in a clash between nine-year-old Harry and a lad three years older. There had been some singing and dancing one cloudless May day, and the deck was so steady that the lads on board played games of marbles. Harry was playing "keepsies" with "a lad of dark complexion, swarthy skin and hard face," who was a head taller than himself. Dispute over actual ownership of the marbles led to a scuffle and blows, which Blackeye ended. Fifteen years later, when Harry and John H. Gibbs became missionary companions in Tennessee, they both recalled with amazement this shipboard experience, faded but not forgotten; it proved to enhance the bond of missionary brotherhood they felt. [^14]

28Harry's general isolation from the deck crew and crowd, due to a shy hesitancy, was twice almost overcome-once by hunger and once by a mounting curiosity to witness a full-furied storm from the deck. The hunger was punctuated by an authoritarian first mate, the only one of the officers Harry did not describe as "very fine." He was a grouchy, guttural-voiced, stiff-jointed man. Harry's attention was captured when the first mate ordered Blackeye to bring him some tea with bread and butter. Bread and butter! The words themselves made the rock-hard pellets called sea biscuits seem worse than scant, and Harry stood by, if only to feast his eyes. When the bread was finally brought, the mate blew up, fumed at the thinness of slices, and shouted, "I told you to get some bread and butter, not wafers!" and tossed the sandwich (Roberts's notes call it a "double-sandwich") overboard. Under the pall of helplessness, Harry's stomach keenly begrudged the ocean those slices, however thin.

During the last week of the voyage, a fierce storm proved a thrilling adventure for Harry. As the winds began to whip, Harry lingered near the only cabin on board and watched an aristocratic man stare at the menacing horizon and say with an oath, "I wish we were in New York Harbor!" That heightened his curiosity more than his fear. In spite of orders to go below, he hid near the penthouse on the rear of the deck among the emergency compasses, where he could see up to the bridge. There the helmsman was, as a precaution, lashed to the frame of the steering wheel. The ship was soon caught in the path of a "spiral of water, a water-spout; in fact," and began to swirl, shudder, lunge and rock wildly. Harry held on as if in a trance, staying in his hiding place until he was soaked as thoroughly as he was satisfied. Then he slipped below with the passengers. The tempest lasted long enough to blow the ship far off course. When the sea ended its ragings, half a day was required for navigational soundings from the ocean floor, and it was rumored that the ship had been taken "up toward Newfoundland."

On June 6, 1866, the John Bright arrived at Castle Gardens in New York and spilled out its contribution to the eight million emigrants-the historian Oscar Handlin calls them "The Uprooted"-who would enter America at this place. Fifty years later, Roberts revisited the spot in New York where he had put down his bedroll and planted his feet on sovereign spiritual ground. In a "Gems of Thor" notebook he inserted these lines which probably evoked more than they contrasted with his boyish perception of the emigrant multitude:

29Worn women Unkempt, frowsy; Children lusty Exuberant With a sense of adventure; Dull men, Braver than they know- Facing the universe! [^15]

A description of himself as a boy immigrant, dictated when he was seventy-five, provides a glimpse of his personality as well as his appearance as he first touched American soil. Face: "solid and sober." Eyes: "restless keen blue, deep set." Neck: "crunched down, nose turned up"; a gap between his two front teeth through which he could whistle. Hair: "mouse-colored," "unruly." Body: "chunky." He described Polly as "plain" except for her "intensely bright" hazel eyes, and he contrasted her pleasant social disposition with his own somewhat surly one.

A young loner had entered a land choice above all other lands. But Harry Roberts had not been dulled by his first ten years; rather, he was in most ways sensitized.

Harry and Polly found upon their arrival that their mother's well-meaning attempt at having a few provisions and cash waiting for them was foiled. The messenger who was to meet the children was unreliable; neither he nor his precious cargo ever arrived in New York. The children were less disappointed than they would have been had they realized how crucial warm clothing would be in the ordeal ahead.

30With only the first phase of their journey completed, the immigrants faced the long overland trek. They were loaded on low-lying steamboats for the passage up Long Island Sound to New Haven; then by rail and riverboat they made it to Montreal, Canada; thence they went up the river to Fort Lawrence; after which a kind of cattle car conveyed them to Niagara, Chicago and Quincy, Illinois (where the talk turned to Joseph Smith and the lost majesty of the abandoned and burned Nauvoo Temple). The trip continued on to St. Joseph, then up the Missouri River to Wyoming, Nebraska, just south of Council Bluffs, which was as far as the Union Pacific Railroad had reached. This central point had, by that time, replaced Winter Quarters in Iowa as the point of Mormon embarkation west.

This water and rail journey took thirteen days. Young Harry's random impressions included a breathtaking view of Niagara Falls-the train stopped on the bridge (Had Blondell really walked over them on a tightrope, his feet encased in baskets?); the antics of a good Welsh brother by the name of Williams, apparently assigned in New York to watch over the Roberts children, [^16] who "bitterly resented" being locked up on cattle cars on the Canadian bridge and, peppery-tempered, noisily assailed the oak doors with a small and ancient rapier, hardly loosening a splinter (Roberts later compared him to Shakespeare's Welshman in Prince Hal's Glendower, who said he could "call spirits from the vasty deep," but who was taunted, "So can I, or so can any man, but will they come when you do call for them?" [^17] ).

Harry had a scary encounter with a poor, suffering Scottish mother whose hysteria he had witnessed at Castle Gardens. At Niagara she attempted to leap from the train while it was on the bridge; her screams jolted Harry from a sound sleep. The suicide was averted but, screaming and sashaying, she sat on his head, and he himself let out a yell that "would have awakened the Seven sleepers. [^18] As the train reached the Canadian side there was a baggage check by the customs office, perhaps remembered because Polly and he had almost none. And Polly records how she and her brother crouched in fear, feeling intimidated by the many soldiers in full uniform who came in their car. America's Civil War had just ended, but its tensions, as they would learn soon enough, had not.

June 19 brought the excitement of reaching the end of the railroad line; and there assembled were the wagons and equipage of the mule and ox trains by the Perpetual Emigration Fund Company. [^19] It was a half-way house "for the poor," but it made Harry and Polly feel rich and well provided for.

31The Millennial Star in England reported regularly on the exodus, and through it Harry may have heard of this place. By that time, Andrew Jenson records, flour, bacon, beans, dried apples and cooking equipment filled two warehouses, each three stories high. [^20] It must have looked higher than that to young Harry: he made the unaccustomed observation that "food was plentiful." But his sister had used up all her meager savings and had to sell a set of china cups and saucers-her only "treasures"-to purchase food for herself and Harry. [^21]

The month of preparation (the time required to outfit the trains and divide them into groups) seemed "a restful and glorious period." A secure feeling enveloped Harry and he basked in it, complaining of neither the muggy hot days nor the brisk nights. Adults did most of the hard work, and the children were let loose "for frolic and games." Harry, habitually alone, did not feel attracted to the throng, so instead combined solitary bathing and swimming along the Missouri with some fishing. One day he hooked a terrapin turtle which, once banked (he apparently had no pole, only a hand fish line), pulled its head into its shell, taking hook and some line with it. Harry carried his prize into camp, the four feet clawing the air. At the wagon a young Utahn expertly slapped it onto a wooden chopping block, hacked off the head, removed the shell, cut up small steaks and fried them for supper. "I did not relish the rich overfat meat. I could not get over the idea that the turtle was still alive, so persistent seemed to be its life. I desired to catch no more terrapins. [^22]

No exact record is available of the size of the train to which Harry and Polly were assigned, but there are figures on that summer's total combination of equipment and personnel. Roberts's notes describe his company as "one of the largest" of the ten trains that summer; if so it included at least forty-five teamsters, four or five mounted guards, three hundred oxen, twenty or more horses and mules, and forty wagons. William Henry Chipman was the company captain. He was from American Fork, Utah, and had himself first crossed the plains at the age of thirteen with the vanguard companies of 1847. Perhaps he felt a special warmth for the youngsters in the group, but still he could do little to relieve their unique ordeals. Since the ox train was loaded to capacity with freight, and because (if the Journal History is accurate) there were 375 emigrants in the company, it was mandatory that none ride but the aged, the crippled. or the sickly. [^23] Even for small children the journey was to be a one-thousand-mile foot march. [^24]

32The mature B. H. Roberts was one of the youngest veterans, as well as one of the most seasoned observers, of the plains epic. Through prolonged comparative study, he developed several misgivings about the treatment the trek received at the hands of historians and yarn-makers, its literary "exploiters." We cannot be sure how much he permitted those judgments-some of them revised from his earlier ones -to affect and impress his own selection of memories of his crossing at age ten. Nevertheless, it is important to gesture toward them as a backdrop.

33First, he came to lament the tendency in "reckless speech and careless writing" [^25] to single out and glorify (or in the case of debunkers, to exaggerate) the tragedies-the grim, debilitating exposure, sickness and death-which are found on almost every page of the story. Was it, the critic asks, inspiration that led the Willie and Martin handcart companies to slow, agonizing, frost-bitten starvation and death? One writer answers that it was masochism. "Could we have endured that much?" the grandchild asks, tracing his blood kinship and magnifying the misery with the same zeal some feel in tracing their ancestry to the Mayflower. In contrast, however, in a paper prepared for Professor Harry Carman. at Columbia University, Roberts, rather than emphasizing the hardships, paid tribute to the immense order and mastery that went with the effort. The Mormons, he acknowledges, were "driven" into the wilderness; but in the most crucial ways they were prepared to be driven-and were resourceful in coping with areas of unpreparedhess. He described how the first companies endured "scant feed, burning prairies, troublesome Indians, [and] no trail" to make it easier for the companies to follow. He gathered evidence of the preplanning, "the thorough-going scouting," the establishing of mills, the planting of crops in strategic places for following companies, the measuring of distances between water encampments, the skillful blazing of separate trails (to free the emigrants from entanglements with other plains companies who had different, sometimes predatory, motives), the schools-in-motion efforts to teach the children, the amazing examples of manufacture and repair with "make-do" equipment and only the rudiments or residues of supply. Roberts praised the Perpetual Emigrating Fund, the come-now-pay-later plan which brought so many converts from abroad, acknowledged it to be an economic stroke of genius, and judged the government's calling it to a halt through the Edmunds-Tucker Act of 1887 a "cruel blow. [^26] The Mormon emigrants, he observed, were not hunters and trappers, explorers like Lewis and Clark or Jedediah Smith. They were "pioneers of empire founding who brought with them plows and seeds," and more importantly, they comprised whole families to build villages unto the Lord. [^27] All in all, he concludes, "the wonder of that exodus will grow more and more as we become further removed from it. It is one of the most wonderful spectacles of American history, this community on wheels, yet held together in solidarity. [^28] For all its terrifying costs (some of the terror more appalling to twentieth-century observers than to actual participants), it was a resounding success.

34Second, Roberts refused to countenance the notion, encouraged from many sources, that the Latter-day Saints were utterly repudiated and abandoned by either the nation at large or the individual states, or that their clash with antagonistic elements of society was the most significant root of the conflict. [^29] Even Illinois Governor Ford, after the Carthage tragedy, dispatched troops to safeguard Brigham Young and the gathering leaders. Moreover, Roberts went out of his way to emphasize that the march of the Mormon Battalion, simultaneous with the exodus sacrificial effort though it was, was at Mormon-that is, Brigham Young's-initiative and request. The government-not, of course, without mixed motives t accommodated. The resources thus gained, and the equipage furnished the family and associates left behind but soon to follow, was a boon; or as Brigham Young said at the time, a "blessing. [^30] Most writers, including novelists, draw the lines of conflict sharply between the Saints and their hostile surroundings, personified in persecutors and raw wilderness. But some of the most telling and important tensions were interior-between the Saints and their own flagging sense of callings, their own covenants, their own religious rootage. It was a test, "writ large," and only the spiritually fittest, the elite, emerged as Saints. Desertion was also apostasy, and half-heartedness-a show of unfaith-were constant and haunting options. Like the Israelites under Moses, many murmured. And some became embittered more than sanctified by their extremity.

Thus, at the religious level, Roberts saw the singular power of the drama, not just in sheer outdoor survival-of which there may be many moral equivalents-but in how "the journey became a mirror," as Edwin Bryant put it, "of the very roots of one's being." This was a process that ground them exceedingly fine. Roberts came to feel, which is more than just to believe, that the purging and purifying power of such struggles are the essence of the life of the Spirit. And, as Roberts's command of history grew, from the Exodus from Egypt to the colonization by the Nephites, he came to generalize that God, if he wants to raise up a people inclined to serve him, must pour them out on a hostile floor-a desert floor seems to be the pattern-where they either get together or flounder; where they either learn to walk by faith endowed with power from on high or they cannot proceed. "The pathway of fiery trials is the way ordained by God for his favored sons," he wrote. He believed that, however roundabout and cruel the pathway seemed, the Mormons were divinely favored. In the end, Roberts felt like his namesake, Brigham Young:

You that have not passed through the trials, and persecutions, and drivings, with this people, from the beginning, but have only read of them, or heard some of them related, may think how awful they were to endure, and wonder that the Saints survived them at all. The thought of it makes your heart sink within you, your brains reel, and your bodies tremble, and you are ready to exclaim, "I could not have endured it." I have been in the heat of it, and I never felt better in my life; I never felt the peace and power of the Almighty more copiously poured upon me than in the keenest part of our trials. They appeared nothing to me. [^31]

35Franciscans, hunters, trappers, adventurers, and gold-hungry prospectors have crossed the same plains, but few walked with quite this sense of meaning, and few rejoiced in it and not just after it. For the Saints the beginning and end of the journey was Jesus Christ. And he was a hard taskmaster. B. H. Roberts said fifty years after his own plains experience, "There is no progression from ease to ease." And a missionary recorded his table conversation thus:

Q. What is progression?

A. Overcoming difficulties. Those who have the most difficulties, disappointments, sickness, etc., develop the greatest souls.

Q. Why did God have the children of Israel wander in the wilderness for forty years?

A. To give them experience, sorrow, trials, to develop them to be strong enough and good enough to enter the Promised Land. Even then they weren't prepared. [^32]

Roberts saw the plains as the allegory of life; and of the struggle as a rite of passage to Christlike life. It was a vale for making souls.

If the ancient Israelites didn't arrive at holiness in forty years, the modern ones could hardly do it in twenty. But many came close.

"What was the motive, the impelling force behind it all?" Roberts asked himself. "I can remember how in my own mother's case, and in the case of many with whom I have conversed, and the snatches of conversation that I remember to have heard on the sea journey and on the plains, the thing that was in the heart of that mighty emigrant throng was the desire to be established in the settlements of Zion, among the Saints, where they could rear their children in the fear and admonition of the Lord, where the house of the Lord was being builded, and where the sacred rites of the Temple would be administered, and where they and their children could be taught in the ways of the Lord, and where they could walk in his paths. [^33]

It was, he later wrote, a "nucleus of modern Israel." [^34]

36As a boy of ten it is unlikely that Roberts would have felt greatly blessed, or blessed toward greatness, in the demanding march. On the other hand, there was little of the crybaby in him. What strikes one who goes over his files about the plains is that he would have considered it his duty (and duty dominated, if it did not crowd out, pleasure in his youth) to tone down the "etc." in his list of religious difficulties. We cannot be sure he could even remember all of them. His biographical notes portray it neither as a picnic nor spiritual romance (although his sister Mary records that he was inclined to pranks and jokes). But he does convey a spirit of adventure; and these images persevered and were perhaps enhanced over nearly sixty-six years. There was afterwards, John Whitaker recalled, a certain wistful identification for Roberts with the adventuring of Mark Twain's Tom Sawyer. [^35] Fielding K. Smith, an illustrator of western periodicals, was inspired by Roberts's verbal silhouette of the plains to produce a Twain-like freehand drawing of a boy with stand-up trousers, tousled hair, and one shoulder strap. When the artist brought it to his office, Roberts winced slightly and smiled, "I was that boy." [^36]

Departure day, July 13, 1866, came amidst much "cheering and cracking whips by the teamsters, much shouting of warhoops, in imitation of the Indians." [^37] Harry and Polly were assigned a wagon midway back in the train with two other families; one was "Glendower" Williams, their guardian, and the other a man and wife with several children "of mixed ages." At night the wearied women slept in the wagon, with the men and boys underneath or nearby. Harry's only "blanket" was Polly's flannel petticoat. Each night after dark she slipped it through the puckered hole in the rear of the wagon cover. He took it eagerly, but it furnished little insulation from the damp, cold and hard ground.

A worn page in Roberts's files reveals some of the hazards against which the Mormon companies were duly warned: all were counseled against drinking stagnant water and eating various poisonous plants. And there were rules.

37Two years earlier, as British plains historian P.A.M. Taylor notes, it had become standard practice to appoint an "officer of the day" to travel in the rear of the companies and prevent dangerous straggling. [^40] Over and over the children were reminded to stay close to the wagons. Indians were spotted, usually solitary ones, along the way. Mary recorded "a feeling that we were being watched and followed." [^41] Unwary children were easy prey, so their elders taught them vigilance through gruesome stories of disappearance, torture and ransom. The Sioux, for example, were portrayed as scalpers, and harsh disciplinarians who didn't tolerate crying in their own children; mothers throttled the air passages of infants at the first whimper, almost to the point of suffocation, until infants learned to remain silent.

Such dire warnings did not fully sink into Harry's consciousness. One day, with another lad of about ten, he yielded to the craving for fresh fruit and a propensity to "collect" things. Ignoring the receding company, the pair filled their hats with luscious, ripening yellow currants from bushes along the subsidiary streams of the Platte. Suddenly, hats full, they realized the last wagon was disappearing over a distant hill, and they set out at a fast pace-not running, lest they drop some of the berries. At the crest of a hollow, they were startled to confront three mounted Indians just coming out of the dip. The sight generated "magnificent terror." Stunned, they mechanically kept up the stride, then separated to right and left. The faces of the redmen as they approached were "immobile and solemn and stern and savage." Just as Harry came parallel to a horse, one Indian "let out a piercing wild yell." Caps and currants scattered as both boys broke away like horses out of a rodeo stall. Once, at full speed, they risked a, glance over their shoulders. All three Indians were "doubled over their horses, screaming with laughter." Hardly reassured, they ran-and ran hard-until back at the wagon. "They say Indians don't laugh," Roberts later observed. "They can and do." The incident, he records, led to a strict adherence to camp rules "for many days." But not for long.

38Harry's irrepressible exuberance and impatience soon led to another narrow escape. One day there was talk among those who knew the trail of "the first crossing of the La-Platte [the Flat] River." He anticipated it with fascination and a boy's longing to be the first across. Before dawn he crept unobserved out of camp and walked west in the "gold and purple shadows of the sunrise," figuring on a journey of only a mile or two. But he had misjudged the distance to the river by several hours; though he walked fast it was noon before he glimpsed "the margin of the River which seemed immensely wide, a stream a quarter of a mile wide divided by sandbars, and surrounded by clumps of willows." Triumphant, but tuckered out, he sank into the shade of the willows and fell instantly asleep-a sleep so sound that all the jolting and squeaking and shouting of the passing company did not stir him. Fortunately, just as the last wagon was struggling up into the cottonwood trees on the far side of the river, he awoke. He rushed to the water's edge and shouted at the top of his voice across the river. Captain Chip-man turned back, cupped his hands and shouted, "Can you swim?" He had at least dog-paddled in Wolverhampton canals, so he replied, with more pluck than judgment, "Yes!" "Come on, then!" was the reply. At that, he shuffled clogs from feet with "blisters as big as dollars," dropped his coat, and plunged in. He fared well until he reached the last flange of the river, where the current was too swift; his energies were spent. Chipman quickly reentered the river on his practiced horse, offered Harry a stirrup, and pulled him out. Once on shore Harry felt the sting of Chipman's light horsewhip as he administered several sharp cuts on his wet seat. "But I uttered no cry. I felt that I was well out of a bad scrape." Polly, he notes, had been "greatly excited" at his disappearance. "Excited" is probably not the exact word!

If this crossing was at the "Main Platte," then coming up that riverbank the company was 865 1/4 miles from the Salt Lake Valley. [^42] Whatever the precise distance, Harry trudged the rest of the way without his hat, his coat, or his clogs. He had plenty of time to wonder if anyone would ever find them on the east bank of the Platte. Each night he wished for the coat, and each day-all day-for the clogs.

39That didn't prove the end of Harry's ability to lose things. At a river crossing the order, "All wade through" went out. Harry caught sight of a teenage girl smuggling herself into a supply wagon and reasoned that if she could, so could he. Only a few minutes after he had joined her, however, the wagon was grounded midstream upon a sandbar and its team unhitched to aid other wagons. By nightfall the pair of stowaways were alarmed; their hiding place was still vibrating with the current and settling in the streambed. Harry opted for swimming and wading out, but the girl, frightened both of the quicksand and the darkness, begged him not to abandon her. "I consented to stay with her until the team returned," Harry remembered of his ten-year-old gallantry. But the team did not return; and as the wagon settled, water seeped in, soaking the sugar bags. By then they were hungry. Harry took out his "most precious possession," a four-bladed knife which he had somehow managed to purchase in England as a gift for his seamstress mother. It was a miniature tool chest: blades, pinches, a nail file, an awl for little borings. Too hastily he made small slits in a bag of sugar and of bacon. The knife slipped from his hand through a seam in the wagon and into the turbid water of the Platte -"gone forever." His heart ached more than his stomach the rest of the night. He later forgot the girl's name, but never the loss of his only treasure.

The crossing had begun late in the afternoon, and only half of the wagons made it over before dark. Polly could not find Harry anywhere on the east side of the river, and she feared he was lost or kidnapped. Although Captain Chipman reassured her that the boy must be on the west bank, no one she talked to had seen him go over, and her fear increased with each inquiry. She devoted the entire night to prayer that her brother would be safe-"one of the longest nights I have ever spent." At early dawn, Captain Chipman permitted Polly to cross the river with the first wagon. But no one had seen Harry on that side of the river either, and her distress became panic.

40Shortly the abandoned wagon was pulled from the quicksand and Harry stepped out (none too soon, teamsters said, for in only a few moments it would have floated downstream). Through her thankful tears, Polly gave Harry a thorough scolding, but "he just laughed at me. He said that he had a great time listening to the water sing beneath him. To him the night spent upon the water was a great joke." [^43] But losing his knife was not.

Many events on the trail made him mourn for the knife. Since it was the season for ripe, prickly pear plants (which were "quite sweet and resembled somewhat in taste and seed the juice of the pomegranate"), excursions to gather them were frequent. But for Harry, there was a foot tax: his feet were chapped, cracked, blackened by sun and dust. The blood oozing was bad enough without spines from prickly pears. But each day hunger prevailed, and each night Polly struggled to pull the spines out, without benefit of the knife's useful tweezers. The sister's act of "tender mercy" often brought them both to tears-his of wincing pain, hers of sympathy.

Walk he must, no matter how lame his feet. He had tried, in his exhaustion one evening, riding a worn-out horse, "backsore and lean in flesh to the point of being a mere shack of bones," which had its bridle tied to the rear of a freight wagon. He hoped this bending of rules would not be noticed. But a half-converted plainsman named Charleston (he had joined the Church after his discharge from Johnston's Army), "a cross-grained, overbearing and vicious tempered man," saw Harry and not only whipped him but looked up a man named Tom who was in charge of the freight wagon and verbally skinned him for his breach of rules, with threats of what would happen if it ever recurred.

Harry overheard others in the caravan observe that if Charleston had made such an abusive attack on "Jess," Charleston would probably have been "laid out." Harry went to find and befriend Jess (Jesse Crookston), a man from Logan, Utah, "a sturdy stock-bufit young fellow with red hair, blue eyes, a laughing good nature" and the best wrestler among the teamsters. Harry "heartily regretted" that the attack was not made upon Jess. For some time he tried "in my shy way" to cultivate Jess's friendship, hoping that sorae-day he would "break Charleston in two." It never happened. [^44]

At some point Captain Chipman apparently found a legal way, to bend the rules in favor of the "poor little fellow." On prolonged drives he would permit Polly to wash his clothes, and Harry, could then combine the need for cover with justified permission to ride. [^45]

41As they approached the mountains, there were night drives. Typically (one can conclude from comparing the journals), the companies rose at or just before daylight, ate a meager breakfast, broke camp, and marched until noon; then cattle and company rested for a couple of hours before the afternoon drive. On the average, the oxen moved at about one-and-one-half to two miles per hour, or between ten and twenty miles per day. The last twelve days, Harry's company averaged sixteen miles daily-or day-and-nightly. Delays occurred when there were time-consuming river crossings, births (of which there was at least one in Harry's company, a Master William McCord), [^46] stampedes, and deaths. These, plus enormous distances between usable water holes, sometimes made night drives imperative. And that, for Harry and the others, meant increased footsoreness and lingering muscle-aches.

Once the company stayed overnight at an Indian camp (probably Sioux, Cheyenne or Arapahoe) within view of the Windriver Mountains. Harry had been "persistently lousy" from shipboard on, so his tousled head had been sheep-sheared until he was all but bald. Drawn by the spectacle of the first peace pipe ritual he had ever seen, Harry became a curiosity himself. An Indian brought his open hand down on the boy's head and sent him scurrying as he yelled, "No scalp!"

Harry's curiosity and sense for mischief continued to place him in awkward situations. The sugar bags on the supply wagon, soaked in river crossings, dripped syrup through cracks in the wagon floor. Children and flies were attracted in about equal numbers. Harry lay under the wagon, lapping and fingering the sweet droppings, which fell indiscriminately on his shirt and trousers.

42This resulting stickiness was only a preamble. One night, bone weary and facing a night drive, Harry, though it was "agin the law," slipped into the wagon just behind his, which was teamstered by a young man from Battle Creek who combined duty and pleasure by helping "several of the young ladies on their march by linking his arm in theirs and guiding them over the rough walking." [^47] Harry's plan was to hide in a large, supposedly empty barrel. He gently lowered himself and muffled a scream when the open sores of his feet sank into three or four inches of sticky molasses. He had no choice but to sleep in the goo. The next morning, dripping with molasses from head to foot, he emerged from the wagon and was greeted with "yells of laughter." His crude attempts to scrape off the syrup were of little use. "So bedaubed I had to pass on until dust and drying somewhat obliterated the discomfort." [^48]

43Such grime and itchiness encouraged the lookout for the rare water hole, "where there might be willows or wild pea vines," a semblance of privacy for a bath and a frolic. At the edge of the mountains, Harry, more venturesome than the rest, and "a comrade" (his first and last use of that word in the notes) found a fine swimming hole. During the noon respite they were stripped and splashing about when their play was arrested by a strange rattling sound. They looked up to see three Indians, one shaking a dry piece of rawhide, and all three hissing intensely in shrewd simulation of the sound of rattlesnakes. The nearby cattle bawled and bolted toward the western swales. Stampede! Stampede! In cadence with the thundering hooves, which "could have raised the dead," the two boys, "naked as when born," charged up to Captain Chipman. Their breathless yells confused the message and he laughed at them. "Better get your clothes on!" Then as he stood on his wagon to open the lid of a bread box he saw beyond the willows the whole herd in stampede. The boys ran for their clothes; and Chipman, sobered by the crisis, proved himself a real plainsman by calming and organizing his men. (A hasty pursuit of the cattle might have completed the disaster.) The wagons were pulled into corral formation (front wheels 'interlocked with hind wheels of the next wagon), a makeshift fort, with the company and the remaining stock herded inside. Then three veteran riders were sent out to reconnoiter. Just over the hill they sighted an encampment of several hundred Indians who spotted them at long distance and began waving government blankets and buffalo robes on their gun muzzles amidst rhythmic shouts of derision. The riders turned back to report a hopeless "straight loss" of one hundred head of their strongest cattle and six or eight riding horses. "There was no moving further that afternoon." [^49]

Polly's journal records some apprehension preceding this Indian stealth-a feeling in the company that they were "being watched and followed," and that "even the oxen could sense danger." [^50] For three consecutive days, some thought they glimpsed an ominous apparition like a ghost rider in the sky. "Forget it," Chipman had said.

Chipman sent the scouts back on a second effort for the oxen while the entire company, disconsolate and fearful, waited, hopes fading as the day passed. At twilight they saw black spots approaching. "Were we to be plundered by more savages?" they wondered. Not so. Dazed, they arose with grateful shouts as they recognized their own scouts with many head of oxen. Though the oxen turned out not to be the ones that had stampeded, they helped the company to plod onward. A few days later they caught up to the company to whom the retrieved oxen had belonged. In the spirit of the plains resources were combined. For Harry's company that meant more weight and less ox power. Records show that the stampede was "in the vicinity of Platte Bridge," some 382 miles from the valley-a distance that portended danger, considering the company's now-crippled condition.

For Harry the immediate hurt was the loss of his "nigh wheel ox," "Old Berry" one of the team he sometimes drove. He had become Harry's most dependable boyhood companion (he later told Orson F. Whitney) and was sorely missed. Companies elsewhere on the trail heard rumors that "all the Indians on the road were hostile," that Chipman's train had been attacked and had lost 150 head of cattle, and "no one could say how many women and children had been massacred." Such garbled tales that summer may have reached the ears of Mother Roberts in the valley. Within two months the Sioux actually became "very hostile," surrounding a party from Fort Kearney and massacring them all. Settlers abandoned every post on the route north of the Platte; [^51] and though Roberts's notes omit it, family tradition says that, just before the Chipman company reached it, a pony express station in Wyoming was raided and burned and all its white occupants killed. [^52]

44 There was a death from natural causes in the Chipman company. Elder C. M. Gillet, who had been in charge of the company aboard ship and was returning home from a mission, died on Monday, August 20, twenty-three miles west of Fort Kearney. [^53] The company that immediately followed Roberts's across the plains, however, was besieged by cholera, and many died.

Roberts's notes do not describe some happier phenomena of the march: flag unfurlings like those described by Eliza R. Snow, [^54] evening camp rites with an almost Hebraic spirit of celebration in the rejoicing and bolstering through hymns and occasional dancing; and testimony meetings where manifestations of the Spirit occurred. Nor does Roberts speak of looking up at a perfectly clear starlit evening sky and feeling the presence of a corroborating cluster of stars that for so many gave sanction and meaning to their days. Perhaps he was encouraged (or compelled) to early, sleep like other children and missed many, of the late camp fire activities and adult talk.

In writing the history of Brigham Young's first company of Mormon emigrants, Roberts said, "Notwithstanding all discouraging circumstances, the high spirits of the colonists never failed them." Perhaps he should have said "rarely,." He attributes this to spiritual services around the camp fire every evening (and most of every Sabbath), the inner sense of gathering Israel and the redeeming of Zion, the hope of eternal life and celestial glory for those who love Jehovah, and "the assurance of God's approval in all this," voiced to their souls by the consciousness of the rightness of their own intentions and efforts. He adds that "joy and gladness were in their midst .... the laughter of children was heard, woman's tender ministrations were in evidence, anniversaries of births and weddings were celebrated; there were dances and merriment"; and he adds that "where these are, privations, the hardships... can never break down the spirit of man and make him hopeless." [^55]

45His own memories are mainly matters of heavy realism. Examples include the day he had charge of the freight team and put it into a Sweetwater crossing, utterly deceived by its "beautiful clear water" that appeared a mere foot or two deep, only to find himself immediately in water up to his neck. Pluckily he reined the team over and out, to the amazement of those who had meantime gathered on the banks. Or he writes of the chilly night when in practical self-defense he picked up a quantum of "buffalo chips" (the droppings of buffaloes), which he had learned made "an excellent smoldering fire that gave out a great amount of heat." Outside of the corral of wagons, he rolled two boulders close together, built a blazing fire, then curled up close by and fell asleep. For an hour or two he had his warmest sleep in many months. But he awakened before dawn to find himself covered with an inch and a half of snow.

To be cold was one thing, to be cold and wet, another, but to be cold and wet and hungry was the worst of all. A day came when the company's rations "reached the finishing point." Several days followed when food for the 375 emigrants consisted of whatever the camp hunters with their diminishing energies could provide: sage hens, rabbits, mountain hares, and once in a while, antelope. The teamsters and emigrants shared and shared alike; breakfast, lunch and dinner were the same thing: a piece of game meat, roasted on sticks or spits over the prairie fires. Each person gratefully gnawed at his portion without a taste of bread, vegetables, garnish, or even salt.

Certain landmarks gave the company some sense of progress: the crossing of the Sweetwater, [^56] Independence Rock, Devil's Gate, and South Pass. At Independence Rock (a huge granite boulder that looked like "an immense monster object"), Roberts arose early and climbed up on top to survey the beautiful mountain scenery of the region. [^57]

46Weakened both by the loss of cattle and their prolonged ordeal, the pioneers' travel was dangerously slow. As the daily diet diminished and more and more snowflakes brushed their cheeks like the kiss of death, the veterans were forewarned of their plight. "We were in danger of starvation on the plains," Mary wrote. [^58] Some recalled somberly that near Devil's Cate (described by Orson Pratt as a chasm 900 to 1,000 feet in length and 130 feet in breadth, with perpendicular stone sides) many handcart pioneers of previous years had sung their last "All is well" and been buried in the frozen unfamiliar ground.

Harry and Polly later learned that three men (David Cook, George A. Lincoln, and William Corbridge) had been called, equipped with fast-traveling mules, and assigned to find the Roberts children, bundle them up, and bring them to the valley ahead of their company. Near Green River these three strangers approached the Chipman company and asked Polly, who was dipping water from the river, for a drink. She was shy, and the men were preoccupied; she relieved their thirst and they moved on without recognition. Somehow, whatever inquiries they made in camp failed to reach knowing ears, and the trio concluded that Harry and Polly Roberts were in some other company and rode on east. Once again a costly effort to relieve the Roberts children misfired.

This "might have been" was perhaps in Roberts's mind when, years later, he did some arithmetic in the flyleaf of John R. Murdock's biographical sketch, reporting his meeting at Devil's Gate with General Burton and detachments of the United States Army. Burton asked Murdock to take "an express" to President Brigham Young in Salt Lake. He rode day and night, and with a change of horses covered the 340 miles in four days. Roberts jotted down the average time: eighty-five miles per twenty-four hours. [^59] At that rate, or something like it, he and Polly could have arrived on horseback in the valley by mid-August. Instead it would be mid-September.

47With austere brevity Roberts records the arrival of a relief train sent from the Salt Lake Valley. One sentence sums it up: "They came in time to rescue the train from absolute starvation." According to other records, this was "near the Big Sandy River," about 196 miles from the valley, on September 3, a day that seemed bleak and hostile. The relief train was led by Arza E. Hinckley, a man of seasoned compassion who had been a nine-year-old teamster with Zion's Camp (traveling nearly 986 miles from Kirtland, Ohio, to Independence, Missouri) and had served in the Black Hawk War. The forty sacks of flour out of his wagons were bestowed like heavenly manna on the company. [^60] On this day a surging gratitude filled Harry's consciousness that never left him. The rest of his life he had a dream: that a writer of insight and skill could pull into sacrosanct imagery the stories of men like Hinckley who patrolled, often with no recompense except peace of conscience, as far east as Grand Island, Nebraska ("450 miles stretched out"). With food, consecrated oil, and fierce energy, these men of God searched out famished and suffering emigrants. Such men took their own solitary risks. In Roberts's company a lieutenant named Joe put his life on the line by riding back to warn other companies of nearby Indian cattle rustlers. Many others made such "lonesome and dangerous journeys through the night." Never, Roberts would feel, did these Saints of the saddle-some of them mere boys-receive their just due in the chronicles of the plains. [^61] It was a literary project that would remain undone.

Chimney Rock was famous to plainsmen as the halfway point between Omaha and the Valley of Promise. Roberts's impressions of it are out of chronology, perhaps because in his memory it was a symbol of extremity. It is conical in shape, one hundred feet high, with a shaft about four hundred feet higher, "like a chimney straight up into the blue." [^62] It was glimpsed with glad hosannahs by the wearied company. But it evoked a different reaction in Harry and Polly. In England Polly had received a letter from their mother, telling of baby Thomas's death and describing Chimney Rock as the place of burial. Frail and vulnerable, he had contracted "sea fever" on Mother Roberts's voyage, and that, combined with what was then called "water on the brain," had slowly wasted him away. [^63] The child, peevish during almost every step of the journey, Harry learned, "did not permit anyone to touch him but his mother." She had even carried the little boy for three days before anyone knew he had died, because she could not endure the thought of burying him on the plains.

48The name of the company captain, Horton D. Haight, was enshrined in the mother's memory. A shallow grave had been dug; the babe was wrapped in a blanket and lowered into the grave. The dropping of the shovels full of dirt pierced Ann Roberts like a sword. She turned away and sank beside the grave in a faint. "Hold on," said the captain, "this is too much for me." He went to his wagon, emptied his bread box, placed the infant Thomas in this improvised coffin, returned him to the grave, and then gathered cobblestones from the surrounding hills as a covering.

From this point on, Roberts's notes have a brighter tone. The valley was close enough to almost feel-only twelve days away-so Zion's sky might be over the next horizon. And thanks to the relief wagons there was plenty of flour and even a few vegetables for food. Now gravity began to favor rather than fight the wagons: the march was mainly downhill. But the autumn weather increased their discomforts, for often at 5:30 A.M. the temperature was between 32 and 35 degrees, too cold for any comfortable sleep. [^64]

At Fort Bridget, Harry had heard "campfire gossip" of the Johnston's Army invasion ten years before, but now in Echo Canyon, with "wonderful fascination," he heard the real thing. The teamsters had told stories of the eerie reverberating qualities of the red sandrock cliffs, mostly on the right-hand side of the stream, and to prove and punctuate their tales they cracked their whips, war whooped, and even shot off some cannon. Roberts later called this red-and-yellow-clifted gorge the Mormon "Thermopolae," where a bloodless battle was fought and human rights preserved. [^65]

In July 1912 (when Roberts was fifty-five and on the general board of the MIA under the direction of Elder Heber J. Grant, chairman), Roberts led a "forced march" of Boy Scouts across this last segment of the route of the pioneers. Each Scout was instructed to bring, in addition to adequate clothing, a haversack or bag containing the following articles: a knife, fork, spoon, metal plate and cup, dishcloth, soap, towel, comb, extra pair of socks, toothbrush, and one quilt, rolled. Of these "essential" items, Roberts as a boy had had only one for his crossing-a knife, which he lost in the river.

49But for his first arrival, excitement was so consuming that he left the company and the trail and climbed up a high mountain through cottonwoods and scrub oak until he gained a panoramic glimpse of the valley in the distance, the lake under the setting sun and the growing city, laid out "four square by the compass." This he would later call "the very tenderloin of the Continent." [^66] Of his first impression his daughters report that "it seemed a small world to the boy who had already seen so much." But he would one day idealistically write:

I have heard the muses praise the scenery of far-famed Italy -her shores, mountains, landscapes, sunsets-but doubt if even that surpasses in splendor the enchanting scenery of our Deseret. And as we stand enthralled in admiration of the sublimity of our surrounding, let our heart's adoration go up from nature to our Creator-great nature's God! [^67]

Decades later, in the role of historian, he collected at least a score of early journal descriptions of the virgin Valley. But he selected for publication only Wilford Woodruff's:

To gaze upon a valley of such vast extent entirely surrounded with a perfect chain of everlasting hills and mountains, covered with eternal snows, with their innumerable peaks like pyramids towering towards heaven, presenting at one view the grandest and most sublime scenery that could be obtained on the globe. [^68]

The next day, September 14, when it "was growing grey in evening," the wagons and stock finally jolted and creaked out of the canyon onto the east bench of the city, then pitched camp in triumphantly relaxed formation awaiting the final early morning drive in. Fires were especially big that night, spirits ebullient, and teamsters stood on their wagons and tried to war whoop loud enough to alert the nearby city. Captain Chipman, with a sense of completion, left his lieutenants in charge and "rode on in."

50There was little sleep for Harry that night. He and his sister were too excited. Everyone was up "in great haste at the first streaks of light." Breakfast neglected, they straggled down the well-defined road, entering the city on "Emigration Street." In a scrapbook entry Roberts placed a Tribune clipping (dated September 15, 1910), on which he scribbled that the company turned north at Broadway (Third South) and Main at "about 10 a.m." [^69] If so, this last leg of the journey, less than fifteen miles, took about five hours. Polly, who had lost her hat early in the journey, had hair as bleached as Harry's by sun and wind. She was ashamed of her tatty clothes, her sun-coarsened hair and face. So when people (all veterans of the same crossing, all warm and welcoming) began coming out of their houses to greet the new company, she hid in the wagon. Harry was not in the least intimidated by the spectators and pushed himself "to the head of the company, waving at horsemen who dashed up swinging their hats and kerchiefs." Ignoring Polly's whispers, "Get back, get back!" he strode ahead like a drum major in a parade.

It had become a Latter-day Saint plains tradition, observed by many handcart and wagon trains, to arrive in the valley as immaculate and well dressed as possible. [^70] On the trail they might, as one diarist describes a company, be "walking lumps of dust"; but not as they entered the valley. Nile explorer and author Richard Burton was stunned at the company he saw entering the Great Basin in 1860:

All the new arrivals were in clean clothes, the men washed and shaved, and the girls, who were singing hymns, habited in Sunday dress. The company was sunburned, but looking well and thoroughly happy... they marched through clouds of dust over the sandy road leading up the eastern portion of the town. [^71]

51In this spirit Polly had tried that morning, while Harry hid in a wagon, to wash out his pants in the soapless creek. Likewise, Harry had "washed his face more carefully, unable to do much about his "scalped," "bedaubed," freckled and liced condition. But as he anticipated reunion with his mother in Zion there was one thing he could do: cover the ugly spectacle of his cracked feet. West of Fort Bridger, the company had come on a cluster of log cabins (daughter Georgia recalls his saying it was a pony express station) which had been attacked and burned. Sticking out between two charred logs were the legs of a dead man, and on them a pair of brogues which, to Harry's eyes, looked like new. It took courage for him to linger behind (he may have gone back under cover of darkness) and tug them off-grisly work, because the dead man's feet had swollen. It took more grit to leave them hidden in back of a provision wagon, as early frosts and stinging nettle in the canyon increased his foot suffering. But he never once donned the shoes until the day of arrival. [^72] Striding a bit clumsily (they were several sizes too large), he started up the Salt Lake street first known as East Temple. [^73]

As he slogged along, "a dainty, bright-colored, charming little girl" darted toward him in the middle of the street and presented on her arm a basket of luscious fruitmpeaches, plums, grapes. "Have some peaches!" she said with an inviting smile. He gathered several, hugged them along the crook of his arm, then, reluctant to lose his place at the head of the procession, dashed back to Polly, deposited the fruit in her lap, and ran again for his place.

At the head of East Temple and South Temple they came to the old Tithing Office, "behind the high cobble walls with its half round bastions," and into the stock corrals of President Brigham Young. Cattle were freed from the yokes and turned to sumptuous hay feed; and many of the emigrants-full of a sense of consummation-walked in awe and reverence across the street to gaze up to the unfinished granite walls of the Salt Lake Temple.

Polly and I seemed to be so little of this excitement and joy, nobody seemed to come for us. Polly remained concealed under the wagon cover and I lonesome and heartsick, sat upon the tongue of Captain Chipman's wagon, my chin in my hands and elbows upon my knees, thinking "Zion" was not so much after all, if this was all of it. The spirit of sadness, if it was not forlornness, settled upon me.

52Presently, however, approaching from the west gate, I saw a woman in a red and white plaid shawl, slowly moving among the hillocks of fertilizer that had been raked from the sheds and the yard. She seemed to be daintily picking her way. And there was something in the movement of her head as she looked to the right and to the left that seemed to me familiar. The woman was moving in my direction and the closer she came the stronger the conviction grew upon me that this was my mother. I would have known her from the dainty cleanliness of everything about her. I stood until she came nearly parallel to where I sat, then sliding from the tongue of the wagon I took a few steps which brought me near to her. And plucking her gown I said: "Hey, Muther." She looked down upon my upturned face. Without moving she gazed upon me for some time and then said: "Is this you, Harry? Where is Polly?" Of course, Polly was in hiding, and I led my mother to where she was hiding, and when mother and daughter met there was a flood of tears on both sides; at last I joined them making the trio of the united family. It seemed difficult for the mother to realize that these, at last, were her children after more than four years of separation, but once in a while a smile would break through the tears and she seemed to be supremely happy. [^74]

Notes

Chapter 2

1 The Church had an office at ship-site, a charter program for each ship, an organization for the immigrants, and basic supplies. Some Mormon converts sailed all the way from Liverpool to New Orleans for less than four pounds sterling.

2 BN, p. 22.

3 B.H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Soints, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1930), 5:86-87, 91-93, 113-14; hereafter cited as CHC.

4 Charles Dickens, "Charles Dickens Describes a Mormon Emigrant Ship," Among the Mormons, eds. William Mulder and A. Russell Mortensen (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1958), pp. 334-35.

5 Elsewhere in his writings he includes a passage from Monckton Milnes of the Edinburgh Review for January 1862 in which the Select Committee of the House of Commons cites Lord Houghton that the Mormon ship was "as a family under strong and accepted discipline, with every provision for comfort, decorum, and internal peace," and adds, "no other ships could be depended upon for comfort and security in the same degree. There was more than a genius for organization among them." CHC, 5:93.

6 On logical grounds Wittgenstein rejected the classical arguments for the existence of God.

7 See Norman Malcolm, Ludwig Wittgenstein, a Memoir (New York: Oxford University Press, 1959), p. 72.

8 The last group of converts to leave Britain that year left on May 2, because the total time of immigration was five months and the immi-grants had to arrive in the Salt Lake Valley before the perils of winter. See "The Life Story of Ann Reed Everington," typescript in possession of author, p. 1.

9 BNG, p. 22.

10 BN, pp. 23-24. Not all his ocean memories were so elated. He would learn that his future grandfather-in-law, James Day, had a terrifying ocean crossing. His ship was blown in storms for ten weeks, though for most of that time it was only twelve hours from Liverpool. Sharks followed the ship; and when his baby sister Elizabeth died a sack of coal was tied to her feet, and on a chute made for that purpose she was released into the blue-black water.

11 Byron, Childe Horold's Pilgrimage (New York: Odyssey Press, 1936), p. 203.

12 See also his Pictures of an Inland Sea (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1902).

13 Improvement Era, 18:326.

14 Roberts later wrote: "It cannot often be prophesied what future relations quarreling boys will have to each other. This was one of the strangest."

15 From Don C. Seitz, New York World, 6 September 1922. Immigration between 1846 and 1855 from Britain to the United States had reached an unprecedented high: 1,880,000 passengers. (See Richard Slator Dunn, The Introduction to European Vision of America, pp. 1-17.)

16 To that point the children were in the care of one "Elder C.B. Gibbs," Memoirs, p. 4.

17 King Henry the Fourth, Part I, act 3, sc. 1; see BN, addendum to p. 29.

18 BN, p. 29.

19 On July 14 another company arrived at Wyoming, Nebraska, from London, and on July 17 a 684-member Scandinavian company. See Andrew Jenson, Church Chronology: A Record of Important Events, 2nd ed. rev. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1914), pp. 74-75.

20 "LDS Emigration from Wyoming, Nebraska, 1864-66," Nebraska History, 17:113-27.

21 Memoirs, p. 4.

22 BN, p. 34.

23 Journal History of the Church, 15 September 1866, Church Archives. This is a compilation, made in the 1890s by Andrew Jenson and the Church Historian's Office, from various sources, including the Manuscript History.

24 See Frank Esshorn, Pioneers and Prominent Men of Utah (Salt Lake City: Utah Pioneers Book Publishing Company, 1913), p. 803.

25 CHC, 3:xxii.

26 For the economic impact of this decision see Leonard J. Arring-ton, Great Basin Kingdom: An Economic History of the Latter-day Saints 1830-1900 (Lincoln, Neb.: University of Nebraska Press, 1966], p. 361.

27 CHC, 3:xxii.

28 In light of this prediction one wonders if Roberts read William Weston Merrivale in January 1922 who described the plains epic as "the most significant hegira since the exodus of the Jews from Egypt" and as "the most illuminating example of cooperative enterprise and community well-being in human history." (See "The Anabasis of the Saints," National Magazine [January 1922]: 400-401.) The historian Daniel Boorstin has observed, "Their [the Mormons'] westward movement was a staccato series of enforced group transplantations, each more remarkable than the last as a feat of organization." [See U.S. Congress, Congressional Record, 21 February 1979.) And in Religion and Contemporary Culture (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1960), the social historian Purnell H. Benson says, "Certain it is that there is no more thrilling story in the annals of the American Frontier than this." Seeking to account for the power Mormonism generated that other movements did not he suggests (1) "a keen sense of the common good," (2) persecution, (3) the high cultural and educational level, (4) the combination of economic and religious ideas and (5) sufficient discontent with religion of the time.

29 Other themes, Roberts felt, needed more thorough examination: (1) the valley was not the end but the beginning, a gathering place of gatherers who spread up and down the corridor, a brief respite of peace before they leavened the world; (2) the contrast between the Donner Party who cast lots to see who would die to provide food for the survivors; and (3) the daring of young, solitary plainsmen (and the mature relief trains) who went the second thousand miles to bring flour and muscle, facing hostile Indians with their will, wits, and well of prayer. There were dozens of teenage Jacob Hamblins.

30 Roberts counters three notions about the Battalion and the motives of the government: The motives were not a test of Mormon loyalty; not an attempt which hoped for refusal, thus to loose militia mobs from Iowa and Missouri; and not an attempt to deprive the Mormons of the "flower of their manhood," thus leaving them helpless prey in the wilderness. See CHC, 3:372.

31 Journal of Discourses, 26 vols. (London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86), 1:313; hereafter cited as JD. Italics added.

32 Mabel Strong to Truman G. Madsen, 1970.

33 "Ye Are a Chosen Generation," Improvement Era 19 (July 1916): 900.

34 CHC, 4:xxiii.

35 He once told his secretary he would like to see his biography written (especially the account of his boyhood) like Mark Twain's autobiography.

36 The drawing is in the Roberts Papers in the Marriott Collection, Marriott Library, University of Utah.

37 BN, p. 35.

38 One of Roberts's relatives by marriage had been in a company on 15 July 1846. At Kanesville, Iowa, the prairie grass was so high that even horsemen could not always be seen above it. This girl-who was staying in a tent near a wagon and sleeping on top of three kegs of gun powder-suddenly became aware of a fire. She and her parents were convinced death was imminent. "Well, we will soon be gone now, Minerva." But suddenly as the flames licked close, the wind changed and all were saved.

39 Notes on Exodus, Roberts Files, Church Archives.

40 P.A.M. Taylor, Expectations Westward: The Mormons and the Emigration of Their British Converts in the Nineteenth Century [Edinburgh and London: Oliver & Boyd, 1965).

41 Memoirs, p. 4.

42 This distance had been marked earlier by William Clayton.

43 Memoirs, p. 5.

44 BN, p. 52.

45 Memoirs, p. 5.

46 Treasures of Pioneer History [Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1954), p. 111.

47 At some such times Harry became the willing temporary driver of this four-yoke ox team.

48 BN, p. 51.

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
[^23] 23 Mrs. William Reed to Ann Roberts.
[^24] 24 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^25] 25 Late in their lives, on 3 May 1928, B. H. and Annie Brynie, a half-sister, and Mary arranged for the temple sealing of Ann Everington and Benjamin Roberts and all of the children including the twins and baby Thomas. See BHR Temple Book.
[^26] 26 Roberts kept one sample of his father's handwriting from the original wrapping of the photo given his mother. It is preserved in the family collection.
[^27] 27 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 1 September 1883, Roberts Family Collection.
[^28] 28 Research has failed to establish where and when Ben died. The marriage date is 15 June 1848 (he was twenty-two) in Poplar, Middlesex, England; from the Book of Remembrance of Haven R. Day.
[^29] 29 B. H. Roberts to Ann Everington, 21 April 1880, Roberts Family Collection.
[^30] 30 Mrs. Charles H. Wilcox recorded these impressions from a conversation with B.H. Roberts at his home prior to his call to the Eastern States.
[^31] 31 BN, p. 10.
[^32] 32 See Juvenile Instructor 49 (February 1914): 85.
[^33] 33 Fifty years later, as chairman of "Vocations and Industry" in the youth program of the Church, he wrote, "We shall take the ground that no vocation of honest industry need be ignoble or debasing in its effects, but by properly correlating it with the general welfare of human life can be in effect both honorable and glorious." Improvement Era 15 (October 1912): 1083.
[^34] 34 Liahona 12 (20 October 1914): 364.
[^35] 35. Salt Lake Herald, 8 January 1899.
[^36] 36. So Roberts later told his children.
[^37] 37. BNG, p. 8.
[^40] 40 Beniamin's father's brother.
[^41] 41 N. B. Lundwall, Roberts's secretary for twelve years, recalls him saying this incident occurred when he was seven.
[^42] 42 BNG, p. 16. Roberts spoke in later years of this spiritual impression (which one tradition says was repeated three times) as evidence that "the promptings of the Spirit of God" can come early - several years, in his case, before his official baptism and confirmation in 1867.
[^43] 43 The word gomin - rather than urchha - was endeared to Roberts through the Victor Hugo story of Gayroche who, in the midst of battle, went along the pavement gathering unfired cartridges from the corpses of fallen men, gaining strength at each step.
[^44] 44 Memoirs, p. 4.
[^45] 45 BN, p. 18a.
[^46] 46 Apparently Tovey's periodic alienations from the LDS Church did not interfere with his desire to preach.
[^47] 47 This was republished by Harvard University Press in 1962. The book was originally issued in fifteen separately stitched parts from July 1854 to September 1855.
[^48] 48 BN, p. 20.
[^49] 49 BN, p. 56.
[^50] 50 Memoirs. Crossing the plains, mules would somehow detect the nearby presence of Indians and bellow-often soon enough to enable the emigrants to take crucial precautions (see Roberts's chapter on the exodus in CHC, 3:170).
[^51] 51 "Diary of William Driver," New Mexico Historical Review (January 1943): 57.
[^52] 52 Northwest Nebraska News (Crawford, Nebraska), located in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University.
[^53] 53 See Jenson's Church Chronology.
[^54] 54 See Eliza R. Snow, "A Sketch of My Life: 1804-1887," Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley.
[^55] 55 CHC, 3:304.
[^56] 56 BNG, pp. 32-33. Here, sixty years later, he addressed five thousand Boy Scouts. "On the occasion of an historic visit," where a great gathering brought to mind this early visit of Harry's boyhood, and now "an old and broken man," he remembered and told the story of his little adventure in passing the Sweetwater Ford.
[^57] 57 BNG, p. 33
[^58] 58 Memoirs, p. 4.
[^59] 59 J.M. Tanner, Biographical Sketch of John Riggs Murdock (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1909), p. 128.
[^60] 60 Hinckley's relief train returned to the valley on Sunday, October 7. See Jenson's Church Chronology.
[^61] 61 "When boys go back on the Plains to encounter storms and rescue the suffering, as did David P. Kimball, Stephen Taylor, Joseph A. Young, Ephraim Hanks, and many others, it makes me feel well. David took the consecrated oil and went forth, like a man of God, and anointed the sick and afflicted, and commanded them to arise; and those boys acted valiantly, having been trained up amid the Saints." (Remarks by Heber C. Kimball at funeral of Jedediah M. Grant; see JD, 4:137.)
[^62] 62 Church News, June 1970. Chimney Rock is twenty-three miles west of Fort Kearney.
[^63] 63 BN, p. 58.
[^64] 64 Salt Lake Tribune.
[^65] 65 Harry learned about the misinformed Johnston's Army ("President Buchanan's folly") and the account of Governor Cumming, who, in the phrase of the anti-Mormon historian T. B. H. Stenhouse, was kept in "a continued strain of feverish expectation" by a delicious hoax, He was halted about every fifty paces by three men who had built a fire, and who made him "advance and be recognized" and checked his credentials. Cureming became convinced the place "swarmed with mountaineers to resist Johnston." According to the story, it was only a trio. After each encounter they skirted the trail, passed him and then confronted him anew. They took turns being commander, lantern-holder, and inspector.
[^66] 66 CHC, 3:xx.
[^67] 67 "To the Youth of Israel," Contributor 6 (May 1885): 294.
[^68] 68 CHC, 3;231.
[^69] 69 B.H. Roberts Personal Papers, Church Archives.
[^70] 70 Roberts was impressed with Grandmother Ensign when she visited his Centerville home; by then she was in her late eighties or early nineties. She had crossed the plains with a handcart, and often helped prepare the July Twenty-fourth celebration. Once the Roberts children put dust and dirt on their clothing and dirt to their faces to simulate the plains companies. Grandma Ensign scolded: "We were not dirty. We kept ourselves and our clothes clean, It was wrong for you to be dirty."
[^71] 71 Richard F. Burton, The City of the Scdnts and Across the Rocky Mountains to California, ed. Fawn M. Brodie (1861; New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1963), pp. 225-27.
[^72] 72 See Georgia and Josie Roberts, "They Came Alone," Our Pioneer Heritage (Salt Lake City: C. P., 1959), 2:282.
[^73] 73 BN, p. 68.
[^74] 74 BN, p. 70.
