Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

3 Minor and Miner in Silver

In one of the hardest of hard ways he had made it to Zion. (The ease of railroad travel was available three years later.) Reveling in belonging, young Harry rode with a next-door neighbor of Mother Roberts, John K. Crosby, a New Englander who had volunteered his team and wagon to pull them the last ten miles to Bountiful, just north of Salt Lake City. As they talked of his mother's own home-which she owned-his eyes widened; in England, only posh people owned homes. Suddenly there was no limit to his fancying; as the wagon approached a New England-like meetinghouse (the Bountiful Tabernacle) he shouted with glee, "There's my mother's home!" Not so. When the wagon pulled up to a log house with a dirt roof, connected to an unchinked roofless log-square, he sensed "great humiliation." [^1]

54Mother Roberts had married and lost a husband during the family separation, a man named Nichols [^2] She had earned a bare living by house-to-house sewing, for which she accepted pay in any staple item-bread, corn, vegetables, fruit. Adah [^3] recalls her saying she once sewed all day for a quart of molasses. Later she opened a small shop for tailoring, and designing and making hats. Thus even the cost of mailing a letter had been prohibitive: Postage was sixty cents a letter, and that was a week's earnings. [^4]

Roberts records several lasting flashes: the wonder of meeting "Annie," now twelve-"what a charming thing she was... beautiful... sprightly... seemed to be everywhere about the house at once"; the scrubbing his mother gave him: "Come with me, my son. I haven't washed you for more than four years"-the way she went at it "I was led to believe that she thought I had not been washed since then"; and a simple meal with not much variety-"just white, light buttermilk biscuits with butter, clear water from the creek and a dark, sweet sticky fluid called "molasses." This sweet substance was made by a Brother Parrish, whose wooden rollers milled the juice out of cornstocks. He writes that the meal was "fit for princes." [^5] To the end of his days Roberts had a yen for buttermilk biscuits.

In addition to her work as seamstress, [^6] Mother Roberts had to master pioneer skills: making soap and starch, candles and molasses; carding, dying, spinning and weaving cloth for her sewing. Wells had to be dug, water hauled, and fruits and 'vegetables planted, weeded and irrigated; fences repaired, a cow or two milked, and a dozen other farm chores seen to.

In this struggle to keep a kind of self-sufficient farm, Mother Roberts had been obliged to ask for help from young James Day, a next-door neighbor. He did most of the heavy chores for her. Since Ann Roberts could not pay him she often said to him half-seriously that for all his kindnesses he could have the hand of her daughter Mary (Polly), who had not yet arrived in the valley. A courtship did begin as soon as Mary reached Bountiful. Harry approved this transaction in his own boyish way: looking over a fence at a patch of Day's watermelons, he called to James Day, "What are those?" "They are watermelons and they are good to eat! You can have one if you will give me your sister, Mary." "Sure!" Harry said instantly. "I'll give her to you." "So," James Day later wrote, "through the longing of little B. H. for something good to eat, I became the suitor of one of the loveliest girls a young man could wish for." [^7]

55 Roberts's notes barely sketch the main influences of the next three years: a germinating of skills; plenty of hard physical labor; contact with tutors who, at last, made the mysteries of the alphabet and the rudiments of school work intelligible to him.

The population of Utah Territory at that time was about one hundred thousand, about three hundred of whom were in Bountiful (sometimes dubbed "Scantiful" by Brigham Young because of the slowness of the people to complete their prime public building, the Bountiful Tabernacle). [^8] Bountiful had not only agrarian residents but also shopkeepers, artisans, mechanics-a representative cross section of countries and survival skills from former cultures. The Mormon colonizers did not commit the urban fallacy "bigger is better." Their model cities were small enough to avoid psychic anonymity, spatial cramp, and the loss of horizon. As the historian T. Edgar Lyon put it, "Brigham Young would have preferred to have ten cities of ten thousand each, rather than one of one hundred thousand." [^9] In that preference he was following his mentor, Joseph Smith.

Roberts summarized these times: "of luxuries, none, of comforts, few." According to Walter Prescott Webb, historian of the plains, there are "three legs of civilization"-water, timber, and land-the Mormons had plenty of only one, land, and little of that was usable. [^10] There were precious pine, maple and aspen up in the mountains, but it was far up, and Roberts often cited George A. Smith's grim remark that "our timber was in a high state of preservation." [^11] Water was more precious than gold to the Mormons. The few roads that existed were frozen ruts in winter, mud "up to a horse's belly," in spring, and thick dust in the summer. The economy was by barter, goods for goods; later, scrip, honored at central Church storehouses, was issued.

56After he had met the two neighbor boys, named Jones but called "Holbrooks" because they lived with Aunt Hannah Flint, "who was a plural wife of Judge Holbrook," Roberts became aware of the unusual relationships that could flourish in a community of immigrant Saints. He, to the boys, was a semisavage with a Lancashire dialect, and they were "an odd pair of Utah's crude product" to him. When they mimicked him, he blurted out, "I'll take none of your sauce!" and they had some fights that ended in draws. But soon he had made some fast friends (perhaps his first), and he became one of the few young Americans who could play cowboys and Indians from memory. Usually he preferred the role of Indian, using his own handmade arrows made from cane growths and oak bushes. For the first time in his life, he was engaging in good-natured boyish play. But he also began the stirrings of intellectual growth.

Within that first year Hannah Holbrook, a "village character," became his tutor, teacher and a permanent influence. A native of Vermont, and a graduate of an Eastern college, she was disinherited by her family when she joined the Church. Her husband, who had accepted the gospel in the infancy of the Church, was a legendary character in his own right and often recounted to young Roberts the "Battle of Fishing River" (in Missouri), where a storm saved the lives of many Zion's Camp men by routing their would-be attackers. [^12] Hannah, first teaching in a wickiup of mud and willows and a cowhide door located by the Jordan River, soon expanded her school into a one-room adobe house. Slates were often used instead of paper. [^13] Tuition was voluntary. Her husband's journal depicts the omnibus difficulties.

She had from seventy to eighty scholars [a Vermontism for student]. Many of them were large scholars, which made it pretty hard to get through with them, as many of them were backward. She is one of the most capable teachers, and the most experienced in the country, and keeps a good school. [^14]

57Roberts was not large, not "backward," and not able to pay his way. But out of the teacher's love for Ann Everington she pulled eleven-year-old Harry Roberts into her private school and taught him his alphabet. It opened worlds to him -worlds upon worlds. No papers or magazines were in Roberts's home-unless borrowed, they were too costly-but he did struggle with "the mysterious art of reading" in the family Bible. This three-year focus on the oldest and richest of books consummated his earlier aural acquaintance. He later said of the Bible that, even leaving out its religious import, "the study of no other literature is so intellectually stimulating to the child, nor can he anywhere else find such a model of sturdy, sinewy English." It was "a wonderful model." [^15] He would always be immersed in it. One wonders if his awe before the record of Paul's personality and ministry in Acts, plus his teachings in the epistles, which Roberts practically memorized, began here. Perhaps. He says he read "painfully." Pauline prose is difficult compared to the simpler narratives of Mark and Matthew. A ravenous but thwarted literary appetite had now found its proper food, and scripture reading became a dominant and lasting passion.

His first experience in a semipublic school was with a Scottish teacher by the name of Finlayson. Wilson readers were used as textbooks for his reading classes. The texts contained classic Old Testament narratives (the story of Joseph in Egypt, for example) and also many of the religious poems of Nathaniel Parker Willis, whose writing, because of its concrete biblical images, haunted Roberts the rest of his life. Willis's account of Christ and the Widow of Nain, or Healing the Leper, for example, fueled Roberts's imagination and his dramatic sense; and though he later often quoted British nature poets-Byron, Wordsworth, Tennyson, for example-he cited Willis and was quoting him still as a seventy-year-old Seventy.

58But reading and school were luxuries; practical pressures elbowed them out. Young Harry held three kinds of jobs during these initial years in Utah-as a farm hand for local farmers, stripping cane at the molasses mills, or husking corn. Pay for such labor was "in kind" - molasses out of the cane, the tenth bushel of corn, picked apples or harvested wheat. (Flour in those years was six to eight dollars per hundredweight.) Later he was hired to make bricks for the construction of "America's First Department Store," Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution (ZCMI) in Salt Lake City. By the time he was twelve, his demonstrated skill with a team won him a job as an ox-team grader, scraping for the Utah Central Railway, a spur of the Union Pacific which was extended from below Centerville into Salt Lake City. For this task his training on the plains stood him in good stead. By shouts and an expert whip hand he could simultaneously drive the oxen and manipulate the controls of the scraper. He did a man-size day's work. From the wages earned he soon repaid the Perpetual Emigration Fund, which had advanced the cost of his passage from England to Utah. [^16] For the rest of his life he kept that receipt with pride.

Neighboring the Roberts hovel was the home of the distinguished Call family-wealthy, dedicated, missionary-minded, and advantaged by special schooling in Utah Territory. Harry's interest in them was due to more than proximity and contrast. When the searching eyes of "Aunt Hannah" were trained upon him at his mother's request to appraise his potential, she allowed (though this is likely exaggerated in the notes) that she couldn't say much "from the looks of the lad." "Yet," she said, "there is something in his eyes that reminds me of 'Anson V' [Call]." Anson V was the grandson of Hannah Holbrook's sister, who was married to the original Anson Call, who was a native of the Church's refiner's fire in Missouri and Nauvoo. [^17]

Roberts soon befriended Anson V. The two were to become the "mental aristocrats" of the community. Roberts's notes record that Artson was three years older (he was actually two), quick-minded, talkative, a memorizer and, as Harry the country boy viewed him, something of a braggart. (Roberts claims that though young Call had committed the entire Constitution of the United States to memory, he really did not know much about it. And the comment, accurate or not, reflects a lifetime insistence that improving memory is not the same as improving judgment.) In his writing and speaking, exact quotation was to be less Roberts's forte (he came to believe it led too much to logic-chopping) than the interrelating of basic ideas. He was to become a creative paraphraser, a coiner of phrases, an original. Artson V. Call was to become a successful mathematician and builder, a mayor (in Afton, Wyoming) and a stake president. [^18]

59Roberts's first effort at written composition was attended, he records, "with a sense of shame," as it was an act of plagiarism. A Sunday School contest was held for an essay on the life of Joseph Smith. He learned that his competitors (the Holbrook-Jones boys) were being "helped" by Aunt Hannah-helped to the point that she was practically their ghost writer. Why shouldn't he, therefore, help himself to a "rather fine summary" of the Prophet's life in sacred books: D&C 135 of the Doctrine and Covenants. (He learned later that the author of this masterly document was his hero, John Taylor.) He copied it without changing a word, submitted it, and won half of the prize of one dollar.

Roberts's notes include a lamentation ("humiliation") over what he calls "vicious pronunciation" (spelled, symptomatically, "pronounciation"); it was, he says, never quite overcome in him. The years when word habits usually become second nature were his illiterate ones. Both in spelling and speaking, he slipped into embarrassing mistakes all his life.

Teachers sometimes "corrected" him in reverse. He was taught to pronounce lunatic asylum, lun-'a-tick 'as-y-lure and Penelope, 'Pen-e-lope. The mature Roberts would have derived some comfort had he known that some first-rate writers of his own generation were atrocious spellers, being saved from disgrace by alert copyreaders. His wives, daughters, and secretaries made up the deficiency; all of them developed proofreading skills.

In literary as in other ways, Roberts's penchant for independence was extreme. He often lent material to others, but mainly as stimulus. He did not like to hear himself quoted exactly. "No two men are alike. Don't try to be me or Talmage. God stamped individuality upon you. Be you!" [^19] Sometimes when he lent his own rough drafts he scrawled defiantly, "Not to be copied!"

60He became ultrasensitive about plagiarism. Branding the plagiarist the most "despicable character in the literary world," he counseled speakers, teachers, writers-especially in the Church-to be honest, to avoid trying to shine "not even by borrowed but by stolen light." The admonition grew out of an unpleasant experience with his own research on Missouri and Nauvoo. First published serially in the Church's youth periodical, the Contributor, they were not only widely quoted (even that made him uncomfortable, for he feared the calamity of carbon-copy disciples) but also, without his permission, cribbed and reprinted in other forms. When he finally published them in book form he was accused more than once of plagiarizing his own material. [^20] At root, he considered literary "borrowing" a form of mental laziness-the inability to think for oneself-and his critique of it is finally' traceable to Joseph Smith's "noble doctrine" of uncreated intelligence. We must not expect anyone, not even God, to do for us what we are able to do for ourselves.

It was in the role of recitation, when he could put his ideas into the air, that Roberts tasted what he calls his "first victories." His teachers began to recognize that they were dealing with an analytical mind and an astounding memory. Finlayson, as was the fashion, lined up his class in a row as at an old-time spelling bee. At the close of each reading lesson he would put questions to the class, starting with the student in front. When a student faltered, the next student had his say, and if he answered correctly he moved up in the line. [^21] Roberts found himself again and again at the head of the class and "began to feel the thrill of superior capacity in remembering the subject matter of the lessons."

Order and respect in these early schools were hard come by. The assortment of mental sizes, shapes, and speeds meant that Finlayson was as often frustrated as he was mocked and abused. Shortly he retreated from the teaching ordeal and moved away to Panaca, Nevada, an even smaller town. What Roberts didn't recall (or at least record) is that one Captain Witherall, a convert-captain from the army of the Confederate South, took on the discipline problems with a large black strap. He was known to flog boys for looking up from their reading and anyone else, boy or girl, who protested even by a slight grimace. There was also another classroom disciplinarian, Chester Call, whose instrument of control was an oak stick. [^22]

These first steps into intellectuality were promising. One can speculate about what might have been had Harry Roberts, like his friend Anson V, attracted enough special attention, buttressed by financial aid, to attend the equivalent of a school for honor students for a few consecutive years in his teens.

61In his thirteenth year, however, even the semblance of a steady home-school environment was taken away from him and replaced once more by an outdoor life, this time in mining. It resulted from his mother's marriage to Seth Dustin, a man whose interests took him away from home.

Roberts's own papers provide little more than the name of this stepfather. Dustin directed a large-scale road construction company whose equipment had been heavily contracted during the Echo Canyon grading of the Union Pacific line. He married Mother Roberts, and he and his three "grown-up" sons, who were dominating, rugged lads, moved in. Roberts was at this time thirteen. [^23]

Roberts's own sisters, Mary (Polly) and Annie, had already married and were living nearby in Bountiful. But neither one was able to make a home for him. So faint was his filial response towards this stepfather-not to mention his stepfather's sons-that Roberts felt as little home attraction as he had with the Toveys. We may infer that only a certain loyalty, a carry over of his genuine love for his mother, sustained him. He became a kind of chore boy to Mr. Dustin. Some of the neighbors of that generation remember "Henry" (his formal middle name, from which "Harry" was derived) roping and hauling horses from the field for his stepfather, "wearing a long comforter" around his neck. [^24] Apparently the arrangement brought little happiness, even to his mother. As for himself, his notes say only, "For several years home life was considerably interfered with." There is no way to trace the exact date of separation, but some years later-after the Dustin boys were raised and gone from home-Seth Dustin was more and more away and, just as he had abruptly entered the Roberts home, he abruptly disappeared.

62The mining years were melancholy and misspent ones for Henry. While working for the brick makers he had tried both chewing tobacco and the diluted alcohol the workmen were able to obtain. And he was to waste his early teens with the big-time muckers in the silver mines, mixing with men at their worst. Mr. Dustin (he never calls him "father" or even "uncle," a frequent term of affection among the Mormons) had prospected for coal on the west side of the Wasatch range. Then in the Oquirrh range, west of the Salt Lake Valley near Tooele, there was talk of silver strikes. [^25] Dry Canyon, where there was a little mining camp named Ophir, became the hoped-for bonanza of a group of Davis County farmers, Dustin at their head. At age fourteen Roberts was sent out with a company of hired hands to begin the prospecting. The men were floaters with few admirable habits. Plenty of rot-gut whiskey was in the buckboards. The men badgered the youth to join their festivities as they went across the Jordan River toward Tooele (a stone's throw, if you could find a stone, from what was later the Saltair Pavilion, a sort of Utah Coney Island). That day set the pattern:

· .. near sunset, I then yielded to the solicitation and drank a half tin cup full of the fiery liquor. Its effect on me, the unpracticed youth, can be imagined. I was soon in the swirl of intoxication with a reckless dare-devil spirit that had been awakened. I was mounted at the time upon a scarcely broken three-year-old colt. Now with my senseless putting the colt through his paces there was a wild riding, circling the wagons, conveying the miners to the west, challenging them to a race, etc. etc. At last the sun was setting, the great round crimson ball behind a film of clouds suggested the insane notion of riding out to the sun and overtaking it, and I put the horse on a dead run for the blazing objective. That was the last I knew. From my companions I later learned that the horse slowed up and began straight bucking to get rid of me. It soon succeeded and I was picked up unconscious and placed in the wagon. My next remembrance was of my dull aching body, slowly awakening amid the bedding and kegs of whiskey in the wagon, and entering into something of a quarrel and fight with the man on the front seat. [^26]

A feverish night was made more fitful for the boy by some ladles of brackish water. In the morning, offered more of "the hair of the dog that bit him," he declined from compelling nausea. He "had had enough."

63An early incident at work typifies his recklessness. Up Shoofly Hill in the middle of Dry Canyon there was nothing more defined than a deer trail. Henry, the new recruit, arrived with his group just as a company (called pretentiously the Empire Mine) was about to dynamite. Henry pleaded to light the fuse and won consent only after a solemn caution that he shout several times, "Look out below!" to warn anyone on the trail. Impulsively he lit the fuse and was scrambling up the hill before he remembered the instruction. Then he frantically began to yell and at that instant saw-exactly below the sputtering fuse and charge - a man on a white mule loaded from neck to tail with an ax, pick handles, tinware, milk pans, and bread frying pans. At the shout the rider belabored his beast. But the mule stopped cold in his tracks.

The blast exploded and the whole canyon, to me, seemed to be filled with a shower of dust and stones of various sizes. The next I saw of the mule and rider was a white streak breaking up the opposite side of the canyon through a grove of quaken aspen, scattering the tinware as it went. Nothing was said of this misadventure of the mule and his rider. But in about an hour he came into the Empire prospector's camp inquiring for the d ... f- - that let off a blast before he could get out of the way. He had been severely stoned and the mule, from his ears to his tail, bore a number of peeled-off patches of skin which showed his experience had been quite serious. I confessed to being the d - . . f. - - inquired for. But the whole thing was so laughable when it was related that good nature obtained and the unfortunate rider of the mule was reconciled to my omission to give proper warning. What the mule thought was not expressed. [^27]

Henry himself was soon to be mauled and mutilated by the explosive immoralisms of Dry Canyon, where there was more liquor than water-and he never saw fit to laugh about it.

64The year Roberts arrived in Utah (1866), Salt Lake City had outlawed gambling, which meant only outlaws gambled -underground. Three "dens" were raided and closed. "Faro tables" and "bars" were likewise obliterated. The Deseret News announced, apparently to induce other towns to follow suit, that such places were opposed by public sentiment in every community, adding that they "breed vice as carrion breeds maggots." [^28] A year earlier a commercial prospectus seeking silver miners had acknowledged that the Mormon people "dislike gamblers and drunkards" but offered inducement to the "honest hard-working miner." They observed that there were "few saloons, loafers and no places of 'ill fame,' " and that Utah is "one of the healthiest spots on this globe": its climate is invigorating without fevers or agues; mosquitoes are "almost unknown" except for a few that do their "work in the day" because the cool nights "induce them to roost"; and umbrellas are unsalable except "in defense of the sun's rays by day." They concluded that Salt Lake City "may well become the greatest commercial city in the world." [^29]

But prospectors had a fevered disinterest in moralistic editorials or in promoters whose main pitch was the wholesome people or the healthy climate. They were rushing to Ophir Canyon, working prospects on the crest of the hills above the place now known as "Mercur." [^30] They came from Montana, Colorado, Nevada, Idaho and Wyoming for a strike. [^31] Silver discoveries, or the fantasy of them, had brought Utah settlers (including the nephews of Horace Greeley, John and Mark) up from Camp Floyd. The city Ophir, in the Old Testament, was famous for its gold; this modern camp aspired to be "Silveropolis." A frantic pace and the speculative spirit were not altogether corrosive. Charles C. Goodwin, newspaperman and oftentimes a critic of Mormons, extolled the "rugged virtues" and "outdoor purity" of miners in the Sierras, claiming, with a certain dreamy charm, that the very distance from home influence made the miners "tenderer and more considerate"; that the absence of families made them "adopt all the world's children"; and that, though the men were "wild and reckless," they turned their gaze upward to the trees which were "higher than church spires. [^32]

Perhaps. But when Roberts arrived on the scene, things were hardly tender, pure, or worshipful. Most of the men were "flotsam and jetsam" of almost "every degree of intelligence and desperation" known. In Dry Canyon there soon grew the rough mining camp, Jacob City. No "Israel City," it was instead a cluster of "saloons, gambling dens and road-houses." Whatever might be offered in defense of the "moral neutrality" and freeing quality of such exposure, Roberts surely would have been better off in school.

65It is tempting to juxtapose Henry's life in the Oquirrh Mountains with life in the Utah town of Knightsville. Reconverted Mormon, Jesse Knight, as a center for the operation of his silver mines, built a town unique in the world of mining. At his own expense, and in a sense of gratitude (for he had covenanted to use his wealth in the cause of Christ and was as concerned to avoid the human corruptions of procuring it as those of dispensing it), he built a chapel and an attractive cultural hall. He set up evening activities-lively and enlightening enough to compete with, and often to defeat, the fleshpot allurements in a nearby place called Eureka. He established a school, hired a first-rate teacher, taxed every miner to contribute to its operation, and kept the town spotless. He sponsored lectures, concerts, town dances, basketball games and socials. Meantime he paid his men more than the prevailing wage, closed down the operation on the Sabbath, and fired any man who would not leave alcohol alone. His accumulated fortune ended up (as had been predicted) "saving the credit of the Church" and substantially underwriting the beginnings of the huge enterprise now known as Brigham Young University.

Henry Roberts, a minor among miners, came to the hills too soon for such social benefits. His daylight tasks were wholesome enough, summer and winter: he packed in drinking water, using a "train" of two burros and a cargo of four barrels. This required daily solitary trips to the summit of Soldiers Canyon. He also functioned at various times as camp cook and as errand boy, handyman, prospector, trader of jacks and jack-of-all-trades. All of this was in itself harmless.

The evenings were something else. In gambling houses he manipulated the jack of hearts and spades; learned to drink his coffee black ("Bl-a-a-a-ack," he always said) and his liquor straight; learned to bet and bluff and cajole; listened to men spit vulgarisms with the same abandon that they spat tobacco; saw fortunes claimed, jump-claimed, and wiped out in one evening; and mixed with the lurid mentality of fraud and violence. "Men are vile." He was to be a participant in "irregular habits," "improprieties," "recklessness," "jumped claims," "fights and gun play," and "saloons," and a spectator of "murder."

66One of the most vocal, flamboyant, and perverse of the men, Ben Maynard, a desperado from Texas, took a shine to young Roberts. There is no evidence that Maynard ever made a dime in mining; but his father, a wealthy planter, sent him "heavy remittances" each month, and he dumped them on faro tables, roulette wheels, and poker chips. He "adopted" young Roberts as a child of the world, dubbed him his "mascot," and insisted on the presence of his teen shadow in every joint, feud, and gunfight. "Big Ben," a roistering camp hero, was frequently challenged but rarely defeated. For Roberts, impressionable and lonesome, Ben became an object of teenage adulation, or of what he calls "boyish reverence." A "strong friendship" grew between man and boy. Shoot-outs were Maynard's main diversion, and young Roberts stood by while Ben supplied corpses for the local cemeteries. [^33]

On Main Street, for example, immediately in front of McKimmon's Livery Stable in downtown Salt Lake, Ben, professing to heartily despise a certain man, called him to account. The scene would fit any mediocre TV western; but it was real.

Meeting at the place designated above, Big Ben, whose manners were always excessively polite and whose voice was soft and low, made the statement to his enemy that he had heard some ugly rumors of things alleged to be said and done by Maynard. Maynard deliberately permitted the man to make an attempt. He did draw his revolver, but Maynard was too quick for him and shot him through the heart before his enemy could fire.

Maynard did not move from his tracks, but waited until a policeman appeared on the scene and he cooly surrendered the pistol to the officer and willingly accompanied him to the City Hall. The hearing on the case was sufficient to absolve Maynard from the charge of murder and a verdict of self-defense was rendered. [^34]

No record of this incident is recoverable from newspaper files, but it and like experiences were indelible in the boy. Before Roberts could become completely molded in his image, Maynard simply disappeared. But his spectre remained. Years later, speaking of his mining days, Roberts would say, "I absorbed much that is injurious to character building," and "I witnessed some of the deepest die of criminality that it had been my fortune to meet so far in life."

67How much did he witness and how much did he absorb? Henry's bishop, Edwin D. Woolley, was not sure of the distinction. From a distance of forty miles he judged that Roberts was not being honest with himself. [^35] Woolley is known as having great interest in the character development of young boys; and he was a stubborn man ("contrary" was the contemporary word, with the stress on the second syllable). The bandied witticism was, "If he dies by drowning, look for the body upstream." But he was a wise judge of character and his philosophy of leadership was often to test and challenge faith. [^36] In the presence of Heber J. Grant's mother, he called Heber "lazy" (which was like calling Abraham Lincoln dishonest) and told Widow Grant when she came to pay her tithing that if she had to wait on her only son to repair the roof (there were six or eight pans catching the leaking rain), she would wait a long time. No remark ever had been more motivating. The youth built a new house for his mother by the time he was twenty-one, and then invited the good bishop over to dedicate it. It is possible that Woolley saw some Heber J. Grant in B. H. Roberts (and one day they would see a lot of and in each other) and applied this ecclesiastical hard knock to bring it out.

68How Woolley could have anything to do with Roberts is not clear. He was bishop of the historic Thirteenth Ward, which was near the center of downtown Salt Lake City. Perhaps by practical Church gerrymandering he was responsible for the Mormons out in the mines some forty miles away. Henry occasionally came in to the Thirteenth Ward Sunday services, and perhaps Woolley had also observed him when he traveled to Salt Lake for supplies and had become troubled at the undermining effects of his mining life. In any case, he saw to it that Henry Roberts was summarily disfellowshipped from the Church. [^37] The records do not indicate whether Roberts was present at the high council hearing. But some time later Elder George A. Smith, a member of the Council of the Twelve, met the young man on the street in Salt Lake. "Henry," he said, "I understand you've been cut off from the Church." "So?" the young man shrugged. "Well," said the apostle, "what are you going to do about it? .... Nothing!" Roberts replied. "If Bishop Woolley want: me out of the Church, then I'm out of the Church." "Well then," Elder Smith said, "you're on your way to hell." And with that Elder Smith walked away. His tone and his size-he was an amiable but impressive three hundred pounds-not to mention his spiritual mantle, gave a certain authority to his statement. "Hell" to Latter-day Saints is not Dante's or Augustine's or Jonathan Edwards's: it is the New Testament withdrawal of Spirit and the gnawings of guilt. A place it may be, but it is also a condition of soul here as also hereafter. "A man is his own tormenter and condemner.' [^38]

Disfellowship was strange and harsh treatment but was perhaps intended to be therapeutic for the frustrations that were pounding in him, at him. Harry himself knew, as none else, that he was losing touch with the voice of his soul. He later wrote a comment of Sysiphus on conscience: "I thank God these pleasures are not sweet to me now in the very enjoying of them."

Brought up short, but at the same time grateful that his bishop cared that much (and perhaps surprised that he himself did), he appealed the decision to a Church court. To his further surprise, Bishop Woolley appeared, stood in the youth's behalf, and said with commanding assurance, "I move that Henry Roberts be restored to full faith and fellowship.' [^39] Had the bishop seen signs of genuine repentance and renewal in the boy? There is no way of knowing. But this act was a turning point. Henry's contact with what he called the "awful life" would persist for a time; but his submission to it would diminish.

69Friends who heard him speak in later years about those wild days remember this story: he had learned to follow the camp habit of chewing tobacco, keeping a massive cud between his cheek and his gum. (The size of the lump and the distance of the spitting were like hair on one's chest: proof of manliness.) When he became disgusted with the habit, not only out of religious sensitivity but because it was a nuisance, a "filthy habit," he pulled an unused portion out of his pocket and with firm resolve threw it aimlessly into the dirt and sagebrush. Shortly the throb of addiction intensified. He turned back and with increasing urgency retraced his steps. The fever drove him to his hands and knees, scraping, pushing, searching in every direction, until finally by bad luck he recovered the cud. Then came relief, the sheer satisfaction of having it back in his mouth.

That experience was all too symbolic of his struggle with other more damaging habits. Years later he would write:

Sometimes after years of carelessness and manifest indifference ... how is it with you? How is it with me? I know, and so do you know. In your wayward career, in your days of indifference, when friends became discouraged and left you to drift, and take your own course, you know that there was a voice within you that did not cease to reprove, to rebuke your sin, and to speak the word of encouragement when you did well. The Spirit worked with you; it will work, Latter-day Saints, with your offspring to whom you taught the gospel, and who received its ordinances. Sooner or later that divine planting which you witnessed will have its growth and come to its harvest. [^40]

So, sooner or later, it did with him.

It would give him some pause later to recognize that his mother, and her children, had pulled away from a world of sordid immorality at enormous cost in faith, raw nerve, and pain. And after all that, he had been thrust into a camp life more brazen and brutal than he had left in England. "Our fathers," he later wrote in an article for youth, generalizing the point, "left behind them those evils which curse our civilization. For years there were none among us. From whom did they come?" And he replies a little sadly, "from our would-be reformers." But for him, riding scapegoats-men, hostile nature, the devil, even in inverse reverence blaming God-had no redeeming human value. His considered remedy: "You are stronger than your environment." [^41]

'Tis hard to combat but we cannot fly. The temptations must be met. We must rise above them, and in the midst of temptation remain pure and unsullied by the sins of the world. This, in my judgment, is the only thing we can do... with a prayer to Him for divine aid. [^42]

70He would later teach his daughters and sons of the healing power of love, and counsel against "the solitary vice of sex cowards" and indulgence without love and responsibility. At times they thought him more inflexible than an observant Jew. But his was not a "spoilsport" philosophy; he had supreme respect for the enjoyments of both body and spirit and concern for vibrant happiness on all levels, physical no less than intellectual. But for him enough influences work to the deterioration of joy without taking addictive substances into the system. Certain kinds of abstinence make the heart grow finer, purer, and more capable of life's fulness.

He learned the hard way that "merely quitting" alcohol was not easy, permanent, or the root of the matter. A note in the Contributor, though anonymous, is probably his. "Like produces like," it says, and that is doubled edged. His conclusion? He saw himself not as the hereditary victim of an intemperate father but of his own self-enslaving habits-it is alcohol that generates desire for more alcohol. At some point in his teens he made a pact with his mother that he would not reenact her husband's excess ("I promise you I will not end up like my father"). But he slowly learned that, short of a "new creation" through spiritual forces, his struggle with drink would not only beat him to his knees but to his elbows and chin. He often said of President John Taylor (he became Taylor's biographer), in the pensive regret of contrast, that "in his [Taylor's] youth never had he partaken of hot and rebellious liquors to inflame or contaminate his blood." [^43] All through his middle teens, Roberts had.

71By standards other than those of the Latter-day Saints, his mining camp lapses might be written off as "growing up." But for him they were monkeys on his back. The evidence is that he really overcame most of the bluster and squandering escapisms: the gambler's irresponsibility, the rough language and smut, the drink. His work with Church youth programs shows that he was for prevention; but he was also for exposure to raw contrast (all one can take)-as the essence of life, even the saintly life. The entrapments that entered his blood became miniature demons, indulged and exercised and then painfully exorcised. Not just his indomitable will but also his faith in Christ were essential to the power of release. He said the rest of his life, "My mining encampment life followed me.' [^44] It did more; it plagued him. At the age of sixty, Roberts spoke of "escaping from his teens." [^45] When he became a leader of one of the Church's youth organizations he pleaded, "Catch them right between manhood and boyhood when they need us most." [^46] Few men have been more grateful to put their teens behind them.

Nor were the mining years a financial success. Not one of this Davis County group (nor any of the others who worked the claims at Ophir) ever hit it big. The discovery of copper in the now world-renowned open pit of Bingham Canyon fifteen miles away came ten years later. In 1947, Utah's centennial year, mining accounted for about 15 percent of the economy of the state, and half of its population was dependent upon it. By that time also about half of the population lived in the larger cities (those adjacent to the major mines) and were of other than Mormon backgrounds. [^47]

In his personal copy, Roberts has checked and underlined (later he told his wife Margaret he found many passages autobiographical) passages from Childe Harold's Pilgrimage by Lord Byron. Harold, Byron wrote in an introduction to the poems, was a "child of imagination," and in no way "knightly," unless one acknowledges that actual knights were often profligate and unchivalrous. The author did not intend him "as an example." But the story of Harold does show, Byron says,

that early perversion of mind and morals leads to satiety of past pleasures and disappointment in new ones, and that even the beauty of nature, and the stimulus of travel (except ambition, the most powerful of all excitements) are lost on a soul so constituted, or rather misdirected. [^48]

It is not difficult to see how Roberts would recognize his own early years and some of his later ones in this account, and would identify with Byron himself, who was "so wild so fierce." The renewings of the gospel of Jesus Christ had to reach his very cell structure or leave him unchanged.

"This is not an easy plan of salvation," Roberts would write, adding:

After forgiveness of past sins the human weakness still remains, human inclinations ascend and still drive man on toward error, and his imperfect judgment is not sufficient to guide him aright; his human strength alone is not sufficient to make him equal to the task of living in harmony with the divine law. Hence the need for an unction from the Holy One, by which he may know all things, an anointing which, if it will abide upon him will teach him all things. [^49]

Notes

Chapter 3

1 BN, p. 71.

2 He died 14 August 1865.

3 Roberts's oldest daughter.

4 "Ann and Her Son Brigham Henry," comp. Kate B. Carter, Our Pioneer Heritage, 2:274.

5 BNG, pp. 39-40.

6 Ann Everington sustained herself through most of her life by keeping a millinery shop in her own home.

7 They were married 23 March 1867 by Heber C. Kimball in the Endowment House, just six months after Mary arrived. See Incidents in the Life of James Day, manuscript in possession of Haven G. Day, p. 3; also Memoirs, p. 6.

8 Bountiful is a Book of Mormon place-name, so named "because of its much fruit." See 1 Ne. 17:6.

9 "Mormon Exodus and Colonization of the West," Improvement Era 73 (July 1970): 13.

10 Walter Prescott Webb, History of the United States, eds. Williams, Current, Freidel (New York: Alfred A. Knopf), p. 128.

11 See Contributor 6 (1884): 456.

12 See B.H. Roberts, The Missouri Persecutions (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965), pp. 140-41.

13 East of Antelope Island (Salt Lake City: Carr Printing, Daughters of Utah Pioneers), p. 339.

14 Life of Joseph Holbrook, unpublished manuscript, BYU Special Collections.

15 See "The Bible as a Factor in Education," Improvement Era 2 (March 1899): 371. Robert praises Thomas Huxley, the clear-headed agnostic and "orthodox Briton" who nevertheless taught his own children the Bible.

16 The money that enabled both Mother Roberts and later B. H. and Polly to come to America was advanced by a British convert, William Hughes, who was formerly a deacon in the Church of England and, for that day, a prosperous lumberman in Liverpool. He had intended to bring his own family; but shortly after joining the Church his wife died, leaving five small children. He sold his lumber business and many household furnishings and advanced the money for the Robertses. He later crossed the plains with a handcart. (This detail came from a great-granddaughter of William Hughes, Lula Lundquist.)

17 Anson Call had stood at Montrose, Iowa, and studied Joseph Smith's face as Joseph uttered the classic Rocky Mountain prophecy. After drinking a tumbler of cold water and looking westward, Joseph said: "There is Anson, he shall go and shall assist in building up cities from one end of the country to the other; . . . and shall perform as great a work as has been done by man, so that the nations of the earth shall be astonished, and many of them will be gathered in that land and assist in building cities and temples, and Israel shall be made to rejoice." Before Artson died he had settled twenty-five communities in the Rocky Mountain Corridor. (See Duane S. Crowther, The Prophecies of Joseph Smith [Salt Lake City: Book-craft, 1963], pp. 64-65.)

18 BNG, pp. 39-40.

19 See Improvement Era 3 (July 1900): 653.

20 See Roberts's preface to the first edition of Missouri Persecutions. He was so conscientious that even when he was clearly summarizing or quoting in extenso he sometimes put a footnote indicating, "This is not mine," in the latter case not being satisfied just to use quotation marks.

21 In similar schools the students also lined up for "mental arithmetic."

22 Call expected and demanded much of his gifted student, Roberts, and followed his career closely. Decades later, in the last stages of cancer, Call called for him. "Henry," he said, "I'm going to die. I want you to speak at my funeral. It won't do me any good but it may make my family feel better." Then with a twinkle, "If you will do it, I won't paddle you with that old stick." Roberts rose to the honor.

23 A temple index card records the marriage to Seth Dustin on 5 April 1869.

24 Davis County Clipper, 29 September 1933.

25 Oquirrh means "green," the tradition says, but after the smoke-belching, copper-mining smelters moved in, the hills became a barren

26 BN, pp. 82-83.

27 BN, p. 84.

28 Deseret News, vol. 15, p. 5.

29 Prospectus (Thomas B. Brown & Son, 1865). Original in Utah Historical Society.

30 See Improvement Era 20 (September 1917).

31 See Daughters of Utah Pioneers files of 1869.

32 Charles C. Goodwin, As I Remember Them (Salt Lake City: Salt Lake Commercial Club, 1913), p. 35.

33 BN, pp. 85-87.

34 BN, p. 86.

35 See Leonard J. Arrington, From Quaker to Latter-day Saint: Bishop Edwin D. Woolley (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Go., 1976). pp. 467-68.

36 righam Young is quoted as saying, "Bishop Woolley is the worst bishop in the Church, and, at the same time, the best."

37 There is no record of this action in the Salt Lake City Thirteenth Ward records. Leonard Arrington, Woolley's biographer. says he did in at least one other case excommunicate a man "just to shnke-or wake-him up," then tenderly reinstated him.

38 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1946), p. 357; hereafter cited as TPJS.

39 These recollections are Thomas C. Romney's, as related to Oscar W. McConkie, Jr., then bishop of the Thirteenth Ward. Roberts apparently was seventeen years old and appealed his action to a stake court.

40 B.H. Roberts, The Advantages Possessed by the Saints, (Chatta-nooga, Tn.: Southern States Mission, 1884), p. 6.

41 Improvement Era 19 (May 1916): 908.

42 Contributor 6 (1885): 457.

43 A paraphrase from Shakespeare's As You Like It, act 2, sc. 3.

44 BN, p. 88.

45 See Improvement Era 24 (April 1921): 482.

46 Improvement Era 15 (October 1912): 1136.

47 See "Mining," in Butt B. Brewster's "History of Mining in Utah," Centennial History of Utah, ed. Wain Sutton, 2 vols. (New York: Lewis Historical Publishing Co., 1949).

48 Roberts's personal copy of Childe Harold's Pilgrimage was published in London by John Murray, Albermarle Street, 1841; see introduction to the work.

49 Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 833.

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
[^23] 23 Mrs. William Reed to Ann Roberts.
[^24] 24 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^25] 25 Late in their lives, on 3 May 1928, B. H. and Annie Brynie, a half-sister, and Mary arranged for the temple sealing of Ann Everington and Benjamin Roberts and all of the children including the twins and baby Thomas. See BHR Temple Book.
[^26] 26 Roberts kept one sample of his father's handwriting from the original wrapping of the photo given his mother. It is preserved in the family collection.
[^27] 27 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 1 September 1883, Roberts Family Collection.
[^28] 28 Research has failed to establish where and when Ben died. The marriage date is 15 June 1848 (he was twenty-two) in Poplar, Middlesex, England; from the Book of Remembrance of Haven R. Day.
[^29] 29 B. H. Roberts to Ann Everington, 21 April 1880, Roberts Family Collection.
[^30] 30 Mrs. Charles H. Wilcox recorded these impressions from a conversation with B.H. Roberts at his home prior to his call to the Eastern States.
[^31] 31 BN, p. 10.
[^32] 32 See Juvenile Instructor 49 (February 1914): 85.
[^33] 33 Fifty years later, as chairman of "Vocations and Industry" in the youth program of the Church, he wrote, "We shall take the ground that no vocation of honest industry need be ignoble or debasing in its effects, but by properly correlating it with the general welfare of human life can be in effect both honorable and glorious." Improvement Era 15 (October 1912): 1083.
[^34] 34 Liahona 12 (20 October 1914): 364.
[^35] 35. Salt Lake Herald, 8 January 1899.
[^36] 36. So Roberts later told his children.
[^37] 37. BNG, p. 8.
[^38] 38 See History of Utah, 4:689.
[^39] 39 In a notebook under "Roberts, B. H." is this handwritten note: "Warrington-Town of, my birth place. Warrington, at the head of tide water on the Mersey River. It was a station of Romans (Veraterium) in the time of Agricola - (69-84 A.D.) and many Roman relics have been found in the neighborhood."
[^40] 40 Beniamin's father's brother.
[^41] 41 N. B. Lundwall, Roberts's secretary for twelve years, recalls him saying this incident occurred when he was seven.
[^42] 42 BNG, p. 16. Roberts spoke in later years of this spiritual impression (which one tradition says was repeated three times) as evidence that "the promptings of the Spirit of God" can come early - several years, in his case, before his official baptism and confirmation in 1867.
[^43] 43 The word gomin - rather than urchha - was endeared to Roberts through the Victor Hugo story of Gayroche who, in the midst of battle, went along the pavement gathering unfired cartridges from the corpses of fallen men, gaining strength at each step.
[^44] 44 Memoirs, p. 4.
[^45] 45 BN, p. 18a.
[^46] 46 Apparently Tovey's periodic alienations from the LDS Church did not interfere with his desire to preach.
[^47] 47 This was republished by Harvard University Press in 1962. The book was originally issued in fifteen separately stitched parts from July 1854 to September 1855.
[^48] 48 BN, p. 20.
[^49] 49 BN, p. 56.
