Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

4 Apprentice Village Blacksmith

Roberts's mother became the moving force behind his self-recovery. In retrospect he felt an analogy between Ann Everington Roberts and Monica, the mother of Augustine (A.D. 354-430), who became a watershed theologian of both Catholic and Protestant thought. He balked at much of Augustine's theology: the platonic abstractions that vitiate the personality of God; the life-negations; the sin-blistered contempt of marriage. But he felt an empathic gladness in studying Augustine's life, a life that wandered through years of profligacy, indulgence, penitence, anguish-all of it lovingly endured by his prayerful mother, Monica-and then, through her, emerged at last into a kind of blessedness. For Roberts, that story was a light amidst the shadows. Through rocky times it symbolized the enduring trust of his own mother.

73A young Bountiful man Ann knew, James Baird, had moved to Centerville and opened a blacksmith shop. Would Henry like to become a tradesman, "getting into some regular order of life," in the manner of his forebears in Kent, England, and hold "an honorable station"? [^1] Roberts's notes record, "the idea of perpetuating in America the trade of my ancestors" struck his fancy. [^2] But it was intended to strike more than that.

One wonders how much Mother Roberts envisioned for her vigorous son, the brash ram of the mining camps. We find a hint of early hope for her son in his very name. "Henry" was his father's choice of first names; he was so christened. But after Mother Roberts encountered the Savior through the LDS missionaries, she wanted her son to carry the name of a prophetic figure. Convinced that the Master had touched President Brigham Young-though she only knew of him by hearsay (Roberts himself as a boy had only one fleeting glimpse of President Young)-she chose a modern Moses and asked the missionaries in a formal blessing to add to the infant's name the illustrious "Brigham." In later years people often thought it a curiosity, perhaps a perverse one, that though others used it, he rarely did. Even on official documents he signed himself "B. H. Roberts." Was it an aversion, a disrespect or hesitancy about the name, or a desire to be different? It was probably just the opposite-a sense of adulation. Through the long years of careful documentary study, his reverence for Brigham Young's sacred calling deepened and intensified, leading to several chapters on him in Roberts's published histories-chapters which no doubt contributed to national recognition of Brigham Young as an ingenious colonizer and, among other honors, to a monument that now stands in the rotunda of the Capitol Building in Washington, D.C. He could not appropriate the name "Brigham." Even after his own rise to prominence he apparently felt there was really only one Brigham.

74 James Baird was a good blacksmith, but to Mother Roberts that was incidental. Roberts had known three absentee fathers-his own, Benjamin Roberts, John Tovey (Gailey), and Seth Dustin. All had (by presence or absence) been shadows on his emotional screen. Upon none had he been able to lean for a self-image or for sustaining love. Mother Roberts knew of these jagged losses and sensed the penalties in the boy's life. It was her intuitive faith that James Baird could effect a change of direction in her son. As she prayed and yearned, it began to happen. Roberts, easily impressed at that age by physical exploits, could see that Baird was "splendid" in his stature and strength. "I know of no more perfectly formed physical man than James Baird," he later said. But Baird had moral strengths, too. He was an active peacemaker and practical hero. Twice he had volunteered for rescue missions, driving a relief wagon all the way to Grand Island, Nebraska, and Ft. Steele, Wyoming, and back again, lifting exhausted men, women and children from despair and death. His plains craftsmanship was a legend in Centerville, Utah. No other man in the whole community could cling to an ox tail to "swim" through the Sweetwater or North Platte rivers as he did. More crucial and decisive for Roberts's formative needs was Baird's religious leadership; he was the leader of a Young Men's organization and knew how to "regulate" without harshness and keep people straight. [^3] Baird made a vow at his own marriage that none of his children would ever hear him swear, or see him break the Word of Wisdom, or see him work on Sunday. He was true to his word. [^4]

Baird set up his Centerville smithy in 1873. Roberts joined him as an apprentice soon after, "boarding in." It was a shift in roles for Baird to have an apprentice. As a young man, Baird had come to Utah by ox team with his mother (who had been widowed in a yellow fever epidemic in New Orleans). As apprentice to Henry Rampton, he had earned twelve dollars a month. Necessity had taught him to shoe oxen as well as horses; he was fully professional when he opened his own shop.

75The Baird smithy was immediately south of the Thomas Whitaker home at the corner of Main and First North. One consequence of that proximity was Roberts's lasting friendship with Thomas's son, John M. Whitaker, who in maturity became the personal secretary of President John Taylor, general secretary of the First Council of the Seventy, and an intimate link between Roberts and these veteran Church leaders. From the late 1880s on, John M. Whitaker was a close secretarial and administrative aide to Roberts himself, as a scribe, proofreader, copyist, and manager of affairs. "I am fortunate," Whitaker wrote fifteen years later, "to have his complete confidence." [^5] Whitaker was one of the few who ever enjoyed intimate conversation and camaraderie with Roberts, John's mother was the second positive influence from that household. She became the adoptive godmother to Roberts's own children. "How I loved her for all she had done for my family," he said in 1889. [^6]

Cosmopolite though Roberts eventually became, Centerville was a permanent home to him, or, more accurately, a point of departure for him and his family for the rest of his life. [^7]

As he began his adjustment in Centerville, "The good boys didn't want me; I did not want the bad ones, so I stayed to myself," he told his family. The transition was not smooth. Lads of less-checkered backgrounds were slow to warm to him. At first, he veered toward and found "somewhat congenial association" with a group of "roughnecks." Their hangout was a vacant house near the Baird shop. The taming of this crew of young roustabouts of which he quickly became titular head was only "after some stress." A certain bravura had worked into his skin in the mining camps and with it attitudes of protective discoloration, a put-on disdain of conventions. He rose to many ego tests.

76One of the contests of this teen clique was a "game" with these rules: two lines of boys faced each other one-to-one. At a given signal the first pair began flailing each other and continued until one or the other "drew blood." Then the next pair clashed, victors against victors, until all were bloodied or down except one unwounded victor. "I submit," Roberts later commented, "that in such a contest a sissy did not survive." Apparently he not only survived but often "won." As for serious collisions with this breed of roustabout, he would later reflect: "I really never had in my boyhood days a fight in my life but what it was forced upon me .... So far as I can remember I entered every engagement that fell in my way with a good deal of anxiety, even fear, but there was this peculiarity about it-the first blow struck, I was always very comfortable after that." [^8] Sublimated in maturity (and there were many who felt it was not sublimated enough), this capacity gave him, whatever trepidation he felt beforehand, a calmness in the thick of conflict and a tendency to be "at his best in controversy."

Nosebleeds and face-marring occurred inside this circle -and some collective damage outside. Roberts looked back on it sadly. One night, for example, the gang, in senseless vandalism, pulled up most of a whole garden of productive raspberry bushes. Ironically, the next morning James Baird, all unaware, sent his apprentice down to that very house for raspberry "starts." The mother answered the door and, not recognizing "Henry Roberts," told of the loss, condemned "Hen Nichols" (one of his aliases) as the ringleader, and then kindly gave the straight-faced youth all the raspberries he wanted. There was no taste of triumph in such episodes. In some ways the community as well as the youth suffered during his "identity crisis."

Now another "Ben," Ben Tasker, crossed his path. [^9] He was a horse thief who often came through town shipping ponies from his own illegal southern Utah ranches to Evanston, Wyoming, and, unknown to the young blacksmith, mixing stolen horses with legitimate ones. He set up a relay station at the mouth of Bingham Canyon in the chain from southern Utah.

77One day the Centerville postmaster refused to lend his "fine team and spring wagon" to Henry. The boy had volunteered for an emergency trip to retrieve a man in Little Cottonwood Canyon whose wife was undergoing a dangerous birth. The refusal did not set well with anyone. Such a man, it was said in the blacksmith shop the next day, "didn't deserve to have a team." An idler present (Ben Tasker's local relay man, Henry afterwards learned) said: "All right, let's run it out of the country. I can manage it." Henry agreed to be the go-between-moral indignation almost making him party to a crime. Fortunately for Henry, the shipment of stolen horses to which the postmaster's team would have been joined arrived from Bingham a night early and was "rushed" through, so the would-be theft dissolved into a solitary prank. Henry removed the team and carriage to an adjoining village and was gratified when it took the postmaster three days to locate them. When Henry learned the facts about Ben Tasker's horse-running, he "dropped the relationship."

But he did not immediately drop his interest in milder mischief. Stories still circulate in Centerville that Roberts was a "scamp." [^10] James Baird was deputy to the sheriff and many times had to stand up for his apprentice with apologies and sometimes a gold coin for petty damages. Finally there was a showdown-a scrape for which Baird told Roberts he would have to take his own medicine. Henry promised as he reached over the anvil: "I give you my hand and my word. If you will help me this time you will never have to help me again." Something in his manner and his blue piercing eyes was convincing. Baird records: "I put my hand in my pocket, pulled out a five-dollar gold piece, and shook on it. He was as good as his word. I never had to get him out of trouble again." [^11] Within a year James Baird was appointed Davis County sheriff and Roberts became his unofficial deputy. Together they captured three horse thieves, who were sent to prison, and a string of stolen horses. One of the thieves was near Roberts's own age. What pulsations must have stirred in him as he rode these men to their penalties! (At thirty he would find himself in prison, "for conscience' sake," not for criminal misdeeds.)

At the peak of his teens, after what he calls "a peculiar personal struggle," he achieved a unity of the deepest spiritual impulses in him. [^12] It came experientially through immersion and leadership experience in the Mutual Improvement Association; intellectually through immersion in the scriptures and some of the world's literature. But it began first with just being in a "committed community" [^13] that was not only led by committed Christians but permeated by them. The kingdom of God was not only at the center but also at the ragged edge of their lives.

78An intimacy of kinship and religious vision was the motivating force in the pooling of talent to which Roberts was exposed. [^14] In the midst of this community of four hundred, Roberts absorbed many of the attitudes implicit in their lives. There was a close-to-nature sense, a sense of the elements being held in the hand of God. There was reverence for age and experience; families came and sat together in church in order of age. There was sensitivity and tenderness in the midst of rugged strength, and something spiritual in everything secular. There was concern with the world beyond the local horizon, both old and new. Jim Kinnard (an editor for the Deseret News) and his father were "great readers" and constantly "up on current trends." [^15] John Whitaker subscribed to many British journals and newspapers. He took notes (half in Pitman shorthand) and supplied Roberts with all the speeches of Edmund Burke as well as the details of the great debates and political trends worldwide.

Anson Call had built a mill in Centerville; it was also used as a baptismal font. As Joseph Smith had said, the "Gospel net gathers of every kind"-some of the meanest and some of the finest. The test of crossing the plains had created a new order of the fittest. And Centerville was a melting pot for the Yankee love of freedom, the Southerner's desire to draw the Mason-Dixon line parallel to the Rockies, the British sense of magisterial law and royalty, the Irish spirit of passionate advocacy, the Germanic obsession with meticulous scholarship and a preference for concepts over precepts, the Scandinavian preoccupation with cleanliness, and the Dutch penchant for industry.

Most important, the gospel, the power of revelatory experience, and the experience in the desert had created a committed community, a harassed people who did not care that they remained something of a mystery to outsiders. Zane Grey in Riders of the Purple Sage characterized Mormons as "ghost riders," in some cases endowing them with a sinister, coyote image; and for more than half of the nineteenth century journalists and novelists reinforced that image. Direct exposure dispelled the mystery and won respect. After Ernest Hemingway summered among Mormons in Ketchurn, Idaho, in the 1960s, he wrote, "To tell the truth, if I were reborn and I had a choice I'd be a Mormon." [^16]

79Roberts had yet to be reborn. The spiritual soil of Centerville grew all kinds of boys: Roberts was fortunate to have been transplanted. In light of the trumpet testimony that permeated Roberts's mature life, one would expect a definitive watershed experience from which all of his later religious assurances derived. As one of his missionaries later said: "You could just feel the burning force of the testimony that permeated that man. Nothing could quench it. Nothing could freeze it. It just came out like a trumpet call." [^17] But for the Latter-day Saint, religious assurance has many strands and cannot remain vital without renewed experiences.

Roberts was a complex personality, and the pulling of those strands together into what in Mormondom is called a testimony-a religious assurance that is the fountainhead of allegiance, growth, covenant-making, and fellowship with the Master-was slow. Like his admired leader, Joseph F. Smith, he "went out" into the wilderness in his youth, expecting through prayer a marvelous experience. But rather than "marvels" he came to know the gospel "line upon line, precept upon precept," accompanied by penetrating light, until it was written in him as a possession that would never pass away. He knew the truth "from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet." Like George Q. Cannon, he could say, "I cannot remember when I did not have a testimony." For there was, as he later wrote, his own childhood in mind, something innate, something "native to truth," something of the soul-voice from the earliest reaches of his consciousness. With James E. Talmage he could add that some strands of his kinship with God arose from the pure power of the scriptures. With John A. Widtsoe he could say that the careful study and measuring the clarity of gospel truths against all else, even utilizing the methodologies of natural science, would lead to one conclusion: Joseph Smith told the truth. And in the case of the young apprentice there was the assurance of contrast. He heard much from idlers and local atheists who haunted the blacksmith's shop ("They just had a funeral and talked about resurrection. What do they know?"). As with Orson F. Whitney, who had fallen in love with his own pen and was boiling over with literary ideas, something had to happen to sink a shaft into the depths of him and bring him to his knees. We don't know exactly when and how it came to culmination, but we know it did. He later wrote, "I have said to some of my intimate friends that I think it is a good thing the Lord has made it known unto me, for if he had not made it known beyond all doubt, it is very questionable with me if I could believe it. [^18]

80 Of the range and coherence that later gave him excitement and awe in the presence of the gospel there was one theme that he cherished most. In a handwritten summary of "Why Mormonism appeals to me" he says it is the religious power of intimate sonship of God and man.

To have fixed in the mind, in the consciousness... the reality of God, the reality of the divine in man, the consciousness that this spirit within us is of a divine nature, and that it is capable of attaining to something really good and great-to something really worthwhile-to goodness, power and glory ·.. to feel that God has merely "withheld the recollection of our former friends and birth"... is to gather strength for the battle of life... that he envelops us closely about by spiritual influences that we can call to our assistance... is to banish from us the thought of failing in life. [^19]

James Baird's reasons for his spiritual allegiance were inarticulate. He expressed his faith and love through his biceps and the palms of his hands. Nathan T. Porter (certainly the most important single influence on Roberts in this period) had the added gift of verbal eloquence. Roberts wrote of him:

During this time of apprenticeship I had formed a very dear relationship with Elder Nathan T. Porter, St., a naturally gifted man of fine spiritual character. He was of the swarthy type, deep-set and dark hazel eyes, above which loomed a marble-like forehead back from which was a fine black head of hair of almost silken texture, his nose and mouth and chin were shapely and tapered to a pear-shaped pointed face. He was somewhat noted as a local orator and I used to imagine his great similarity to some of the finer portraits of Patrick Henry, of Virginia. In his speeches, which were always ex-temporaneous, he was fervid, even passionate, and under the spirit he rose to real heights, apparently both in knowledge and in the expression of it. Especially in matters involving the interpretations of scripture of which he was a severely logical and impressive interpreter. In fact in this little mountain hamlet of Centerville there were gathered quite a number of gifted men with what passed as "oratory" and of which Nathan Porter was the chief shining example. [^20]

Nathan Porter became the living interpreter for Roberts in his late youth. "Porter put his arm around him and told him he was doing wrong." "The family can never be grateful enough to him. We loved him," Roberts's daughter Georgia later wrote. [^21]

Porter was a British convert and later a British missionary. Having known Joseph Smith in Nauvoo, he was a treasury, of firsthand recollection. He was in his early fifties and had been assigned as a "home missionary" when Roberts entered his quorum as a seventy. He had an eye for flashes of spiritual promise in youth and a preoccupation with helping them make good. Porter had himself been promised in a blessing that, as he bore record of the gospel of Jesus Christ and declared his testimony of modern prophets, "power shall rest upon you. Kings and queens shall tremble at thy word." [^22]

The bond between Porter and Roberts was permanent. Throughout his life, whenever asked for his "line of ordination" by those he ordained, set apart or blessed, Roberts traced it through Nathan T. Porter, who ordained him a seventy on March 8, 1877, when Roberts was twenty-one years old. Porter was acting as president of the council of the Nineteenth Quorum of the seventy. [^23]

By Porter's arrangement, his neophyte seventy stood to speak for the first time before a meeting of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association. Henry stood ill at ease, squirmed over the lectern, placed his elbows on the stand, held his face in his hands, stood with feet apart, and stared blankly. After he had sputtered to a verbal standstill and the silence became unbearable, Mr. Baird took him by the arm and led him to his chair. The next morning at breakfast, Roberts's frustration and resolve motivated him to promise Baird: "The day will come when I will speak from that stand again. And this time they will listen!" [^24]

82Orson F. Whitney reconstructed Henry's first triumph as an orator. Henry had volunteered to deliver a "brief lecture," on a subject of his own choosing, in Nathan Porter's class of about twenty boys and girls. Porter noticed the tension in the lad's face and offered aid "if necessary." Henry arose feeling as if one great eye were glaring at him. He was at first tongue-tied; then out of the silence came a girl's backrow giggle. Startled, Henry launched into a bright, fluent, forty-five-minute lecture, without notes, on "the Duty of Man in his Relation to God." The following Sunday he was asked to be the main speaker in his home chapel; [^25] in following weeks he accompanied President Willard Smith to a variety of meetings up and down the Mormon chain of chapels in Cache Valley. From that point on, his reputation and power as a translucent speaker grew steadily.

"After some stress" Henry joined the Young Men's Club which James Baird had organized [^26]Henry soon proved himself both the most regular and the most facile member of the club ("retelling stories was something of a gift of mine"), and he shortly became its president. The tether with the roughnecks had been completely severed, and now his energies were constructive. Previously the club had met in private homes, but Roberts, on his own initiative, subscribed stock and began a cooperative building project. He and the Duncan boys (who were skillful in stonecraft) were soon at work on- a stone hall which the Young Men's Club could call its own.

The building was near completion when Junius F. Wells, just recently returned from a British mission, arrived. He had been commissioned by Brigham Young to organize, with Thomas Hull, a worldwide youth program for the Church. It was to be named the Mutual Improvement Association, or the MIA for short. Wells, articulate, literary, and full of practical ideas, was a charismatic figure to Henry, and he agreed to preside at the meeting at which Wells would put his proposal.

The other boys rebelled directly, threatening Henry with impeachment if he presided at Wells's meeting. [^27] "Of course, this made no difference to me," Henry wrote. The meeting was held and Thomas Hull proposed that B. H. Roberts be president of the new MIA. [^28] The other youths, though disgruntled, abandoned the idea of impeaching Henry, so the building and the club took the label, YMMIA.

83Experience in performing ordinances taught him the "link" to Christ, and was the reality that gave him power to teach, exhort, administer the sacrament, baptize, confirm, and administer to the sick. His own ordination at the early age of eleven had lain dormant in him until his gifts were stirred up by experiences in Centerville.

During Roberts's late teen years, his notes say, he gave three months each during three years to various "common schools." [^29] Roberts was interested in everything. He studied penmanship and free-hand drawing, and learned something of music from Professor Phelps and his niece. After reading a play dialogue to himself he would perform it aloud; his flair for storytelling involved him in a rash of melodramatic performances. The lads had built a stage at the north end of the old Elkhorn Hall, [^30] Centerville's version of the Salt Lake Theater. [^31] Acting gave Henry access to dramatic scriptural stories, but though there was a mania for memorizing among his friends, he preferred to restate the meaning rather than to "reel-it-off." The implications, variations and applications of ideas were what fascinated him.

Now he began his literary baptism by immersion. Chambers's Information for the People and Chambers's Encyclopaedia, as well as an eighteen-volume set of books entitled The Library of General Knowledge for the People, provided Henry an intellectual overview that motivated him to pursue three years of systematic note-taking of comparative reading. He had the classics from the Young Men's library, the Whitaker Collection, and some borrowed sets from Margaret Taylor. Reading was one way of coping with enforced solitude. He read Hallam's Constitutional History of England; Macaulay's five-volume History of England; Blackstone's Commentary on English Law (two volumes with notes by Chitty, Christian, Lee, Hovendor and Ryland); and Edward Gibbon's The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. "I remember exchanging several other books for possession of these." [^32] He also read Macaulay's five-volume Miscellaneous Works. Lord Macaulay's prose style seemed flawless to Roberts, and he sought in vain to emulate it. He frequently recommended a study of Macaulay's History of England to writers and a study of Macaulay's speeches in parliament to speakers.

84The Oxford movement in Britain had produced a forty-two-volume set, The Christian Fathers. Roberts bought, read and marked the whole set. His notes on blank pages and in margins are extensive. It was a project that occupied him for the better part of a year. The set (from Tertullian to Chrysostom) became the foundation of lasting scholarship, research, and the background for the most important historical essay he ever wrote: the seventy-one-page introduction to volume one of the Documentary History of the Church.

In addition, his own notes record that he read all of the following:

Lardnor, Credibility of the Gospel History

Rollins, Ancient History

Neander, The Christian Religion and Church

Mosheim, Ecclesiastical History

Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion

Milner, The History of the Church of Chris

Shedd, History of Christian Doctrine

Stebbins, History of the Christian Church

Milman, History of Christianity under the Empire

Priestley, Corruptions of Christianity

Brueck, The History of the Catholic Church

Jortin, Christian History

d'Aubigné, History of the Reformation

Dawling, History of Romanism

Edersheim, The Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah

He indicates that he "read also other authors in the same line of historical treatment of Christianity, both Catholic and Protestant," but he does not name them. The oldest volumes in his collection included Antiquities by Josephus and the five-volume History of the U.S. Constitution by Von Holts.

85Among the philosophers he read were: Plato, especially translations of the Republic and the Timaeus; Aristotle, with special interest in Metaphysics; Spinoza, from whom he learned the power and limitations of mathematical interrelationships; Descartes, whose method of "systematic" doubt led him to formulate his own rules for "beginning over" (Roberts rejected out of hand the Descartes dualism of two kinds of being, and rejected, too, Descartes's eventual re-admission of the Catholic presuppositions, which he traced to Athens not Jerusalem); Bacon, presumably Francis Bacon, who impressed him to avoid "idols"; and Rousseau in his Social Contract.

His favorite English philosophers included Locke, Hume, John Stuart Mill, and Thomas More, a man whose reasons were viewed as treasons, but whom Roberts admired because of his stand and martyrdom. He read Campanella. He also read Renan's works, which were "too pretty, too flowery, too lacking in substance", and Alexander Campbell's constructive works; Thomas Paine, though "blasphemous," and Robert Ingersoll, though skeptical, occupied him also. He enjoyed Ingersoll's irreverent deflating of long-standing nonsense, and where he disagreed, he would use Ingersoll as popular fodder for sermons.

He became increasingly conscious of the permeating influence of Greek rationalism-the two absolutely unlike worlds of Plato and Aristotle-on Christian doctrines of Deity. He saw that Christianity in its original verve for accommodation became more Greek than Hebrew. For these and other reasons he was drawn to John Stuart Mill, and eventually to William James, who viewed God as more experiential, more personal, more respectful of the senses. These and later the "process philosophers" saw something as "given" in the universe (Roberts would have said "eternal") and affirmed man's freedom in conquest with the outcome not guaranteed but dependent on cooperative effort.

Hume's test for miracles Roberts wholeheartedly accepted: Accept a miraculous explanation only when all alternative explanations are more miraculous. The birth of the Christian Church is remote in time. But its rebirth in this dispensation is close. Its witnesses, its artifacts, its impact are present. For Roberts, therefore, attempts to "explain it away" pose a greater tax on human credulity than its own explanation.

Henry also probed a long list of biblical commentaries. Among the prevalent ones, to which he returned again and again in his writings, were: William Smith's unabridged Bible Dictionary (four volumes), The Durnmelow Commentary, Kitto's Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature, the International Bible Dictionary, Cambridge Bible Dictionary, and Kitto's Biblical Literature.

86He says he read "a number of other miscellaneous collections" and, as an example, names the Harvard Classics. This is, no doubt, a telescoping of memory; he probably read most of the works (in other translations and editions) that were eventually included in that set. One further probability is that he read the actual set when it finally came from the press in 1909, which was thirty years after his first teenage immersion in reading.

He was also drawn to Jonathan Edwards "because of the incomparable subtlety of Edwards's 'intellect' [and said that] if he were educating his own son he would recommend his [Edwards's] theological works 'that he might learn the art of clear thinking and the sequence of pure logic.' " [^33]

Roberts could cite at length from his favorites-Emer-son, Shakespeare and Carlyle. Emerson, with his doctrine of the oversoul, was, Roberts thought, one step from comprehending the immanent radiation of the Spirit of God. His doctrine of compensation was close to the recognition of laws beyond the laws which bind even God. Shakespeare's best, for Roberts, included Hamlet, King Lear, A Midsummer Night's Dream, and Measure for Measure.

If he read even reasonably well in these books, there is hardly a university which would not grant him a master's degree for such mastery-in history, philosophy, or literature, for these are not introductory textbooks.

During these years of self-teaching, Roberts related his newfound masteries in history and literature to what he would later call the Truth Gems-great aphorisms from the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price.

Truth Gems

It is the first principle of the gospel to know for a certainty the character of God; and to know that man [as Moses] may converse with him as one man converses with another.

Jesus was in the beginning with the Father; man was also in the beginning with God the Father. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be.

The glory, of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth.

87It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance.

Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection.

There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated - And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated.

This is my work and my glory-to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

Adam fell that man might be; and men are, that they might have joy.

The intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an end.

The spirit and the body are the soul of man. And the resurrection from the dead is the redemption of the soul. [^34]

These truth gems or "germ truths" [^35] are not only the core statements which he found most impressive, distinctive and challenging, both in their power to sum up and to invade every corner of life; they are also the theses that he nailed to the door of his own career. He wrote:["[they] await only the mind of some God-inspired Spencer to cast them into synthetical form-to be adequately presented and witnessed-to constitute Mormonism, the Religion and Philosophy of modern times-to bring to pass and to glorify the Golden Age of the long-promised Millennium of Christian hope." [^36] He ultimately wrote a treatise on each of them.

88 Section ninety-three of the Doctrine and Covenants became the very warp and woof of his consciousness. He called it a "remarkable outgiving," and "intellectual treasury," and "that splendid utterance respecting the glory of God." He exulted in the statement "the glory of God is intelligence"-the light and truth that cognizes and applies truth, which brings forth wisdom and, after these, justice, judgment, mercy and love. And he found in it the definition of truth, the eternity of intelligence, the agency and eternal autonomy of man; man is spirit and, therefore, from the nature of him, capable of apprehending truth, the eternity of the elements of matter and the design of their union with spirit, and finally the immanence of the power of God and Christ in the elements and in man. [^37]

He learned early to study by topics, "a practice," his colleague Orson F. Whitney says, "to which he owed a power and facility for massing facts in argument." [^38]

As his residual library (both family and friends have taken volumes and sets from it) of some one thousand volumes shows, Roberts read books in methodical, comment-in-the-margin fashion, cross-referencing important passages. In addition he packed the front and back flyleaves of each volume with a series of summaries of the most important ideas with page numbers. In some cases these became so elaborate that he eventually asked his secretaries to type them, and the typed versions were then inserted or glued in his books. (Roberts never learned to type, even in the two-finger style.) Out of periodical literature he took paragraph excerpts and pasted them in notebooks and files on the same basic subject. Some of his books became so stuffed with paste-ins that the binding broke. For his speaking and writing these were his reference books. [^39]

When he had become assistant superintendent of the MIA and editor of the youth magazine, [^40] Roberts pleaded for the value of "book-companions," and, citing the Doctrine and Covenants ("intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence... light cleaveth unto light" D&C 88:40), he counseled against cheap "yellow-backed" literature-dime-novel trash as well as the "driveling love tale" of which Cowper wrote, "such writers and such readers owe the gust and relish of their pleasure all to lust."

One paragraph at least is autobiographical:

89You cannot expect the young to always pore over the stately pages of Gibbon; discuss political questions with Macaulay; or religious ones with Adam Clark or the first Christian fathers; or delve into the intricacies of law with Blackstone or Greenleaf; or of philosophy with Newton, Bacon or Spencer. The young will want to break away from such authors at times, and listen to the pleasant tales of Washington Irving; hear the half weird legends of Scotland as sung or related by Scott; or wander out in the springtime, summer or autumn with Thompson, or read the adventure of Tam O'Sbanter with Burns, or laugh with Dickens at the dilemmas of the unfortunate Mr. Pickwick, or follow the meanderings of Nicholas Nickleby. [^41]

These authors happen to be the boon companions of his own teens; but he "broke away" to fiction much less often than he assumed the coming generation would. He did recommend that parents see to it their children make Scott, Burns, Thompson, Dickens, Cowper, Milton or Shakespeare their companions until "virtuous sentiments will become living, active principles within them." [^42]

Mother Ellen Baird, bedfast for two of the three years that Roberts was "boarding in," remembered the absorption that became habitual in him and which set the lad apart from others of her family. "He seemed more inclined to read than eat his pancakes or sleep, and much preferred books to social banter." At age twenty, during the summer evenings of 1877, after arduous days in the shop when outside temperatures were reaching from ninety to one hundred degrees, he would take a book to the least populated corner of the house and sink motionless except for eyes and hands (which moved to turn, to mark, and to make notes on the pages).

Not even the small children scuffling and squalling about distracted Henry. [^43] He was temperamentally gifted with concentration, and that enabled him to acquire "that perfect ease with books" and with all kinds of books which became his permanent possession. At the very end of his life, with failing eyesight, he devoured Eddington's work on the implications of physics in one hour and fifteen minutes, capturing both its essence and its subtleties. And in the same week he read a highly literary volume by Matthew Arnold and remarked, "what grasp of the inner facts of things"; he read modern fiction and felt swift revulsion toward much of it because of its "sewer air." He did not have to make ideas vital; he found them that way, and fed upon them. The Baird family realized increasingly that he was a real student.

Like Pip in Dickens's Great Expectations, Roberts didn't really take to blacksmithing or to the unaccustomed strain of meticulous supervision. He considered this time "my period of bondage while learning my trade." [^44]

90 Although Roberts had the brawn for blacksmithing (Whitaker remembers that Henry could hold the leg of the strongest horse "so rigid that the animal could not kick or get loose from his powerful grasp" [^45] ), he was more excited by the world of ideas. James Baird was patient with his apprentice and even talked seriously of a "journeyman's tour" and a "partnership." But it became clear that Henry was not really cut out for the trade. Baird supported Roberts's intellectual drive and by the end of the second year arranged with Nathan Cheney, bishop of the Centerville Ward, to send Roberts to Deseret University. [^46] Only one student each year was chosen from each county in the territory to attend.

Notes

Chapter 4

1 BN, p. 87.

2 "An honorable station"-all his life, when asked "What do you do?" Roberts would answer, "I am a blacksmith," as if it was his point of arrival rather than a point of departure. This is another symbol of his attachment to his father.

3 Edwin Baird to Truman G. Madsen, 18 March 1967.

4 See Life of James Hyrum Baird, 1848-1910, compiled and published by Edwin Baird, 1968, pp. 4-5.

5 Journal of John M. Whitaker, July 1896, Church Archives.

6 Ibid., 17 November 1889.

7 Centerville was so named because it was between Bountiful and Farmington. "Centerville," Roberts wrote, a "picturesque hamlet," is "the first daughter" settlement of the Salt Lake colony. See Salt Lake Tribune, 27 July 1913.

8 Conference Report, October 1914, p. 108.

9 The family name is one of those strange but significant curiosi-ties: Ben Roberts, the father of intemperate habits; Ben Maynard, the Texas desperado; Ben Tasker, the horse thief.

10 When Georgia, Roberts's daughter, became a professional English teacher, she often told these exploits in starfling detail. Some thought this demeaning to Roberts's by now prominent name. She always said in defense, "He told me." One little boy in her class, when asked by the principal why he liked his teacher, said, "She tells us stuff that ain't in books."

11 Edwin Baird to Truman G. Madsen, 17 August 1967.

12 BNG, p. 49.

13 In a conversation with the author in 1969, Nels F. S. Ferre used this descriptive phrase for Mormons.

14 Thomas Whitaker was an acknowledged horticulturist (Queen Victoria had corresponded with him); his bees made a special flavor of honey from buckwheat blossoms, lucerne, and both wild and domestic fruit blossoms. He and William C. Staines, landscape gardener on Temple Square, had proved one could grow almost anything in the Davis County soil. In Whitaker's basement were silkworms, all kinds of fruit seeds, and other mementos from the Pacific islands where he had been a missionary to Tahiti.

15 Recollection of Thomas Whitaker, John Whitaker Journal.

16 A. E. Hotchmer, Papa Hemingway (Bantam Books, Random House, 1967), p. 222.

17 From a sermon by David Cummings, given 1 October 1933 in Hollywood, California.

18 See Conference Report, October 1896.

19 Improvement Era 13 (April 1910): 481-89.

20 BN, p. 100.

21 Notes on Celia Dibble by Georgia Roberts.

22 This blessing was given by Joseph Young, Jedediah M. Grant, and Albert P. Rockwood.

23 Roberts was later ordained a President in the First Council of the Seventy by President Lorenzo Snow, and on request he would trace his line of ordination through Lorenzo Snow. But he preferred to trace it through his earlier line of authority, Nathan T. Porter.

24 Edwin Baird to Truman G. Madsen, 26 June 1967.

25 See Whitney, History of Utah, 4:69.

26 It was mainly a reading club (and one example of how the artifacts of culture came across the plains). Margaret Taylor, while her husband John Taylor was in New York for two years editing a paper, had built a classic library which was then schoonered across the plains. The technique for acquiring new books was that after paying a $2.50 entrance fee (equivalent to half a semester's tuition in college), members attended weekly meetings to report on their reading. A fifty-cent penalty was imposed for missing the meetings and another for failure to demonstrate accurate comprehension of the reading. The accumulated fines purchased a remarkable collection of books.

27 "If you want enemies," Roberts later wrote in a notebook, "excel others; if you want friends, let others excel you." Of course, the highest form of leadership, he learned, was to apply one's own excellence in lifting others to excellence.

28 Roberts never quite understood why he was invited annually by Thomas Hull to come to meetings of the MIA General Board and recount the circumstances of the Centerville organization. Each time it resulted in "uncanny silence." The probable reason is that he was "Exhibit A" of the fruitfulness of a deliberate policy. In 1879 an editorial in the youth magazine acknowledged that heretofore "crowds of uncouth boys were loitering around the stores, hallooing in the streets, breaking horses on the Sabbath day... but then came MIA and in many cases the roughest of these boys had been chosen for presidents of Associations." See Leon M. Strong, History of the Young Men's MIA, 1875-1938" (M.A. thesis, Brigham Young University, 1939).

29 Grandma Kesler's Night School, John Morgan's Commercial College, and A. J. Phelp's Orthography Class.

30 An old photo of the building is in the possession of the family.

31 Treasures of Pioneer History, 2:438. On stage there were two minor disasters. One scene called for eating, so they did it "live." Aaron Porter (Nathan's son) choked on a chicken bone. He missed his lines and Henry came out of character in a vigorous back-pounding, hand-in-mouth rescue which the audience only slowly realized was not in the script. Another occasion involved the firing of blanks, and it was arranged that red ink would show on the victim's shirt. But the gun wielder had not been told. The scene fell apart when, after shooting, he saw the "blood" and shouted, "My gosh, pull down the curtain-I've killed him!"

32 BN, pp. 95-96.

33 B. H. Roberts, "America Will Not Fail," from Discourses of B. H. Boberrs (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1948), p. 35.

34 See, for example, B. H. Roberts, "The Prophet's Generalizations," Joseph Smith: Prophet-Teacher (1908; Princeton: Deseret Club, 1967), pp. 62-65; also the great summations in volume 4 of B. H. Roberts's Seventy's Course in Theology, 5 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1907-1912); and the introduction to Joseph Smith, Jr., History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1948), 6:xliv; hereafter cited as HC.

35 Improvement Era 9 (July 1906): 713.

36 HC, 6:xlv.

37 CHC, 1:309.

38 Whitney, History of Utah, 4:690.

39 These are in the Church Archives.

40 B. H. Roberts is listed as editor under Joseph F. Smith and over Edward H. Anderson.

41 Improvement Era 2 (December 1898): 138-43.

42 Ibid.

43 Edwin Baird to Truman G. Madsen, 17 August 1967.

44 Improvement Era 24 (April 1921): 482.

45 John Whitaker Journal, 27 September 1933.

46 He was the third student from Davis County. He was preceded by Anson V. Call and by Joseph Kingsbury, who later became president of the University of Utah.

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
[^23] 23 Mrs. William Reed to Ann Roberts.
[^24] 24 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^25] 25 Late in their lives, on 3 May 1928, B. H. and Annie Brynie, a half-sister, and Mary arranged for the temple sealing of Ann Everington and Benjamin Roberts and all of the children including the twins and baby Thomas. See BHR Temple Book.
[^26] 26 Roberts kept one sample of his father's handwriting from the original wrapping of the photo given his mother. It is preserved in the family collection.
[^27] 27 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 1 September 1883, Roberts Family Collection.
[^28] 28 Research has failed to establish where and when Ben died. The marriage date is 15 June 1848 (he was twenty-two) in Poplar, Middlesex, England; from the Book of Remembrance of Haven R. Day.
[^29] 29 B. H. Roberts to Ann Everington, 21 April 1880, Roberts Family Collection.
[^30] 30 Mrs. Charles H. Wilcox recorded these impressions from a conversation with B.H. Roberts at his home prior to his call to the Eastern States.
[^31] 31 BN, p. 10.
[^32] 32 See Juvenile Instructor 49 (February 1914): 85.
[^33] 33 Fifty years later, as chairman of "Vocations and Industry" in the youth program of the Church, he wrote, "We shall take the ground that no vocation of honest industry need be ignoble or debasing in its effects, but by properly correlating it with the general welfare of human life can be in effect both honorable and glorious." Improvement Era 15 (October 1912): 1083.
[^34] 34 Liahona 12 (20 October 1914): 364.
[^35] 35. Salt Lake Herald, 8 January 1899.
[^36] 36. So Roberts later told his children.
[^37] 37. BNG, p. 8.
[^38] 38 See History of Utah, 4:689.
[^39] 39 In a notebook under "Roberts, B. H." is this handwritten note: "Warrington-Town of, my birth place. Warrington, at the head of tide water on the Mersey River. It was a station of Romans (Veraterium) in the time of Agricola - (69-84 A.D.) and many Roman relics have been found in the neighborhood."
[^40] 40 Beniamin's father's brother.
[^41] 41 N. B. Lundwall, Roberts's secretary for twelve years, recalls him saying this incident occurred when he was seven.
[^42] 42 BNG, p. 16. Roberts spoke in later years of this spiritual impression (which one tradition says was repeated three times) as evidence that "the promptings of the Spirit of God" can come early - several years, in his case, before his official baptism and confirmation in 1867.
[^43] 43 The word gomin - rather than urchha - was endeared to Roberts through the Victor Hugo story of Gayroche who, in the midst of battle, went along the pavement gathering unfired cartridges from the corpses of fallen men, gaining strength at each step.
[^44] 44 Memoirs, p. 4.
[^45] 45 BN, p. 18a.
[^46] 46 Apparently Tovey's periodic alienations from the LDS Church did not interfere with his desire to preach.
