Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

5 New Horizons

Roberts's contract with James Baird expired by the spring of 1877 when Roberts was nearly twenty. Adolescent dissipation and pranks were left behind; he had been spiritually reawakened. He was a bright young man, on fire with ideas and aspirations. But, restless from both shop and book work, he contracted for a summer at the Centerville dairy ranch, owned by Orrin and Melvin Randall, brothers-in-law of James Baird. The ranch was high above Weber Canyon. A dozen or more of the young people of Centerville worked for the Randalls. One of them became Roberts's romantic interest, the Davis stake president's daughter, Sarah Louisa Smith.

From April until August Roberts rode the mountain range, herding the cattle. He relished the outdoor life and on one hunt bagged a 550-pound grizzly bear with his sawed-off, Enfield, Civil War vintage musket. [^1] His later description of the summer is just short of idyllic:

92All this with the fresh mornings and thin sunlight tinting the snow-clad peaks of the Wasatch Mountains; likewise the sultry noons of the midsummer months; the frugal meal from the saddle bags, eaten in the solitude and the silence of the mountains while the horse, relieved of his saddle and bridle, cropped and munched the tender mountain grass in evident delight. Then there was the return to the ranch, the shouted welcome as one approached it, the jest, the courteous retort, the joy of being young, without being quite conscious that you were young, and not knowing really that that was the source of your joyful exuberance. [^2]

In late June Roberts wrote home that he had that day ridden horseback to Porterville from the Randall ranch, some twenty miles and back again, and then on a fresh horse had ridden ten miles further for a total of fifty. He then returned in time to milk seventeen cows. In his "leisure time" in May and June he had read the Book of Mormon, Parley P. Pratt's Key to the Science of Theology, the Pratt-Newman debate, a work on practical morality, and a course in English grammar, and had kept "a lively correspondence" with his schoolmaster and also "posted myself on various points of doctrine."

Some of his notes on that summer are concrete, pictorial and vivid. The intensity as well as the immensity of the universe impressed him. He wondered that a bundle of flowers like Indian paintbrush could "break forth in all the colors of the rainbow from a shovelfull of brown earth."

Both day and night Roberts pondered deeply the truths from the spiritual repository from which he so keenly dipped. "Scorning the bunkhouse," Roberts slept "out under the stars":

In my earlier reading I had learned the names of some of the great, fixed star groups, and somewhat their relations in space. Now I could mark their rising and progress across that great inverted bowl called the sky, and marvel to my heart's content upon their beauty, and maiesty and glory; with now and then a flashing thought upon the greater maiesty and glory of Him who must have created them, His very handiwork. [^3]

93Five decades later, with a somewhat more cosmological approach, Roberts expanded on that theme:

This view represents the universe not as static, but as dynamic; movement everywhere, leading not to "being," merely, but to that "becoming" which is the noblest, as also is it the most scientific conception of the universe; so also the most in harmony with religious feeling, since it gives evidence of the Intelligence back of the phenomena, and some idea of the magnificence and glory of that Intelligence of God moving in His maiesty and power. [^4]

God, for B. H. Roberts, was not Aristotle's Unmoved Mover but rather the most moved and the most moving of Movers. "How the heart bounds with ecstasy in contemplating the stupendous works and the excellency and splendor of the Gods!" [^5]

It was an exceptionally dry summer, and the drought threatened the production of cheese and butter. As a result, the ranch managers ordered Henry, over his protests, to take the herd to private lands on the north slopes of the Weber where the feed was richer. At that

I rebelled, and told my employers, the managers of the ranch, that I would take no part in moving the herd to the north side of the range, and that if the settlers would resent this invasion of their rights, I would stand with them and would consider every hoof of the large herd that crossed the river as trespassing and would favor shooting them down and resisting to the limit this iniustice. [^6]

Though they threatened to fire him, Roberts held out. The manager finally abandoned the illegal proposal.

94Having gone word by word and line by line through the writings of Joseph Smith, and having read everything he could find on his life, he had found Joseph Smith to be possessed of a deeper and richer comprehension of Christ than anyone he had read in the Christian tradition since the apostles. Through all Roberts's buffetings and his intellectual probings, honing his own mind with the major figures in the history of Western thought, this conviction never diminished. And as his extensive knowledge of the alternatives increased, his conviction deepened: Joseph Smith told the truth, Joseph Smith was a prism of the Lord Jesus Christ.

In August, Henry sought a patriarchal blessing from the Patriarch to the Church, John Smith, the oldest son of Hyrum Smith, who had died in the explosive volley at Carthage, Illinois. A note in Roberts's papers says, "there could be no doubt but what the gifts of the patriarchal office was his"; nevertheless, he was "in some respects a peculiar man."

To me the blessing in the main was unsatisfactory and greatly disappointing. But there were two things which stood out prominently in it that attracted attention and constituted its value (as demonstrated in my later experience). One was the statement that my special gift in the priesthood and ministry of the Church was to have power to heal the sick. The other was what must have been a prophetic statement, that "the Lord [Jesus Christ] hath delivered you from the hands of your enemies." Aside from these two things all was commonplace and as before noted, disappointing. [^7]

One wonders if Roberts remained "greatly disappointed" in the architecture of his patriarchal blessing. Three decades later he would recommend that the Church send a "traveling patriarch" to Scandinavia, Germany and Britain, where there were great numbers of converts, and his reasons reflect an awareness of the import of self-understanding which the receipt of a patriarchal blessing can produce.

95Actually his blessing, even omitting the two statements that impressed him at twenty, was anything but "commonplace." The first sentence affirmed "in the authority and name of Jesus Christ" that he was one of those "sons of Zion of whom much is expected" and charged him "to inform thy mind" because the day "when thou shalt be called to labor in the ministry" (which to a Mormon means to serve in mission fields in both domestic and foreign shores) "is not far distant." Some of his prominent and even dominant qualities were foreshadowed: "gifts of the Priesthood... wisdom... counsel in righteousness"; so also between the lines of warning and admonition were some of his rough corners: "Be prudent... listen... to the whisperings of the still small voice of the Comforter." Through such means the Patriarch promised there would be inspired warnings "of events to come... to give thee power over evil and unclean spirits ... thou shalt realize that the hand of the Lord is over thee for good." He was told that his life had been preserved and that he had been "delivered from among thine enemies," and the Patriarch added, "for a wise purpose." Language and conversion gifts were indicated. And, on condition that he would "give praise unto whom praise is due," he would "assist in gathering the honest in heart from among the nations of the earth... and shall preside over a Stake in Zion .... shall feed many with both spiritual and temporal food... and shall become a mighty man in Israel." [^8]

If any one line from his blessing became the imperative of his character, it was, "Be firm in thine integrity." On that condition he is promised that "notwithstanding thou shalt see many changes and witness trying events among the people ·.. all shall be well with thee."

One reason for Roberts's disappointment was perhaps that, though he was charged to "inform thy mind," there was no hint of an academic career ahead. Disturbing too was the omission of any mention of marriage and family life, a characteristic of many patriarchal blessings. He was at the time courting Louisa Smith and had hoped for some word of reassurance about his feelings for her. He had known Louisa for many years but had thought seriously about her for two years since his mother had said on his twentieth birthday, "My son, it is time for you to be married."

The daughter of William Read Smith and Emmeline Leavitt, Louisa had large expressive eyes and was in her carriage and bearing an attractive girl. Her clear mentality and interest in intellectual things attracted Roberts. By contemporary standards, her father was wealthy. She had enjoyed special schooling, fine clothing and rare cultural opportunities.

96Whatever else Roberts was in appearance and personality it was clear to Louisa that he was poetic, full of life, and in his bearing and aspirations something of a Romeo. Before the second anniversary of their marriage Roberts wrote Louisa a blank-verse poem which gives the clearest glimpse of his feelings for her. Her beauty, he said, was not "gaudy" or "dazzling" and might be overlooked at first. But there was something in her quiet spirit that had won him. He loved her "ere he was aware." Of himself he writes he is "formed with passions, fierce and strong." But in his journal he records what Louisa soon learned: "Men who are fiercest with men are gentlest with women." He had early confided to her his intent to capitalize on his "degenerate sensitiveness," his yearning out of deprivation for a "quiet home." And in her he found steadiness. His own ideal of husbandly deportment was recorded in a notebook entry of 1886: "They make no slaves of their women; they make companions of them; and in honoring them they honor themselves." In later years he often said that he was to Louisa what she was to him, a "balance wheel." [^9]

One of his dreams, which Louisa promptly shared, was that their marriage would be performed by the veteran of the early scenes of the Church, President John Taylor. It came to pass. On January 24, 1878, Sarah Louisa Smith and Brigham Henry Roberts were sealed together by President John Taylor in the Salt Lake Endowment House. [^10]

Almost penniless, jobless, and homeless, they began their marriage as extended family in the home of Louisa's parents in Centerville. And Roberts began his studies at the university.

Deseret University, Roberts said, "was as humble as the quarters in which it was lodged." Its "campus" was an improvised school building on the corner of First South and Second West in Salt Lake City. Roberts registered in the Normal School, designed to prepare teachers for school systems in the territory. [^11] The university was scarcely equal to a high school which, he often said, explains why he completed the two-year course in one year and graduated at the head of the class.

97 John R. Park, the father of the University of Utah, formed the nucleus of a small faculty, and he sanctioned the doubling up of Roberts's courses. Park, forty-five years of age in 1878, was a rarity in the Mormon community because he was a bachelor, which is even more remarkable because he had been converted to the Church while studying the sociology of Mormon family life. Park's most famous mentor was John William Draper, a chemist and physiologist who authored The Intellectual Development of Europe, a volume which became one of Roberts's perpetual reference works. Park had attended two years of medical school at New York University and Bellevue. [^12] This preparation was augmented when Brigham Young commissioned Park in 1872 to travel to the East and throughout Europe in order to make an intensive study of schools and educational systems.

The Normal School met from 9:30 A.M. to 1:30 P.M. each day, with classes in forty-five-minute segments. In addition to required courses Roberts managed to attend Orson Pratt's lectures in astronomy and mathematics, lectures, Roberts said, which had structure and symmetry "like a column of Roman soldiers marching by in stately, regular fashion, or it was more nearly like the unfolding of a scroll which you followed chained to the reading of it as it was unfolded, its stately treatment of the facts, and of which you never tired. [^13]

Congenial to the mentality and predisposition of young Roberts was Park's insistence upon independent thought. He said, "Each of you will have the right to full and free expression of his thoughts and no opinion or belief will be forced upon you."

The University catalog stipulated that the school would "furnish elements of knowledge ... to awaken and establish habits of thought" in order that students would be "prepared to pursue [knowledge] intelligently and determine results rather through rational inquiry and consistent application than through blind empiricism. [^14]

An appreciation of this point of view was not singular to Roberts, but a characteristic of the Latter-day Saints. Of them Roberts said, "In regard to education, we are the most zealous advocates for it in the fullest sense. [^15]

Joseph Toronto taught the ancient languages and natural sciences. Language, literature, and theory and practice of teaching were taught by John Park himself. Rachel Edwards, in her reminiscences, mentions a poetry class where Park had assigned a concert recitation of a long poem. After a bit only one voice was reciting. Park looked over his glasses, noted that it was Roberts, and predicted, "That boy will be a leader among men. [^16]

98 There were forty students in the Normal School, making close personal contact possible between faculty and students; but Roberts's associations with classmates were hesitant and halting even in class. He was still a loner who won respect more than friendship. James H. Moyle, a classmate, considered Roberts brilliant and would nominate Roberts for Congress two decades later; George M. Cannon recommended Roberts as the first president of the Alumni Association because "he could make even dry bones talk." [^17] Frank J. Cannon, another classmate, became Utah's senior Republican senator. When his political career collapsed, he became bitter against the Church, the state, and Roberts, and he edited the Salt Lake Tribune in bitter denunciation for five years at the turn of the century.

99If Roberts's intellectual gifts set him apart from the other students, so did his poverty; his summer wages and money from the sale of his bear skin were quickly depleted and he could not afford lodgings in Salt Lake. So he walked or dog-trotted to and from his father-in-law's home in Centerville, covering the 11.3 miles to the university and home again (three hours on the road, thinking aloud) on foot. Sometimes a kind farmer with a team of horses or a hayrack picked him up. By midyear he was almost penniless and could afford neither the time nor money to commute. So he made arrangements to bunk with three temple workmen in a little log house which stood on Second North and West Temple, "near a cluster of adobe houses." Here resided a black family whose father crossed the plains with Brigham Young's vanguard pioneer company. [^18] The construction workers in this log house were sustained by wages provided by the people of Centerville; that gave Henry an "in" which apparently no one questioned. None of the four persons living in this cabin could afford to buy wood for a fire. Henry, wrapped in bed clothes, often lay on the floor in the evenings, trying to concentrate on his studies in the midst of bustle and conversation. The light was terrible. Because he wanted to keep his humble quarters a secret, he made scrupulous efforts to leave his classes each day before the bell rang. "Pride," his notes say, "even under these circumstances stayed with me." So far as he knew, his secret was kept. The private embarrassment over his living arrangements was compounded by public awareness of the one ill-fitting suit which he wore every day all year. Together these blunted any real social interchange with the other students. Looking back he called this a "grave defect in my very lame and inadequate education," a "defect and always a vacant spot." And at age seventy-five he asserted, "I never recovered from it."

During his heaviest period of concentration Henry took round-the-clock intermittent naps rather than sleeping the whole night through, and in the same spirit ignored anything extracurricular. He did not, for example, belong to the Zeta Gamma Society, organized under Park's direction for discussion and debate. He did not attend the activities at the Social Hall, the Salt Lake Theatre, or the Deseret Academy of Arts, or the cultural events in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, all within three or four blocks of his secret lodgings. His poverty, implacable pride, and tendency to solitariness, reinforced his concentration on classes and books. He was not particularly shy or withdrawn; nor was he blind to social amenities. But his early social deprivations were compounded by his distant relationship with the other students. He had had too little experience in being a friend.

Some of the consequences were lasting. The social strand of his nature, for example, later found expression in distancing himself before large groups-in public speaking or in his writing. Throughout his life he could hold a large audience spellbound with hypnotic rapport, but in one-to-one relationships he seemed austere, formal and unnerving. One of his daughters later said, "He could make his own children feel they were imposing on a corporate executive."

His tendency to work quickly to the structure of argument and evidence in discussion and disagreement made him appear blunt and tactless to others. Peace-loving Levi Edgar Young, professor of Western history and later a colleague in the First Council of the Seventy, said, "He frequently had to suffer for his severe use of language." Rudger Clawson noted, "he failed to show due deference," even to his fellow Brethren.

100He admired self-sufficiency and sought to reenact John Taylor's dignified bearing, writing, with him in mind, "the great man is the man who chooses the right with invincible resolution." But that resolution made him lonely. His resultant tendency to brood, which he called "a perverse inclination to unreasoning sadness," made his moments of kinship hard-earned. Somehow he could not gauge how deeply others responded to him in affection or gratitude, and he was halting in his efforts to reciprocate.

On what was then known as "the Sacred Square," the Salt Lake Temple was slowly being built. [^19] The oval Tabernacle was finished and there was also an Endowment House comparable to Israel's Ark of the Covenant "in the days of their poverty" and in the wilderness. This Roberts called "a link with the heavens." It was while he was at the Deseret University that Roberts went to the Endowment House for what the New Testament calls an "endowment," a time of spiritual instruction and consecration. Near the end of his life he said:

Whenever I pass this Temple, walk alongside of it and contemplate its towers, its architectural beauty .... I hold it as sacred in my heart .... it is a mass testimony of a whole people, a testimony to the world that God has spoken, and that he has revealed his truths once more for the salvation of men and has ushered in the dispensation of the fulness of times .... and other temples also partake of the same glory and power and spirit. [^20]

Those who observed Roberts during his studies at the University of Deseret remarked on four traits not usually combined in one mind: his gift for images and a corresponding literary flair; his tendency to press for ultimate principles; his obstinate skill in following an argument even after the exact subject matter had fallen away; and a gift for patience in amassing and ordering facts. Each of these required a vigorous memory.

101When he had become one of the arch-defenders of both state and Church, he wrote a reply to an article by a young ex-minister who had become an agnostic while a student at Harvard. Roberts's lines were intended to "act as teeth tearing at the cocoon in which people wrap themselves." Here is repeated his conviction that "instead of the Church being in the rear of man's considered discoveries respecting the universe, she is in advance of them." The phrase "no limits fixed" (which he used of that same period in his biographical notes about his reading) was his way of saying that man's understanding of truth should not be "limited to the imperfection of the Churches or the incomplete revelations of past centuries." "One of the most disastrous steps Christendom took toward a 'pitiful state' was when it 'fixed limitations' upon itself by denying continuous revelation to the Church." [^21] Science is ever enlarging and correcting itself; how can religions survive strapped to a wooden restatement of traditions whose meaning as well as application fades unless there is further light from on high?

Both the intellectual success and the personal deprivation of Roberts's academic year came to a culmination when the question of the valedictory address arose. "So that I might not feel embarrassed," Roberts suspected, Dr. Park deliberately absented him from a class meeting at which Park announced the need for the class representative at graduation. A popular girl's nomination was quickly seconded. Dr. Park halted proceedings and announced that this was not a matter of popular choice but of class standing. "Roberts, the student from Davis County, is at the top of the graduating class and should therefore deliver the valedictorian address." [^22] In the silence following this announcement a young lady grimaced and then spoke: "He would never do. Why, look at his clothes!" Roberts was appointed, though, and hearing of the comments on his clothes, his sister Polly tailored a secondhand Prince Albert suit for him. This, it turned out, was less flattering than the "brown sack-suit" he had worn all year. " 'Clothes don't make the man' may be all right as a theory," he later mused, "but I give it as my testimony that they have much to do with distress and discomfort." [^23]

In that inauspicious suit and without notes-a bold omission that later amazed him-he ventured to address dignitaries of both the Church and the territory at the graduation ceremonies:

102I undertook to deliver that address, and, as most valedictorians do, I chose subjects that were very much beyond my years and very much beyond my knowledge and experience. No one in the room sensed that more than I did when I got through, and I felt much humiliated. The speaker who pre-ceded me was a very brilliant young man [Frank J. Cannon] who thrilled the audience with the beauty of the things that he said. My awkwardness and countrified air and my unfortunate forgetfulness of a good many things that I hoped to have said and did not say, put me in very marked contrast with him I had a longing desire to escape from the assembly. President Joseph F. Smith was sitting by the door, and as soon as it was possible, without attracting any attention, I slipped out of the room and tried to pass everybody without noticing them; but as I passed President Smith he caught me by the hand; he looked up into my face from his chair, with those soulful eyes of his, and said: "My boy, them's my sentiments." That was a source of comfort to me, and I thought perhaps I had not made such an awful slaughter of ideas as perhaps I imagined I had; but it was a source of comfort to me for many, many days. [^24]

Roberts was ever after a benefactor of the university. [^25] As a representative-elect, he helped decide the new location high on the East Bench; and when a crisis arose in 1915 causing fifteen professors to resign, Roberts was nominated to a committee of twenty-five men to handle the matter. When President Joseph Kingsbury was asked to resign, Roberts defended him against several malcontents. [^26] Ironically, Roberts's name was omitted from lists of distinguished alumni because he did not have a four-year degree and therefore was not properly an alumnus. Roberts later refused the recommendation by Levi Edgar Young of an honorary degree. "No," he said bluntly. "What for?"

Having been sponsored in his studies by the county, Roberts was duty-bound to teach at least two years in Davis County. His pay, if it was the same as his colleagues, was that year about three dollars a week.

103Roberts was by now a father; his first daughter, Adah, was born February 12, 1879. "A beautiful child," he always said. By using the small salary credit he had accumulated with James Baird because "my expenses had been very light," he was able to pay part of the cost of two vacant lots in Centerville and mortgage the rest. [^27] Then, with pick and shovel in hand, he undertook the excavation of a basement for a projected two-room cottage which would be home to him, Louisa and their infant daughter.

Meanwhile, "Mormon lightning" was about to strike. President John Taylor had that spring charged leaders in three different organizations (the young men's auxiliary, the priesthood quorums, and the stakes) to prepare missionaries. Youth leader Junius F. Wells was told "to prepare men for responsible positions in the Church." [^28] Each ward was to submit the name of "the most faithful and competent young man who lives his religion, possesses the faith of the gospel and is also blessed with the means to enable him to bear necessary expense for a mission to the United States." [^29] As a result of this effort forty young men were chosen, most of them, like Roberts, leaders of MIA organizations. For Roberts the moment of decision came in a priesthood meeting. Roberts had been a seventy for more than two years (he was ordained five days before his birthday, March 8, 1877). Nathan T. Porter called a meeting of Roberts's quorum of seventy and asked if there were any men who felt to volunteer for missions. Not only were no hands raised, but there was no response to Porter's inquiry for those presently unable but anyway willing to serve. The spirit of the group was "you must choose," but Porter declined, saying he only wanted to be able to report to the quorum president that there were some who would go, provided means were available. At this Roberts rose as such an one. Before he arrived home word reached his wife Louisa that her husband had "volunteered to go on a mission"; she was stunned and heartbroken. "Tears and disappointment came with this misrepresentation that I had volunteered to go." [^30]

104It was not unusual at this time for married men, even with sizeable families, to be called on missions, and such calls were rarely declined. Roberts soon received a letter indicating he would be called and assigned in the spring of 1880. He then wrote the missionary committee, explaining his circumstances, and said he was consecrated to "the establishment of a home." The call was canceled. A letter of reproof from the First Council of the Seventy followed; they felt he was attempting to avoid missionary service.

With every swing of his pick and shovel Roberts's soul voice seemed to say: "You will not complete this building now. You will not complete this building now." Under that impression he replied to the First Council of the Seventy's letter by giving his unqualified acceptance of a mission call. Bishop Cheney, who felt the whole matter had been mishandled, then went before the Council and explained why it was utterly impossible for Roberts to go. Once again word came from the Church Office Building that the call had been canceled. At that point President John Taylor called Bishop Cheney and in "an excited Lancashire dialect" said: "What is all this I hear about young Roberts going on a mission? What's the matter with him? Is it anything wrong that would prevent his going on a mission, that would make him unworthy?" Bishop Cheney explained that the problem was not worthiness but lack of means, and President Taylor chided him with: "Well, Bishop, what do you suppose we have bishops in the Church for?" The bishop's call includes the temporal as well as the spiritual welfare of his congregation. Bishop Cheney understood: the ward members would support Roberts's wife and child while he was away.

In general conference, April 1880, as was the practice of the time, the name of Elder B. H. Roberts was read on the list of missionaries who had received calls to serve missions. B. H. Roberts was assigned to the Northern States Mission, to begin his labors in Iowa. The Deseret News editors wanted representative letters from missionaries in the field; apparently aware of the young elder's budding talent with the pen, they assigned Roberts to act as a "field correspondent." The Church's youth magazine, the Contributor, also sought articles from his hand.

105Shortly before her father was to depart, little Adah was stricken with an illness believed to be measles, which was complicated by pneumonia, a high fever and delirium. Her condition became critical; Louisa asked her husband to exercise his priesthood, knowing he had been promised "thou shalt also be mighty in healing the sick by the laying on of hands, for this shall be thy special gift through prayer and faith."

I doubted my spiritual strength to rise to this need. [^31] therefore left the sick room and walked out into the orchard. There I engaged in a very serious and earnest prayer. I conceived my unworthiness to undertake such administration as had been called for. At the conclusion of my struggle in prayer there seemed to be a voice outside myself which took me to task for carelessness, and on the weaknesses of my human nature. But in conclusion, I was told that my daughter should live, and live to grow up into a beautiful young woman, on condition of my faithfulness. Her life was left in my hands. With these reproofs and promises vividly imbranded in my mind I returned to the sick room. When [Louisa] the anxious mother extended her hands and welcomed my return (she suspected what I had been doing), she asked, "Well, will she live?" Remembering my obligation I answered "Yes, she will live." And with that I administered to her and her recovery began and was completed. [^32]

Once again, the voice-this time "outside myself." Roberts later wrote that phrases familiarized to Latter-day Saints by Joseph Smith, "strokes of ideas" and "the flow of pure intelligence," seem to be within yet also to come from beyond the self. [^33]

Adah Roberts was bright and certainly the most literary of Louisa's children. In her mature years she became a tower of strength to her father. Meantime he felt the burden of being true to the conditions that had preserved her life. The pattern was established-to preserve his family he must leave them. Some friends and neighbors saw this as a heartless indifference to their well-being. Louisa quietly endured and was able to understand more than did her children.

Louisa developed a rugged patience, even when missionary and other Church burdens were redoubled. But his daughter Adah found it difficult all through her growing-up years to interpret Roberts's long missionary expeditions as anything more than desertion.

106On March 29, 1879, Elder Brigham Henry Roberts was the center of "lively conversation, the singing of hymns ('Israel, Israel, God Is Calling') and finally the more sober word of admonition" in his father-in-law's home. The customary voluntary contributions to defray cost of travel amounted to enough to pay Roberts's train fare to Sioux City, Iowa. After that he was to travel "without purse or scrip," which, especially in rural America, was the missionary pattern of the times. A few days later Roberts was formally set apart as a missionary by Orson Pratt, Joseph Young, and Wilford Woodruff.

In the gathering there were forty-two elders bound for England, Scandinavia, Germany, Holland, or the United States. The setting-apart blessing for each, in which he was given inspired promises and counsel, was given in the presence of the others already ordained to the ministry. [^34] Whatever of the contents of his blessing Roberts remembered, he noted one thing that had been omitted: a promise of safe return. Only one other of the forty-two young men had not been promised this. Wondering if the omission was significant or not stirred in the back of Roberts's mind for the following four years.

All forty-two elders departed by train on April 13, 1879. [^35] A short distance out of Salt Lake, a passenger from the Pullman section sent word he would like an elder to present the story of the Church. Elder William M. Palmer volunteered.

I wondered how I would have felt or appeared had the choice of making the speech been delegated to me. There was an awful feeling of blankness when that thought asserted itself and I made a hasty movement for a Bible to find out some text that I could use for such an occasion. [^36]

107A couple of days later this same Elder Palmer stepped off the train with Henry Roberts in Iowa to help him begin his missionary labor.

Notes

Chapter 5

1 Shortly afterward, his expenses at the university required him to "augment his savings" by selling the skin, which he keenly regretted because of its trophy value. The skin became part of the harness-housing for a proud span of horses. "To such base uses," he wrote, "do things noble sometimes come, Horatio!" See "My Bear Story," Improvement Era 24 (April 1921): 490.

2 BN, p. 104. See also Improvement Era 24 (April 1921): 482-90.

3 BNG, p. 104. This theme, the "grandeur of the universe," was one of his personal answers to the question, "Why Mormonism Appeals to Me." It entered into seven of his books, five of his most auspicious sermons, and all of his frequently reprinted tracts, and was the theme of one of his "Last Seven Discourses"-the background of his protest against a "Dying Universe."

4 CHC, 2:129; cf. D&C 88.

5 Contributor 9 (January 1888): 118.

6 BN, p. 116.

7 BN, p. 132.

8 In his time men who were General Authorities sometimes served in a double capacity in regions or stakes, especially on the perimeters of the Church's colonizing efforts. Roberts, when he became a President in the First Council of the Seventy, served much of his life as the assigned authority in Davis Stake and in that sense presided over Davis Stake. In addition, of course, as a General Authority he presided over all those who presided over stakes. In this sense, his life exceeded the promise.

9 B. H. Roberts to Louisa, 17 September 1886, Roberts Family Collection.

10 See Temple Index Bureau, Church Genealogical Library.

11 The university curriculum as blueprinted by John R. Park had five divisions: Preparatory, Commercial, Normal, Scientific and Classical.

12 H. Wayne Driggs, John Bocky Park [New York: New York University, 1934), p. 77.

13 BNG, p. 103.

14 University of Utah Catalog, August 1879, p. 113.

15 Journal of Abraham H. Cannon, 13 July 1890, BYU Special Collections, p. 221.

16 "Reminiscences of Rachel Edwards" in Memories of John B. Paris, ed. Ralph V. Chamberlain (Salt Lake City: University of Utah, 1949), p. 84.

17 "Reminiscences of Ann M. Caimon" in Memories of John R. Park, p. 137.

18 They and other workmen from the Mormon communities contributed labor and/or support to the building of the temple. Everyone had something to do; the project was mammoth. For instance, Mary (Polly) Roberts sewed socks for some of the temple masons.

19 See George Reynolds, Mormon Metropolis (1883); this pamphlet is located in the Church Archives.

20 Conference Report, October 1928, p. 86.

21 Improvement Era 36 (March 1933): 260.

22 Roberts believed that his status as valedictorian came from his comparative class record (lack of real competition) rather than from "any brilliancy on examinations." But there is evidence that he was outstanding in both respects.

23 BN, p. 124.

24 The later version is "Them's my sentiments, too," said with a "twinkle of humor." Alice Louise Reynolds, one of the English teachers, claims, from chats with later associates of Roberts, that the exact wording of Joseph F. Smith's comment was: "I want to congratulate you on the excellence of your address. There is a brilliant career before you." See Diary of Alice Louise Reynolds, BYU Special Collections.

25 B. H. Roberts participated as one of several lecturers in the "Public Lecturer" series in 1892-1893. This series featured "the best local thought on the leading topics of the day." See Chamberlain, History of the University of Utah, ed. R. W. Bentley (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1960), p. 189.

26 Salt Lake Tribune, 15 April 1915 and 18 April 1915.

27 His son Ben records the cost as $229. See Ben Roberts to B. H. Roberts, 11 March 1918, Marriott Collection.

28 Improvement Era 28 (July 1925): 876.

29 This was on 20 June 1879.

30 BN, p. 111.

31 The word need is a guess; the exact word is undecipherable in the typed manuscript.

32 BN, pp. 132-33.

33 In the late 1890s William James wrote a letter to Church leaders in Salt Lake City seeking an official statement on the Mormon understanding of revelation. James was, both in psychology and philosophy, an empiricist, fascinated by firsthand religious experience. The resulting letter was published, in his Varieties of Religious Experience, as a footnote to his account of the "motor" elements in Joseph Smith's revelations. The writer of this letter may well have been Roberts. Roberts was slow to seek a formal, theoretical rationale of revelation, for reasons similar to those of the poet who is slow to develop a set of fixed dogmas of the creative process. Additionally, the intricacies of revelation can only be grasped by revelation.

34 One is ordained to an office in the priesthood. One is "set apart" to a particular jurisdiction.

35 Juvenile Instructor 19 (May 1884): 130.

36 BN, p. 137.

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
[^23] 23 Mrs. William Reed to Ann Roberts.
[^24] 24 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^25] 25 Late in their lives, on 3 May 1928, B. H. and Annie Brynie, a half-sister, and Mary arranged for the temple sealing of Ann Everington and Benjamin Roberts and all of the children including the twins and baby Thomas. See BHR Temple Book.
[^26] 26 Roberts kept one sample of his father's handwriting from the original wrapping of the photo given his mother. It is preserved in the family collection.
[^27] 27 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 1 September 1883, Roberts Family Collection.
[^28] 28 Research has failed to establish where and when Ben died. The marriage date is 15 June 1848 (he was twenty-two) in Poplar, Middlesex, England; from the Book of Remembrance of Haven R. Day.
[^29] 29 B. H. Roberts to Ann Everington, 21 April 1880, Roberts Family Collection.
[^30] 30 Mrs. Charles H. Wilcox recorded these impressions from a conversation with B.H. Roberts at his home prior to his call to the Eastern States.
[^31] 31 BN, p. 10.
[^32] 32 See Juvenile Instructor 49 (February 1914): 85.
[^33] 33 Fifty years later, as chairman of "Vocations and Industry" in the youth program of the Church, he wrote, "We shall take the ground that no vocation of honest industry need be ignoble or debasing in its effects, but by properly correlating it with the general welfare of human life can be in effect both honorable and glorious." Improvement Era 15 (October 1912): 1083.
[^34] 34 Liahona 12 (20 October 1914): 364.
[^35] 35. Salt Lake Herald, 8 January 1899.
[^36] 36. So Roberts later told his children.
