Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

6 First Mission Northeast

Elders Palmer and Roberts knew of one man in Omaha, a Mr. Gibbs, who had inquired about the Church. When they located him they discovered that he, his family and several sons-in-law with their families were preparing to move to Utah. They were not yet members of the Church but were deeply interested and sympathetic. Mr. Gibbs helped the young elders set up a meeting in a public hall on the next Sabbath where his family and their friends could come. Roberts's notes record only one meeting, but other sources show that he actually gave fifteen public discourses, eight of them in the same hall, "feeling young and dependent." Though this seemed an impressive beginning, the fledgling elder had a diminishing attendance, until at the last meeting only one man came to hear him. Prior to these meetings Elders Roberts and Palmer visited an eloquent preacher named McLoid (or McLeod) in the First Baptist Church.

108As Brother Palmer and I stepped into the [apparently full] Church we found the pastor engaged in prayer, and what was my surprise to hear him say: "O Lord, help us to understand that we have enough of Thy word; that the canon of scripture is full. Help us to believe, O Lord, that the awful voice of prophecy will no more be heard; help us to believe that revelation has ceased, that Thou wilt no more speak to man." Well, thought I, there is a wide difference between the ideas contained in that parson's prayer and what we are going to preach. [^1]

The contrast was striking: Here were missionaries come to testify that God has spoken and was speaking anew, that the canon of scripture would never be full, that the "awful voice of prophecy" was a glorious voice, and that revelation would be given from God to man as long as man would listen and hearken.

Preparatory to the first Sunday evening preachment, the elders put up circulars announcing the meeting.

I remember remarking, as the last bill was being stuck on a telephone pole by the wayside, "Whosoever is ashamed to acknowledge me before men, him will I be ashamed to acknowledge before my Father and all the holy angels." At this Brother Palmer spoke up and said, "I thought of that passage at every place we have stuck up a poster." [^2]

Conversing with the Gibbs family, Elder Palmer had expressed his own private and rather fanciful reading of a passage in Genesis having to do with the stone of Israel. He drew strange connections between it and the stone box in which Joseph Smith had found the gold plates, and he announced his intention to speak to this subject. Elder Roberts expressed misgivings about this strained interpretation and noted that it had nothing to do with the fundamental principles of the gospel. Elder Palmer was not to be dissuaded. At the meeting he read the text and began "to build up its significance." In ten minutes he ran into such confusion that he reached a dead end and simply stopped. The meeting passed to Elder Roberts:

109My mind seemed all confusion when I arose to complete the meeting. Then I remembered Joseph Smith's story of how the New Dispensation opened. Taking that circumstance, I related it in a most simple manner. As soon as my mind cleared and I got possession of myself, I felt a reaction from the congregation. It gave me confidence to feel that I had struck the right line of approach. The people listened with rapt atten-tion. [^3]

This proved a valuable teaching experience for Roberts and helped him sharpen his focus as he proceeded in his missionary labors. The following morning, a Mr. and Mrs. Oliver and two other friends of the Gibbs family presented themselves for baptism. Ever after, Roberts held to the axiom that a constant recurrence to fundamentals is indispensable in teaching, administration, statesmanship, and religion.

He baptized the converts in the Mississippi River and soon afterwards they left for the West. Young Elder Roberts may have felt a nostalgia to go with them, but reinforcement to stay with his call came "in the form of a very vivid dream which was as real as life itself." He dreamed he was standing in the Centerville School Square at the center of the town "without a proper release." (For Mormon missionaries the call to serve and the release from the call are considered prophetic.) The panorama of his dream was extremely familiar to him:

I noted, and remembered, the hanging of one of the green shutters of the old school house, which had long been an eye-sore to the community; the walk down the sidewalk and the defect in the fences; the houses and the orchards so well remembered until at last I came to the story and a half adobe house where my wife and child were residing. Through the window I saw Emmeline Smith (the wife of President William Smith) and heard her exclaim as she hurriedly left the kitchen of the house, evidently to go in search of my wife I took advantage of a board which had been broken from the fence surrounding the old homestead which enabled me to make a shortcut to the kitchen door without going on a quarter of a block to the gate entrance. As Mother Smith left the kitchen for her daughter's room in the house, I heard her exclaim, "Well, if it isn't Harry come back." The words produced a peculiar shock in me. Presently my wife, Louisa, came from the further part of the house and met me in the kitchen, putting her arms around my neck and said, "I'm so glad to see you. But oh I do wish you had stayed and finished your mission." By this time I nearly collapsed. [^4]

Then came a dream within a dream:

My dream included my retirement and then during the night I seemed to wake up and begin to realize the seriousness of having returned home without an honorable release. I began to speculate upon what kind of an excuse or story I could fix up to tell President Taylor, who was a boyhood hero of mine. What could I tell that battle-scarred hero of a half hundred missions, [^5] and what excuse could I offer for having left the post? I resolved I would not make a report to President Taylor, but would undertake to get back to my place in the mission field, and then began contact with innumerable obstacles, having no money, I would have to beat my way back. This I did by stealing rides upon freight trains and getting into all sorts of adventures including hunger, and disgust above all for this unwarranted desertion. And so it went until I began to approach the familiar regions of Omaha, which, of course, is a center of early pioneer reminiscences for the Church. [^6]

Winter Quarters, with its cluster of settlements, had been the rallying point of the first Mormon exiles as they launched their westward exodus. Roberts knew, from both reading and talking with participants, the story of the difficult winter of 1846 when many of those camped at Winter Quarters in their hand-built, makeshift lean-to's faced scurvy, cholera and starvation. Today a bronze plaque records the names and ages of six hundred buried near there; more than half of the ages are recorded in months rather than years. It was powerful symbolism to measure Winter Quarters and the costs of discipleship against his homesickness.

111I finally noted the moonshine penetrating into the upper chamber to which Elder Palmer and I had been assigned in the Gibbs' home. The thought slowly dawned upon my troubled mind that the experience might not be real, but that I had dreamed the whole thing through. As I lay there I recalled that Eider Palmer ought to be in a bed across the room from me and would be a means of helping me decide whether the experience was a dream or reality. Accordingly I slipped out of bed, crossed the room, and sure enough found Eider Palmer in his bed not only sleeping but snoring. It was the most welcome sound I ever heard! I dropped to my knees at the side of his bed and thanked God I had only been dreaming. And, again, I thanked God for this experience of what would probably happen should I desert my calling and return home without being honorably released. So acute had been my suffering, so real the counterfeit presentments to my mind, that it stood as a permanent lesson through all the years of my missionary service. It was a security against the likelihood of anything happening of that kind in my conscious life; and it never did. It was only necessary to recall the suffering endured in this dream to put such thoughts from my mind thereafter. [^7]

Interestingly, Louisa also had a dream, which she interpreted to mean that she should not desire Roberts to return until honorably released. He wrote his mother, "I would rather that my bones should bleach on the plains and never see those I love than to turn home without the approbation of my Master and my Redeemer and my conscience." [^8]

On May 10, 1879, after less than thirty days of "breaking in" the young elder, Elder Palmer set out for Michigan. Now Roberts was both companionless and without a mission president [^9] He sent his written reports "directly to President John Taylor" and received instructions from him. The going was rugged, but the ballast of his dream steadied him. [^10]

Roberts set out for Sioux City, bearing a message that was sometimes easier to feel than to communicate to others. In the Sioux City area Roberts inherited some of the bitter effects of the popularized "expose" of Ann Eliza Webb, who had billed herself as "the nineteenth wife of Brigham Young." When Roberts arranged for and advertised a meeting in a "vacant storeroom in one of the largest buildings," improvising a pulpit "out of an empty drygoods box," and benches from "planking lying around the building," he attracted a few genuinely responsible, interested persons, but also some hecklers. His pulpit was close to the rear door. First at the front and then at the back door there were shouts:

112As I made a few remarks there came a furious assault upon this door close to the speaker. Brick bats and what not were hurled at it and the door stood likely to be crashed through. My patience was too short for this kind of treatment and I was emphatic in my denunciations. In fact, at one of these poundings which had interrupted me several times, I heard "D - - - the door." Fortunately, however, this was not heard by the congregation and I proceeded for some time with the unfolding of my message. [^11]

Disturbers of the peace soon assembled in front of the storeroom and shattered the windows with brick bats and clubs, apparently intent upon manhandling the young speaker, but the Sioux City police intervened and the crowd was dispersed. Elder Roberts, however, was "encouraged" to move on

These initial batterings of missionary life might have vexed young Elder Roberts. But in his short time with Elder Palmer, who was his senior by ten years (and who had even in the midst of bitter trials been instrumental in bringing sixty-seven persons into the Church and organizing three branches), Roberts was steadied. Elder Palmer had a calm and imperturbable spirit. He taught Roberts the crucial missionary lesson: all is wasted unless the Master's love is in the heart. At the core of his testimony was the admonition, "Don't teach about Christ without the love of Christ." [^12]

113The standard missionary perplexities- who, where, and how-pushed him to sheer spiritual upreaching; but his disposition to be systematic came in conflict with his concern to be malleable to inspiration. To resolve the dilemma he devised a strategy to determine which direction his preaching would take him: he would spread out the map of Iowa, pray for direction, then run his fingers along the map until he felt a sense of peace or assurance. By this method he reached the decision to go north some twenty-five miles to Rockwell, in Wright County, a town of fifteen to eighteen hundred people. There he arranged to use a church union hall (which was used by Methodists, Baptists, and Congregationalists). One trustee named Howard, "an infidel," readily gave his consent, but when Howard's approval became known among the local citizenry, delegations served notice on Howard that he must refuse the hall to Roberts. [^13] Howard balked: "No, if you preachers can't meet the boy's arguments and show the people that he is wrong and get rid of him in that way, he can remain and use the house so long as I am director of it." At that the schoolmaster defiantly locked the door. Howard then authorized Roberts to "take the door down." Instead, the janitor volunteered another key; the building filled with people and Roberts spoke coherently "with good liberty of the Spirit." Though several stayed afterwards to question Roberts, no one offered him a bed so he "made a pillow of his valise" and "lay down to pleasant dreams" in the schoolhouse.

The next day the rumor was spread that, whatever their religious views, Mormons were disloyal to the government. On hearing this even Mr. Howard turned against Henry until the young elder defended the intense Mormon commitment to the Constitution. After that, Roberts managed to hold nine meetings, reducing ill will towards the Church, but sparking no one to conversion. Feeling the solemn pain every missionary knows, he wrote "sadness settled over my heart like a pall." [^14] But all his life Roberts genuinely admired fair-minded-ness, however it occurred; he saw the wisdom in honest doubt over dishonest and defensive "faith." He aspired to be one of the few who are "grand enough in their spirits" to brook public opinion for the sake of a principle.

After prayer the next morning he felt impressed to visit a "large white farm house nearly surrounded by poplar trees," belonging to the Trapp family. He was welcomed, and stayed with them for two weeks while he continued his meetings, though rumors soon came to the ears of the Trapp family suggesting they would regret their hospitality to young Elder Roberts since their daughter would likely run off to Utah. The Trapps had been told that the Mormon elder was "husband to four wives and father of twenty children"; Mrs. Trapp was noticeably cool towards Roberts at meals until she finally blurted out the rumor and said, "I think it's too bad!" Roberts replied mildly, "Mrs. Trapp, don't you think that makes up rather a patriarchal family, too large for so young a man as myself?" The apparent absurdity struck her and "she broke out laughing."

114In this same area he had an early encounter with ministers who combined against him in an effort to "help stamp out Mormonism." Three ministers announced they would attend Elder Roberts's next meeting and "expose Mormonism." The promised confrontation became "the absorbing theme of conversation throughout the neighborhood." When the meeting convened Roberts arose to a packed house. Facing the ministers, he announced his topic: "The Affirmation that a Man Must be Called of God by Prophecy and the Laying on of Hands by Those Who Are in Authority to Preach the Gospel and Administer the Ordinances Thereof." As he spoke he stepped from behind the desk to address the ministers "as a lawyer would a jury."

The Spirit of the Lord was with me, it loosened my tongue, and the ministers soon became tired of taking notes. It was proved from holy writ that God had always called men by prophecy, inspiration and revelation to preach the Gospel and to administer in the ordinances of salvation-baptism and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, and I then proclaimed to them that God had again spoken from Heaven, had called men by His own voice to be prophets and apostles, and to minister in things pertaining to God; that I was sent to them by that authority to call upon them to repent of their sins and turn unto the Lord. [^15]

As promised, he opened up the meeting for questions. All eyes turned to the ministers, but they said nothing. "Perfect silence was retained for fully ten minutes." Finally someone at the back of the hall said, "I guess we can go home now." "Yes," the young elder replied. "I am through for this evening unless some persons have questions." The people filed out, the ministers among the first.

Though silent in the meeting, the ministers were soon verbal in the community, visiting their flocks, warning them against becoming "unsettled in their faith." [^16] Then followed the usual repetition of slanderous reports and bloodcurdling stories about the Mormons. Roberts's notes simply say the ministers advised their flocks "not to encourage the Mormon meetings by their presence." He left the area lamenting, "Sooner or later it will occur to mankind that 'persecution is not a refutation, nor even triumph.'"

115Though all through life Roberts commended the missionary policy of going about "without purse or scrip," it was painful for him. It was foreign to his sense of independence to ask for room or board. But in its time the plan was, as it had been in Judea in the time of Christ, eminently practical. Some of the finest families lived in remote homes and hamlets and were otherwise unreachable. Their manifestations of hospitality were the first gestures of Christlike compassion. Technically the New Testament phrase "neither purse, nor scrip" (Luke 10:4) means not "without purse or money" but "without purse or begging bag." Christ called his missionaries to be neither hirelings nor beggars. To Roberts the counsel, "take no thought... what ye shall eat," and "seek ye first the kingdom of God (Matt. 6:25, 33)," was the nub-and the rub-of Christ's counsel. "There is something in it which goes right home to the heart of the honest,' [^17] whether missionary or proselyte.

The faith of such missionaries is continually on trial and often in extremity. As Abraham H. Cannon said in Roberts's Centerville home, "travel without means and have faith that God will open the way... but where faith is lacking, provide yourself with money." Roberts found, or developed, enough binding faith in these first months that by July he had traveled 550 miles on foot, held ninety-three meetings, and been given twenty-six dollars, of which thirteen were used for the rental of halls and thirteen for food and clothing.

In this same amount of time he had encountered a barrage of threats and trumped-up stories. "But all this has a tendency to encourage one, as we know that when the powers of darkness are uneasy and begin to complain, there is good being done." "It is now a very busy time of year"; his meetings had been well attended. [^18] "Some are believing the Gospel of Christ who will, I think, yet join the Church." [^19]

116Perhaps the most remarkable experience of his Iowa ministry occurred quite early. One of its sad strains is that Roberts did not live long enough to learn the sequel. He had followed his previous strategy, spread his map out, prayed, considered several small towns, and then "as a result of my own judgment strictly, not of any inspiration" decided to go to Mason City. [^20] A fine Catholic family named Slade had been lodging him and had generously given him aid. On the night before his planned departure for Mason City he slept on a lounge bed in the parlor of the Slade home.

As the day was dawning I began to wake and found myself with my face turned closely to the wall, somewhat cramped from lying too long in one position. I stretched and turned over on the other side, facing now the spacious sitting room.

To my astonishment as I looked down upon the carpet I saw the bare feet of a personage. Gradually I looked up until the whole figure was before me. I saw standing there a young man, medium-sized, beardless, and light-complexioned. I noticed beautifully wavy hair, tastefully waved about a handsome face. This personage was truly noble in his bearing; erect, but not stiff, a graceful subtle pose which seemed so quiet and native to him. I looked upon him for some moments, the shock passing, and a beautiful feeling of confidence and pleasure clothed the circumstance. Then the youth bent forward smiling and slowly and gracefully raising his hand he pointed to the eastward and said in a voice, the tenderness and beauty of which can never be forgotten, "You are called to go to Rockford.' [^21] Then gradually the vision vanished. [^22]

The splendor of the young messenger reduced Roberts's fear, but he later marveled that he did not have the presence of mind to speak, to inquire, or even to reply. This wonderment is perhaps reflected in his comment about the manifestations of the Father and the Son to Joseph Smith in the Sacred Grove. "It gives evidence of the intellectual tenacity of Joseph Smith that in the midst of all these bewildering occurrences he held clearly in his mind the purpose for which he had come to the secluded spot.' [^23]

117Roberts had a different kind of tenacity. He arose, dressed, and walked out on the open prairie in the long grass and wild flowers. The dew was heavy enough that on his return his feet were wet. It was a "pondering walk"; "My mind was perplexed," he records. "Had I not made up my mind to go to Mason City? Had I not told the whole neighborhood I was going there? To change my mind now, would they not regard me as fickle-minded? Besides, I did not like giving up my own arrangements." These statements, given in an article for youth under the title "Fruits of Disobedience," may overstate his willfulness. But earlier notes likewise record that he vacillated back and forth. And under such circumstances, he admits that even vacillating was "very unusual."

Neither Roberts nor the Slades had ever heard of Rockford. But at the breakfast table a hired man said that his parents lived there. It was a town to the northeast. "I said no more to them and decided at last to carry out my own plans at all hazards." [^24] Accordingly Roberts set out for Mason City, despite the message he had received, and faced an unbroken series of insults, cold shoulders and slammed doors. He was "sternly refused" meetinghouses and schools in Mason City, and met instant enmity in every attempt at communication. Hoping for a better reception on the outskirts of the city, he failed again. He resolved to try more remote rural areas, trudging for hours in the August sun with his grip becoming heavier in his hands. At one home where the table was laden with food he was invited in. But as soon as he was introduced to the head of the home, seated at table, the man said, "with cold severe tones": "then you are a Mormon preacher... the sooner you get out of my house the better." "I have come with an important message," Roberts replied. The man roughly ordered Roberts to leave. [^25]

After several more rebuffs and misdirections the sun set and the weary elder soliloquized, "Well, it looks as if I might spend another night in the open prairie," and he laid down in "as good a place as any."

Soon I discovered that the grass was full of spiders and bugs. From my grip I took a large handkerchief, wound it around my head, and began to fight for rest with crickets, insects and vermin. For when I next became conscious the sun was struggling through the mist to shine in my face. [Elsewhere he says the sun was an hour high before he awoke.] Rising to a sitting posture, my knees drawn up and hands over my knees, I began to review my experiences of the past few days and then commented, "Well, this is a pretty hard way, it seems to me, to servo the Lord!" Just then, as if in answer to my comment, the severe and clear reproving voice, evidently of the one who visited me in the Slade living room, spoke out, "You were told to go to Rockford." Leaping like lightning, I turned in the direction of the voice and cried out aloud, "So I was and to Rockford I will go! I've had enough of this." [^26]

118Bathing his face in the river, he started to walk the stiffness out of his limbs. After reversing his direction it became as if he was no longer moving against the grain, and the way opened to him. At a forwarding address he found a letter from his wife, Louisa, enclosing a gift from a friend (five dollars, say his notes, two dollars reports the published article)- enough to cover his return train fare to the Slade neighborhood. A companion, Elder Hyrum Jensen, arrived (reportedly on July 9, 1880). They arranged to advertise a meeting through the local paper, the Rockford Reveille, and, after arguing over the "disagreeable necessity" of asking for lodging, were invited to stay in Beebe's Hotel in Rockford. They set up meetings in Leigh Hall. [^27]

One might expect remarkable results from such a set of circumstances. Perhaps Rockford would be another Chat-burn, England, where an entire town responded to young Heber C. Kimball's proselyting by awakening to Christ and converting to the gospel; or maybe even one soul would be converted-a soul like the ancient Amulek, who became a great prophet. Nothing quite so magnificent occurred, but what did occur was testimony enough.

Fresh and eager, the young elders went the next morning to a well-filled Leigh Hall. Elder Jensen spoke briefly, then Elder Roberts arose and "felt rather unexpectedly driven into the consideration of Judah's place in the New Dispensation." None, so far as he knew, in the assembly were Jewish. He referred to several prophecies (there are at least thirty major segments in modern scripture which confirm and elaborate the glories to descend upon Judah after sanctifying pain; see D&C 133:35). God, he testified, had not forever forsaken Judah; their descendants would play a prominent role in the culminating events of the last days. He dwelt upon the promise that the "first shall be last and the last first," and testified (sometimes using Judah as the symbol of all the tribes of Israel) that the gospel of Jesus Christ in this new era was to come first to the Gentiles, and then to the Jews. Jerusalem and the Temple were to be rebuilt, the water of the Dead Sea healed, the land sanctified under the feet of the gathering Jewish Saints. A strange quiet attended his explanations. In the afternoon meeting he again discussed and enlarged upon the theme and was puzzled again by "an unaccountable silence." [^28]

119 No visible response came until the next day, when a clear-eyed Jewish merchant stopped Roberts on the street and urged him to come to his library above his clothing store. The merchant had attended the meetings and wanted to compare the prophecies in the inspired literature of the Latter-day Saints with those in his original Hebrew texts. Together they probed his vast collection of texts and pored over the Book of Moses and other writings of major prophets.

The process of discussion, comparison and analysis took three hours. They were at some point joined by the merchant's brother, "a kind of skeptic" who had offered technical help in translating the Hebrew, but who, as they proceeded, voiced his total disbelief in Judaic prophecies. He had visited Palestine and knew its geography, conditions, forbidding climate, and sterile land. Palestine, he said, simply could not sustain a large population as promised in ancient Jewish writing-not in the past and certainly not in the future. All these alluring dreams were the invention of feverish and persecuted Jewish imagination. "It is simply ridiculous!" At the height of these outbursts, the older brother stepped to the middle of the room and proceeded "to bear a mighty testimony to the land being sufficient for all that was promised. It could and would sustain all the people who inhabited it." When the blessings of the Lord turned upon the Jewish people and the land of Palestine, he said, trembling with conviction, it would again be "a land flowing with milk and honey," sufficient for the life sustenance of millions to be gathered there. Roberts, quickened by the Spirit that attended these words, found himself adding his own testimony: "I said God would make the land equal to the burden to be put upon it. Under His blessing the promises would come to pass." [^29] The lips of the skeptical brother were silenced, though his doubts were not.

120Elder Roberts left Rockford with no converts but with several Jewish friends. He himself had been so indelibly re-converted to the scriptural promises, ancient and modern, to Judah that he never forgot them. Impressions and vivid testimony concerning the Jews clung to him like mist to the morning grass. "I glimpsed in power the part they would take in the great latter-day scenes, their role in the restoration of Israel and the redemption of Jerusalem. I was given Divine assurance of the coming Holy City as their near-future home."

One immediate and lasting consequence of this experience was that Roberts built out of "intense interest" prodigious files of Jewish utterances concerning the Messiah and the redemption of the Jewish race: Palestine, Zionism, Prophecy and the eventual Temple. He cross-referenced the Bible and the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants for passages on Jewish culminations, finding hundreds of prophetic verses embedded there that he had not previously recognized or compared. Later as assistant Church historian he sifted through the records of the apostle Orson Hyde, who had been ordained and commissioned by the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1842 to visit the Holy Land and dedicate it for the return of the Jews. Elder Hyde built an altar and offered his prayer at the crest of the Mount of Olives. As if Roberts were keeping a scrapbook on the state of Israel (before Hirtzel and Zionism in any organized sense were under way, and long before Britain became, as Orson Hyde predicted it would, a helpful instrument), he recorded the new Jewish awareness, the world migration, and the new exodus. [^30] It was fifty years before the meaning and power of this became apparent.

Among the high points of his Iowa ministry with Elder Hyrum Jensen was the historic meeting at Elkader, Iowa, with William B. Smith, a brother of the Prophet Joseph Smith. [^31]

121A striking fact about the Prophet Joseph Smith's immediate family was their loyalty through years of terror and persecution. Joseph's brothers were, in spiritual realms, a bulwark to him. Eventually the hardships imposed by the cause of Christ-which would have been avoidable by simple renunciation-cost the lives of his father and four of the Smith brothers: Don Carlos, Joseph, Hyrum and Samuel. But of the brothers, William was the irascible one; his allegiance and patience in suffering were sometimes superlative, but were just as often contentious and erratic. Splashed over the pages of the history of Joseph are tides of William's testy and proud rebellion followed by flowing tears and reconciliation. Roberts was determined to meet this unpredictable man.

Elder Roberts and Elder Jensen had traveled for several nights, covering ninety miles towards the Mississippi, when Jensen contracted malaria. Roberts went to Buttenberg, a town where no one spoke English, to sell his open-faced, luminous-dial watch for a sum which would enable him to purchase quinine, hot lemonades, and a hotel room where he could nurse his companion back to health. This accomplished, they retraced their steps to a friendly family named Stevenson, determined to track down William B. Smith, who had become alienated from the Utah Church. William Smith received the young elders with good will, but his wife, a dominating woman, apparently begrudged them every moment and vetoed William's request that the young elders administer to their sick son, Edson Barney. [^32] But William dined them and invited them to stay the night, giving them his own bed while he slept on the floor. He showed them many precious documents relating to the Nauvoo period of Church history. He even wrote them a letter of introduction ("a most feeling and pleading" letter) to a friend, giving high recommendation. He discussed with them his own disappointed claims to Church leadership, and then walked with them to the outskirts of town.

William Smith at this time was very advanced in age. [^33] He was an unusually tall man and, though emaciated, disclosed a symmetrical physical manhood. We saw some portraits taken of him when he probably would have been a man of about twenty-five-220 pounds. He stood erect, full of form, with an aggressive appearance and boldness that would well nigh surpass understanding. Emaciated as he was, the head appeared unusually large; the features, however, were strong and fine. He was slow of speech, owing, perhaps, to being so subdued by the members of this household. The eyes were soft, but deep blue, easily converted by the depth of them to almost dark eyes, when animated or stirred with emotion. [^34]

122Roberts was impressed by William and by William's influence, which had infused the community with a solemn respect for his illustrious brother, Joseph. Many people they met in the area told them the same story: because they knew William Smith they felt his brother Joseph "had as much right to be a prophet in these days as Ezekiel or Amos or any of the prophets had in ancient times." Roberts's notes tell how this general sentiment had arisen: A visiting lecturer had spoken on "The American Mohammed," and his disregard of fact for fiction had "created a very ugly impression of the Prophet Joseph." When the lecturer sat down, William Smith startled the audience by introducing himself as the brother of Joseph Smith. He announced that he knew firsthand the lecturer had grossly misrepresented the Prophet's claims, his conduct, and the effects of his life's works; but most of all he had falsified Joseph's character. [^35]

William offered to set the record straight with firsthand information. Merchants instantly arose to guarantee the hall (one even promised to furnish him with a new suit of clothes). A time was set.

To the amazement of the community he delivered a very logical and effective reply to the lectures. He so vindicated the claims and the character of his brother that ever afterward whenever the question of Joseph Smith came up, people would say, "He had just as good a right to be a prophet as any man mentioned in the Bible." [^36]

William's leave-taking from the elders made a deep impression upon Roberts. As the elders were about to ascend "a sharp incline" outside of Elkader:

He extended his hands, long, nervous, powerful hands, taking the hand of each of us. Then he burst into a flood of tears. I had seen men weep before, but never had I seen any weep like this man. It was a veritable flood of tears accompanied by a clinging, warm clasp of his hand. What was it that moved him to such emotions? Was it recollections of his own youth when he, too, under the favor of God, had been an itinerant missionary going from house to house to present the great message of the New Dispensation? Or was it the memory of all his dramatic experiences with the Church in New York, Kirtland and Nauvoo? We did not know. [^37]

"This contact with the nearest living relative of the Prophet Joseph Smith was the only one I ever had." Roberts did not forget it.

123Several frustrating weeks followed, filled with hopes and disappointments and the quiet grief that only missionaries know. Then a Mr. Hughes filled them with encouragement when he not only welcomed them but furnished them with a team and carriage for traveling to their meetings. In gratitude, Elders Roberts and Jensen offered help during the threshing season. Roberts astonished Hughes and his farm-hands by instructing them "how to begin at the very top of the stack and take it down systematically, circle by circle, the bundles to be passed [to] the table, then passed on to the feeder." [^38]

Word of the eiders' efficient aid spread through the neighborhood and did much to open doors. Thirty meetings were held in four schoolhouses, "all well-attended." "Especially receptive" were, in addition to the family and friends of the Hugheses, a Captain Heath, who had served the Union in the Civil War; a Mr. Severson, an agnostic; and a Mr. Thomas, who had visited Salt Lake City and heard several discourses by Orson Pratt. [^39]

The elders became somewhat entrenched in the community, and Elder Jensen was offered a stock management job until the following spring. Facing the winter freeze and the slowdown in missionary opportunity, he was sorely tempted to accept. Roberts in turn was offered a written contract for sixteen hundred dollars guaranteed minimum salary to be the local minister "for a year." He was not tempted at all. After reading the proposed contract aloud to one assembly of investigators, he explained that as a Mormon and a missionary he was "not for hire." He would continue to teach them as long (but only as long) as they manifested genuine interest in the message of the Restoration. A similar offer came to him later in Tennessee. He wrote home in February 1881 that the local people had offered to "send for his wife," settle them in the community, let him "preach all the time," and even build him a new church. [^40]

124His notes acknowledge that he dreamed of becoming a missionary leader in the Midwest. But health problems intervened. For someone with nasal allergies the Iowa belt, due to its humidity and the multiple origins of its weather, can be one of the most aggravating climates in America. Roberts, especially when he worked in the grain fields, was in eye-itching, stuffed-nose misery. His sermons became a mixture of nasal twang, sneezes and handkerchiefs. "My health was failing rapidly and a change was imperative." Soon, a letter from President John Taylor, to whom he had confided his condition, recommended a transfer to the South. In early December he received notification from President John Morgan of the Southern States Mission that he was transferred to the more congenial climate of Tennessee.

Upon finding Roberts packing, Mr. Hughes dumped his valise out on the bed with the expostulation that even the Queen of England would not be permitted to replace Roberts in his home. In addition, Hughes knew that three prominent women from Chicago, classmates of his and graduates of his college, were coming to visit to compare notes on their lucrative successes-he in large-scale farming and they in merchandising. "I want you to stay and visit with these classmates of mine and teach them your faith." Roberts agreed to stay through the holidays (his first of many Christmases away from Louisa and his family); there is no record of their final response to his personal witness of Christ, but he records that they were "intensely interested." [^41] All he could afford to send home for Christmas to Louisa and his mother was a picture which showed him weighing 170 pounds and "one inch taller" since leaving home. [^42]

En route to Tennessee, Roberts crossed the frozen Mississippi at St. Louis. After St. Louis and a thirty-mile train ride, Roberts traveled on foot through a dense wooded section where he had to cross icy, waist-deep streams several times. At the door of a house of a man named Anderson, he knocked late at night and rather pitifully said: "I am wet, tired and hungry. I would like the privilege of sitting by your fire till morning." Anderson invited him in and was miraculously hospitable, for Roberts later learned that he was famed as anti-Mormon and had announced publicly that no Mormon elder would be safe in his "clearin'." [^43]

125In Wilson County, Roberts labored with a new companion, Elder Joseph Ford. Slowly the people there went from "curious resentment to respect," then from "widespread interest to conversion." Influential in this transformation was Mr. Saunders, a wealthy landowner who had met the two young elders on a trip from St. Louis. They had spent the entire train journey discussing religious themes. Saunders promised the elders "assistance and opportunities to present the message" and more than kept his word. He had a curious role; he was the economic savior of the region, so acknowledged by the people, for he had "literally saved Wilson County from famine with grain and imports of corn and pork"; he was also, as he himself acknowledged, the illegitimate father of many of the inhabitants of Wilson County. To Roberts it was a puzzle how a man so socially minded and benevolent but so weak in morals could be attracted to the message of Christ. But he was; and he did his best to open the way for the young elders wherever they went.

In this segment of the Bible Belt was a town named Moccasin, named for its snakes. The predominant religious denomination there was Disciple or Campbellite. Night after night in halls and homes Roberts presented the first principles and ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ: faith in Christ, repentance through Christ, baptism, confirmation for the gift of the Holy Ghost. The doctrine that conversion to Christ culminated in the reception of the Holy Ghost seemed brand new to them.

A woman who often shouted and cried out in local revival services of other churches joined the Church and soon lost her inclination to shout. When her friends came to badger her about the ordinances of baptism and the laying on of hands, implying that these were empty formalities, she gave them a gentle reply:

[Before I was a Mormon] if you ladies had come to my house and insulted me as you have this morning, I would long ago have been pulling your hair in violent resistance. But now I do not feel the least disposition to anger or violence I am sure that could only come to me because of the presence in my soul of the Holy Ghost received in obedience to the Latter-day Saint Gospel. [^44]

126An event which had long and lingering repercussions in Roberts's life (and in the volumes he would eventually write) occurred at Lebanon, Tennessee, where both the State Law School and the ministerial school of the Presbyterian Church South were located. There meetings of the young missionaries attracted professional people: lawyers, professors. Before long a notice reached the press:

We were introduced by Mr. Ben Baird and found the elders to be very quiet and dignified gentlemen ready to answer any questions relative to their religion. Their names are Brigham H. Roberts and Joseph Ford.

After a "garbled" account of Mormon doctrine and some old slanders, the article passed lightly over Elder Ford's brief address but said:

Roberts did much better. He is about 28 years old [he was 23. All his life he was thought to be older and more mature than he was], light-complexioned, had a good eye and face and is a natural orator. He spoke about an hour. He said the Bible and the New Testament so far as they were rightly translated, are the word of God. And the Book of Mormon was written for the nations of the American continent, etc., etc. [^45]

Out of this trifle of publicity a chain of consequences was forged: prominent citizens demanded that the Mormon youths debate nine Christian ministers so that "the Mormon eiders would be proved unworthy of confidence." Three discourses at the Lebanon courthouse were subsequently arranged. For three nights Roberts faced men learned in legal and theological studies. Hundreds turned out to hear Roberts deal with both the history and doctrine of the Church. Over a thousand, including a note-taking Catholic priest, attended his hour presentation on the "Mormon marriage system." He began his account with the marriage systems of the early Hebrews, then the early Christians, and was so fluent in his "reintroduction of the concept of eternal marriage under divine sealing power" that he was surrounded by questioners until after 11:00 P.M. The questions were friendly, even complimentary, and the "students were surprised that so much could be found in the scriptures" in support of the Mormon understanding of marriage and eternal marriage. In one evening his witness won almost unanimous respect, deference, and even a sort of restrained admiration.

127On February 5, 1881, in lieu of the nine ministers, one Parson Alsup challenged Elder Roberts. He was a Campbellite, famed as a debater, and was now in his early fifties with a reputation of never having engaged in public debate without driving his opponent from the platform. Roberts wrote: "I was twenty-three and had no experience." [^46] The subject of debate was to be the Book of Mormon. Although Alsup claimed to know nothing about the Church or its theology, he said he knew all about the Book of Mormon and that as a religious document "it was of no more worth than last year's Almanac... a fraud, a cheat and worthless fiction." The young elder agreed to debate that proposition but insisted that the debate then turn to the organization, doctrine, and authority of the Campbellite movement.

The debate lasted three days-Saturday, Monday and Tuesday-and from four to five and a half hours each day. The attendance varied but the crowd was never small. After the three days Alsup closed the debate and thereafter "claimed no victory" in his contest with the "young Mormon elder." Immediately following the debates the elders began baptizing converts and within two months had established an organized branch of the Church with sixty members. It thrived.

Roberts's biographical notes record several sidelights to this experience: One was that, against the natural order of debate, Alsup had launched his initial blast against the origin and content of the Book of Mormon-a blast which the two young elders found "appalling if not overwhelming." Roberts forever wished that they had, in the proper order of debate, given an affirmative speech first. He was often frustrated that the divine affirmations of the gospel were never heard through the din of negation. Many years later (1896) Roberts spent time in the library at Cincinnati, Ohio, which was a Campbellite center. There he read the collected works of Alexander Campbell, including the Millennial Harbinger of 1831. He found therein, point for point, all the arguments Parson Alsup had introduced in the debate, thus discovering that in answering Alsup he had really answered Campbell, whose critique was "exhaustive and bitter," a philippic which Alsup no doubt thought invincible. [^47]

128During the third day of debate, in "a rapid verbal exchange," Alsup ridiculed a passage in the Book of Mormon. Roberts arose and denied that there was such a passage. Then he instantly recalled this passage and that it had a "thoroughly rational explanation." But he chose not to jeopardize the audience's sympathy to him by so saying. During the lunch hour (he did not eat but, still suffering with sinus problems, chose to lie down instead) Roberts pleaded with his companion to kneel with him and pray that "the whole matter" would be taken from the minds of the opponents. Elder Ford, who had noticed right after the blunder that one of the ministers smiled and wrote something down, felt that such a prayer would be asking too much. But Roberts insisted. They took turns praying, and at first Elder Ford's efforts "did not ring with much faith." As they persisted, however, "there came a flowing, glowing spirit of faith and power. I prayed once again and the entire cloud seemed lifted." The outcome of their pleadings was in fact remarkable: that afternoon Alsup not only did not mention the passage, but he announced that he was finished and closed the debate. That was singular enough. But Roberts marveled less at Alsup's forgetfulness than at his own. The rest of his life that passage was blotted from his memory; fifty years of Book of Mormon research line by line never recovered it to him.

Roberts was permanently influenced by Alsup's charge that, unlike the Bible which is rich in proverbs, aphorisms, and wisdom-literature, the Book of Mormon had not a single redeeming verse. At the time Roberts replied, "I can think of only one at the moment-the words of Christ in Ether 12:26: 'Fools mock, but they shall mourn; and my grace is sufficient for the meek.' " [^48] But the rest of his life he gathered and sermonized on Book of Mormon "truth gems."

Highlights of the debate were reported by Roberts to the Deseret News on Valentine's day, 1881, in a dispatch from Baird's Mills. In this we learn the specific resolution:

The doctrine of the "Mormons" contradicts the teachings of the King James translation of the Bible. [^49]

129Few of the arguments advanced deserve attention today. But Roberts continued to revise, supplement, and expand his Book of Mormon scholarship, eventually publishing more than fifteen hundred pages on the Book of Mormon.

Alsup's historical point was no trivial issue: the pre-New Testament understanding of Christ. Struggling to drive a wedge between the Bible and the Book of Mormon, Alsup complained that the Book of Mormon prophets were represented, centuries before Christ, as having a detailed knowledge of Christ, full of the relations between types, shadows and symbols of the Abrahamic-Mosaic covenant and prophetic allusions to the coming of Christ. The Book of Mormon is messianic from first to last. That was impossible, he argued, since "no one had knowledge of the Christian faith until the Meridian of Time." Roberts became sensitive to that issue. He memorized the New Testament scriptures that reflect the Old Testament pronouncements about Christ. (See Rev. 3:8; Titus 1:2; Heb. 11:26; Gal. 3:8, 19, 24; Heb. 4:1, 2; 1 Cor. 10:1-4.) Each of these scriptures teach that Christ is "the Lamb slain from before the foundation of the world." [^50] In the debate itself Roberts cited the biblical evidence that Abraham comprehended the mission of Christ. Alsup conceded that "a sort of Gospel" was taught to Abraham but contended that it was not the same gospel that came into the world after Christ. Roberts replied that there was one gospel, an everlasting gospel, and it brought salvation to those who lived before Christ as well as after. (It always seemed strange to him that this should come as news to many Christians.) Otherwise, Christ's gospel left the destinies of the ancient Hebrew prophets and their people in doubt. A man in the audience arose to say that Alsup's view "had left Abraham in hell and that Elder Roberts had dared to get him out!" and the audience murmured approval. At this point Alsup refused to go on with the de. bate.

130In his missionary journal (three years later on November 10, 1884) he writes that the Book of Mormon and the evidence of its divine authenticity "is intensely interesting to me." And then he adds, "I have observed when speaking on this subject I have enjoyed great liberty of the Spirit perhaps more so than with speaking on any subject." [^51] It became a lifetime preoccupation, prompting intense analysis of the book, both textual and contextual.

Brevity of mission assignments required constant turnover among the elders, hence there was a need for rapid transmission of experience from home-going veterans to incoming eiders. Commensurate with the first signs of promise, leadership descended quickly to young missionaries. Roberts had done well in Tennessee. But he had yet to meet his mission president, John Morgan.

Roberts later anonymously wrote articles entitled "An Elder in the Southern States Mission." [^52] Here he describes the long journeys, "tramping through the red clay of Murphysboro County" to Nashville, where there was to be a mission conference. He also describes the prayer custom, since experienced by thousands of Mormon missionaries all over the world. [^53] "The times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord enjoyed by the Elders in these gatherings are, perhaps, the happiest experience while absent from home, or even in life."

Many contrasts are shown in his notes. One obvious one is the missionaries' experience of being "today in the mansions of the wealthy surrounded by the refinement of the higher social classes, tomorrow in the wretched hovels of the poor, the next day a wanderer with tired limbs and blistered feet." "Only the comforting influence of the Holy Ghost cheers his heart, even in the midst of tribulation... he suffers it, walking in the footsteps of his Lord, Christ Jesus." For the faithful it ceases to be galling.

John Morgan, the mission president, traveled to Nashville for the conference. Before his call as mission president, he had been head of the Morgan Commercial College in Salt Lake City, where Roberts had done some studying. Elder Roberts, to his embarrassment, was wearing "a slouched hat, bespattered, wet clothing and red muddy shoes" when he met his leader.

President Morgan did not seem to notice, bless his heart. With extended hands and a bright sensitive face he drew me into an embrace. It sealed a friendship between us forever.

131At this, his first official missionary conference, Roberts, who had spent too much time alone, responded to the missionary kinship and wrote: "The warmth of brothers... even those who never before met, in a few hours are bosom friends. There is no formality, no reserve, no striving for effect, no hypocrisy. Each countenance beams with honest joy and their hearts go out to each other." [^54]

Some weeks earlier Roberts had experienced an unaccountable inner gloom. Resounding success at Lebanon had been followed by bleak reception in Wilson County. Once more a dream counterbalanced discouragement. This prescient dream occurred at Rooster Ranch in Wilson County.

In the dream I found myself coming over the winding path from the turnpike toward the residence. There were four in the company of Elders approaching the homestead and as we came to the gateway of the woods lot, entering into the before described mound two of the number passed on and one came through the gate with me to the Huddleston home. It seemed we had been away for some time and received a very hearty welcome to the quarters where we had before stayed. Shortly after the dinner was announced, being served out of doors on the lawn, I noted the absence of Mrs. Vaughn but said nothing of the absence. Presently, however, observing that I had finished my dinner before the rest at the table I good-naturedly said I would excuse them for not getting through as soon as I and arose and walked out under the young trees on the lawn. Presently in my dream I saw Mrs. Vaughn standing in the doorway of one of these cabins on the lawn and as I drew nearer I noticed she was crying. She made an effort to stop the tears and extended her hand to me, as I drew close, saying, "I am so glad that you have returned. I was afraid you never would come back and I want you to baptize me." This was a matter of surprise because directly we had heard nothing of her interest in joining the Church. With this the dream closed. [^55]

132The elders had talked seriously about moving to a new area, but Roberts awoke from this dream, shook his companion and said decisively, "We are not going to leave this neighborhood. We will stay and see what comes of it." But later at the conference, either because his memory or his enthusiasm had dimmed, Roberts asked for a transfer. President Morgan not only ignored the request but assigned two additional elders to the area. Thus Eiders Snow and Hammond returned with Elders Roberts and Ford to the Moccasin District.

The young elder did not remember his dream until he "lived through it," for on return the exact sequence of events he had dreamed unfolded, "wonderful, definite fulfillment." The gate leading to the plantation, the departure of Ford and Snow, a dinner spread out under the trees, the absence of Mrs. Vaughn, his approach, and the exact words she spoke: "I was afraid you would never come back and I want you to baptize me." She continued on, however: "Richard [her doctor-husband] is opposed to my being baptized and is making things disagreeable for me. What is to be done?" Roberts then approached the doctor and told him that neither he nor his missionary successors would undertake to baptize his wife without his explicit permission (a firm Church policy reflecting the sense of the patriarchal tradition and a father's rights) [^56] That forthright statement gave the doctor "much pleasure." A few days later he came to the elders and gave his full consent. A beautiful clear spring of water, twenty feet at its deepest, became the baptismal font for Mrs. Vaughn and eight other converts. Soon Dr. Vaughn himself was baptized, and before long he and his wife visited the temple in Salt Lake City, "drinking in by nature the spirit of the New Dispensation." They became stalwarts, lasting lights in the Moccasin District of Wilson County, Tennessee.

For Roberts this dream experience showed that "the future can be exactly revealed to the mind of man." And if, therefore, it is an axiom of higher criticism-as it is of most forms of scientific naturalism-that prophecy is impossible, he had firsthand compelling evidence to the contrary. "With a shock the young elder remembered his dream," he later wrote. Hence, "the first Isaiah can do all that is attributed to the second Isaiah." [^57]

133A man named Robert Church, who had been baptized as a boy with his father by the Prophet Joseph Smith, lived in the area with several of his sons. They were a reliable source of missionary sustenance in the South, since their home was open day or night to the elders. Through "Uncle Robert Church," [^58] Elder Roberts came almost daily into intimate touch with Church history: the elders rode a dun-colored horse named "Old Traveler," after the one Parley P. Pratt had ridden; [^59] they knocked on doors that had known the knuckles of Wilford Woodruff; they held conferences in Shady Grove, Tennessee, where Elder David W. Patten had been a missionary, one of the first Mormons to die as a martyr to his faith.

Surrounding them also were battlefields of the Civil War: Shiloh, where twenty thousand men were killed in two days, and Nashville, Franklin, Murphreesboro, Missionary Ridge, Chickamauga and Lookout Mountain; later he visited Richmond, where the wilderness battles were fought and three hundred thousand men gave their lives in the Civil War.

Roberts wrote in his journal, "Fairly, the words of the Prophet Joseph have been fulfilled wherein he said that the war of rebellion would 'end in the death and misery of many souls.' " [^60]

Letters and journals from this time period indicate his feelings as well as his activities. To Ann Everington, in a letter written June 14, 1881, he admits he is discouraged because baptisms come so slowly, and yet he is consoled: "I know I have done my part. But oh how I wish they would turn from their corruptions! How I wish they would see themselves as God sees them."

From Duck River, on January 7, 1882, he wrote home, summarizing the year. He had arrived January 1, 1881, and had spent almost the whole year in Tennessee-with the exception of one week in Alabama. He had ridden on horseback and wagons 299 miles, on the railroad 404 miles, and had walked 1,846 miles-covering a total of 2,549 miles. He had held 153 meetings in eleven counties, assisted in the organization of four branches of the Church, baptized seven persons, assisted in the baptism of five others, blessed "quite a number of children," and spent a Merry Christmas with the Saints of Shady Grove. He adds that Brother Robbins Church had bought a horse "which he is fattening up for me to ride next summer. The prospect is I shall not have so much walking to do."

134Perhaps Roberts's most representative diary entry for 1882 was recorded one Sunday at the home of Robert R. Church in Shady Grove. He begins the journal with a prayer of thanks for his health and "being in the full faith of the gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." He prays for his family:

And now my father, during the year that commences with this day extend thine arm of protection around those I love, and whom I have left for the gospel sake. Preserve them in the faith of Thy glorious gospel; and pour out upon them a rich abundance of Thy Holy Spirit to cheer their hearts and comfort them in my absence. Bless them with health, and if any should fall a prey to sickness, grant oh Lord that the prayer of faith shall save them and the fell destroyer, death, be banished by the same power.

Bless my wife with wisdom in training our child. May Adah live and grow up to womanhood and fill up the measure of her creation in righteousness. And give me power Father to put away from me all my folly and unrighteousness; help me to be worthy of these precious gems which Thou hast blessed me with that I may not only be worthy of them here, but also in eternity, and help me to conduct myself in such a manner, that they would choose me as their head.

Bless my mother preserve her in health that she may live until I see her once more in the flesh. Bless my sisters and their families; and may their children grow up in righteousness. And prosper Thy work in all the world, and may Thy Kingdom come, and Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven, Amen.

135It would not be long, though, before Roberts would be reunited with his family. In May 1882 he was released to return home.

Notes

Chapter 6

1 Juvenile Instructor 19 (May 1884): 130.

2 BN, p. 138.

3 BN, p. 141. Henry later found Elder Palmer "lying full length face down on the bank of the River plucking up the grass in an agony of spirit." He felt he had failed.

4 BN, pp. 144-45.

5 President Taylor had served three foreign missions: to France, Canada, and Britain. That could seem like "a half hundred" to a youth. In terms of total years of missionary service, Roberts more than doubled the missionary time of his boyhood hero-twenty years.

6 BN, pp. 145-46.

7 BN, pp. 144-47.

8 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 12 August 1880, from Rockford, Floyd County.

9 The mission had a "nominal" president, Cyrus Wheelock of Mount Pleasant, Utah. But he was infirm and had not been in the mission for some years.

10 Conference Report, October 1929, p. 8.

11 BN, p. 148.

12 From an interview with the daughter of William Moroni Palmer, 4 March 1976.

13 "A Fair Infidel," Juvenile Instructor 19 (May 1884): 148-49; see also "An Inspired Prayer," same volume, pp. 130-31.

14 ]uvenile Instructor 19 [May 1884): 149.

15 In his Biographical Notes the word is return unto the Lord, reflecting perhaps Roberts's considered conviction that all men have, in various degrees, a sense of higher light. See ]uvenile Instructor 19 (May 1884): 172.

16 See B.H. Roberts's published version, "Tying up a 'Mormon' Elder," Juvenile Instructor 19 (May 1884): 171-72.

17 His commentaries on the Sermon on the Mount and "The Fifth Gospel" (the account of Christ's ministry in America), in which occur the words "Take no thought what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink," insist that these counsels apply not to all members of Christ's church (who must take thought to provide for their own) but to missionaries, like Paul and Silas. Their needs but not always their desires would be met "sufficient unto the day."

18 In Franklin, Cerro Gordo, Floyd and Butler counties.

19 See Deseret Evening News, 2 August 1880.

20 The center of Cerro Gordo County has since been popularized by Meredith Willson's Music Man.

21 This phrase is recorded in the Biographical Notes and in a published account in Iuvenile Instructor 19 (June 1884): 178. In another version the phrase is simply, "You go to Rockford."

22 BN, p. 162.

23 CHC, 1:54.

24 The phrase "at all hazards" occurs, as Roberts well knew, in a statement of Joseph Smith based on John 14. He taught that the highest spiritual blessing of life comes only after "hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and living by every word of God" until one is determined to serve Christ "at all hazards"; TPJS, p. 150.

25 BN, p. 167. This was the only time in his life that Roberts followed the scriptural admonition of the Master and washed his feet with water as a testimony. See D&C 84:92-93.

26 BN, p. 171. Cf. "Missionary Experience: Fruits of Disobedience," Juvenile Instructor 19 (June 1884): 178-79.

27 BN, p. 175.

28 BN, p. 178.

29 Roberts probably utilized passages from Isaiah and D&C 45 and 133, and the many prophecies in Nephi, Jacob, Enos, Alma, and Moroni.

30 See Abraham Joshua Heschel, Israel: An Echo of Eternity (New York: Farrat, Strauss and Giroux, 1969).

31 The "B" in "William B. Smith" was self-imposed-an effort to distinguish himself while in the Union Army from a host of other assorted "William Smiths" who had also enlisted.

32 The son later joined the Church.

33 He was seventy.

34 BN, p. 193.

35 Roberts cites Joseph Smith's characterization of his brother William as the "fierce lion which divideth in the spoil because he has much strength," underlining the prophetic promise "in the pride of his heart he will neglect the more weighty matters until his soul is bowed down in sorrow; then he shall return and call on the name of his God and shall find forgiveness and shall wax valiant in the cause of truth; therefore, he shall be saved unto the uttermost, and shall be endowed with power from on High." Echoes of this incident are in Roberts's Succession in the Presidency (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1894).

36 BN, p. 199.

37 BN, p. 196.

38 BN, p. 206. To honor this feat in foiling lost motion, Hughes ordered the roasting of a turkey gobbler theretofore earmarked for Christmas and asked his young guest to carve it. Elder Roberts held up his hand and pleaded inexperience. "What?" cried Mr. Hughes, "a preacher that can take down a grain stack like he would do a problem in geometry and yet can't carve a turkey?" So Roberts, somewhat clumsily, managed to hack away until all had huge portions (BN, p. 204). It was a challenge to him; later, in New York, those who attended banquets with him wrote home that he could carve a whole turkey deftly "without moving the fork."

39 BN, pp. 206-7.

40 B. H. Roberts to his mother. February 1881.

41 See Journal History. 14 February 1881.

42 B. H. Roberts to his mother, 20 December 1880.

43 BN, pp. 218-20.

44 BN, pp. 226-27.

45 BN, pp. 227-28.

46 Conference Report, April 1928, p. 109.

47 See Defense of the Faith and the Saints, 2:108. Roberts copied these materials in extenso, had them bound. and kept them as one of his prize manuscripts.

48 Conference Report. April 1928. p. 108. This entire sermon is devoted to Book of Mormon aphorisms.

49 Deseret Evening News. vol. 14. p. 2.

50 See CHC. 1:224.

51 See Truman G. Madsen, "B. H. Roberts and the Book of Mormon," BYU Studies 19 (Summer 1979): 427-45.

52 Contributor 6 (June 1885): 326-31.

53 These were two-man "conferences"-kneeling in prayer some distance from the road in a retired glen in the woods which they had dedicated as a place of prayer. Scriptures were reviewed and plans made for missionary approaches.

54 "A Mormon Elder in the Southern States." Contributor 6 (June1885).

55 BN, p. 247.

56 See Roberts's account of the biblical roots of this Mormon precept. Millennial Star 49 (19 December 1887): 808.

57 Improvement Era 14 (July 1911): 774-86.

58 BN, p. 245.

59 He considered Pratt's Key to the Science of Theology "one of the very best expositions of our faith"; see Millennial Star 49 (28 November 1887): 760.

60 From a journal of B. H. Roberts. 16 April 1883.

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
[^23] 23 Mrs. William Reed to Ann Roberts.
[^24] 24 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^25] 25 Late in their lives, on 3 May 1928, B. H. and Annie Brynie, a half-sister, and Mary arranged for the temple sealing of Ann Everington and Benjamin Roberts and all of the children including the twins and baby Thomas. See BHR Temple Book.
[^26] 26 Roberts kept one sample of his father's handwriting from the original wrapping of the photo given his mother. It is preserved in the family collection.
[^27] 27 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 1 September 1883, Roberts Family Collection.
[^28] 28 Research has failed to establish where and when Ben died. The marriage date is 15 June 1848 (he was twenty-two) in Poplar, Middlesex, England; from the Book of Remembrance of Haven R. Day.
[^29] 29 B. H. Roberts to Ann Everington, 21 April 1880, Roberts Family Collection.
[^30] 30 Mrs. Charles H. Wilcox recorded these impressions from a conversation with B.H. Roberts at his home prior to his call to the Eastern States.
[^31] 31 BN, p. 10.
[^32] 32 See Juvenile Instructor 49 (February 1914): 85.
[^33] 33 Fifty years later, as chairman of "Vocations and Industry" in the youth program of the Church, he wrote, "We shall take the ground that no vocation of honest industry need be ignoble or debasing in its effects, but by properly correlating it with the general welfare of human life can be in effect both honorable and glorious." Improvement Era 15 (October 1912): 1083.
[^34] 34 Liahona 12 (20 October 1914): 364.
[^35] 35. Salt Lake Herald, 8 January 1899.
[^36] 36. So Roberts later told his children.
[^37] 37. BNG, p. 8.
[^38] 38 See History of Utah, 4:689.
[^39] 39 In a notebook under "Roberts, B. H." is this handwritten note: "Warrington-Town of, my birth place. Warrington, at the head of tide water on the Mersey River. It was a station of Romans (Veraterium) in the time of Agricola - (69-84 A.D.) and many Roman relics have been found in the neighborhood."
[^40] 40 Beniamin's father's brother.
[^41] 41 N. B. Lundwall, Roberts's secretary for twelve years, recalls him saying this incident occurred when he was seven.
[^42] 42 BNG, p. 16. Roberts spoke in later years of this spiritual impression (which one tradition says was repeated three times) as evidence that "the promptings of the Spirit of God" can come early - several years, in his case, before his official baptism and confirmation in 1867.
[^43] 43 The word gomin - rather than urchha - was endeared to Roberts through the Victor Hugo story of Gayroche who, in the midst of battle, went along the pavement gathering unfired cartridges from the corpses of fallen men, gaining strength at each step.
[^44] 44 Memoirs, p. 4.
[^45] 45 BN, p. 18a.
[^46] 46 Apparently Tovey's periodic alienations from the LDS Church did not interfere with his desire to preach.
[^47] 47 This was republished by Harvard University Press in 1962. The book was originally issued in fifteen separately stitched parts from July 1854 to September 1855.
[^48] 48 BN, p. 20.
[^49] 49 BN, p. 56.
[^50] 50 Memoirs. Crossing the plains, mules would somehow detect the nearby presence of Indians and bellow-often soon enough to enable the emigrants to take crucial precautions (see Roberts's chapter on the exodus in CHC, 3:170).
[^51] 51 "Diary of William Driver," New Mexico Historical Review (January 1943): 57.
[^52] 52 Northwest Nebraska News (Crawford, Nebraska), located in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University.
[^53] 53 See Jenson's Church Chronology.
[^54] 54 See Eliza R. Snow, "A Sketch of My Life: 1804-1887," Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley.
[^55] 55 CHC, 3:304.
[^56] 56 BNG, pp. 32-33. Here, sixty years later, he addressed five thousand Boy Scouts. "On the occasion of an historic visit," where a great gathering brought to mind this early visit of Harry's boyhood, and now "an old and broken man," he remembered and told the story of his little adventure in passing the Sweetwater Ford.
[^57] 57 BNG, p. 33
[^58] 58 Memoirs, p. 4.
[^59] 59 J.M. Tanner, Biographical Sketch of John Riggs Murdock (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1909), p. 128.
[^60] 60 Hinckley's relief train returned to the valley on Sunday, October 7. See Jenson's Church Chronology.
