Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

7 President in the South

On May 26, 1882, Roberts, having been released from his missionary labors, arrived on the Union Pacific Railroad in Ogden and then headed south to Centerville: "I need not try to tell my feelings in thus coming to the home of the saints. I have been absent for two years and two months." At Kaysville on the railroad platform his wife, his little Adah, his mother, and his father-in-law awaited him. At Centerville many of his missionary associates were waiting also, including Joseph Ford. He made his report to Elder Wilford Woodruff, who "listened to my report and told me much of his experience in early days." He also met Franklin D. Richards and Joseph F. Smith, who blessed him.

136In the next eight months he worked "fixing and fencing," and did some blacksmithing with Henry Rampton. During the summer months he also went to Goose Creek Territory in Marsh Basin, Idaho, and sheared sheep for the family of Joe Ford, his former missionary companion. In the fall he began erecting the house he had promised Louisa-"18 by 32 feet, two rooms." A letter came from John Morgan expressing the wish that he assist in the presidency of the Southern States Mission, but time passed without that obligation coming to fruition so he began teaching school in Bountiful for sixty dollars a month. During this period Roberts also spoke warmly on political topics against both liberals and non-Mormons in the political campaign and in support of John T. Caine for the U.S. Congress. Each Sunday he lectured before the young men's group. For these privileges he was grateful, but his diary also records "frequently giving way to passion in my family, which is not proper," and that he "often grieved the Spirit of God."

Through the Christmas holidays he "took solid comfort with [his] family." Just after Christmas, President John Morgan called on him. The visit was more than a social call. He praised Roberts's effective missionary work as the conference president or traveling elder in Tennessee, and amidst the pleasantries asked: "How does it really feel to confine your labors within four walls? Are you satisfied with the limited sphere in which you now labor? Have you ever thought of returning to the mission field?" Soon Roberts learned that President Morgan had already been released (on November 16, 1882) as the full-time mission president in the South, where he had served more than thirteen years. Before his visit to Centerville he suggested to the First Presidency that Elder Roberts become his successor. The Brethren, aware of Roberts's comparative youth (he was twenty-six), had counseled that if Roberts would accept the call, Morgan could remain in Utah and retain a kind of executive authority over the eleven-state mission, and through his "field man," Elder Roberts, coordinate the immigration groups who came from the South through San Luis Valley, Colorado. [^1]

We do not have a verbatim report of the "setting-apart" blessing President John Taylor gave Roberts prior to his departure, but Roberts recorded as much of the blessing as he could remember, of which the following is an excerpt:

137And we bless you with the spirit and the power of this calling and say unto you be faithful and God will bless you with the spirit of revelation to guide you in your labors and wisdom shall be given you in directing your brethren in their labors. You should be an instrument in the hands of God in bringing many to the knowledge of the truth and in teaching them the principles of righteousness and leading them to Zion. We pray God to bless you in your labors. [^2]

"It was a severe trial to have me go again from home as I had only been at home from my first mission 10 months and it appeared all Louisa could bear to have me go again. The Lord will support her, however, and bless her for making the sacrifice." It was hard for his mother, Ann Everington, also, but she "felt proud that he was counted worthy to go." He was aided by the brethren and sisters of Centerville who, after he had erected the walls of his home, stepped forward and laid the floor, put on the roof, put in the windows, and did the carpentry and the plaster work. A number of Saints helped him to pay his debts and to leave some resources with his family.

Finally Roberts took leave of Centerville, heading first for Manassa, Colorado, where he met John Morgan and others. Roberts wrote on April 5, 1883:

Men may sing of the joy they feel in going to their homes and countries. But of all joys none are so exquisite as those we experience in meeting those for whom we have formed a love when abroad, when we were strangers together in a strange land. President Morgan met me with all his usual open, frank and hearty manner. Those are the kind of people I like, those who are warmhearted and are not ashamed to let their feelings gush out.

Most of April was spent in visiting the Saints and holding meetings with President Morgan in the Manassa area and the city of Pueblo, Colorado.

In later years Roberts almost habitually asked missionaries their age. Then he would say, "I became a mission president at twenty-four." Actually, he was a kind of mission aide under President Morgan at twenty-six. He was, however, mission president to twenty-four new elders assigned to the South.

138He first met these elders on a train from St. Louis headed south, and since none of them recognized him as either a Mormon or a mission president, he launched a charade often repeated whenever his identity was unknown. He assumed the role of the incisive critic, the polite agnostic, the scripture-equipped skeptic. On this particular occasion, several of the young elders, one of whom was J. Golden Kimball ("a splendid young man," his diary says), were before long "in grave doubt about their message of salvation." Then he disclosed his identity and rebuilt and deepened their roots. "He gave them a training they never forgot." [^3]

Back in the mission field, Roberts's first act was to return to "the Shady Grove District" where, as he records, "my heart drew me." It had been his headquarters when he was the presiding elder in the Tennessee conference. He crossed the river on a flatboat, climbed the steep bluff, walked across the lawn of the spacious plantation, and was welcomed and embraced by friends and members of the Church. Then "Old Traveler," the famous missionary horse who had become an institution in the South, ambled up and nudged him from behind and "all of our journeys and adventures flooded my memory."

Some of the older men of the mission had been "thunderstruck" to be called as missionaries; now they were more so to have a man of such tender years as their mission president. It was almost without precedent.

Roberts began his presidency with vigor. He was in no sense a novice. He had grown in his grasp of the gospel, both doctrinal and historical, and was an embodiment of method and system, and incessant energy. His first sermon, delivered at Burke's Garden in Chattanooga, the headquarters of the mission, symbolized all three. It was titled "The Mission of Joseph Smith," and in orderly fashion he showed that by the manifestation of the very Christ, the young Prophet had received and conveyed more than hosts of traditional theologians; not a twist or interpretation or a fashionable approach, but a whole mine of bedrock revelation. [^4] Elder J. Golden Kimball wrote, "I confess, at that time and for a considerable length of time afterwards, I was awestruck and beaten into silence when asked to follow him in his public addresses."

139The tone of discipline was set at a conference near McEwen station in April. The minutes record that the new mission president counseled his elders "to systematize themselves [not] to present all the subjects of the gospel to the people in one discourse, but to take up one principle at a time and expound it and then proceed to the next and so continue. ... cleanliness of person, neatness of dress, and purity of mind were urged upon the attention of the Elders. An excellent spirit prevailed." "How I loved those Elders," Roberts wrote in retrospect, and "watched over them, meeting the Elders personally, restraining the over-zealous, encouraging the under-zealous, teaching, seeking to temper all with the wisdom that would not provoke antagonism, or bring reproach to our cause."

The missionary customs of the time seem, in comparison to a softer contemporary ease, a little quaint. The elders were decked out in derby hats and long-tailed coats, carrying stickgrips and umbrellas-umbrellas with curved handles which would hang on the inside sleeve under the arm or in vest pockets. In their handgrips they carried copies of the Bible and the Book of Mormon, tracts, especially the Plan of Salvation written by President John Morgan, and the Friendly Discussion written by President Ben E. Rich. In the larger cities they often held street meetings, during which, Roberts records, "as many people get behind the speaker as in front of him"; [^5] "cottage meetings" were held in the homes. The homes of members of the Church, who were in the minority, were widely separated, and it required steep courage to defy public sentiment and permit the elders to hold meetings, stay overnight, or even to visit. "There is no law in Georgia for Mormons!" was a local axiom. [^6]

Missionaries traveled by foot or by horseback, averaging ten to twenty miles a day as they tracted.

During his second year in the field, Roberts chose J. Golden Kimball as mission secretary, who later recalled:

140He trusted me, and I never betrayed him. He confided in me, the only time in his life, about his own affairs, his family, etc. We occupied one room-used as office and sleeping quarters. We paid $25 a month for rent and board. It was hotter than Hades most of the time. I was his secretary. He walked the floor and dictated, and I wrote long-hand volumes and stored away a fund of information .... As much as I honor and respect Brother Roberts I have never felt inferior to him in his presence; he has never made me feel that way. He had a greater intellect, greater intelligence, but I have had some gifts... of my own. [^7]

Missionary journal entries allow further glimpses into Roberts's experiences as a mission president. On the morning of July 14, 1883, while in council with the elders traveling in the Southern Carolina Conference,

I was telling the manner in which Satan would strive to hinder them in their work of preaching the gospel, and what great power he possessed, when I was attacked by an unseen power, and nearly overcome; I managed, however, to keep my feet and continue my remarks. I was smitten twice afterward the same morning but through the mercies of God was not overpowered, for which I am thankful to my Father in Heaven: I trust he will ever shield me from [this] power, and if in God's great wisdom he can see there is a time that I would become a servant to the Power of Darkness I pray that he will take me to Himself before I shall live to see that day.

On July 25, 1883, he wrote: "This day was lost. I read a novel called Morton House and it took me all day to finish it. I bitterly regret being so thoughtless as to spend my precious time in reading such worthless trash." Two days later he says:

Conference [in the Hollyclove church] convened but owing to several blunders which I have made of late, was not feeling so well in spirit. This feeling gradually wore away, however, and as I commenced speaking to the people on the principles of the gospel the Spirit of God came to my assistance and my tongue was loosened. Oh, how long suffering and kind our Father is. Well may David say, "I will praise Him for His loving kindness, for his mercy endureth forever." Another writer has said, "Man may dismiss compassion from his heart. But God will never." I trust that some day I shall overcome all my weakness, not give way to every temptation to do evil that comes in my way, though with my impetuous nature it is difficult to overcome.

141In August 1883 Roberts spent time with a convert's wealthy brother, who had no response to the gospel. Roberts wrote:

Just think of it! Here is all his wealth but what does it amount to? He will soon pass away and leave it all behind. To get it, he is oppressing the poor in his wages and will in eternity stand as poor and naked as those whom now he robs. No wife sealed to him, no children he can claim, no sins atoned for or ordinances attended to which would blot them out. How poor and insignificant does this worldly wealth appear when contrasted with these heavenly blessings which men receive through the gospel! And since the earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof what an easy matter for our Father who is in Heaven to give unto us an inheritance upon it, one too that shall be an eternal one. Oh Lord, ever give unto Thy servant the desire to lay up treasures in heaven-to seek first the Kingdom of heaven and trust unto Thee for the addition of all things else.

Roberts himself traveled great distances across the mission, often on trains. On one such trip he sought solitude against the pressure of missionary conscience to use every opportunity. Feeling he was entitled to rest, he slumped and pulled his hat over his eyes. A man and a woman sat nearby. Roberts's soul voice impressed him, "If they are not brought to a knowledge of the gospel by you, now, they may never have the privilege again in this life." Rousing himself, he announced his calling and soon was deep into an animated conversation on the principles of the gospel. Before long his seat was surrounded by passengers from the entire car. By the end of the journey he had distributed nearly fifty tracts, many books, and written down several names and addresses for further contact. One man in this group took him to Batesville, arranged for the courthouse, and personally invited the leading citizens of the town to attend a meeting. Here Roberts presented his message and received a full and fair synopsis in the press. This resulted in some conversions and in friendly reverberations throughout the entire state. [^8]

142 John Bench, a Southern States missionary of that period, records that a legendary Mr. "Robert Edge" traveled alone into an area and taught all the doctrines of the Mormon elders: faith in Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism by immersion, the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. He then told his listeners that though he had the right to teach these New Testament truths he did not have the authority to officiate in the gospel ordinances. If, he promised, they would fast and pray for three days and then remain faithful the opportunity for baptism would come. When Mormon elders arrived in areas where Mr. Edge had visited, entire families and groups of people were not only prepared but eager to receive them. In one case seventeen persons immediately accepted baptism when they met the elders.

Unfortunately, President Roberts and his missionaries did not often enjoy the relative ease in spreading the gospel message which Roberts had experienced on the train. In fact, the missionaries were subjected to various modes of harassment. Roberts, for example, arranged two lectures in a courthouse in Lawrenceburg, Tennessee, but when he arrived the keys of the hall were refused to him. In a similar case he was provided the keys only to find there were no lights inside. He encouraged the missionaries who were denied halls to announce outdoor meetings and recommend that all "bring a lantern." But then other churches in the village would appoint a meeting to be held at the same hour. [^9] Small cottage meetings were held in private homes, but signs were hung on nearby poles accusing the elders of things as farfetched as "poisoning trees," [^10] and papers were circulated threatening with "fifty lashes" elders who attempted to preach anywhere. If meetings were actually in progress, groups assembled to pound on doors and windows, hallooing and cursing. The final stroke was more destructive; when all other efforts failed, the homes or halls of the Mormon people were set on fire. At least nine homes were burned to the ground during Roberts's tenure, one of them a small log house that had served as a chapel at Cane Creek, Tennessee.

143The struggle was not unfamiliar to the elders; it was part of a missionary day. Sometimes crises were met by the subduing influence of music. During one outdoor baptismal service the assembly was menaced by a group of men nearby who had threatened to break up the services and whip the elders. Elder Roberts led the Saints in hymn after hymn, hoping the sound of the music would placate the men. Eventually they drew closer, and a man without a hostile line in his face appeared from the trees, came forward fingering his hat, and asked, "Could you sing that thar hymn again?" The hymn was sung and the baptisms were performed without incident. [^11]

On another occasion Roberts was addressing an assembly when there was a clatter at the door and a man armed to the teeth stepped in and announced his intent to break up the meeting. Roberts was quoting a passage on love from the New Testament. He stepped down from the lectern and walked down the aisle, his eyes fixed intently on the eyes of the disturber. He walked slowly, quoting as he came until he was almost nose to nose with the man, who sank meekly into a chair. Roberts returned to the pulpit and continued the meeting.

But as the dangerous summer season came and animosities seemed to increase throughout the mission, President Roberts wrote to the First Presidency with a plan which they immediately approved: two elders would be sent to the "courthouses in the county seats to give them information on the historical, social, political and religious phases of the work of the Lord." [^12]

For the assignment Roberts chose Elder John H. Gibbs, from Paradise, Utah, who had served about a year and a half in the field and was then thirty-one years of age. This was the lad with whom Roberts had quarreled over a game of marbles on the deck of the S.S. John Bright while crossing the Atlantic. Gibbs had become a schoolteacher with an outstanding reputation. He had a family of several children. Roberts had traveled with him in the summer of 1883 for several weeks and had observed that Gibbs was calm when faced with threats and violence.

144In a bound copy of volume one of the Southern Star, his own missionary publication, Roberts underlined the date of many notable events in orange crayon. One such date is May 24, 1883; on this day a schoolhouse in which the elders had arranged to speak was "burned to the ground." In the margin Roberts wrote, "Gibbs offer of life." Gibbs, troubled to the marrow by the animosities that led to arson, yearned for a way to meet the opposition. [^13] On this occasion he had said soberly, "I am willing to lay down my life for the truth's sake and for the testimony of Jesus."

With Elder Gibbs, Roberts assigned William S. Berry, at forty-six a mature and seasoned missionary and a native of Tennessee. Roberts described him as "somewhat slow of speech, but endowed to a remarkable degree with good sound sense, and of a mild and genial disposition," a man who spoke and acted out of practical wisdom. [^14] With dedication not uncommon in that era, he had come on his two-year mission, leaving behind a family of fifteen children. [^15]

Though the efforts of these two men seemed somewhat effective, the official Manuscript History of the mission records that Roberts became "uneasy" in late July and early August, adding that "for this there appeared no cause." Roberts wrote several letters to President John Morgan during this time expressing his concern for the safety of the missionaries. [^16] On August 1, he recorded in his Manuscript History that a kind of lull had occurred, "a pall of gloom seemed to overshadow the mission." [^17] Elders Gibbs and Berry had just completed their "roving mission" and returned to Cane Creek from Mississippi.

That week the Salt Lake Tribune printed a yeasty diatribe against the United States government by "Bishop" West of Juab County, Utah. The statement called for the vengeance of God to fall upon the United States government and its representatives holding federal office in Utah. [^18] The national news services picked up this message. "With a few trifling exceptions this was a genuine document," Mormon defender John Nicholson wrote. The "trifling" exceptions were: there was no Bishop West; no such address was ever delivered; and no such meeting as reported was ever held in Juab County or anywhere else. In short it was a faked canard. But its effects "scattered broadcast" like wildfire throughout the nation.

Due to threats and provocations aimed at the Mormons, Judge Stark, a circuit judge, had issued a statement in northwest Tennessee that "Mormon missionaries were citizens of the U.S. and as such must be protected in their religious rights." This apparently aroused rather than pacified hostility. [^19]

145One Friday night, two days before the event, Sister Rachel Condor, at whose home tragedy was to occur, dreamt of a mob attacking her home. On Saturday she related this dream to her family and felt so strongly about it that her two sons, Martin and J. R. Hudson (a son by a previous marriage) prepared themselves to defend their home. They loaded their guns -a hunting rifle and a Kentucky rifle.

From the late 1870s to 1884, Cane Creek had been one of the more fruitful missionary areas. Twenty converts were baptized in the first months of 1884, and all except two families there were members of the Church. On the Sunday morning of August 10, three elders-William S. Berry, Henry Thompson, and John H. Gibbs-left the home of a non-Mormon friend, Mr. Thomas Garrett, some two miles above Cane Creek and began walking toward the Condor residence for Sunday services. Elder Jones remained behind to finish reading an issue of the Deseret News. [^20] Nearly an hour later, as he walked alone toward Cane Creek, Elder Jones was ambushed near a log bridge by twelve or fourteen men dressed in Ku Klux Klan garb. [^21] They bound Elder Jones and demanded to know where his companions were. Surmising that the others had gone ahead, they left one of their men to guard Jones, threatened to shoot him if he tried to escape, and headed for the Condor home. The men were under the influence of liquor and were wearing masks, fantastic hats, coats, and pantaloons. Only moments later the man guarding Jones heard shooting and screams and cried out, "They have shot the women and children! " [^22]

The home of James Condor, which had served as the meeting place of the branch after their hall was razed, was on the bluff above the little stream of Cane Creek that winds through the valley of that name. On this bright Sunday in August, the gathering began the service in the main living room by singing hymns, one of which was:

When shall we all meet again? When shall we our rest obtain? When our pilgrimage be o'er, Parting sighs be known no more.

146This holy scene of Sabbath tranquility was rudely broken up by the mob of masked men who had captured Elder Jones, rushing from the woods to the Condor residence. At the gate, part of them seized Brother James Condor, owner of the premises, and held him fast, while the rest ran on to the house. Although Brother Condor found himself helpless in the hands of his captors, his first and only thought seemed to be for the safety of the Elders. He shouted to his two sons, who were out in the orchard, to get their guns. They both started for the house-Martin Condor (19) reaching the back door just as the leader of the mob entered the front door, crossed the room and was taking down a shot gun suspended on hooks above the back door. [^23] A struggle to get possession of the gun took place between this man and Martin Condor, when the mobber drew a pistol and snapped it at his antagonist, but it failed to go off; it made young Condor start back, however, and then the mobber turned and shot Eider Gibbs with the shot gun, the shot taking effect under the arm. Elder Gibbs clutched the wound and sank by the side of a bed, a dead man

While this was transpiring, a gun was presented at Elder Thompson, but Elder Berry seized it with both hands and held it fast. This cleared the way for Elder Thompson, who ran out the back door, and escaped to the woods. As he was leaving the house, he saw two guns presented at Elder Berry, who bowed his head and received the shots about at the waist, and fell to the floor, dying without a struggle or a groan. As soon as Elder Gibbs fell, Martin Condor sprang again upon the man who shot him, but as he did so, was shot by other parties, and the one he attacked stepped out of the front door.

While these things were occurring J. R. Hudson, half-brother to Martin Condor, had climbed into the loft after his gun. He came down just as the man who shot Elder Gibbs stepped out of the house. Two men grappled him, but he threw them off sufficiently to shoot the man who had first entered the house and who had proved to be David Hinson. [^24] As he [Hinson] fell, some one outside said, "I'll have revenge," and shot [J. R.] Hudson, who died an hour later. After Hudson was shot, [^25] the mobbers came up to the window and fired a volley through it, the shots entering the body of Elder Berry and wounding Sister Condor in the hip. [^26] The mob now retired, taking the body of Hinson with them. [^27]

147When the Sabbath had ended, a few local officers assisted James Condor in procuring "plain board coffins," and buried in a nearby plot his two sons and the two elders.

At mission headquarters in Chattanooga, late Monday afternoon, Roberts was writing an article for the Juvenile Instructor based on the story of a mother's influence on a missionary. That night

the article finished and made ready for mailing, I prepared for retirement and extinguished the lamp. To my astonishment there was no diminution of light in the room. Every object was as vividly seen as before the lamp was extinguished. This of course was something of a mystery to me and instead of immediately retiring I walked about the room trying to account for the strange phenomenon. I thought perhaps it was an unusual afterglow of the lamplight and with the thought of correcting my sight I threw myself upon the bed face down in the pillow hoping in this way to exclude the light until my eyes became properly adjusted. After a time on raising my head I still found the light undiminished. I lay marveling at it for some hours, nearly through the night, in fact. But with the breaking of day I fell into a restless sleep and when I awoke the sunshine was brightly slanting in the room from the east. [^28]

Four decades later (in 1927) at the funeral services of the widow of Elder Gibbs, Roberts said he felt that this light, a light that would not yield to darkness, was somehow an effort of Elder John F. Gibbs to communicate with him or to prepare him for the news that would come rather abruptly:

It was customary for me to breakfast at a Hotel restaurant near the office and sleeping quarters. [^29] As I entered the foyer of the Hotel all eyes seemed intent upon me but no one spoke. When the morning paper was brought to me I was astonished to see in glaring headlines an account of the Mormon elders being massacred on Cane Creek in Lewis County. [^30] It was too horrible to believe. Neglecting breakfast I returned to headquarters that I might ask in prayer if this terrible thing were true. While on my knees in the office of the Mission, engaged in prayer, the voice which so frequently spoke to me in times of crisis, bade me return to the Hotel where I would receive a message. At the Hotel I found a telegram from Jonathan Golden Kimball, the secretary, confirming the newspaper account of the killing of the elders and the Condor boys. [^31]

The earliest newspaper account, a front-page story, was in the Nashville Banner on Tuesday, August 12, 1884; the headlines read:

MURDER OF MORMONS Four Killed in Lewis County by Masked Men One of the Mob Shot and Another Man Hurt

Calling it "one of the most horrible butcheries ever enacted in this state," the column named Martin Condor and John R. Hudson as victims and added that the mob "opened fire on the Mormon elders, two of whom were killed outright," but no missionary names were given. There were several missionaries in the area, so Roberts didn't know exactly who had been killed until he received J. Golden Kimball's telegram. It must have been a painful irony that his two appointed "peacemakers" were the ones who had been shot down.

President Roberts telegraphed President John Morgan and then arranged for steel coffins in order to render "the last grain of comfort to the families" [^32] by returning the bodies home for burial. The pall of helplessness weighed upon his responsible shoulders: "I did not desert them. I took my risk with them to render them service, dead though they were." [^33] Boarding the first train to Nashville, Tennessee, in order to see the governor and acquire state sanction for his plan to recover the bodies, Roberts heard his "familiar voice" impressing him: "you will go to secure those bodies and all will be well with you. But you must go." On the strength of that, on August 14 he sent a telegram to President Morgan, "Let the friends be assured, we shall get the bodies." [^34]

149In Nashville, Roberts found that Governor Bates was campaigning outside the city and his lieutenant governor disclaimed authority. Roberts was able however to obtain a letter from the adjutant general addressed to the sheriff which said it would "not be against the law" to open the graves. [^35] On this half-approval, with the friendship of the Lewis County sheriff, John Carroll, and assisted by Sister Condor's brother, Roberts proceeded. While Roberts was in Nashville, Kimball's journal records, "reporters rushed in from all sides and would intreat Roberts, and actually beg, that he would give them the facts of the case, but he preferred writing them out in full." He did however give an interview to the Banner and asked that they publish the Articles of Faith. This they did. [^36]

In Columbia, Tennessee, Roberts located Elder Kimball and the surviving elders. The owner of their "fourth-rate rooming house" was much agitated at threats of a mob coming to drag the elders from their rooms, so Roberts moved them to Bethel House, the city's best hotel. He interviewed each one carefully on the details of the shooting, and while they slept he wrote to Church authorities, giving a full account of the murders. [^37] Next morning at a livery stable President Roberts procured a horse and buggy to travel to Shady Grove. The anxious stable owner tried to dissuade him:

With deep emotion he took my shoulder and gently shook me saying, Notwithstanding your pretense to send others after those bodies I know it is your intention to go yourself. And now, Mr. Roberts, let me tell you, you are a young man, you have only one life and if you go into that Kane Creek section you will be killed. Dave Hinson, the leader of the mob down there, has a large number of friends and a lot of political pull. It will go hard for you if his following are aware that you are in their midst. Let me beg you, do not go! They will kill you. [^38]

Elder Kimball also pleaded for Roberts to abandon his plan, offering to go himself. President Roberts finally remonstrated: "I know! And if you are in doubt about it go and ask our Father." Elder Kimball made several trips into a cornfield to pray without receiving a confirming impression. Roberts finally prevailed by pointing out that Elder Kimball's long, lean, greyhound figure would make effective disguise impossible." [^39] And anyway, Kimball was still weak from a bout with malaria.

150Roberts disguised himself by shaving his beard and mustache, dressing in a suit of mismatched old clothing, wearing a slouched hat and rough cowhide boots, and rubbing soot grease from the smokehouse walls over his face. He was a hard-looking sight. No one recognized him, not even a young friend, Robert Coleman, whom he asked: "Robert, I am going to Kane Creek with two teams to secure the bodies of the elders who have been murdered. Brothers Church and Harlow have consented to take one wagon. Will you go with me and drive the other wagon?" "Why yes, Mr. Roberts, I'll go anywhere with you, Sir!" The youth was not a member of the Church. "This direct answer, this symbol of trust and fidelity," Roberts later wrote, "shook me with emotion." [^40]

Somehow Roberts's efforts to obtain state and legal protection had come to the attention of the mob forces. They had blockaded and were patrolling every road into the county west and south.

By separate roundabout journey Roberts and Coleman first picked up the coffins some distance from Shady Grove; the two wagons reached the home of Mr. Garrett, two miles away from Cane Creek. [^41] Roberts handed Garrett a letter signed by "B. H. Roberts," authorizing him to take the bodies, and Garrett replied, without recognizing him: "Well, I will do all I can to help you. What can I do?" Roberts asked that he walk with him ahead of the teams down the road to the Condor residence. Keeping up a Southern drawl Roberts asked Garrett many questions about the circumstances of the shooting and the location of the graves. Finally at a secluded part of the road-"a dip in the road where the underbrush and trees were dense" - Roberts dropped his accent and said, "Mr. Garrett you don't seem to know me." Garrett stared hard then raised his hands saying, with an oath, "Are you here?" [^42] With the joy of recognition came new eagerness to give aid. As they approached the graves where, by now, there were quite a number of people gathered, Garrett whispered, "Some who did the shooting are here." A daughter recalls Roberts saying that he was close enough to overhear one man say, "Do you believe that is Roberts?" The other replied with an oath: "No. He wouldn't dare come here."

151To cover the odor as the coffins were opened Mr. Garrett wrapped some tobacco in a rag and kept it burning. Several times, even at that, Roberts had to thrust his head into a bucket of water to prevent a faint. The bodies were wrapped in clean white sheets provided by the Church family and placed in the coffins, and putty or oil paste was spread over the lower flange of the caskets and the covers carefully sealed by securing small bolts at every inch. All this took until twilight. By then, an uneasiness among bystanders increased Roberts's anxiety that there would be legal protest. But without a hitch the carriages were driven back to Garrett's home, and at that moment the physician who had given the original certificate of burial, after a coroner's inquest, arrived and willingly signed a certificate of release.

To his family Roberts later confided that one of the saddest moments of his life came as they left the gravesides. Aware of Mrs. Condor, the bereaved mother, he longed to throw off his disguise and administer comfort to her and the other Saints. But that was impossible.

At Mr. Garrett's home the wagons and coffins were secured in the barn. At the supper table Mr. Garrett said, "Elder Roberts, would you please say grace?" and his daughter burst out: "I knew it, I knew it from the time he came to our gate. I knew it was Elder Roberts." After dinner, with Mr. Garrett standing guard, Roberts fell into bed for the first time in three days and nights.

The caskets were transported to the railroad station without incident and arrived in the West where memorial services were held. Of the mobs reportedly set to intercept the coffins and prevent their removal from the county Roberts wrote, "if so, the Lord delivered us from their hands." [^43]

152Back in Nashville, looking very respectable in a black suit, Roberts sought publicity for the breach of civil liberties. He showed a Nashville American reporter an unsigned letter from Chattanooga which threatened: "Leave the state in twenty-four hours. If you do not you will certainly go the way the rest of the Mormon elders are going." In reply, Roberts cited the Constitution, reiterated his rights, and said "with a tone and air of determination," "I shall demand them and I mean to maintain them." He told the reporter that he had asked a prominent citizen of Cane Creek, Mr. B. Hemsley, "What were these men killed for?" Mr. Hemsley replied: "God only knows. I don't." But press coverage was weak. One Judge Bateman reacted to Roberts's statement in the Chattanooga Times: a grand jury, he said, would "aid any person who desires to prosecute the mob who killed the Mormon Elders, Gibbs and Berry, and also John Hudson and Martin Condor." But he added: "The practice of killing men for attempting to introduce a new religion in a country that does not want it can never be suppressed by civil tribunals. The anti-Mormon feeling is still strong." [^44] Certainly his statement did little to diminish that feeling. Another correspondent justified the murders on the ground that the Mormons were "preaching to the poor and ignorant," adding that there had been several Mormon converts from this class "which is very obnoxious to an enlightened and virtuous people." Roberts interpreted this to mean that Christ was not enlightened or virtuous enough to despise the poor.

The Utah press exposed as slanderous the accusation that Gibbs and Berry had seduced women and disrupted families. In a similar rationale of prejudice, the press charged that the elders had been teaching polygamy. Roberts wrote rebuttals, and some were published. [^45] On the other hand, the New York World called the massacre a "burning disgrace" and printed an editorial in which it was asserted that "the whole affair read like an emeute in the twelfth century." The New York Post traced the attack to legislators in Washington who were pumping out "irrational anti-polygamy legislation." The New York Dial of August 13 pleaded for immediate arrest and punishment of the perpetrators. Commentary in the British press was of similar tone. [^46] Roberts himself placed the major responsibility not on "dull backwoodsmen" in Tennessee, but on those who "fulminated the evil lie" in Salt Lake City and spread it broadcast throughout the nation. [^47]

During the following days, President Roberts petitioned the governor of Tennessee to offer a reward for the arrest of the murderers. All the elders of that region went before a justice of the peace to sign and file the petition sent to the governor's office. The governor eventually responded by offering a reward of one thousand dollars for the murderer of David Hinson, the mob leader. [^48]

153After these tragedies, Elder Kimball wrote letters of caution and encouragement to the missionaries. A telegram came from Church headquarters counseling that neither Roberts nor Elder Kimball leave the mission; Elder Willis E. Robinson was assigned to accompany the coffins to the West.

These deaths did not diminish ill feeling; violence continued rife in the South, especially in Tennessee, Georgia and Mississippi. Eiders were dragged from their lodgings at night, and tied to trees ("they were driving us like wild animals" [^49] ); "driven into the woods by hounds and kept in the trees all night"; [^50] beaten with hickory rods and leather straps. Some were harassed and threatened until their nerves shattered and they had to be sent home. Members and even friends of the Church were likewise hounded. Thomas Garrett, not a Church member but a loyal aide, afraid to return to his own home, had to hide out in the woods for nearly a week, after which he abruptly moved his family to Illinois. Before the end of August, Uncle "Robbins" Church lapsed "nearly deranged" into delirious reenactment of the scenes of the tragedy and soon died. It was a disheartening grief to Roberts and his elders. Uncle Robbins's open door and bounteous table had been an anchor of refuge to the eiders for nearly forty years. He had often lent them horses and had been fearless in his support of the missionaries in spite of threats of mob reprisal.

154In the face of all this Roberts instructed his missionaries to "stand firm." Elders in the dangerous Baird's Mills area were counseled to "arm themselves with shotgun, stay with staunch friends, warn mobbers that they would defend themselves and if this were disregarded to use the shotgun in defense." President John Morgan was sent a copy of a letter which circulated throughout the mission instructing that "Mormon ministers did not propose to yield, without resistance, to mob tactics." President Morgan replied that the eiders should not be impulsive in resisting the mobs and reported that the Brethren in Salt Lake were considering discontinuing missionary work in the South. Since President Morgan and President Roberts advocated perpetuating the mission, both could be held responsible if there were further deaths. Roberts replied that in his judgment "every Elder in the South was exposed to extreme danger"; if the presiding Brethren were considering discontinuance he "felt this fact should be reported to all the Elders."

I said I knew my own life was in danger and that I wanted no one to feel responsible for it if I were taken. But I added I was unwilling to assume responsibility for any other Elder's life. I asked that this report and request be forwarded to President John Taylor. [^51]

President Taylor immediately replied: "Exercise due care, to protect the lives of the Elders. But there is to be no abandonment of missionary labors in the South." The elders were to obey the injunction of Christ, "if they persecute you in one city, flee unto another." It was all the more impressive to Roberts that, five years after the deaths in Tennessee, when conditions were still extremely dangerous, President Taylor called and sent his own son into that mission. [^52]

The straitened times brought men to spiritual maturity. As an example, Elder James T. Hammond, twenty years Roberts's senior, admired the "character and integrity" of his mission president and considered it a high privilege to labor with him. [^53]

Though he wrote, "What deep wound ever healed without a scar?" Roberts felt no craving for retribution upon perpetrators of violence against missionaries and members. For instance, though the early Saints had been violated and persecuted by Missourians, after recounting the anguish suffered by residents of Jackson County, Missouri, and other nearby counties during the Civil War, Roberts would write, "the heart sickens at such recitals as these." [^54] There was "no spirit of gloating exultation" [^55] over the severe troubles that came to those who had earlier persecuted the Mormons there.

155B. H. Roberts found recounting the Tennessee trauma unpleasant, though throughout the rest of his life, because of its drama, it was a matter of frequent inquiry. He preferred to diminish or leave out his own role: In response to such a request, as editor of the Improvement Era in 1898 he chose to print instead an unpublished letter of Elder Willis E. Robinson who accompanied the bodies home; [^56] in A Comprehensive History of the Church he records the incident but refers to an unnamed "assistant mission president" only. [^57] Howard R. Driggs once persuaded him to dress in hobo clothes and relate his Tennessee adventures to a large gathering of youth in Pleasant Grove, Utah; they were spellbound. But he could only endure the narrative for a short while; then he threw off his "disguise" and bore an incandescent testimony of the meaning of dedication to Christ. Such a shift indicates his maturity: it was not fitting to heap scorn upon the opponents of Christ, but more appropriate to honor those who endured.

On September 1, Roberts received a heartening letter from President John Morgan requesting that he attend a stake conference at Manassa, Colorado, to meet President Joseph F. Smith of the First Presidency, Elder Erastus Snow of the Council of the Twelve, and President Morgan. He was then to accompany them during a series of meetings in nearby settlements. One effect of the trip was to help him recover from the tensions of battle fatigue; it was also to give him firsthand knowledge of emigration procedures.

Reunion with these brethren at Sanford, Colorado, was a memorable moment in his life; as he stepped off the train President Joseph F. Smith gave him "an overwhelming embrace" and a kiss, a kiss he later said, "I cherish most, my love of women to the contrary notwithstanding."

In Roberts's description of John Taylor's return home from "untiring zeal abroad" in 1852 there is an echo of his own experience at this meeting in 1884:

How sweet to the ear! how joyous to the soul! how gratifying to the heart is that grandest of all salutations-"Well done thou good and faithful servant!" and when spoken by those holding the holy priesthood, backed by the warm grasp of the hand, and confirmed by the countenance lit up with unfeigned brotherly love, it certainly is a foretaste of the joy that shall fill the hearts of the faithful who hear the same salutation from the Master, who will add: "Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord!' [^58]

Roberts had come a second time to the mission field with "a deep anxiety if not a premonition" that he might be called "to lay down my life while serving as a missionary." In sober gratitude that his life had thus far been spared, he remembered the covenant he had made shortly before leaving home:

156In prayer I had several times expressed to God my desire to be able to say at the throne of the Almighty that I had obeyed every law of Christ as it was revealed. And I had promised that if my life were preserved I would obey this law [plural marriage].

This promise came again to mind as he observed Elizabeth Snow, the wife of Erastus Snow, who was "beyond the heyday of youth" (she was in her sixties). Roberts greatly admired Erastus Snow, and in observing Elizabeth he noted:

The gallant attitude that shone in her husband seemed to me unspeakably beautiful and transcended the loving solicitude I had ever witnessed by a husband for his wife. It must have been an exhilarating and deeply satisfying thing to Sister Snow. As I watched them, and aware that these thoughtful attentions to her comfort and welfare, came to a woman who was in the autumn of life, I felt a profound awe and respect for the institution of plural marriage. [^59]

Throughout his life, in spite of other boyhood transgressions, he had been morally clean. But he had seen, he said, enough of the world to well understand these lines from Burns:

The sacred low o' well-placed love Luxuriantly indulge it, But never tempt the illicit rove Though naething would divulge it. I waive the quantum o' the sin, The hazard of concealing. But, och! it hardens a' within, And petrifies the feeling. [^60]

He realized in short that illicit love turns to ashes. Roberts saw in Erastus and Elizabeth Snow "an exalted state of mind, full of kindness, a beautiful appreciation and tenderest emotions and care at every turn. Not brutality but gentleness, not perversion but love unfeigned, not corruption, but purification and exaltation." "If such effects as now radiated in him were a symbol of the nature of plural marriage, it stood, for me, completely vindicated."

157But he well knew that the principle of plural marriage is a family matter-the right of building a second family requiring the consent and love of the first-and that whatever else is involved is a matter of divine inspiration. As Erastus Snow himself taught, "Never take unto yourself a wife unless directed by the Spirit of the Lord."

Three weeks after Roberts returned to the Rocky Mountains he had an interview with President John Taylor and afterwards "opened up the whole subject" of plural marriage with his wife, Louisa. They prayed together and decided he should propose to Celia Dibble, the daughter of Philo Dibble, who had been critically wounded by mob violence in Jackson County, Missouri. She had been one of Roberts's students during his brief teaching career in Centerville and Bountiful; her whole life had prepared her for "consecrated motherhood." She was the oldest of five children, seven years younger than B. H. Roberts. She had a fine mind and was a "splendid reader," and was "shy, reserved, temperate, kindly, highly cultured," with a self-sacrificing spirit and a great deal of patience.

The next Sabbath, Roberts walked around the Dibble home several times before he knocked at the door. Louisa had earlier prepared Celia mentally, but even at that Roberts's proposal was abrupt: seated with Celia and her parents he came immediately to the point. It was just before sacrament meeting: "My wife and I desire to begin a second family. If you become my wife there will be much hardship for I am constantly on call as a missionary. Will you be my wife?" Celia consented, and the marriage was performed in the Endowment House on October 2, 1884. The couple returned to Centerville, Celia to her parents' home and Roberts to his own. Then, without consummating the marriage, he left to resume his duties in the Southern States Mission.

All this had happened, Roberts felt, according to a divine script: the New Testament teaches that until one is willing to lay down his life for Christ, in the image of Christlike love, he is not fully worthy to raise up children unto the Lord. Roberts wrote Celia honest, emotional letters from the mission field, and their relationship bloomed.

158After October conference in 1884 Roberts visited with John Morgan, discussing the situation in the South, the number of missionaries there (seventy-six), and strategies for distributing tracts. He was given fifty dollars to pay travel expenses back to the South and also two hundred dollars in tithing orders from Bishop Cheney to assist his family. On October 15 he spent a day in Bountiful with his mother. That evening at about four o'clock he bade his family good-bye again, and on October 16 traveled with John Morgan through Ogden with a number of the Saints and on to Pueblo, Colorado. He then went on to Kansas City and St. Louis, arriving in Chattanooga on October 24 at 8:30 A.M., where the elders gave him a royal welcome. Aware of what they were going through, Roberts says they "would be glad to see even a dog from home."

He found many of the elders discouraged and expecting the mission to be discontinued or abandoned because of the "tragedy on Cane Creek" and other persecutions. (Elder Joseph B. Eldridge had in late October been confronted with five armed and masked men who gave him ten days to leave on penalty of death.)

J. Golden Kimball was by now largely recovered from malaria but full of anxiety for the mission. As they walked the streets in Chattanooga they heard threatening remarks and the snapping of pistols. Kimball said: "I never was afraid of a mob in the Southern states when I had the Spirit of God. But I was scared pretty nearly to death after the Spirit left." [^61] On November 1, 1884, Roberts records: "I have felt sad all day long and felt like I wanted to burst into tears though just what the matter is I can't say. Oh dear, what strange beings we mortals are!"

As the Spirit left, so did many of the Saints. Preparations were made for beleaguered members of the Church to move from the South into communities in western Colorado and Utah. On November 5 Roberts received some fifteen thousand dollars to assist in emigrating the Saints from Cane Creek and other danger zones. "My heart was in my mouth nearly all morning." "I felt as if I had passed through the wars." [^62]

159Roberts had the responsibility to arrange for "a Mormon train" with the Santa Fe Railroad. (The first company was so large it occupied ten passenger cars.) Cincinnati was a point of embarkation and many arrived there destitute (on foot or in makeshift cart) with insufficient money, clothing and food. There were many children in the company, and they created special problems of care and supervision. All of the luggage, as well as arrangements for the disposal of abandoned homes, properties and goods, ended up as Roberts's worry. His organizational skills were tested to the limit. He soon developed an orderly plan and "instruction procedures." But each arrival and transfer was a major operation. [^63]

Over some lengths of the journey the passengers had to be taken from passenger cars and boarded on freight cars, and then towed by small steamers for long water distances. President Roberts put each car in charge of one reliable "anchor man." At transfer points he arranged for the cars to empty in opposite directions from the center; the men and larger boys then reentered to gather up the baggage and place it in the hands of its owners. Then the entire company marched single file to waiting rooms in anticipation of the next part of the journey.

The railroad contractor, Mr. Lippincott, was appointed by the railroad as overseer of the first journey; but after watching President Roberts's systematic procedures, he committed all the arrangements to him. At St. Louis, when passenger agents surrounded the Mormons, Lippincott shouted: "Leave these Mormon emigrants alone. They are in the charge of a young man who knows more about travel arrangements than you will ever know. Stand by and see how he manages it." Many spectators jeered at the women; only by placing guards every few steps could Roberts insulate the emigrants from jostling and insults. "This making scorn and pointing of fingers put me in mind of the vision of Lehi," he wrote in his journal. [^64]

Under such arrangements Roberts conducted one emigration in the spring, another in the fall, and another in the winter, when cold weather created special difficulties.

160On November 27, 1884, Roberts arrived in Salt Lake at 4:00 P.M., stayed overnight at the home of President John Morgan, to whom he reported all his labors and who was "satisfied with all I had done." After a brief visit home he returned once again to the rigors of the mission field and emigration.

Notes

Chapter 7

1 BNG, p. 128.

2 From a journal of B. H. Roberts, 2 April 1883.

3 Conference Report, October 1933, p. 43; see also Claude Richards, J. Golden Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966). p. 385.

4 See Conference Report. October 1926, p. 127. This discourse was a polished version of one Roberts gave twice in meetings in Davis Stake and was so remarkable that it was included in the Journal of Discourses (25:130-143), which usually was reserved for the sermons of General Authorities.

5 Contributor 6 (June 1885): 328.

6 Elder Joseph Standing had been shot and killed by an angry mob at Varnal Station. Georgia, in July 1879. five years earlier. Missionary work in that area was not revived for nearly a century. President David O. McKay dedicated a monument there 3 May 1952.

7 Conference Report, October 1933.

8 Contributor 7 (May 1886): 305.

9 Autobiography of Andrew M. Israelson (Salt Lake City, 1938): see also Contributor, 6:392ff.

10 Historical Record of Southern States Mission, Church Archives, p. 85.

11 Roberts more than once spoke to groups composed of or interrupted by men with "arms in their hands and murder in their hearts, and under the blessing of God saw them subdued." B. H. Roberts to Charles W. Nibley, 11 June 1908.

12 Historical Record of Southern States Mission, p. 58.

13 See Deseret News, 10 May 1922.

14 CHC, 6:96.

15 William S. Berry's immediate family had already sacrificed in their efforts to serve the Lord. Two of his brothers had been murdered by Indians: his mother was in her eighty-first year.

16 Historical Record of Southern States Mission. p. 65.

17 Deseret News. 14 August 1884. Gibbs and Berry had distributed great quantites of excerpts from speeches of Southern senators in behalf of the character and the religious freedom of the Mormon people. These were notably Senators Morgan of Alabama, Call of Florida, DeLamar of Mississippi, Pendleton of Ohio, and West of Missouri. John T. Caine, the Utah territorial delegate, had sent "large quantities" of these pamphlets to Chattanooga.

18 The "Bishop West" document and comments of the antagonistic press are dealt with in CHC, 6:86-89.

19 The missionaries believed that one of the most active agitators was a Parson Vandever, a Baptist preacher from Hohenwald, Lewis County. He devoted much energy to the wide circulation of the "red hot address," but none to the published refutation mailed him by Elder Gibbs and Elder Jones. See letter of Elder Jones cited in John Nicholsoh's Salt Lake Theater Address. "The Utah Conspiracy," 22 September 1884. A copy of this address is in the Huntington Library, San Marino, California.

20 The recollections of Elder Jones are in the Millennial Star 46 (6 October 1884): 629.

21 This number is the estimate given by Roberts to the press on 15 August 1884, but rumor had it that some forty men started out. See Deseret Evening News. 14 August 1884.

22 See Nashville American, 15 August 1884. See also the petition to Governor Bates signed by Roberts, Kimball, Jones, Thompson, and Robinson; the Manuscript History of the Southern States Mission, 20 August 1884; and the Contributor 6 (June 1885): 329-30.

23 Roberts's earlier account says it was a Kentucky rifle hanging on deer antlers over the fireplace.

24 David Hinson (according to I. S. Westbrook, a native of the area who was a convert to the Church) was a local preacher about age thirty, of Methodist persuasion, and a prominent citizen of Hickman County. His home was some seven miles from the Condor farm. See Deseret News, 13 August 1884 and 16 August 1884.

25 The Hudson sons (Martin, about nineteen, and J. Riley, about twenty-four) were out in the orchard. "When Brother lames Condor called for them to get their guns, they saw their father already in the hands of desperate men, and the people running in every direction. Had they been disposed, they could easily have saved their own lives, by flight, or non-interference; but they appeared only to be anxious for the safety of the Elders . .. they attacked the mob, fighting like lions in defense of the brethren, with the result already recorded." See Contributor 6 (October 1884): 21.

26 In his official account Roberts adds that the wound suffered by Mother Condor "rendered her a cripple for life." CHC, 6:89.

27 These paragraphs are excerpted from the narrative written nearly a year later based on all Roberts could learn from witnesses. It is therefore preferable to the outline he dictated in 1933. See Contributor 6 (October 1884): 18-19.

28 BN, pp. 271-72.

29 This was the Florentine Hotel in the heart of Chattanooga.

30 He read the account of the massacre in the Nashville Banner.

31 BN, p. 213. Kimball received word of the attack from Elder Jones, who had escaped his guard (who willingly released him) and who had traveled on foot to Shady Grove on Monday morning. (See Deseret Everting News, 10 August 1884.) On Tuesday morning they set out on horseback, anxious about the other elders. Ten miles away they met Elder Thompson with Mr. Garrett, who confirmed their worst fears. Thompson had spent two nights hiding in the woods and had been without food or water for thirty-six hours. (See Deseret Evening News, 15 August 1884.) Kimball then dispatched the telegram to Roberts. (See Diary of J. Golden Kimball, entries for these dates, Church Archives.)

32 This phrase is John Nicholson's, whose speech on the Tennessee affair, "The Utah Conspiracy," was given to a huge gathering in the Salt Lake Theater.

33 Conference Report, October 1929, p. 90.

34 See Nicholson, "The Utah Conspiracy."

35 Deseret News, 5 August 1884.

36 J. Golden Kimball Diary, 14 August 1884.

37 Meantime there was "a case of Judah helping Ephraim" (see the Manuscript History, 25 August 1884). Roberts wrote Church headquarters requesting funds, but couldn't await reply. He sent J. Golden Kimball to Mr. Bernard Moses, a Jewish clothier in Chattanooga. Elder Kimball explained the crisis and asked for money to buy steel caskets. Mr. Moses not only paid the undertaker for caskets, but also withdrew several hundred dollars for Roberts and lent it without a note. Roberts later wrote to Bernard Moses of that generous gesture, "Your hand found mine then, and in your grip was benediction." (See inscription in CHC, vol. 3, presented to Bernard Moses in December 1931.) Fifteen years later Moses came to Roberts's support in the congressional battle, visiting Roberts in Washington and making a statement in his behalf to the press. "He thinks as little of persecution now as he did then," Roberts said. (See Salt Lake Herald, 9 December 1899.) This friendship was a thread in Roberts's lasting interest in and love for the Jewish people.

38 Conference Report, October 1933, p. 43.

39 Richards, J. Golden Kimball, pp. 20-41.

40 These details and those that follow on this experience are from BN. Accounts differ on the identity and age of the boy who aided Roberts, and whether he was named Rufus or Robert. Roberts's daughter Georgia traced the family; the boy was Robert Alexander Coleman, who later joined the Church. Temple work was performed for his parents, Rufus, St., and Elizabeth Hoover Coleman, and they were sealed to each other and had twelve children sealed to them. Born 30 July 1863, Robert Coleman at the time of the Cane Creek murders was not eighteen as Roberts recalled but twenty-one.

41 Thomas Garrett befriended the Mormon missionaries and had often armed himself and ridden with them to provide protection; so also had the two sons of Mrs. Condor. (Deseret News, 16 August 1884.)

42 In a family scrapbook it is recorded that to enhance his disguise Roberts "assumed a foreign dialect," put a corncob pipe in his mouth, and as he approached the burial place with Garrett, he chewed some tobacco and let the juice stain both sides of his lips and run down his chin. A photo of Roberts in his tramp disguise was taken for his family in Nashville at a tintype photo gallery. Later, quite against his desire, it was reproduced nationwide.

43 Contributor 6 (October 1884): 23.

44 Chattanooga Times, 19 August 1884; see also Journal History, 19 August 1884.

45 See his own narrative, "The Tennessee Massacre," Contributor 6 (October 1884): 20.

46 See for example the column of Hugh Walpole of the University of Cambridge, reprinted in Deseret News, 19 August 1884.

47 Today a highway marker says, "The fight was caused primarily because of local opposition to the practice of plural marriage by the Mormon Church." (Marker 3F37, "Tennessee Mormon Massacre.")

48 J. Golden Kimball Diary, 18 August 1884. "Generous soul," he wrote of the governor.

49 J. Golden Kimball Diary.

50 This refers to an incident in Alabama reported three years later in a Roberts editorial. Millennial Star 49 (19 December 1887): 808.

51 BN, p. 301.

52 Many mothers of young Mormon missionaries felt as did the wife of Lorenzo Snow: "I just wouldn't let a boy of mine go on a mission in the South." Her son Edward replied: "Oh yes you would. If I were called tomorrow I would go." Within a week he was called, and he went to the Southern States, serving faithfully and safely. See Autobiography of Edward Snow, BYU Special Collections, p. 20.

53 See Tanner, John Riggs Murdock, p. 168.

54 CHC, 1:551.

55 CHC, 1:559.

56 There are eight different accounts in which Roberts had some hand. In order of composition they are: newspaper fragments in the Nashville Banner; the printed petition to Governor Bates; the Manuscript History of the Southern States Mission; the Southern Star, 1:201-202, 209-210, 217-18, 225-26, 233-34; the Millennial Star, vol. 46; the Contributor, 6:83-100; accounts in ,4 Comprehensive History of The Church; and the memoirs of the Biographical Notes, dictated in 1933. The Deseret Evening News republished the story at the time of Roberts's death, 28 September 1933.

57 CHC, 6:93.

58 B.H. Roberts, The Life of John Taylor (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1963), p. 241.

59 BN, pp. 305-306.

60 Roberts Burns, "Epistle to a Young Friend."

61 See Conference Report, October 1910, p. 53.

62 From a journal of B. H. Roberts, 5 November 1884.

63 BN, pp. 307-13.

64 From a journal of B. H. Roberts, 1884, p. 56.

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
[^23] 23 Mrs. William Reed to Ann Roberts.
[^24] 24 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^25] 25 Late in their lives, on 3 May 1928, B. H. and Annie Brynie, a half-sister, and Mary arranged for the temple sealing of Ann Everington and Benjamin Roberts and all of the children including the twins and baby Thomas. See BHR Temple Book.
[^26] 26 Roberts kept one sample of his father's handwriting from the original wrapping of the photo given his mother. It is preserved in the family collection.
[^27] 27 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 1 September 1883, Roberts Family Collection.
[^28] 28 Research has failed to establish where and when Ben died. The marriage date is 15 June 1848 (he was twenty-two) in Poplar, Middlesex, England; from the Book of Remembrance of Haven R. Day.
[^29] 29 B. H. Roberts to Ann Everington, 21 April 1880, Roberts Family Collection.
[^30] 30 Mrs. Charles H. Wilcox recorded these impressions from a conversation with B.H. Roberts at his home prior to his call to the Eastern States.
[^31] 31 BN, p. 10.
[^32] 32 See Juvenile Instructor 49 (February 1914): 85.
[^33] 33 Fifty years later, as chairman of "Vocations and Industry" in the youth program of the Church, he wrote, "We shall take the ground that no vocation of honest industry need be ignoble or debasing in its effects, but by properly correlating it with the general welfare of human life can be in effect both honorable and glorious." Improvement Era 15 (October 1912): 1083.
[^34] 34 Liahona 12 (20 October 1914): 364.
[^35] 35. Salt Lake Herald, 8 January 1899.
[^36] 36. So Roberts later told his children.
[^37] 37. BNG, p. 8.
[^38] 38 See History of Utah, 4:689.
[^39] 39 In a notebook under "Roberts, B. H." is this handwritten note: "Warrington-Town of, my birth place. Warrington, at the head of tide water on the Mersey River. It was a station of Romans (Veraterium) in the time of Agricola - (69-84 A.D.) and many Roman relics have been found in the neighborhood."
[^40] 40 Beniamin's father's brother.
[^41] 41 N. B. Lundwall, Roberts's secretary for twelve years, recalls him saying this incident occurred when he was seven.
[^42] 42 BNG, p. 16. Roberts spoke in later years of this spiritual impression (which one tradition says was repeated three times) as evidence that "the promptings of the Spirit of God" can come early - several years, in his case, before his official baptism and confirmation in 1867.
[^43] 43 The word gomin - rather than urchha - was endeared to Roberts through the Victor Hugo story of Gayroche who, in the midst of battle, went along the pavement gathering unfired cartridges from the corpses of fallen men, gaining strength at each step.
[^44] 44 Memoirs, p. 4.
[^45] 45 BN, p. 18a.
[^46] 46 Apparently Tovey's periodic alienations from the LDS Church did not interfere with his desire to preach.
[^47] 47 This was republished by Harvard University Press in 1962. The book was originally issued in fifteen separately stitched parts from July 1854 to September 1855.
[^48] 48 BN, p. 20.
[^49] 49 BN, p. 56.
[^50] 50 Memoirs. Crossing the plains, mules would somehow detect the nearby presence of Indians and bellow-often soon enough to enable the emigrants to take crucial precautions (see Roberts's chapter on the exodus in CHC, 3:170).
[^51] 51 "Diary of William Driver," New Mexico Historical Review (January 1943): 57.
[^52] 52 Northwest Nebraska News (Crawford, Nebraska), located in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University.
[^53] 53 See Jenson's Church Chronology.
[^54] 54 See Eliza R. Snow, "A Sketch of My Life: 1804-1887," Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley.
[^55] 55 CHC, 3:304.
[^56] 56 BNG, pp. 32-33. Here, sixty years later, he addressed five thousand Boy Scouts. "On the occasion of an historic visit," where a great gathering brought to mind this early visit of Harry's boyhood, and now "an old and broken man," he remembered and told the story of his little adventure in passing the Sweetwater Ford.
[^57] 57 BNG, p. 33
[^58] 58 Memoirs, p. 4.
[^59] 59 J.M. Tanner, Biographical Sketch of John Riggs Murdock (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1909), p. 128.
[^60] 60 Hinckley's relief train returned to the valley on Sunday, October 7. See Jenson's Church Chronology.
[^61] 61 "When boys go back on the Plains to encounter storms and rescue the suffering, as did David P. Kimball, Stephen Taylor, Joseph A. Young, Ephraim Hanks, and many others, it makes me feel well. David took the consecrated oil and went forth, like a man of God, and anointed the sick and afflicted, and commanded them to arise; and those boys acted valiantly, having been trained up amid the Saints." (Remarks by Heber C. Kimball at funeral of Jedediah M. Grant; see JD, 4:137.)
[^62] 62 Church News, June 1970. Chimney Rock is twenty-three miles west of Fort Kearney.
[^63] 63 BN, p. 58.
[^64] 64 Salt Lake Tribune.
