Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

8 Exile in England

In the late summer of 1885 Roberts received a letter from the First Presidency approving a temporary visit home. But as he packed his valise he had the impression that he would not return to the South; he made arrangements on that assumption. While Roberts was in Utah, John Morgan was assigned to return to preside over the Southern States Mission, and his young associate was released.

161Roberts took advantage of the respite by building an addition to his house and laboring daily in harvesting the wheat, corn, pumpkin and squash. In the fall of 1885 President Wilford Woodruff assigned him and Junius F. Wells to canvass the entire territory for subscriptions to the Contributor while also laboring as missionaries for the Young Men's association of the Church. Starting at St. George, Utah, they visited nearly every settlement up the Utah corridor and on into Idaho-Cedar City, Beaver, Fillmore, Parowan, Nephi, Springville, Provo, Ogden, Brigham City, Logan, Pocatello. "Everywhere we had crowded meetings and I enjoyed the labor immensely and regard it as the most successful mission I have yet performed and the most fruitful of good to myself and I think it was so to others."

In the spring of 1886, B. H. Roberts assumed editorial duties with the Salt Lake Herald. He worked with Mr. Groo, the manager, and their association was pleasant. "He respected my faith and I his doubts. Many a night we sat and discussed Mormonism until the wee small hours, and he never opposed much and appeared at times greatly interested." Roberts wrote in retrospect (March 21, 1915) that journalism was "responsible, educative involvement." It provided opportunities "without limit-opportunities in fiction, science, art, history, philosophy, and religion." [^1] "I fell in love with that kind of work and the privilege of being with my family." [^2]

That privilege, for Roberts, was again to be short lived. In a small journal Roberts records that on December 5, 1886, "while busily engaged in preparing the daily dispatches for the Salt Lake Herald on which paper I had acted as associate editor for 7 or 8 months," Deputy Marshal Pratt, son of Orson Pratt, and Deputy Marshal Vandercook came into the Herald office. Roberts was arrested on a bench warrant charging him with unlawful cohabitation with Sarah Louise Roberts and Celia Dibble.

He accompanied the officers to the office of Commissioner William McKay and entered into a thousand-dollar bond to appear the next day at two o'clock. Charles Burton and J. F. Wells were his bondsmen and James H. Moyle, his old schoolmate at the university, was his attorney. "I made an appointment with my attorney to meet him next morning at 9:30 A.M. to talk over my case but Brother ]. F. Wells drew me aside and suggested the propriety and at that point he... [entry breaks off]."

162A council was held that evening (the arrest was at 6:00 P.M.) with John Henry Smith of the First Presidency and Elder Heber J Grant. The alternatives were examined. Should Roberts be convicted of polygamy, his sentence could be five to six years in prison with a fine of five hundred dollars. [^3] It was expected that investigation would show that Roberts had in fact taken another wife, Celia, in marriage. Junius F. Wells, whose father, Daniel H. Wells, was president of the European Mission, knew of Roberts's literary talent. Wells and Burton agreed to sacrifice the bond in order that Roberts be sent to England to serve as editor of the Millennial Star, the most important Church publication on the European continent. By nine o'clock that evening Roberts rushed to Centerville and managed to throw a few clothes in a satchel. He abruptly kissed his wife Louisa, Adah, and his three-month-old child, Ben, good-bye. Then behind a team of horses from Heber J. Grant's livery stable, he started up the canyon toward Peterson, Utah. It was bitter cold and he was not warmly dressed. The wind chill forced him into a deserted house to get "thawed out." By traveling all night he managed to arrive at a railroad junction by 10:00 A.M. to catch a smoking car going east to Evanston, Wyoming. [In later years, he said that on one link of the trip to Denver he had sought a brief nap on a plank "in a box car.") As the train approached Denver a conductor came through announcing, "telegram for James Reed." This was the alias that had been decided upon by his friends to use in England, and he almost raised his hand to accept the telegram. But an impression came to him: "Don't take it up; it is a trap." He said nothing, and was not discovered. (Apparently those who saw him sign his ticket "James Reed" had telegraphed to Utah, learned that this was his assigned pseudonym, and planned to identify and apprehend him in Denver.) At Denver he followed another distinct impression and changed his destination to Kansas City. Finally he arranged for a direct passage from there to New York via the Santa Fe Railroad. Within a day or two he was on board ship for Liverpool.

Celia, who was known as "Mrs. E" and was living with her babe Harold at the Morall home in Logan, Utah, was sitting in the front room a few days later when a visitor dropped in and, unaware of her relationship to Roberts, relayed the rumor that "B. H. Roberts had decided to jump bond and go to England." Neighbors said they knew by the expression on her face that she was Roberts's wife.

163Roberts's mother had been sitting in an office at the Herald when her son was arrested. Roberts quickly stepped out of the office so she would not be recognized and brought in to appear as a witness. In a letter from mid-ocean, he wrote, "I had been filled with dread and anxiety all day though why I did not know until the event had occurred." Roberts explained he had promised his bondsmen that he would repay the thousand dollars, and that "having freedom rather than several years of imprisonment was well worth a thousand dollars." He didn't know how long he would be gone but "until the Lord shall open the way for my return." [^4] He had gnawing anxieties, he said, for his family, and did not enjoy "being torn from the joys of home and friends and becoming an exile." He ended with a prayer that he would find the work the Lord had "marked out" and recommended that his mother write him through the mission office but post her letters from Salt Lake City.

Crossing the Atlantic, Elder "James Reed" became a conversational novelty. The passengers were "full of Christmas spirit, and anyway congenial." Roberts, strengthened by his English ties and his recent immersion in editorial work at the Herald, had strong convictions on the question of Irish home rule. His fellow passengers included ten or twelve young conservatives, and in response to their queries he aired his views. He stirred up so much interest that someone suggested there be a mock parliament organized to enliven the days at sea. By common consent Roberts was made spokesman, and the first evening he took all the time for a speech that "thoroughly maintained the justice of the opposed Irish position." He was soon known aboard ship as "the friend of justice." Esteem grew into cordial friendship, which gave him opportunity to build bridges of religious understanding with the passengers. Demands for him to speak on successive nights continued to the end of the voyage. As he descended the gangplank in Liverpool there were cheers from on board: "Gangway for Parnell!" [^5] (In the 1870s Parnell had dominated the political scene in attempts to establish Irish freedom and was, Winston Churchill wrote, "the most English Irishman ever seen." [^6]

164In the Liverpool Mission Home "Elder Reed" was welcomed by the new and departing mission presidents-Daniel H. Wells, who had just been released, and George Teasdale, who was just beginning his administration. Roberts immediately undertook editorial duties with the Star, with missionary meetings in the evenings and Church conferences on Sundays.

From Liverpool, England, in February, he wrote his mother, "I have often felt that your prayers have been the cause of my deliverance from many temptations," adding that sometimes he felt he had had "a double share" of them. Able to escape doing anything very bad, he knew the "fact is that you [his mother] have had an abiding interest in me and are constantly praying for my deliverance." He continued: "See Louisa as often as you can for she has a pretty big load to carry. Let her complain a little if she wants to but find no fault with her on that account. She is a noble woman and I love her tenderly, but she needs my arm to lean on, and when that support is removed from her she feels lost and is weighed down with sorrow." He added that he was feeling odd about coming to England; yet looking back on his visits to the temple with his mother, "I was preparing for my departure without knowing it." He expressed the desire to turn the sorrow and trouble into great good. His family roots in England were on his mind: "I have an ambition to lay such a foundation that both myself and posterity may have room to build up on it in time and in eternity. I hope to become a savior to my fathers house and kindred as well as to all strangers that may come in my way." [^7]

165In addition to his editorial work on the Star and the Church conferences and missionary meetings he attended, Roberts enjoyed intermittent travel, which counted as a necessity rather than a luxury since the visits provided grist and color for his articles in the Church's youth magazine, the Contributor, and the Millennial Star. In his notebook on April 2, 1887, he mentions attending missionary conferences in Nottingham; but he also visited various beautiful and romantic spots-the church cemetery with its beautiful mound-shaped hill and caves that were occupied by Richard I, King John, and "the bold robber chieftain Robinhood," who in Scott's Ivanhoe is known as Locksley; Brock Castle in the southeast part of town; and a fortress built a thousand years earlier and which was occupied by the Danes in 870, marking the spot where Alfred the Great was defeated. He writes on April 5 of his visit in company with John Wells to Byron's Newstead Abbey, "The emotions one feels in thus coming suddenly upon the home of the poet who was of so strange a nature-so wild, so fierce and yet so gifted is difficult to describe." At Newstead Abbey he purchased a rare collector's copy (1841), with master engravings, of Byron's Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, and he noted on the flyleaf, "I visited in 1887-a great day." [^8]

Roberts's first visit to London, with Presidents Wells and Teasdale, was a memorable occasion. "I am desperately in love with London, and if I were a man of the world I would live here," he wrote home. But how difficult to preach the gospel at Hyde Park! His efforts to teach the people of London were so bleak that he wrote home that he would like to "turn away from humanity with all its pride" and "play the hermit." Missionary work, he adds, is doubtless a noble work but it is also a "thankless task" full of hardships and heartaches. "If anyone thinks it a pleasant thing to go into the world and combat the terrible prejudice existing against our faith he by all means ought to try it." [^9]

He also visited castles in the grand and picturesque midland areas of England.

I saw the River Trent, and Shakespeare's . burial place and the Leicester Castle. I took trips up the Mersey (which shortly after went on to Manchester). All these scenes and many many more visited during my two years' sojourn in my native land. It became something of a tradition in the Liverpool office that it made little difference where Elder Roberts was sent for a conference; he always came back by way of London, Birmingham, Dunham, and Edinburgh. These trips were educational and fed my fanciful nature. [^10]

One of the places that was indelibly planted in his memory was Wicklow, Ireland, where the clear streams of Avon and Avoca meet. This inspired Moore's "Meeting of the Water," and Roberts recalled in an article twenty years later, "in silence [I] acquiesced in the charms of the spot."

166On Sunday, August 7, 1887, he held a conference in Edinburgh with Elder William Wood, Jr., and others in the home of Anna Caulder, a sweet lady who knew more Scottish poetry and old Scottish songs than anyone he had before met. Back in Liverpool and the "daily routine," he reflected upon his meandering visits and hoped they would "have the effect of ennobling my nature, and making me visit often the beautiful, virtuous and grand." "Shame upon him who has such opportunities if they do not increase his love for the virtuous, the beautiful and the godlike. I certainly hope the result will be to refine this rather cross-grained nature of mine which is sorely in need of such influences." [^11]

Shortly he took a trip down the Clyde River to the Scottish Highlands including Loch Lomond and the cultivated grounds of the Earl of Montrose. It was an all-day walk through Tuss and Inverbig. Roberts was relieved to wash his "weary swollen feet" (he had been wearing a new pair of shoes) in the clear cold water of the lake. He speaks of an illness and having to give up on his oar as they were gliding over the clear water. But he was not so ill that he could not enjoy "the glorious day," the skip of the moon gloriously over the high eastern hills and the mantle of silver and splendor it spread over the water. I "enjoyed the glories of such a matchless night."

Stiff the next day, he nevertheless went to the Loch Katnin, the home of Ellen Douglas on the isle made famous by Scott's The Lady of the Lake, and then through "quaint villages and red roofed and thatched cottages." He recalled the battle fought in 1314 between the Scots under Robert Bruce and the English under Edward II. The English had a hundred thousand men and the Scots only forty thousand, but "through superior generalship [the Scots] won the day."

167All was not idyllic in his travels, however. After an August conference in Glasgow, Scotland, a city of approximately eight hundred thousand at the time, he wrote: "I never remember to have seen so much squalid misery and general wretchedness" in the artificial channels; the manufacturing sections of woolens, linens, chemicals, and pottery; and "the flaming chimney stacks belching out their flames and smoke." He was at once repulsed and yet attracted, finding that on the green, people congregated to "discuss religion, infidelity, politics, science and every branch of knowledge." "I observe the people are extremely fond of debate-it is a passion with them." He also remarks on the "splendid monuments" to Scott, Burns and Campbell. That Sunday he gave a sermon on "the life and labors of President Taylor." And after the conference he and Elder Wood, his companion, went to the birthplace of Robert Burns with its mountains, grounds and mural surroundings: "Is it not strange that such is the birthplace in nearly all instances of genius, of those characters who have left on record the best and sweetest thoughts and performed the noblest deeds. It does seem that God mocked the high and great by sending his noblest spirits to the poor and lowly." [^12]

Contrast and controversy awaited the exiled Roberts. John Stuart Mill in his classic essay, On Liberty, argues that truth will only prevail if it is fairly discussed and fairly heard in the presence of alternatives. [^13] Mill cites a conspicuous case of flouting this principle in England at his time: "the language of downright persecution that breaks out from the press of this country whenever it feels called on to notice the remarkable phenomenon of Mormonism." Thirty years after Mill made this objection, B. H. Roberts was on hand in England to take the brunt of press caricature and to grapple with mindless, energetic rhetoric.

From the very first, Roberts was noted as a speaker. Elder Lon J. Haddock, a fellow missionary who heard him in many challenging circumstances, concluded that "fear to him is entirely unknown." In London he recalled the articulate young elder as the nemesis of various open-air orators in Hyde Park-religionists, politicians and reformers alike. They were forced to combine to drive him from the place for such meetings because their followers deserted them whenever "that Mormon" began to speak. [^14]

168But many Englishmen were made antagonistic by an opponent to the Church-one William Jarman, a befuddled public lecturer who toured the British Isles giving dramatic diatribes accompanied by a deluge of inflammatory anti-Mormon tracts. He was also a man who used fists as well as words. He led mobs against the homes of Mormons and the lodgings of missionaries, breaking windows and smashing furniture. There had been no public protest or legal action against him. "How it is that the Lord permits him to continue in his villainy is a mystery to me," Roberts wrote home. The mission president, George Teasdale, finally consented to requests that Eider Roberts be sent to confront Jarman on his own ground in his own meetings. Jarman's leaflets and lectures challenged Mormons to face him "in public discussion"; he gloated that his challenge was always met by silence. The tables were turned, however, when Roberts arose and accepted at a crowded London meeting. Stunned, Jarman offered fifteen minutes the next night.

Nearly two months elapsed between the challenge and the actual debate, however, and then Jarman forbade Roberts to come to the platform until after 10:00 P.M. when most of the respectful part of his audience had already gone home. Roberts read some proposed conditions for a public debate anyway: one, neutral moderators; two, admission fee to be used for charity, not for Jarman; three, the subjects discussed to be the general character of the Mormon people and the Mountain Meadows Massacre. Jarman refused the conditions. For several weeks thereafter the Mormon elders printed up thousands of handbills and distributed them to the crowds attending Jarman's meetings. The handbills headlined Roberts's challenge and debate conditions and asserted, "Mr. Roberts undertakes to show that not in the regions of horrid Hell can come a spirit more damned in falsehood than Mr. Jarman." [^15] Jarman finally agreed to face young Roberts.

Jarman was a showman. He gave vaudevillian lectures clothed in a costume he claimed to be Mormon temple robes while his aides circulated through the audience with pejora-tire tracts. The night Roberts first met Jarman in London, feelings were so intense that when Elder Roberts finished reading his challenge and conditions before an assembly of two thousand, pandemonium ensued. The crowd chewed the tracts into paper wads, flung them in his face, and then swarmed around him, clawing, kicking and spitting. With Elder Nephi Schofield and a convert, Henry Ballard, Roberts struggled towards their cab which was pummeled and pushed until it almost tipped over. This didn't end Roberts's confrontations with Jarman, however. "We were warned against going the second night, but we went and all felt splendid. All fear was taken away from us and I think good will come of it." [^16]

169 At Bermondsey, a division of London, on their second night, Jarman withdrew the fifteen-minute restriction and even accepted Roberts's terms for moderators. Roberts thought his decision a case of "catering to the spirit of fair play, for which English audiences are well known." A Mr. John Cripps volunteered to be moderator.

In the first hour Jarman denounced Roberts as a "Mormon thug" and a "Latter-day devil" who had been sent over by the Church to murder him. [^17] Mr. Cripps called him on this, saying that Mr. Jarman's agreement to meet Roberts on the platform acknowledged Roberts as "worthy of the rights of a gentleman. I will hear no more of abuse!" The audience cheered, unnerving Jarman. Jarman's second speech was a series of contrived claims: his own alleged escape from the hands of murderous "blood atoners" in Utah during which he was "concealed in snows" thirteen feet deep and hidden in trees barely out of reach of the lions and tigers of the Rockies until his rescue by Dr. T. de Witt Talmage of Brooklyn, who arranged his "escape to England." [^18] Jarman pranced before Roberts and inquired if it were not true he would like to cut his throat. Cripps again called Jarman to order. Few except Roberts noticed that this fanciful outburst didn't begin to touch the subject of debate. Roberts arose:

I simply called attention to a few facts: the territory of Utah was a part of the United States. Both Federal and State officers administered its laws. Under the claims of Congress and legislative jurisdiction such murderous conditions as had been described by Jarman were ludicrous. The story of thirteen feet of snow falling in one night was obviously fiction. The preposterous tale of hiding in the Rocky Mountain pines from lions and tigers which are known only in the Tropics broke down all claims to Jarman's reliability and discredited him in the eyes of serious-minded people who cared for consistency and truth. [^19]

170Jarman was somewhat incoherent in his closing speech; he broke into tears and accused Roberts of forcing him into a debate when he was broken in health and his strength exhausted. That appeal won few in the audience; at the conclusion he threatened and cursed Roberts under his breath, saying he would drive him from England. Roberts, though surrounded by Jarman's lieutenants, replied: "Mr. Jarman, you are unable to drive geese out of England. And as for me, I will not leave my native land until I choose." Roberts then received an appreciated police escort to his London Bridge lodgings.

Jarman tried to arrange a further confrontation in London on successive nights, but the elders matched his public threats and announcements with their own pamphlets. One elder noted in his journal, "Jarman said he would not leave London until all Mormons had left.' [^20] But it wasn't long before he reconsidered and moved his campaign to northern England and Wales.

Large crowds and ugly press notices soon led President Teasdale to call Roberts again into service. This time Roberts worked with the missionaries to anticipate Jarman by publishing newspaper statements and delivering lectures of his own in advance of Jarman instead of in his wake. A typical experience with the press occurred in late October 1887. Elder Roberts wrote an article which was carried to the Herald of Wales. The Herald "lost" Roberts's letter and said he would have to write it over. When he did so, and delivered it, he was told "the opportunity is past."

In January Elder Roberts wrote another article entitled, "What Mormonism Is." This time the Herald published it. The local Church leader happily sent out three hundred reprints in the midst of controversy, finding "great demand." But Jarman's leaflets were sold not by the hundreds but by the thousands. In early March it was arranged that Roberts would deliver a lecture on the Book of Mormon in Albert Minor Hall in Swansea, Wales. He spoke for an hour and a half on the Book of Mormon as "A New Witness for Christ." He had "good attention," and then faced questions from a Mr. Adolphus Bolitho (a Jarman supporter who, from all appearances, was thoroughly convinced of both the man's veracity and his philanthropic motives), which Roberts "properly answered." The synopsis of this interchange printed in the Swansea Herald was "full and fair." [^21]

171Similar strategies were followed in Cardiff, Wales, in early March. Three hundred handbills announced Roberts's lecture on "Mormonism and Its Founder." [^22] Roberts's scriptural citations were published (Acts 17:36-37, John 10:16), and so was an accurate summary of his personal witness.

But all this, if it reached and tempered the judgment of the more thoughtful in the communities, worked among the masses to generate a tempest in a smudgepot. Another face-to-face confrontation between Jarman and Roberts became inevitable. The meeting was arranged at Sheffield Park.

Five thousand people turned out for this meeting, and Jarman's tactics fueled such mob fever that Roberts was not only booed down in the meeting but almost trampled by a united mob effort to get him underfoot.

I had withdrawn from the speaker's platform and was standing in a road that had been cut through a hillock the sides of the cut rising some five or six feet. There, as I spoke with several friends, the organized rush came down upon me with great speed. But a big two-fisted Yorkshire policeman, standing by, took me by the back and neck and pitched me up the hillock. Scrambling up after me just as the crowd dashed through the cut, he exclaimed, "Thou'll get thy nut cracked if thou don't mind!' [^23]

In another pair of meetings, afternoon and evening, in the Salvation Army barracks in Hoyland Common (a coal-mining district near Sheffield Park), the Jarman craze, according to Roberts's notes, reached its height.

... a number of the mob came equipped with short bars of iron hid in the sleeves of their coats. They evidently intended to maul the elders at the close of the meeting. Jarman's ravings at this meeting stirred great frenzy. The coal miners seemed, in their ignorance, to want blood. But at the close of the meeting the company of six or eight policemen came into the hall and opened a pathway through the crowd and conducted us to safety. A great calm followed this meeting and the little Branch of the Church there was left undisturbed. [^24]

172Other sources show that it was in Swansea, Wales, that a modicum of intelligence began to prevail over hysteria. The press published many of Jarman's extravagant charges, which provoked incredulous reactions from readers. One citizen wrote to the editor, saying that in attending Jarman's lecture the people had disgraced themselves and that Jarman's tract was "the most absurd nonsense it has ever been my misfortune to read"; the letter was signed "Fair Play." Another, with the improbable signature of "Tootsie Sloper," wrote to object in the name of "decent womanhood" to Jarman's antics:

He promises plain language revelations of depraved practices and unheard-of and indecent things; but does not produce them. All intelligent persons who hear him must conclude that he has a personal grudge against the Mormons and that this is his mode of revenge. He is what our Yankee friends would call a Crank in a very bad way.

At the same time, the editor of the Swansea Times began a careful investigation of Jarman's background. He had thought him a demagogue; now evidence surfaced that he was also demented. The editor learned that Jarman had escaped from an asylum in Exminster, Devon. [^25] Roberts procured a telegram from the superintendent of that institution confirming Jarman's confinement and the dates. After a flurry of these latest press notices, three thousand people turned out for another Jarman-Roberts "debate." Jarman, clad in dramatic robes, stamped and stormed behind the podium where a bowie knife and a brace of pistols were in full view. He began by saying that "Mormons were the biggest liars, gamblers, swearers, thieves in the world." Prancing back and forth, he asked his young opponent to "prove his divine calling" by drinking poison from a bottle labeled "Rough on Rats." Roberts replied with a question: If Jarman knew what he claimed to know about Mormons, why had he himself moved among them and married a Mormon? If Mormons were this contemptible, then he, Jarman, was still more so for not reporting these conditions to U.S. authorities who were present and willing to hear. That response did not seem to impress anyone.

173Jarman's next speech contended that Mormons had murdered his son and five hundred thousand others (the "murdered" son later came to Britain as a missionary), stolen his wealth, and attempted to murder him. He challenged Roberts to bring his dead boy back to life. The audience hooted the Mormons and cheered Jarman.

Roberts's ineffective struggle with such mass psychology is revealed in the press accounts: Roberts traced some observable measures of the civilization developed in Utah and the American West, saying it was unduplicated anywhere in the world ("We hope not!"). He added that 90 percent of the Mormon people owned their own homes (applause), which refuted the notion that Mormons were in the hands of a mercenary priesthood ("Hear! Hear!"). In response to Jarman's wild charge that five hundred thousand people had been "mercilessly murdered in Utah," Roberts couldn't avoid the ad hominem, "Any man who went before an audience and made such a statement could not be short of mad." He was there as an Englishman by birth and an American by adoption to say that such a statement was an unmitigated falsehood (uproar). Who was responsible for the Mountain Meadows Massacre, he called ("The Mormons!")? It did not require much intelligence to cry that out, but it would require more ingenuity than Mr. Jarman or anyone else possessed to prove it (cheers, uproar). Roberts then read from the trial of John D. Lee who led the massacre and showed him convicted by a Mormon jury (uproar). Roberts passionately exclaimed, "For the sake of humanity alone, hear me in my defense!"

Having, he thought, disposed of the charges, he turned to the credibility of the witness. He undertook to read the telegram announcing that Jarman had recently escaped from an asylum. But the crowd refused to listen and sought to drown out his voice at the pronouncement of each word of the dispatch.

But I continued reading it word by word between jeers and catcalls and boisterous shouts. At that rate it took some time to read the telegram. And slowly Jarman's following grew hoarse. Then I stepped to the front of the platform, raised my voice to the fullest volume and read the telegram consecutively until all of it had been heard above the hoarse protests of the crowd. [^26]

174The press version of this debacle reports that Jarman reacted "in a very excited manner. He called on the audience to turn such men as Roberts from the town, paced the platform, now shaking his fist in Mr. Roberts's face and then slapping his hands together within an inch of his opponent's head 'to the great amusement of the audience.'"

When Roberts tried to speak again, disorder prevailed. "Ultimately, however, a motion was passed, with about a dozen dissentients, to the effect that Mr. Jarman had proved his case." [^27]

Immediately a rush was made on the platform, but it was so high that the scrambling required shoulder lifts, which gave time for the moderator, a sea captain named Barrett, to give Roberts a way out. [^28] He imparted a Masonic sign which Roberts did not understand, and led him down a back stairway. The two sat for half an hour while the crowd presumably dispersed. But the moment the door was opened the cunningly silent crowd boomed forth, and only the intervention of a police escort enabled Roberts to reach the home of Church leader, David Williams, whose wife had just given birth to a child. There Roberts stood on a cairn of stones and seashells, trying to quiet the surging crowd enough to announce that a wife and new babe were upstairs.

You people allow the Mormons to be represented as ruffians and murderers, yet I can truthfully dare you to produce any record of a scene and mob disturbance like this ever having happened in Utah. Now here is your chance to set those supposed boisterous and evil people, the Mormons an example of Christian conduct by going to your homes. Good night! [^29]

The crowd, subdued for the moment, withdrew. But as they neared the center of town they began to pummel each other, and within minutes a street fight broke out, leaving a shambles of wreckage.

175It was difficult for Roberts to comprehend how many of Jarman's seemingly rational lieutenants read his tracts with sobriety and wrote to the newspapers in anti-Mormon protest, or how they could work so diligently to promote Jar-man's cause, endorsing the whole of it as truth. In such a mood Roberts wrote a scathing reply to these letters. The whole farce was, he said, Jarman's "opportunity of making himself egregiously" stupid. [^30] He admitted he hesitated to meet him on the platform on the premise that "if a wise man would be confounded let him argue with a fool." Yet over the months he had begun to conclude that Jarman was not a fool but a shrewd muckraker.

Roberts apparently was not hoping to placate the masses; he was hoping for a place in the press where thinking people would see the contrast. Twice at least he had gone on the platform, perhaps in an abundance of youthful zeal, against the mature counsel of the local Church leader, Father Ballard, and sober warnings from the police. There is some evidence that all his efforts brought the pendulum nearer center. One listener remarked, after Roberts's lecture on "The Founder of Mormonism," "Elder Roberts appears to be a gentleman who is always ready to uphold his principles, and it was with a feeling of much regret that I witnessed the continued interruptions he was subjected to last night in Albert Hall."

The South Wales Daily News observed on July 9, 1888, that the reckless crowd sympathies were to be expected. "But there were many present who, while in no way approving of Mormonism, think that had the debate taken place before a jury of logicians the Mormon would have scored over the anti-Mormon. The two men were as different from each other as men possibly could be." The writer said he had anticipated that Jarman would be cool and calm and unfold the story "without any theatrical effect," without "extravagant gesticulations." Instead, "the Mormon elder-the man who might have been expected to indulge in some extravagancies-appeared on the platform a cool, calm, collected gentleman." Others observed that Roberts "exhibited extraordinary forbearance."

176Was he grateful for these small mercies? "I well know," he said sometime later, that I cannot expect to destroy the prejudice of a lifetime engendered against our people, and carry the audience with me in a vote against Mr. Jarman. ... I notice, however, that very many people refuse to vote one way or the other, and with their silence I am much gratified." [^31] In an interview with the Herald of Wales (which was so favorable that it was later part of a two-page tract which the elders circulated), Roberts expressed the wish that he had learned earlier of Jarman's insanity and added, "I should have made that point clear through the papers, then, if people wished to fall in with the ravings of a madman, all well and good until they learn better." John Morgan wrote, "It was possibly the only thing that could be done but it is humiliating to an elder to have to stoop to contend with such degrading spirits. [^32]

The Herald of Wales proceeded to gather information and editorialize, lamenting that the dwelling place of the Williams family "had to be specially guarded every night by a number of policemen." They called for a summons against Jarman: "How long will the testimony and ravings of this escaped lunatic be accepted by Welshmen?" Against Jar-man's "consummate art" of "sanctified humbug" they cited Sir Henry Vivian and Lady Vivian and the Right Honorable Mr. Chillders, an ex-cabinet minister, and others who had visited the American West and found the Mormon community "peaceable, industrious... a monument of triumph of mind over matter... and one of the most lovely spots on earth." They observed finally that twenty thousand Welshmen had emigrated to Utah and nine-tenths of them were "doing well, happy, prosperous and possessing their own homesteads." [^33]

Roberts's notes indicate that it was not long until Jarman was brought before the courts and enjoined to keep the peace; in a few years he died. Offshoot disturbances, though minor, did continue, however. One missionary, Elder Brough, recalls Jarman trying to convince the credulous to permit no more meetings at "No. 4 Grove Place," the home of President Williams. One night nearly five hundred men followed the elders there, "hallooing and reviling us shamefully." Three months later the paper reported that a mob of about one hundred attacked the home with rocks but, "hearing policemen coming," fled. [^34]

177During Roberts's editorial service in Britain the Millennial Star was issued almost every week. First under President Daniel H. Wells and then under President George Teasdale, Roberts turned out weekly editorials of a thousand to two thousand words, and in addition managed to organize, proofread, and see each issue through the press. He wrote that he was sometimes frustrated that it took more time to edit than to write. As editor of the Star he would be followed by men of the stature of Dr. James E. Talmage, Dr. John A. Widtsoe, and Elder Richard L. Evans, to name only a few. [^35] The range and verve of his writing attracted not only the Saints in the British Isles, in Scandinavia, and on the Continent, but also readers in America. As President Wilford Woodruff said in response to the writing of a New England convert, Orson Spencer, "One only needs to read a few lines from a man's pen to know what port his ship is bound for." Young Elder Roberts had already emerged into prominence as both a speaker and a writer.

His editorials range in topics from "Was He a Prophet?" (about Joseph Smith), the nature of God, and continuous revelation, to Nebuchadnezzar's dream, biblical studies, accounts of Christian virtues-for example, faith, charity and self-control-and essays on justice and mercy, spiritual growth, the first principles of the gospel, keeping the Sabbath day holy, the Word of Wisdom, the Book of Mormon as a new witness, and even commentaries on contemporary events, such as a political commentary on the situation in Europe. He wrote on the confiscation of Church property and suggestions to the elders on their duties. [^36]

In some moods he lost all zest for writing. He wrote home: "It becomes irksome to me and it is all unlovely in mine own eyes and I look at most of my productions like a mother does upon a deformed child, they give me no pleasure. Yet I will send you the back numbers of the Star articles." He was self-conscious too in the use of humor. "There has been a kind of fatality attend my every effort at humor," he wrote to Daniel H. Wells. Though he was not above puns, double-meaning, and symbolism, it is hard to find traces of any "bit of nonsense," especially when compared to his friends Orson F. Whitney, J. Golden Kimball, or even the jaunty, darting humor of Charles W. Penrose.

In addition to and partly as an expansion of his articles he published his first book, The Gospel or Man's Relationship to Deity. It was dedicated to Robert Burns (he felt compassion for his life as he had admiration for his poetry). This book was an expanded tract on the first principles and ordinances of the gospel.

178The Gospel was to become a perennial: Sales have thus far exceeded thirty thousand copies, and it was still in print in the 1980s. It is lucid, its chapters brief. It reflects Roberts's skill in analysis, synthesis, and careful scriptural exposition. [^37]

Other literary projects were under way. The mission offices in Liverpool were only a five-minute walk from the Liverpool Picton Library and the Walker Art Gallery, which included an excellent Egyptian collection. [^38] Here, with the encouragement of the mission president, Roberts made frequent visits and built up "an immense collection" of notes on American antiquities and archaeological works. These became the backbone of his treatment of "external evidences" of the Book of Mormon. Editorials in the Millennial Star reflected some of this research, but the full three-volume New Witnesses for God series, published a decade later, had its inception in Britain. [^39]

From his days in Liverpool on, and perhaps earlier, Roberts was never working on only one article or book at a time. He was gathering, storing, and shaping four or five projects simultaneously for the rest of his life. And he never completely "let go" of any project. In his library are corrected and revised editions of his writings, books and articles, stuffed with further notes and instructions to himself: "Add to doctrine of deity"; "Apply to Joseph Smith"; "Consider for doctrinal book." Professor Davis Bitton has shown that Roberts treated most of the major events of Mormon history in various publications at least four times-re-vising, expanding, winnowing, clarifying. [^40] His was a fervently cumulative mind. Unlike the artist who tires and subjectively recoils from each successive artistic effort, he returned again and again to his own works. From this point on, three main interests dominated his scholarly efforts and gave him his deepest release in reading and writing: historical and literary probing, doctrinal exposition, and public preachment. These were his "three first loves."

From the "Latter-day Saints European Printing Publishing and Immigration Office" Roberts wrote Joseph F. Smith (on July 19, 1887); he had not seen Elder Smith since their parting from San Luis Valley, Colorado.

179I know one thing. Brother Joseph, and know it absolutely, as much so as it is possible for me to know any truth capable of the most perfect demonstration, and that is that the Gospel is true; and that behind us and sustaining us is the God of heaven and however many blunders are made He will at last in His own way and time come to our deliverance. Between now and then, or until death shall put a period to my labors in this life, I hope to be faithful and do nothing that will forfeit my right to the blessings promised under the new and everlasting covenant.' [^41]

Still writing under the name "Elder James Reed," Roberts referred in this same letter to the anxieties about his family which, after nearly two years of separation, were intense. He had been able to correspond with Louisa in his own name and had expressed his feelings for her and the children. But this was not the case with Celia and her children-Lena, who was three years old, and Harold, who was just an infant. "What do you suppose I would not give to see them?" he wrote of his families. Celia maintained the name "Mrs. Ellison" and the children were taught (though not by name) about their father who was "away on a mission" and would be home "some day soon." It was not uncommon in this period for children in polygamous families to be visited by their fathers, but also by many "uncles." Not until they were old enough to understand and to be responsible did they learn the actual identity of their own fathers. Mormon folklore even tells of some children who played a "guessing game" in their earliest years; some of them were overjoyed and others were disappointed when they found out which "uncle" was father. To Elder Joseph F. Smith, Roberts wrote that all this was wearing him down:

I would prefer to return home, plead guilty to the charge, go to prison for the six months, after which live apart from both families and go to work to provide for them, for they have need of my doing so, since I have no income but what my labor can secure, and the reflection that my family is upon the charity of others breaks down my spirit as I am sure nothing else can; and I feel that it is now my duty to look after them and their comfort, though deprived of their association until Providence in his own time shall see fit to remove the foot of oppression from our necks. In closing this paragraph I may say that not one word has been said about my bond, nor has any effort been made to collect it. We think it is lost. [^42]

In September 1888, Roberts returned to the mission offices from a conference trip to find a cable from President Woodruff; it was a release and a request for him to return home. He was soon to discover that he was going home to become editor of the Church's youth magazine, the Contributor. Under the nome de plume Horatio, Gratiano and Viratus, he authored most of the editorials and articles for the fall and winter issues that year.

Within a few days of Roberts's return from Britain, President Woodruff sent a letter to the six Presidents of the Seventy. A vacancy in the Council had been occasioned by the death of Horace S. Eldredge, and President Woodruff asked for prayerful recommendations to fill the vacancy. Suggestions would be presented to the Council of the Twelve, and the final selection of the new President would be made by President Woodruff. In response to that request four names were submitted; of these, B. H. Roberts and, later, George Reynolds were appointed. [^43]

On Sunday, October 7, 1888, at the age of thirty-one, B. H. Roberts was sustained as a new member of the First Council of the Seventy in general conference. Two days later, Elder Lorenzo Snow, of the Council of the Twelve, ordained Roberts one of the seven presidents. [^44] Franklin D. Richards was also in the circle. The ordination took place, appropriately, at the Church Historian's Office, which had formerly been the home of George A. Smith. There is no record of his ordination blessing.

In accepting the call Roberts knew that it was for life; there was no mechanism for release, retirement, or withdrawal. Yet lines were not clearly drawn as to support of family, participation in civic affairs, and allotments of time at home or abroad. Roberts would be fortunate to serve under four Church Presidents who never gave up trying to understand him and to bring his gifts and service to full fruition: Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, Joseph F. Smith, and Heber J. Grant. But the path would prove taxing and testing for all of them.

181President Woodruff immediately reinforced and encouraged his talents as a writer. The writing of a chronological history of the Church was a central concern of President Woodruff, and Roberts was to work closely with him in the production of one book, Succession in the Presidency, and in the preparation of another, Missouri Persecutions.

About the Seventies Roberts wrote:

This organization has to do chiefly with the missionary work of the Church. There were at that time Quorums of Seventy and are, as I dictate [1933], 234 such Quorums. They are presided over locally by seven presidents chosen from among the Quorum. The First Council of Seventy has a double presiding role first over the First Quorum of Seventy (which has never been fully filled) [^45] and also over all the individual Quorums of Seventy. Moreover, the First Quorum of Seventy is one of the three Presiding Councils of the Church under the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve.

The calling of the Seventy is to be special witnesses of the Lord, Jesus Christ, in all the world, acting under the direction of the Quorum of the Twelve. These are general quorums of the Church, organized geographically, but not necessarily within the boundary lines of Wards and Stakes. To be one of the Seven holding the keys and rights of presidency over this organization has always been an important station in the Church of the New Dispensation. My experience in missionary work in Iowa, in the South, and in Britain, over the past thirteen years, was apparently a qualifying factor in my appointment.

182At the time no compensation was provided by the Church in this calling. I, and my fellow Presidents, thus served for a number of years without even a living stipend. The Mormon ministry, indeed, does not really offer a vocation to those who engage in it. [^46]

Notes

Chapter 8

1 Roberts's Personal Files, Box 8, Church Archives.

2 B. H. Roberts to Joseph F. Smith, 19 July 1887, Church Archives.

3 See Whitney, History of Utah, 4:690.

4 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 16 December 1886, Marriott Collection.

5 BN, pp. 316-17.

6 Winston Churchill, Great Contemporaries (London: Odhams Press Ltd., 1948), pp. 272ff.

7 B. H. Roberts to his mother, 15 February 1887.

8 Inscription in Roberts's copy of Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, in possession of the author.

9 B. H. Roberts to his mother, 4 May 1888.

10 BN, p. 334.

11 B. H. Roberts to his mother, 7 August 1887.

12 From a journal of B. H. Roberts, entry during August 1887.

13 John Stuart Mill, On Liberty (New York: E. P. Dutton & Company, Everyman's Library, 1950), pp. 199-200.

14 Jurenile Instructor 49 (February 1914): 88.

15 Diary of David H. Morris, 9 September 1887, BYU Special Collections.

16 B. H. Roberts to Joseph F. Smith, 19 July 1887, Church Archives.

17 Millennial Star 49 (28 November 1887): 760.

18 Dr. T. de Witt Talinage attracted public attention from his Brooklyn pulpit in the fall of 1880 by thundering that "Mormonism will never be destroyed until it is destroyed by the guns of the United States government" (see CHC, 5:555), and that the "biggest guns" should "blast the seventh commandment into the Mormons." At the same time, Reverend Joseph Cook in Boston was calling the Church an "Upas tree" and saying "let the ax fall!" Both outbursts were widely condemned by the press in America and Britain. The New York Sun, for example, observed that these reverends hardly represented the spirit of the New Testament, or, for that matter, the Old. "Even the seventh commandment which Talinage would blow into the Mormons with the biggest guns was uttered amid the thunders of Sinai to a polygamous people."

19 BN, p. 325.

20 David H. Morris Diary, 12 November 1887.

21 See Deseret Evening News, 4 April 1888.

22 A sketch of his remarks is in the Millennial Star 50 (26 March 1888): 205-206. See also "Book of Mormon Controversy," Millennial Star 50 (20 February 1888): 113-17.

23 BN, p. 327.

24 BN, p. 328.

25 Roberts's notes mistakenly record that it was in Exeter. Exeter was, instead, Jarman's birthplace.

26 BN, p. 330.

27 South Wales Echo, 6 July 1888.

28 Roberts later publicly thanked Barrett in the Cambria Daily Leader, 7 July 1888. The article he wrote for the Daily Leader was copied into two other daily newspapers the next day, and a fourth paper with a circulation of sixty thousand translated it into Welsh and then published it. (B. H. Roberts to his mother, 5 February 1888, Roberts Family Collection.)

29 BN, pp. 331-32.

30 B. H. Roberts to his mother, 14 October 1887.

31 Journal History, 14 July 1888, p. 8.

32 John Morgan to B.H. Roberts, 15 January 1888, Marriott Collection.

33 Herald of Wales, 22 September 1888. A decade later, Roberts was grateful to learn, Dr. James E, Talinage, of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, gave lectures about Utah and the Mormons in the English cities of London, Nottingham, Oldham, Liverpool, Newcastle, and Cheltenham, as well as in Glasgow, Scotland, and Belfast, Ireland. He had "brilliant success" in allaying the prejudices of the "better class of people in the British Isles." The halls were well filled; in some cases hundreds could not gain admittance.

34 Because Roberts was at the focal point of controversy, his reputation grew as a "belligerent" and provocateur rather than as a peacemaker. It troubled him to be cast in the role of fire-starter when he was, at least in intent, a firefighter. Once, in a general conference, he offered a soft disclaimer of the image which had gained acceptance even among his own people: "It is something of a matter of pride with me that I never yet preached the Gospel in such a manner that it resulted in mob violence; yet during my connection with the Southern States Mission and the mission in Great Britain, there was scarcely a disturbance with which I was not connected, but it was invariably to render assistance to others who were in trouble, and the trouble was none of my creating. Much of the opposition met with in the world is the result of the folly of some of the Elders." (Conference Report, April 1908, p. 104.)

35 The Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star was first published in 1840 and continued without interruption until 1970.

36 See editorials in the Millennial Star from 13 June 1887 to 15 December 1888.

37 In his journal for 1887 he notes that on September 24 he agreed with Junius F. Wells to take three hundred dollars for the manuscript of The Gospel for the first printing, which was copyrighted in Roberts's name. He promptly sent the money home.

38 His notes on Egyptology helped him years later in writing a "Plea in Bar of Final Conclusions" to critics of the Book of Abraham. See Improvement Era 16 (February 1913): 311-25.

39 BN, p. 333.

40 Davis Bitton, "B. H. Roberts as Historian," Dialogue (Winter 1978): 27.

41 B. H. Roberts to Joseph F. Smith, 19 July 1887, Church Archives.

42 Ibid.

43 See Abraham H. Cannon Journal, 3 October 1888, p. 83.

44 Other members of the Quorum at that time and in the early years of his calling were: Jacob Gates, a British leader of sterling gifts; Abraham H. Cannon, soon called to the Council of the Twelve and a man of combined literary and business ability upon whom President Woodruff depended heavily; William W. Taylor, President John Taylor's brother; George Reynolds, the author of scholarly painstaking concordances; Seymour B. Young, a son of Joseph Young and first President of the Seventy; Christian Fjeldsted, a Scandinavian. See Improvement Era 36 (December 1933): 839.

45 In April 1976 the formation of a full quorum beyond the seven presidents was initiated.

46 BN, p. 337.

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
[^23] 23 Mrs. William Reed to Ann Roberts.
[^24] 24 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^25] 25 Late in their lives, on 3 May 1928, B. H. and Annie Brynie, a half-sister, and Mary arranged for the temple sealing of Ann Everington and Benjamin Roberts and all of the children including the twins and baby Thomas. See BHR Temple Book.
[^26] 26 Roberts kept one sample of his father's handwriting from the original wrapping of the photo given his mother. It is preserved in the family collection.
[^27] 27 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 1 September 1883, Roberts Family Collection.
[^28] 28 Research has failed to establish where and when Ben died. The marriage date is 15 June 1848 (he was twenty-two) in Poplar, Middlesex, England; from the Book of Remembrance of Haven R. Day.
[^29] 29 B. H. Roberts to Ann Everington, 21 April 1880, Roberts Family Collection.
[^30] 30 Mrs. Charles H. Wilcox recorded these impressions from a conversation with B.H. Roberts at his home prior to his call to the Eastern States.
[^31] 31 BN, p. 10.
[^32] 32 See Juvenile Instructor 49 (February 1914): 85.
[^33] 33 Fifty years later, as chairman of "Vocations and Industry" in the youth program of the Church, he wrote, "We shall take the ground that no vocation of honest industry need be ignoble or debasing in its effects, but by properly correlating it with the general welfare of human life can be in effect both honorable and glorious." Improvement Era 15 (October 1912): 1083.
[^34] 34 Liahona 12 (20 October 1914): 364.
[^35] 35. Salt Lake Herald, 8 January 1899.
[^36] 36. So Roberts later told his children.
[^37] 37. BNG, p. 8.
[^38] 38 See History of Utah, 4:689.
[^39] 39 In a notebook under "Roberts, B. H." is this handwritten note: "Warrington-Town of, my birth place. Warrington, at the head of tide water on the Mersey River. It was a station of Romans (Veraterium) in the time of Agricola - (69-84 A.D.) and many Roman relics have been found in the neighborhood."
[^40] 40 Beniamin's father's brother.
[^41] 41 N. B. Lundwall, Roberts's secretary for twelve years, recalls him saying this incident occurred when he was seven.
[^42] 42 BNG, p. 16. Roberts spoke in later years of this spiritual impression (which one tradition says was repeated three times) as evidence that "the promptings of the Spirit of God" can come early - several years, in his case, before his official baptism and confirmation in 1867.
[^43] 43 The word gomin - rather than urchha - was endeared to Roberts through the Victor Hugo story of Gayroche who, in the midst of battle, went along the pavement gathering unfired cartridges from the corpses of fallen men, gaining strength at each step.
[^44] 44 Memoirs, p. 4.
[^45] 45 BN, p. 18a.
[^46] 46 Apparently Tovey's periodic alienations from the LDS Church did not interfere with his desire to preach.
