Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

10 Seventy- Politician - Author

In 1890 Roberts proved his commitment to principle and his hostility to unconstitutional harassment by marrying his third wife, Margaret Shipp Roberts. [^1] It is not clear how Roberts had come to know her. Our best information is that she had served in various youth programs of the Church, was a frequent lecturer to groups on hygiene and preventive medicine, and in addition had a sister-in-law who lived in Centerville near the home and family of Henry Rampton, one of Roberts's early blacksmith associates.

Margaret Curtis Shipp was born in St. Louis, Missouri, on December 17, 1849. She was seven years older than Roberts. At the age of eighteen, in 1867, Margaret became one of the plural wives of Milford B. Shipp. And that marriage became the triple root of several estrangements and reconciliations.

200Horace Greeley, after an interview with Brigham Young, said, as have many critics since, that the "degradation (or, if you please, the restriction) of woman to the single office of child-bearing and its accessories, is an inevitable consequence of the system here paramount [polygamy]." Roberts claimed that the consequence of polygamy properly lived was just the reverse: the system bred independence and wives became effectual executives. Wives engaged in the full spectrum of life, including childbearing and nurturing as well as the cultivation of other skills and interests; and they enjoyed abundant service in the Church, ranging from teaching to the arts. Margaret, for example, contributed professionally in the field of medicine.

After some difficult but not hopeless years Margaret's experience in the polygamous home had become in many ways traumatic. The other wife, Ellis Reynolds Shipp, had spoken in the midst of discord of the "holy relationship existing between us," [^2] and Margaret had replied, "Polygamy is from God, it is pure-holy, immaculate, and although my mind is occasionally clouded, yet generally the principle appears clear and practical." She continued, saying that "trivial affairs have occurred to excite our impatience and we have forgotten the noble virtues that reside within us." [^3] Milford Shipp was often away on missions, which no doubt intensified the strain on Margaret's relations with him and with Ellis. Finally, in early 1890, after several earlier separations, Margaret and her husband were granted a temple cancellation by Wilford Woodruff. In April she was married to B. H. Roberts in a ceremony performed by Daniel H. Wells. [^4]

201The desire for motherhood, Roberts often said, was "the great throbbing hunger of a woman's soul." [^5] Margaret was a living model of that hunger. She had borne five children to her first husband, Milford Shipp, but all but one had died at birth. Hoping to spare others that redundant anguish and to find a medical key to bearing her own children, she attended the Philadelphia Women's College, studying obstetrics. She became a qualified gynecologist. Now in her early forties, she craved to bear B. H. Roberts a son. It was a dream that was never fulfilled. She sublimated the frustration with vicarious motherhood: she held classes in obstetrics and was set apart by Church authorities to serve the sisters in the Church at large and was herself given a blessing on July 1, 1895, to perform this work. [^6] In August 1897, she labored as the compassionate midwife in the delivering of twin girls (Georgianna and Joanna) to Roberts's wife Celia, and in 1903 she helped Celia deliver twin boys (David and Lawrence).

Intimate glimpses of the rapport between Roberts and Margaret came from those who watched them in the Brooklyn mission home in the 1920s where they were often seen holding hands. Though she was the least physically prepossessing ("We loved to see the cartoons," Celia's daughter Georgia recalls of the press drawings, "because they all showed Mother as the youngest and most beautiful"), there can be no question of Roberts's intense love for her and of their communion at many levels. He remarked to President McCune in the Eastern States Mission that Margaret was "all a man could ask for," and in his journal three years after their marriage he wrote, "Her cheerfulness and happy disposition make me forget my sadness." [^7] He was to speak at the World Parliament of Religions of the "interdependence of man and woman," and to reaffirm Paul's doctrine that "the man is not without the woman nor the woman without the man in the Lord. Neither can say to the other, 'I have no need of thee!' " [^8] Margaret's medical training would later prolong his life.

In September 1890 Roberts was returning from an extended trip south. At Milford, Utah, he joined Francis M. Lyman, John Henry Smith, John W. Taylor, and Abraham H. Cannon, who were returning from Kanab. In a car of that train these brethren first found a Salt Lake newspaper containing word of President Wilford Woodruff's Manifesto putting an end to plural marriage. "I read with astonishment," Roberts wrote in his journal. "But no sooner had I read, than like a flash of light, all through my soul, the Spirit said 'that is alright.' So it passed."

202But as he rode to Salt Lake he began to reflect on the Saints who had suffered to sustain that doctrine, on his own years in Britain and in prison, and on the sacrifices Celia and the children had made. "Our community has endured every kind of reproach in the world for the sake of it-and is this to be the end?" Through the year 1891, he was plagued with doubts about the Manifesto, but said little about it. Finally he began to remember the flash of light that came to him when he first received the news, and at last his feelings became reconciled. "I repented of my wrong and courted most earnestly the Spirit of God for a testimony and gradually it came I do not pretend to say what God's purpose is or what is to be accomplished by it. It is a matter in which I trust the divine wisdom implicitly. God must be his own interpreter and in time will make it plain." [^9]

The Manifesto did not wipe away the Church's problems in the larger society, however. On November 3, 1890, Roberts arose early (at 5:00 A.M.) to write an article for the semiweekly Herald "on the inconsistency of our opponents wishing to disenfranchise the people of Utah for believing that God would eventually establish His kingdom on earth." [^10]

In December 1890 Roberts had been given a kind of temporary release from his duties as a member of the First Council of the Seventy "to sustain his family," which was now composed of "three wives and six children." President Cannon remarked that "a man's first duty is to his family." [^11] Roberts continued to write semiweekly editorials for the Herald and installments of the history of President John Taylor, which "enabled me to meet my current expenses." Jacob Gates, a member of the First Council of the Seventy, thought he should apply to the Church for financial assistance as he needed it. "This I would not do." But though "released," he did just as much Church work, filling all his appointments in the Council of the Seventy and attending quarterly conferences in the stakes. He responded to numerous invitations in and for the Church to deliver lectures, including a daily lecture on Church history at the LDS Academy in Salt Lake City.

203In January 1891 he received an assignment with John W. Taylor to help the Church with its own financial burden by establishing a freewill-offering fund throughout the Church. Judicial and other costs and confiscation of Church property made this urgent. Wards were divided into districts and a collector assigned over each district to canvass every family and ask for a month-by-month contribution. Thus it was hoped to "relieve the Church without burdening anybody." John W. Taylor was assured he could enlist anyone he wanted in the cause and he asked for Roberts. Others called included Anthon H. Lund, John Morgan, Seymour B. Young, Christian Fjeldsted, George M. Cannon, Royal B. Young, Joseph W. McMurrin, Joseph Summerhays, Frank Y. Taylor, and Matthias F. Cowley. Frank Taylor and Roberts were sent together to the Davis, Weber and Utah stakes. Roberts records a keen admiration for Frank Taylor. "I love Frank," his journal says. "I found him the very soul of honor, generous and outspoken." Together through most of the winter and early summer they raised over twenty-one thousand dollars. [^12]

From the minutes of the First Quorum of the Seventy, of some stake conferences, and of Roberts's closest associates-especially his scribe, editor and colleague, John Whitaker-one can piece together other kinds of activity that occupied Roberts in the initial period of his calling as a Seventy. His earliest office as a Church authority was in the Constitution Building across from the ZCMI department store on Main Street. [^13] This was known as the "new office." Later he moved into the new six-story, granite Church Administration Building at 47 East South Temple.

His first recorded official assignment was to make a study-a "feasibility study"-of expanding the first seven Presidents of Seventy to a full quorum of seventy men. The organizational possibility had been implicit from the beginning in the structure of the Church but was thus far dormant -only the first seven Presidents had been organized and were functioning as a Quorum. There is little on record of Roberts's recommendation or on the postponement.

204 One assignment, which showed the trust of the First Presidency, was his report on the status and scope of the Seventy, outlining procedures by which each quorum could become more active, prepared, and qualified. Other activities showed his ability to "incur the displeasure of some of the brethren," because of "much political discussion, feeling, and speculation as the Brethren took party lines." In May and June of 1891 he had frequent meetings with the Council of the Twelve, which often lasted all day. The pressing agenda often required them to work while they ate: "bread, butter, crackers, grapes, peaches, cheese, melons, cake, apples, and other delicacies." "Roberts is a busy man writing all the time in the new office on Main Street," his clerk recorded. On his manuscript Priesthood and the Right of Succession, which was later published as Succession in the Presidency, [^14] Roberts closely collaborated with President Wilford Woodruff. Letter exchanges and council meeting minutes indicate that he generated clashes on the exact roles and relationships of the seventy and the high priest. Immersed in studies of the early quorum organizations in Kirtland and Nauvoo, he met half a dozen times with Elder Francis M. Lyman on the question. [^15]

The Brethren were preoccupied with statehood and national affairs, so political divisions were seen as early as 1892-Roberts's friends John Henry Smith, George Q. Cannon, and Francis M. Lyman became active Republicans; John Morgan, Moses Thatcher, Abraham H. Cannon and B. H. Roberts lined up on the Democratic side. [^16] Roberts made many visits to quorums of the seventy in Utah, Idaho and Arizona. He gave public discourses on religious-political themes; for example, the confiscation of Church property in 1890 was one topic. Roberts declared this act to be illegal and offered solid grounds for the Church's appeal to the Supreme Court. He also presented a critical review of the confiscation decision of U.S. District Court Judge Anderson. [^17] He was writing outlines for the seventies to study in Sunday School, [^18] working on "correct record keeping" in conferences, [^19] and preparing the members of seventies quorums throughout the Church for the dedication of the Salt Lake Temple. He also did some ghost writing-for example, an article prepared with Mrs. Franklin S. Richards to be presented by her on the woman's place in the Mormon Church. [^20]

205As associate editor of the Salt Lake Herald, Roberts learned in the summer of 1891 of the great Parliament of Religions to be held in Chicago in 1893 in connection with the World's Fair, which was called "The World's Columbian Exposition." Some of the major world faiths who were invited declined participation; for example, the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Sultan of Turkey. The Mormon Church was not invited. In 1893, as Utahns began to visit the exposition, the First Presidency appointed Roberts to go to Chicago to investigate the possibilities of a Mormon presentation. He carried with him a letter from the First Presidency (Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith) citing the announced intention of the parliament: "In friendly conference... not for debate, but to speak of what are to them the supreme truths, to show the relation of these truths to the practical problems of modern life." Roberts arrived in Chicago in late July and after several days of interviews, meetings with the leaders of the parliament, and fulfilling their conditions (including providing an outline of a paper he would be willing to deliver) he was frustrated and returned home. In the meantime, the First Presidency visited the World's Fair with the Tabernacle Choir, which won second place in choral competition. Roberts again was sent (by President Lorenzo Snow) to seek representation and was again in effect rejected by token acceptance: he could read his paper, not on the platform with others but in an obscure back room. Word of this reached the press, and the Chicago News printed comments of Merwin Snell, a professor of comparative religion, who appeared in Roberts's place to explain his refusal to read his paper in "Hall number 3."

All other religions of every kind and from every country were allowed to make their presentation, but this was denied the Mormons, an act that Mr. Snell considered was the "darkest blot in the history of civilization in this country." And this ineradicable blot seems to have been due to contemptible ignorance of their religion... now again the Mormon Church has suffered through the preposterous ignorance and prejudice of other religious bodies.

Roberts's suggestion that there be a Mormon bureau of information at the World's Fair was agreed to, and the exhibit in the Hall of Religions, according to George S. Romney, "was outstanding." [^21] Roberts later published a series of four articles in the Improvement Era recounting the entire history of the transaction. [^22]

206When the parliament and its accompanying pressures ended, Roberts resumed his heavy writing schedule. The volume Succession in the Presidency was published. John M. Whitaker had taken Roberts's dictation on this and other projects in the early part of 1892. He comments:

He is making plans for another great historical effort that will be of intense interest to the coming generation. He is a great, painstaking, student and one of the most accurate I have met with in all my days. [^23]

President Woodruff gave Roberts's book on priesthood succession an open endorsement when, after a public lecture in which the book was summarized, he arose and said:

He has given us an excellent discourse, and has told us the truth.

Before Joseph Smith died, he organized the Church with Apostles, Patriarchs, Pastors, Teachers and the whole government of the Church of God; and that Priesthood he organized or laid the foundations of remained with the people after his death, as Brother Roberts has said tonight.

It has been repeated to you here tonight what was done in the conference in Nauvoo. I do not know whether there is anyone present here tonight but myself who was present at that conference-there are but few living who were present on that occasion. Brigham stepped forth as a leader of Israel, as has been said here tonight by Brother Roberts, and Sidney Rigdon also tried to get the presidency; but when his name was put to a vote before the conference of the Latter-day Saints, and they were asked if they wanted him as their guardian, to guide them in the Celestial Kingdom, Brigham said: "All who do, raise your right hand," and I did not see a hand raised in his favor in that congregation.

A man cannot leave this Church without the power of God leaving him. It has been the power of the Priesthood that made men great; and no man can handle it only according to the order of God. If they do they will fall, as has been stated in the revelations of God, read by Brother Roberts this evening. [^24]

For some time Roberts had been working on his biographical study of President John Taylor. On January 20, 1891, he had written to L. John Nuttall, who had served as President Taylor's secretary, requesting details of the passing of President John Taylor at Kaysville in 1887, "as I have reached that stage in my work when I need it." It became the last chapter of the book.

207Apparently he had been gathering material on this subject since the 1880s, just after his mission to Britain. [^25] In February 1891 he wrote to the Taylor family to say he had completed seven chapters and had presented them to the First Presidency (Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, Joseph F. Smith) for "review, examination and correction." Elders John Jacques and L. John Nuttall, who had served as President Taylor's secretaries, were assigned to carefully scrutinize the manuscript. For nearly a month they met frequently with Roberts and made suggestions. By late March nine chapters were completed and approved, and the book was published early in 1892.

The book is the most laudatory in tone of Roberts's writings. It begins with the preface that "the author loved the subject" and ends with the pronouncement, "he was one of the great ones of the earth."

The character traits Roberts found admirable in President Taylor, they shared: aspiration-"Princely in dignity" yet without stiffness; a "beautiful harmony" in mind and person; powerful intellect and splendid courage; incapable of sectarian feelings (Roberts quoted five paragraphs from Taylor which warn Latter-day Saints not to partake of the sectarian qualities of "the pit from whence we were dug-if we are the children of God so are all others, if the hand of God is over us, it is over all, if we seek exaltation, we should not seek to send others elsewhere, if some say let all come in but the Papist let us say welcome the Papist also"). Many of President Taylor's personal sayings became Roberts's own:

I would rather have God for my friend than all other influences and powers outside.

I believe in a religion I can live for or die for.

I was not born a slave! I cannot, will not be a slave!

Money is of little importance where truth is concerned.

I prefer faded coats to a faded reputation.

If a thing is done well, no one will ask how long it took to do it, but who did it.

208Roberts later wrote that the "spirit and power" of John Taylor's biography had its beginning as boyish "admiration [which] grew almost into hero worship," which was first nurtured by stories Mother Tovey read to him in England. "I admired greatly the courage that prompted this man, Taylor, to stand by his chief at the opening door as the guns were thrust through pressing their deadly messages into... the chamber where the Prophet and his friends were confined." John Taylor, with only a walking stick, had "deliberately parried the guns, drawing them out of range.' [^26]

The Taylor family (two sons, John J. Taylor and John W. Taylor, were executors of the estate) had commissioned Roberts to write this memorial. Their decision perhaps reflects the esteem President Taylor had for the thirty-five-year-old Roberts. Roberts was given access to John Taylor's own journals and his personal papers. Members of the Taylor family were open, cooperative and conscientious in responding to Roberts's searching queries in interviews. Since President Taylor's own counselor, George Q. Cannon, was related to John Taylor by marriage and had (Roberts believed) himself aspired to write his biography, Roberts felt a special responsibility. [^27]

The biography seems today almost a eulogy which sober rethinking would qualify. But four decades later, Roberts printed his tributes to the "commanding strength" of John Taylor, unmodified, in his A Comprehensive History of the Church. [^28]

In qualities of mind and character and in style of leadership, President Taylor was Roberts's model from boyhood. He had performed his marriage, issued his mission call, corresponded with him while the young eider was in the field, and given the "keep going" instruction to him after the trauma of the Tennessee murders. The quiet trust President Taylor paid Roberts by sending his own son into the Southern States Mission made Roberts seem a son as well.

-->209 There are some obvious reasons for Roberts's identification with President Taylor. John Taylor was one of the most preeminent British converts. His life was enmeshed with that of the Church from 1834 on. Some of Roberts's projections on him are autobiographical; for instance, he was "remarkable for character-that mysterious something which exists independent of birth, education and fortune," [^29] or his "mind was unwarped by prevailing customs and traditions." Next to his unflinching regard for Christ (under his picture in many Mormon chapels was the inscription "The Kingdom of God or Nothing") was President Taylor's intense grasp of the roots and rights of human freedom: "I would not be slave to God himself, he is reported to have said. "I would be his servant, his son, but never a slave." Even as a youth, Taylor had "had a natural vivacity" but "little regard for the stiff formula of church creed. [^30] Long before he clearly knew the meaning of either America or the gospel, he had a spiritual intuition: "I must go to America to preach the gospel." Roberts too had known this thirst to come to America.

John Taylor had a prodigious mentality (Brigham Young once said he had the finest mind in the Council of the Twelve at that time), a mind that reached for ultimate principles. He was a statesman, a writer, a lucid debater. His writings were, Roberts wrote, "too large, too high and too deep for minds filled with false, sectarian ideas. [^31] And it was from him that Roberts took the term he found most descriptive of Christ's way: Eternalism.

Roberts admired John Taylor's writings as well as his manner of speaking and his debate technique, which struck a blow by "powerful statement of the truth" but was "backed by a peculiar ability to expose the weakness of his opponent's position. [^32] John Taylor, he wrote, debated Vice-President Colfax-one of the most important discussions in the history of the Church-and Roberts said Elder Taylor "surpassed him not only in the force of argument, but in literary style, in the elegance, ease and beauty of his diction; while for courtesy and fair dealing and frankness he was not surpassed by the Vice-President. [^33] Colfax had a great reputation as speaker and writer; as a member of Congress he had become accustomed to debate.

210 John Taylor wrote The Mediation and Atonement of Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, a collection of all the passages in ancient and contemporary sacred writ that foreshadow, testify, and interpret the life of Christ. Sparse commentary is interspersed with the scriptural excerpts. This volume led to Roberts's Seventy's Yearbook on the Atonement, which President Heber J. Grant praised as "the most beautiful book on the mission of Christ the Redeemer that I have ever read.' [^34]

Overall, Roberts's Life of John Taylor is chronological, the episodes of Elder Taylor's service to the Church being presented in a setting that is semipersonal. The personality of the man comes less into focus than the massive contribution he made in the larger setting of the nation and the Church. Taylor's association with the Prophet Joseph Smith, particularly, in the final days (during which he was one of the two note-taking eyewitnesses), dominate four of the chapters. Through this and a study of John Taylor's discourses, later published in The Gospel Kingdom, Roberts saw with increasing clarity the British-Canadian convert who steadied the knees of many during the Kirtland crises; the missionary in France who debated with honor and who pronounced some French philosophy "fried froth"; the elder who stood at the Place Vendome and Napoleon's Column, looked at the names scratched on it, and said, "I will not write my name there; but I will yet write it in living, imperishable characters!"; the editor who wrote temperate answers to hate literature from New York. [^35]

On Thursday, March 30, 1893, a special council meeting was held in the newly completed room for the First Council of the Seventy on the fourth floor of the Salt Lake Temple. "On entering the room a pleasing sense of gratitude filled my heart for the privileges thus accorded to our council and that we should here have the privilege of meeting in council and prayer." [^36] The brethren expressed themselves in harmony and accord with the authorities.

211Roberts had often spoken of the temple as "God's holy altar for this people." Forty years of sacrificial effort with solid granite had reached completion. [^37] A series of dedicatory meetings began on April 6 and continued until April 23, and as President Wilford Woodruff later wrote, it was "the greatest event of 1893." Nearly seventy-two thousand people met in the dedicatory services, including twelve thousand Sunday School children. Roberts's notes indicate he was able to bring Louisa to the services on Saturday, April 8, and Margaret was with him all day through the services on Sunday, April 9. (Celia was at the time in Manassa, Colorado, "beyond the technical reach of the law.") His daughter Loa, one of his children old enough to be invited, was stricken with scarlet fever and the other children were quarantined. The children later learned of the blessed sanctuary vicariously, however, as their parents returned to Centerville rejoicing.

Many of Roberts's journal entries describing the sessions are followed by a prayer. Of a special temple priesthood gathering on April 19 with the First Presidency, the Twelve, the First Council of the Seventy and many presidencies of stakes, he wrote, "There was a very heavenly spirit throughout and everyone was melted to tears in the presence of these testimonies." The next day, on Thursday, President Woodruff was unable to attend but both Presidents Cannon and Smith spoke and "were deeply affected and moved to tears." President Cannon testified he knew that Jesus was the Christ: "he had seen and conversed with Christ as a man talks with his friend." "The feelings of all were subdued." By prearrangement 115 priesthood leaders joined in a prayer circle, in the spirit of fasting, for a sacrament meeting.

Thus was the Lord's supper truly the sacrament and we ate and drank in memory of Him-our Savior and Redeemer, our Advocate with the Father. Every face beamed with happiness and shone with intelligence. After supper we sang a hymn, conversed at pleasure and told our duties and told anecdotes principally of the Prophet Joseph. One could have sat I know not how long but as all things seem to have an end in this world so did this our meeting. This prayer circle was the first held in the Salt Lake Temple and the largest held in this dispensation. [^38]

As he looked back on these meetings he wrote, "There seemed to flow into my soul a whole flood of light."

This has been a pentecostal time with me. The Lord has shown me my inner parts, myself; and there I have found such grained and gnarled spots that I have been humbled to sincere repentance. At times I have wondered even how the Lord could tolerate me at all as His servant. Truly it is a manifestation of long suffering and mercy. [^39]

President Woodruff had declared that, inasmuch as the people would repent and from that time forth forsake their sins, God would forgive their sins and blot them out that they should "not be proclaimed to the assembled world." Roberts wrote:

To me this is the most precious assurance and blessing of them all. Help me oh Father to attain unto it; and I will serve Thee forever. How good and precious are Thy gifts, oh my Father! I will try for this blessing. Do Thou, oh God, blot out my transgressions and make me strong against evil forever more. [^40]

The dedicated temple brought Roberts another privilege that continued over nearly three decades. Prayer circles, first organized in the Nauvoo Temple in Illinois, were now established afresh. General Authorities were authorized by the First Presidency to select from their own families and loved ones a group to meet every two weeks or so in the sacred setting of the temple to share spiritual perceptions and in the unity of the sacred place pray together. All dressed in temple white, Roberts would welcome his Brethren in a calming way that detached them from the bustle of their world, sit in their midst, to reminisce in his random but sometimes gripping way, review the pressures and needs of the hour, and then take the lead in kneeling prayer. Elder Marion G. Romney, later to become a member of the Council of the Twelve and the First Presidency, was invited as a member of this close-knit group and often knelt with the friends and brethren of B. H. Roberts. President Romney recalls, "So close, so tangible, was the communion of his spirit with God's Spirit in prayer as B. H. Roberts prayed, that I often felt as if the Lord Himself was in the room." [^41]

And yet, with the heights there were also depths:

213This year [1893] for some unaccountable reason has been a year of deep sorrow to me, and peculiar temptations. The flashes of light, heavenly light, have been startlingly bright, made to appear so to me, perhaps, by the thick blackness that has gathered about my horizon. But if my sorrows have been many my joys have been correspondingly keen and there have been bright moments of joy and ecstasy such as few mortals encompass; and if these bright drops of joy can be possessed only by drinking the drops of all of ill between-then fill sorrow's cup to the brim and drain it dry even to the dregs and never murmur. Give me the gleams of sunshine amid the renewing storms and I will stand uncovered to discern the latter in all their fury without a word of protestation. [^42]

From his days in the mission office in Liverpool, Roberts had the idea of writing a three-volume series on Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon, treating them separately yet inseparable as witnesses for God. Now he began systematic organization of the material. His aide and assistant was once again John Whitaker:

During this time he often digresses and discusses many important doctrinal matters of great interest, and many secrets of his busy life. And it is interesting and inspiring to see his determination to leave a witness of the truth in so many ways. He told me of his trials and how hard it is sometimes to make adjustments. But he is leaving a witness in his carefully documented historical writings and on doctrines that will keep his name fresh in the minds of Latter-day Saints for generations to come. He is very painstaking, exact and accurate and states facts as they are, without coloring or favoring this or that point. He says history must be accurate or it is of little value. [^43]

In July 1894, Whitaker recorded further work on the New Witness series and added, "He is doing wonderful work in writing on Church history and many other subjects, and he keeps busy all the time in the work of the Seventy." [^44]

214It was arduous to continue research and writing, and at the same time carry a full work load of office interviews, committee meetings, and the weekend stake conferences, for which travel sometimes took three or four days. As usual, Roberts was reading prodigiously in odd moments: for example, riding the "Dummy" (the electric train from Salt Lake City to Centerville), on which, according to one family story, he often subdued noisy, boisterous children, sometimes his own, by banging their heads together; in automobiles and in hotels during conference visits outside of Utah; and literally in every spare minute between his official meetings and duties in the Church offices.

Completed in Roberts's thirty-ninth year, the New Witness series reflects his approach and grasp of the historical genesis of Christendom and of the restored Church. He does not defend the "character of the Latter-day Saints" but rather the message of divine inspiration and the messenger, Joseph Smith. The series was offered as an alternative-the only one since Burton's City of the Saints, published in 1862-to the sensationalist treatments of Mormonism by "ghouls who have preyed upon the misfortunes of an unpopular people solely for the money or notoriety they could make out of the enterprise." Roberts appeals to the evidence for the genuineness of the Restoration in the abysmal character of apostasy-a theme he later expanded in his Outlines of Ecclesiastical History, in The Falling Away, and in many of his prepared sermons. Roberts's main thrust is that the precise tests developed and used to defend early Christendom from its critics are with even more efficacy applied to the restored Church. And the one criterion not allowed by Christian people who reject the Restoration is the only evidence that moves one from sand to rock: revelation.

215From Rockville in southern Utah Roberts wrote, on September 27, 1895, that he had written fourteen articles for the Contributor that year and had agreed to write the story of the Missouri persecutions, as well as studying all the time so he could speak each evening, and looking after his family affairs besides. "That whirl" of his life, he wrote, is "having a purifying effect on my character." He felt he was a better man than he had been. This letter also underlined how grateful he was for the privilege of "associating with prophets and apostles-men of God-and enjoying their confidence." He prayed in the idiom of Paul that "the love of the world nor poverty nor shame nor bonds nor fire nor death" would influence him in deserting his brethren, his family, or his God.

Notes

Chapter 10

1 Official records place the marriage as about six months prior to the Manifesto.

2 Diary of Ellis Shipp, Church Archives, p. 80.

3 Ibid., p. 81.

4 See Proceedings in the Smoot Case, 4 vols. (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1909), 1:710-11.

5 Improvement Era 10 (July 1907): 706.

6 Abraham H. Cannon Journal, vol. 19, pp. 1-10.

7 . From a journal of B. H. Roberts, 15 May 1893.

8 . Improvement Era 2 (October 1899): 900.

9 From a journal of B. H. Roberts, 1890-93, p. 44.

10 Ibid., 3 November 1890.

11 Roberts recorded in a journal on 11 November 1890 that he had "often sacrificed his family and its interests to labor in the interest of the kingdom."

12 From a journal of B. H. Roberts, January 1891.

13 Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution.

14 John Whitaker Journal, January 1892; see also March and April 1892.

15 Ibid., 16 July 1890 and 27 March 1892.

16 Ibid., 15 June 1892 to 30 June 1892.

17 Ibid., 20 December 1889.

18 Ibid., April 1892.

19 Ibid., January 1893.

20 Ibid., March 1893.

21 Conference Report, October 1893, p. 41.

22 See Improvement Era (June, July, August, September 1899): 584, 673, 750, 831,893.

23 See Conference Report, October 1893, p. 41.

24 Remarks by President Wilford Woodruff following a lecture delivered by Roberts in the Assembly Hall in Salt Lake City on 23 February 1892.

25 In July 1887 Whitaker records Roberts's assignment by the familyto write the biography of John Taylor.

26 BN, p. 18a.

27 In his Biographical Notes, Roberts speculates that this decision was a factor (and he seems to imply the main factor) in the "evident prejudices" Elder Cannon manifested toward him. President Carman's own diary, which records the political strains their relationship endured, is fair, mellow, tolerant and forgiving. As is often true of men who are too much alone with their inner lives, Roberts more than once "took offense" when there was none. He was not a discerning judge of motives.

28 See CHC, 6:189-90.

29 Roberts, Life of John Taylor, p. 2.

30 Ibid., p. 26.

31 Ibid., p. 19.

32 Ibid., p. 20.

33 Ibid., p. 310.

34 Recollections of Elsa Cook. Interview with Truman G. Madsen, 1967.

35 Some men are so accustomed to authority that they disdain the' show of it. So with John Taylor and B. H. Roberts.

36 From a journal of B. H. Roberts, 30 March 1893.

37 In a meeting of 14 March 1893, Roberts records, "I prophesied in the name of the Lord that because of the liberality of the Saints in subscribing for the completion of the temple that this year should be the most prosperous the Church had ever known."

38 From a journal of B. H. Roberts, 20 April 1893.

39 Ibid., 24 April 1893.

40 Ibid., 22 April 1893.

41 Marion G. Romney to Truman G. Madsen, 1971.

42 . From a journal of B. H. Roberts, 1893, p. 44.

43 . John Whitaker Journal, 10 April 1894.

44 . Ibid., July 1894.

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
[^23] 23 Mrs. William Reed to Ann Roberts.
[^24] 24 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^25] 25 Late in their lives, on 3 May 1928, B. H. and Annie Brynie, a half-sister, and Mary arranged for the temple sealing of Ann Everington and Benjamin Roberts and all of the children including the twins and baby Thomas. See BHR Temple Book.
[^26] 26 Roberts kept one sample of his father's handwriting from the original wrapping of the photo given his mother. It is preserved in the family collection.
[^27] 27 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 1 September 1883, Roberts Family Collection.
[^28] 28 Research has failed to establish where and when Ben died. The marriage date is 15 June 1848 (he was twenty-two) in Poplar, Middlesex, England; from the Book of Remembrance of Haven R. Day.
[^29] 29 B. H. Roberts to Ann Everington, 21 April 1880, Roberts Family Collection.
[^30] 30 Mrs. Charles H. Wilcox recorded these impressions from a conversation with B.H. Roberts at his home prior to his call to the Eastern States.
[^31] 31 BN, p. 10.
[^32] 32 See Juvenile Instructor 49 (February 1914): 85.
[^33] 33 Fifty years later, as chairman of "Vocations and Industry" in the youth program of the Church, he wrote, "We shall take the ground that no vocation of honest industry need be ignoble or debasing in its effects, but by properly correlating it with the general welfare of human life can be in effect both honorable and glorious." Improvement Era 15 (October 1912): 1083.
[^34] 34 Liahona 12 (20 October 1914): 364.
[^35] 35. Salt Lake Herald, 8 January 1899.
[^36] 36. So Roberts later told his children.
[^37] 37. BNG, p. 8.
[^38] 38 See History of Utah, 4:689.
[^39] 39 In a notebook under "Roberts, B. H." is this handwritten note: "Warrington-Town of, my birth place. Warrington, at the head of tide water on the Mersey River. It was a station of Romans (Veraterium) in the time of Agricola - (69-84 A.D.) and many Roman relics have been found in the neighborhood."
[^40] 40 Beniamin's father's brother.
[^41] 41 N. B. Lundwall, Roberts's secretary for twelve years, recalls him saying this incident occurred when he was seven.
[^42] 42 BNG, p. 16. Roberts spoke in later years of this spiritual impression (which one tradition says was repeated three times) as evidence that "the promptings of the Spirit of God" can come early - several years, in his case, before his official baptism and confirmation in 1867.
[^43] 43 The word gomin - rather than urchha - was endeared to Roberts through the Victor Hugo story of Gayroche who, in the midst of battle, went along the pavement gathering unfired cartridges from the corpses of fallen men, gaining strength at each step.
[^44] 44 Memoirs, p. 4.
