Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

11 Statehood, Suffrage, and the Mission East

Roberts first involved himself in politics as a campaign manager:

In the fall of 1889 [he was thirty-two] a Territorial election took place. I had for some time manifested a profound interest in political questions. Since the offices of congressman and legislator were contested, I was asked to participate in gaining support for the "People's Party" which, at the time, was really the Church party. In this role I visited the principal counties and cities of Utah supporting the candidacy of John R. Caine as a delegate on the Democratic ticket. Two years later I made the same kind of effort on behalf of Joseph L. Rawlins, an eminent lawyer in the Territory. With him I covered the whole spectrum of Utah's political life. Both Mr. Caine and Mr. Rawlins were successful in these elections. The by-product, though I was not fully conscious of it, was a tremendous boost to my own reputation as a campaign manager and advocate. Soon I was considered a political figure to be reckoned with. [^1]

During this same period, some permanent policies were established in the Territory of Utah: the two-party system, statehood, and the climax of antipolygamy legislation.

As preparation to oppose Mr. Rawlins, Mr. Frank J. Cannon, Roberts's student-associate at the University of Deseret, made a strong appeal to the Mormon population in a pamphlet, Nuggets of Truth, which intimated that Mormon leaders had always been Republicans and favored protective tariffs. The pamphlet consisted of quotations from various Church writings and discourses which all supported this idea. The Mormon electorate was swayed by this effort, though not decisively: Mr. Cannon was defeated and Mr. Rawlins returned to Washington as territorial delegate.

Roberts records in an 1893 diary that he was inclined to remain aloof from politics in the early 1890s; Moses Thatcher had said to him, "B. H, let's you and I stay out of it. It is not a wise thing to engage in it." Instead, both men, though officially counseled otherwise, became so involved in politics that complications both for them and for the Church were multiplied. President Wilford Woodruff records that in October 1892, the consensus of the Presidency was that "none of the Presidency, Twelve or Presidents of Seventies should take the stump to make political speeches." [^2] A week later, on October 11, President Woodruff records, "I met with Moses Thatcher and B. H. Roberts and talked politics and met with many, of the Brethren and spoke of our duties." [^3]

Aside from political involvements Roberts had taken on other secular burdens: he accepted the editorship of the Salt Lake Herald without the sanction or even the knowledge of the First Presidency. When President Woodruff learned of it, he was concerned (though he did not say so to Roberts) that the task would siphon away precious time and energy from Roberts's Church service. [^4]

217In the campaigns of 1892 and 1893, Roberts had contended vigorously for his candidates and was upset at whispers that he was "out of favor" with the leaders of the Church who, it was said, desired his defeat. He reacted to the comments made by, President Woodruff and George Q. Cannon to the Salt Lake Times, saying that they were "meddling." The Brethren in the First Council of the Seventy felt that by such public statements he had needlessly "increased the burdens" of the First Presidency. They counseled him to clarify matters. At first he refused. Finally he visited with George Q. Cannon, who recorded: "We acquitted him of any deliberate design to injure the First Presidency. I talked very freely to him but with what I supposed to be a kind and brotherly spirit, and he received it as such. He asked our forgiveness, and I in turn asked his forgiveness for anything I had said that had hurt his feelings. " [^5]

Within ten minutes of that interview, however, he was back in a caucus with several party figures and resorted, John Whitaker records, to "severe and caustic language.' [^6] Later some of his public statements went from the dignity of debate to the heat of harangue. The First Presidency responded by not responding. They neither wished to sustain his political views publicly or privately nor on the other hand to "do anything that would hurt him in the least." [^7]

In anticipation of the state constitutional convention, Roberts was elected-in absentia-as a delegate from Davis County. He inquired of the First Presidency as to whether they approved of his participation, and learned that rather than "deprive the state of some of the best services that could be given in a convention," prominent brethren in the Church were encouraged to serve. He concluded that that same permission extended to his later decision to seek political office in the newly organized state. [^8] The convention began on March 4, 1895, and continued until May 8-sixty-six days. Republican John Henry Smith, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, was elected chairman of the convention.

In the constitutional convention the suffrage issue took up the better part of ten days between March 26 and April 8. (The debates on this question occupy nearly four hundred pages in the published proceedings.) In Roberts's own retrospective notes it becomes apparent that he felt his position, in which he stood virtually alone, was not fully understood then or later.

218In his view, woman and woman suffrage had been victimized by political gamesmanship. He speaks in his notes of what he considered "false opposition" to woman suffrage.

There had been talk of "reform" in the electorate of the state from early territorial days. The minority non-Mormon population in Utah hoped that if women were given the franchise they would overturn Mormon domination in the territory. Brigham Young accepted the challenge and urged the conferring of the franchise upon Utah women. Congress upheld the decision. Then it was realized that by that process the "Mormon vote" had practically doubled, whereupon a clamor arose to disenfranchise Utah women. With the Ed-mundso Tucker Act of 1887 that was done. From then on Latter-day Saint women united with the national suffrage campaign. Now that Utah was again seeking statehood, the territory had been divided, sometimes artificially, along national party lines, and both parties "sought to outdo the other" in their pledges to give women the franchise. Roberts believed that President Grover Cleveland was opposed to woman suffrage and that Utah's chances for statehood would be jeopardized by putting that plank in the enabling legislation. On that, it turned out, he was simply mistaken.

Aside from his plea for inexpediency, Roberts made two speeches. The first was on the reasons for denying suffrage. The second was a response to the criticisms that came from major spokesmen on the floor, including Charles Varian, a Republican and non-Mormon who congratulated Roberts on his rhetoric and "the attendant graces of elocution" but re-jected his arguments. [^9]

219Then, as now, Roberts's position was dismissed as obstructionist, and as reflecting a prejudicial disesteem for women. Obstinate he was. But the undergirding premise of much that he said in the convention and for the rest of his life is quite different from the stereotype: He presupposed that women are in many ways superior to men. As such they are entitled not only to love but to privileged representation. Unmarried women, he urged, should have suffrage. But wives and mothers should be represented through their husbands and thus remain at a distance from the din of political battle. For the same reason he believed they should be exempt from poll taxes, work upon public roads, jury duty, and the military. If they were "embroiled in political agitation," the "Queenly Aureola" of their brow would fade and the proper reverence due them disappear. During the convention some of the suffragettes had already been referred to as "neither brute nor human but ghouls." Roberts asked, why submit women to such "jests and jibes"? [^10]

And what were Roberts's ultimate assumptions about men and women and their respective roles? He invoked tradition and some scripture (Paul's "man is the head of the woman"), saying that women were as different from men "as Gladstone is different from Tennyson." Arguing that suffrage is a privilege and not a right, he cited statistics (for example, some from Chicago) to show that not the most noble women but the most "brazen" would actually vote. He then used (as later in his life) the metaphor of two streams which should not be run together. [^11] He also injected a personal subjective argument, hoping, he said, to go to his own home to find "some asylum, some refuge from the storms and cares of life," rather than to a "political argument."

Roberts seems to have been aware that he was defending a losing cause. Some who knew his temperament wondered if that was the subjective root of his defense. Most of the leaders of the Church were anxious to do in the state what, from the beginning, had been done in the Church -give women privileges of sanction. John Henry Smith praised Roberts's "courage" but Joseph F. Smith saw little to praise. In his antisuffrage stance Roberts offended his own constituency in Davis County, who felt "a flush of displeasure." He displeased most Republicans and Democrats alike by accusing both parties of insincerity. To their murmurings he replied that he had no political aspirations and therefore no stars to be "blotted out." He denounced both parties for cowardice and in response was charged with being ungentle-manly. And he made no friends among the unpartied but civic-minded by his negative esteem of politics as a "mire" to which women should not descend. What then of men?

220On the final morning of the debate, Roberts came with fifteen pages of notes which he had prepared by burning the midnight oil. There was enough interest in his proposed message that the floor overruled an attempt to shut off debate as "useless." He had a list of delegates who had "yielded their time" to him which added up to two hours and thirty minutes. He indulged in some oratorical horseplay in his response to Orson F. Whitney, which involved them in good-natured banter for the rest of their lives. (Orson F. Whitney inscribed a book to Roberts, "To my old opponent in debate.") He had compared Roberts to the Old Testament Balaam who was bull-like in his indifference to "threatened danger." [^12]

Roberts was not accustomed to praise in the local press. But the Salt Lake Tribune published his arguments in extenso with headlines saying "he annihilates the women suffragettes with logic and eloquence." A weekly independent paper in Salt Lake City, the Argus, claimed that the fears in the hearts of "hundreds of men on the street" in Salt Lake and "entertained by almost every gentile in the convention" had been expressed "most eloquently by a Mormon." They credit Roberts with "courage" and "nerve" and with "the ability to puncture the hides of the skulkers with sarcasm so keen as to make them wince. [^13]

During later days in the constitutional convention the issue of location for the University of Utah arose. An effort was made to discontinue the State Agricultural College in Logan and amalgamate it with the University of Utah. This would have sacrificed the college plant in Logan and discontinued federal support for agricultural colleges in Utah. Roberts was among those who opposed this move, and it was defeated.

Roberts also engineered and introduced the passage of a section of the state constitution prohibiting the use of state credit in support of private or corporate organizations. [^14] An unsuccessful effort was also made to confine corporations to one general line of activity in each case.

Of all the praise and censure he received, Roberts appreciated this letter most:

Hon. B. H. Roberts Constitutional Convention Salt Lake City, Utah

221Dear Sir:

I appreciate most highly the manly stand you have taken in the Convention upon the question of Woman Suffrage; and though you and I differ in national politics I see in that fact all the more reason why I should say to you that in the discussion of the question thus far you are in my opinion the only man with the possible exception of Mr. [Anthony C.] Lund who has approached the subject entirely free from the speech and art of the demagogue ....

Yours truly, [Signed] William McKay

Similarly, Governor Caleb W. West was so impressed with Roberts's influence in the convention that he wrote a commendation "as a testimonial which you will be at liberty to use as you may deem proper." [^15] Then he cited him as one of the "foremost citizens" of the new state for performing "colossal work in molding public sentiment and securing that happy release from the contentions of the past, which ended in our admission into the Union"; taking a more active part than any delegate in "framing the Constitution"; serving as "an editor, public speaker, and writer"; and for opinions "forceful, honest, and potential." [^16]

One form of praise was more tangible: An attorney and mining man in Ogden, David W. Evans, offered Roberts a partnership in his firm, a salary, and tuition to attend two years of law school at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor. Later, Orlando W. Powers, one of the West's leading criminal attorneys, "bettered" the offer, assuring Roberts that his "general information, logical mind and ability to handle facts" qualified him for immediate entry into law practice and that in a short time the technicalities would "come naturally." [^17]

He consulted with the Church authorities and, in the absence of specific direction from them, stayed with his Church calling. [^18]

222In the first election of the new state in 1895 both B. H. Roberts and the apostle Moses Thatcher were urged to seek congressional seats. Roberts was nominated by acclamation at the Democratic convention, held in June 1895, to run for a seat in the House of Representatives. He soon was at work canvassing the entire state with John T. Caine, a candidate for governor, and Richard W. Young, a candidate for the Supreme Court. Moses Thatcher and Joseph L. Rawlins, a prominent attorney, were seeking election to the U.S. Senate, and Roberts's campaign chairman, O. W. Powers, was nominated for the state Democratic committee. [^19]

Neither Roberts nor Thatcher consulted the authorities of the Church, and that omission was censured abruptly by Joseph F. Smith of the First Presidency in the general priesthood meeting of October conference. Both men considered the statement politically motivated, since Joseph F. Smith was known as a firm Republican. They proceeded to turn their campaigns into a plea against "ecclesiastical interference," and, rather than reconciling their situation with the First Presidency, they independently stumped the state. The planks of Roberts's platform-coping with hard times, defense of protective tariff, silver as a money standard, and the issue of bonds-were variously treated. But in each of his addresses (and he gave eight addresses in three days in Summit and Wasatch counties) he dealt with the "events of the Priesthood Meeting." He did not specify names and conceded the right of Church leaders to censure. But he attacked "petty politicians" who were using the incident in a whisper campaign (he called it "gum-shoeing" and "grapevine wire warnings") to urge his defeat. Partisan spirit was generated and a movement was organized to withdraw the entire Democratic ticket and nullify the adoption of the state constitution and, by implication, of statehood. The Democratic state committees were convened to see if this was their decision, but the resolution was defeated. Roberts said in that meeting:

I believe the party this year was marching toward a glorious victory, when, as if an earthquake had rolled under our feet, we came to a standstill and began to wonder if again it could be true that the unwelcome influence of the Church was to rob us of a victory. [He then] declared for "a firm and determined resolution in the hearts of enough people to divorce the Church from the state. [^20]

223The campaign continued and, though Roberts ran ahead of his ticket by nearly a thousand votes, he was defeated by C. E. Allen, his Republican opponent, by 897 votes. [^21] Roberts believed to the end of his life that "unquestionably the campaign of 1895 was more or less influenced, and the defeat of Mr. Roberts and the Democratic party in general was more or less influenced by the criticism of himself and Moses Thatcher." [^22]

On Thursday, November 14, 1895, George Q. Cannon observed in a First Presidency meeting that both Elders Thatcher and Roberts should be interviewed before "any ecclesiastical appointments." Lorenzo Snow, the President of the Quorum of the Twelve, said he could not fellowship them until they made things right, nor could any of the Quorum do so. Pending statehood the interview was postponed. [^23]

Utah became a state on January 4, 1896. The First Presidency and the Twelve met with Roberts on February 13, 1896, and recorded that he "finally made acknowledgement" of the chasm between himself and the Brethren. Until then, apparently, he had not even consented to meet with the First Presidency. Among the Brethren there was much rejoicing that he had not severed himself from his Quorum. But he was still unwilling to sign a proposed political manifesto, which would keep him from running for political office except by approval of the First Presidency.

His semi-mellow attitude was brief. On March 5, 1896, in the Salt Lake Temple, President Wilford Woodruff records: "We spent the whole day here ["we" included the First Presidency, all of the Council of the Twelve, and all of the seven presidents of the Seventy [^24] ]until six o'clock laboring with B. H. Roberts, the second meeting we held with [him] to get him to repent of his wrong in what he had said and done against the Church and Presidency on political principles. But he stood like Adamant and he is going to destruction." [^25] Two weeks later there was another long day (five hours, Marriner W. Merrill records) in the temple. "It was a solemn scene-many tears. But B. H. R. not moved," wrote George Reynolds. [^26]

224In one of these temple meetings Roberts performed his "marvelous feat." Elder Heber J. Grant often described with mixed admiration and chagrin how Roberts "held all the brethren at bay." He sat before the Council of the Twelve while each member in turn spoke at length and in detail about Roberts's position, offering comments and making important distinctions. When every man in the room had spoken, Roberts arose and addressed himself to each comment in the exact sequence in which it had been uttered, answered it-or at least responded to it-in full, and then moved on. As he completed his remarks he said, in effect: "Now Brethren, I have spoken without notes. If there is any point that I have omitted or left without comment, please mention." There was silence. Elder Grant, for one, came away with new admiration for Roberts's memory, his capacity for orderly rejoinder and his composure on his feet, but was all the more appalled at his intractable posture. In this meeting, feelings became so intense that President Woodruff arose and with the temperate wisdom for which he is honored said, "Brethren, we will close this meeting by singing 'School Thy Feelings, O My Brother,'" and immediately adjourned the meeting. [^27]

225After this second lengthy and fruitless temple meeting, Heber J. Grant was encouraged, with Francis M. Lyman, to call on Roberts at his home in Salt Lake, more to diagnose than to remonstrate. Some of the Brethren felt that Roberts's frosty resistance arose from feelings that went deeper than his political posture. With all the persuasion and patience of brotherhood, his friends pleaded with him to tell them, even if he wished it to remain privileged communication, what these might be. Roberts absolutely refused. "His heart was like stone." After a long evening these brethren, worn out and disappointed, arose to leave. At the door Roberts shook hands with each of them and said, in substance, "Brethren, though I have not changed my mind, I nevertheless honor you for your kindness, your willingness to try to be helpful." And as he spoke, tears rose to his eyes. Heber J. Grant impulsively took him by the shoulder, pushed him into a chair and said: "What's that? A tear? All right now, out with it! What is in your craw? [^28] Unable to stop himself, Roberts poured out three incidents: an overheard comment of a Republican, a sermon of George Q. Cannon's which Roberts had supposed was directed against him, and a fancied slight. It happened that Elder Grant had firsthand knowledge in each case, and he now showed that in each situation Roberts had taken offense and jumped to an unwarranted conclusion. Roberts knew Heber J. Grant as a man of staggering honesty; he did not question him. He simply stared incredulously through a long and thoughtful silence and then said, "Well, Brethren, I am non-plussed... I am This changes things." [^29]

A copy of Roberts's New Witnesses for God, personally inscribed by the author to Heber J. Grant, refers to this experience on "the night of March 12th." President Grant reciprocated in a letter, writing that "with all my heart, I can assure you that I hope and pray that the friendship which I feel was cemented and increased on that night may grow and strengthen with our years on the earth and ripen into an eternity of friendship in the life to come." [^30]

Roberts's long-time confidant, assistant, and secretary, John Whitaker, called at his home on Monday, March 16, and pleaded with him to do as the First Presidency desired, saying "that it would make him a bigger man than ever. [^31] The same morning Roberts had called on President Woodruff (George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith were out of town), and whatever was said, President Woodruff "expressed great pleasure at the result.' [^32]

To clarify the position of Church leaders who might consider seeking political office in the future, a document which came to be known as the Political Manifesto was drawn up and all the General Authorities were asked to sign it. All except Moses Thatcher and B. H. Roberts did so. It read in part:

Before accepting any position political or otherwise, which would interfere with the proper and complete discharge of his ecclesiastical duties, and before accepting a nomination or entering into engagements to perform new duties, said official should apply to the proper authorities and learn from them whether he can, consistently with the obligations already entered into with the Church upon assuming his office, take upon himself the added duties and labors and responsibilities of the new position. [^33]

226Perhaps, the document went on, such a man should be released from all obligations of Church office before accepting political office. Roberts felt that this instrument needed to be used with "exceeding great care," since by giving or withholding consent, the wishes of the administration of the Church might well influence which candidates could compete in the political arena. [^34]

Though Roberts regarded the manifesto as honest and acknowledged that the earlier Mormon and non-Mormon alignments were unavoidable and that with statehood the two-party system had to be embraced, he held out and refused to sign the document.

Early in March during the period of stalemate Roberts was informed that his public ministry would cease for three weeks, and that if he had no change of heart by the end of that time he would lose his standing as one of the Presidents of the First Council of the Seventy. The night before the deadline, March 25, 1896, the First Presidency met with him again. Eighty-nine-year-old President Woodruff was described as "saintly, loving... as free from all assumption of authority as any man I ever knew. His simple beauty and purity of character were preeminently Christ-like." [^35] He and his two counselors pleaded with Roberts; but he was unyielding. They finally told him he had until nine o'clock the next morning. That night, all night, Roberts walked the streets of Salt Lake, praying, brooding, trying to untangle the strands of his troubled consciousness. The next morning he returned to the offices of the First Presidency, visibly transformed. He came, according to Wilford Woodruff's journal, "with a broken heart and a contrite spirit." Decisively he told the Presidency that he would unite with the Brethren in signing the manifesto and that "his difficulties were all satisfied." Then he added, "Brethren, I have not slept; I have been walking and praying all night long to come to this!" President Joseph F. Smith, with moist, bloodshot eyes, smiled a weary smile. "Yes, Brother Roberts," he responded. "We have not slept either. We have stayed in this room all night praying that you would reach this decision." [^36]

227In the temple meeting that afternoon, Marriner W. Merrill records, Roberts "was forgiven by all present." "We took him into our fellowship," John Henry Smith wrote. "He with the others present shed tears of joy at the change in his spirit.' [^37]

A fortnight later, on April 6 at general conference, President Woodruff called on B. H. Roberts to speak. Roberts had been conspicuously absent from the pulpit for many months.

... when he arose and said he accepted the counsel of General Authorities, told them he had done wrong, that he would sustain the priesthood first and foremost in all things, President Woodruff and the brethren wept for joy. It was a scene never to be forgotten to see a whole congregation so affected. [^38]

Christian Fjeldsted of the First Council of the Seventy could not then, nor for some time, speak of the incident without tears. [^39] As the meeting ended, Joseph F. Smith poured out his heart, embraced Roberts and gave him "an holy kiss," as he did with his own family. "God bless you," he said. Roberts, not always comfortable with such displays of affection, was touched to the core. [^40]

Reconciliation with his Brethren utterly estranged many political backers who had predicted a great career for him. Indignant, some of them preferred jaywalking to confronting him on the streets. He wrote to Moses Thatcher, formerly a close ally, that he had been encouraged by non-Mormon politicos, perhaps even flattered by their back-slapping and sweeping predictions of "a great character, a marked personality, and doubtless had before him a very distinguished career; but [now] the moment the same man's independent thinking and action led him to cross their purposes, or go counter to their way of thinking, then there was a wonderful shrinkage in all the qualities that before went to the making of his greatness." [^41]

228During the same period Moses Thatcher too was approached about signing the political manifesto. Though it had taken Roberts some time to fall in line with the First Presidency's wishes, Elder Thatcher found it even more difficult. Within six months, Roberts having resigned from the Salt Lake Herald on May 10, 1896, because his editorial silence on the Thatcher case, which he had earlier championed, "greatly exasperated many [Thatcher] friends," he undertook the delicate task of writing to Thatcher, who as a member of the Council of the Twelve was senior to him both in age and in calling, in order "to discharge what to me is the sacred duty of friendship to you... and true brotherly affection."

I desire to say that I think we both were mistaken in the course we pursued in that matter. We took an extreme view of the action of our brethren [in the Campaign], in relation to political affairs and by denouncing their action in some things, and what was supposed to be their action in some others, the effect of what we said and did-however upright our intentions or honest our motives-the effect, I say of what we said and did, was to represent our brethren as conspiring against the liberties of the people and trifling with their rights as American citizens.

In a manner we brought them into contempt before the people of God, the Church, and even before the world. I grant, you, dear Moses, that this was far from our intentions, but this was the effect of our course as I now see it after a careful and dispassionate view of the whole affair; and our brethren were and are right in demanding that we make this matter right, and it is for them to determine what is necessary to make it right.

In my own case they asked that I acknowledge my error to them and join with them in signing the "Manifesto" announcing the rule of the Church in these matters for the future. This I did and this I think you should consent to do.

I pray you to think of it, my friend, these men, our brethren whom God has honored by giving them the keys of the Kingdom and making them His rulers in these last days, we by our action, however justified we might have felt at the time-these men we humiliated before the people and that unjustly. It is sufficient cause for repentance on our part, and the dignity of their positions demands that they seek a proper vindication from those aspersions cast upon them by the course we pursued.

229As I think of it now under the softening influence of the Spirit of God, I wonder how it is I did not perceive it sooner than I did. And as I wonder at my own blindness, so I wonder at the long-suffering and patience of my brethren, and my heart thanks each of them for their love and kindness. I was stubborn and proud of heart, unyielding and while respectful in demeanor was defiant and determined.

Not all their influence, I regret to say, was sufficient to move me in those days of darkness and trouble, and I well nigh lost my place among them, but at last the Spirit of the Lord came. I learned that it was my duty to yield completely to God's authority on earth and it was not for me to set up my judgment against the combined and united judgment of His servants. I was obedient, thank the Lord, to the promptings of the voice of that Spirit. I did not reject its counsels as I did those of the brethren; and though following its instructions cost the good opinion and friendship I prized; and though it has caused me to sacrifice many worldly ambitions and put a period to my political aspirations, there has not been a day that I have regretted my obedience to the voice of God's Spirit and my reconciliation to His servants. And as my experience has been, so too, I am sure, yours will be. [^42]

To the First Council of the Seventy Roberts wrote: "How glorious it will be if at last he is saved to the Church, to his family and to himself! God grant that it may be so." [^43]

Neither he nor the Brethren prevailed with his friend. Thatcher never signed the political manifesto and his standing in the Twelve was lost, never to be regained. Years later when Roberts was invited to speak at Thatcher's funeral, he expressed his conviction in a manner forthright but tactless that, whatever mistakes Thatcher had made, the most serious was his refusal to acknowledge his mistake.

Later when Roberts's daughters were proofreading his Comprehensive History and reached his segment on the events that led to the political manifesto, they asked him point-blank during an intimate conversation what really went on inside him as he suffered through those defiant months and the last all-night vigil. [^44] "I have given the brethren a lot of headaches," he said. And he then summarized the internal dilemma of those dark hours: "Will I give up my pride or will I be taken out of this glorious work?"

230In the political aftermath, as Heber J. Grant put it, Roberts "concluded that perhaps some mistakes had been made, and wanted to make the patch as great as the sore." He said: "I want to atone as best I can by being called on a mission to preach the gospel of truth, the plan of life and salvation." [^45]

By this time, his Church and his political activities had made him notorious, a public figure who attracted interest. Whatever his topic, he was articulate and persuasive, and, some said, flamboyant. Earlier, in 1889, he had been called by President Woodruff to "take a mission through the east" with his missionary associate, John Morgan, to rent halls, lecture in New York and Washington, and offer assistance to John T. Caine, Utah Territorial Representative in Washington. [^46] The effort was fruitless. From Chicago on February 17, 1890, Roberts had written home: "Darkness is so dense here that one feels it literally. One may clutch it with his fingers. I have been trying to get a hearing through the press of the country and have written much but nearly all of it has been returned to me." But it was time to try again, with higher hopes. This second tour east was to last almost eight months. On July 7, 1896, Elder Roberts left Salt Lake in company with a Tabernacle Choir quartet led by tenor soloist George D. Pyper. Their tour was to include Kansas City, St. Louis, Chicago, Cincinnati, Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, Brooklyn, and New York.

231Whitaker's minutes define Roberts's "special mission" as a goodwill tour "to deliver addresses on Utah and her people and place before the public the truth regarding our people, their religion, their social and political life and to present the fact of our loyalty [to the nation] ever since the church was organized." Roberts soon deviated from that program, however, and concentrated on direct missionary presentations, seeking converts to Christ. Initially his subject matter for the tour had come from non-Mormon writers who had visited Mormon communities both in America and abroad and had written perceptive praise. For example, the Leslies, who published a magazine by the same name, wrote of their visit to Utah: "Roses are better than sagebrush, and potatoes and peas preferable as diet to buffalo grass. Also, schoolhouses, with cleanly and comfortable troupes of children about them are a symptom of more advanced civilization than lowly shanties with only fever and ague and whiskey there." "The thriftiest, the most contented and happiest people west of the Mississippi are the Mormons, and I for one do not want to see them treated with injustice." [^47]

Another non-Mormon witness, Phil Robinson, summarized in his Shaners and Saints: "Godspeed these Mormons, then. They are doing both the 'old country' and the new good in their transforming English paupers into American farmers-and then exchanging the vices and squalor of English poverty for the temperance, piety, comfort of these Utah homesteads." [^48] And Sir Richard Burton wrote in his City of the Saints: "In point of mere morality, the Mormon community is perhaps purer than any other of equal numbers ... the penalties against violations of chastity, morality and decency are exceptionally severe .... I was much pleased with their religious tolerance. The Mormons are certainly the least fanatical of our faiths, owning like the Hindus, that every man should walk in his own way, while claiming for themselves superiority in belief and practice." [^49] To such comments Roberts added his own personal assurance based on wide travel:

It has fallen to my lot to travel through nearly all the states of America and the greater part of England, which has given me the advantage of comparing "Mormon community" with communities existing under systems of religion and different social customs. I need only say that comparison-reviled, scorned and even hated as the "Mormons" are-has made me proud of my people, and my heart swells with gratitude to the giver of all good, that it has fallen in my lot to be reared among the Mormon spirit. [^50]

Even with the many positive reactions to the Mormons, the problem of building goodwill, or of reducing ill will, was a huge one. New York reporter Phil Robinson had demanded to know why the Mormons neglected the public media in presenting their case. As a special correspondent for the New York World, he had seen enough to know the "utter unreliability of anti-Mormon literature, and [had] complained that there were few other sources of information since the Mormons themselves were most foolishly negligent of the power of the press." [^51]

232 In St. Louis, Roberts instantly stirred controversy. A pastor of a local church, named Colbert, said: "I believe that the success of these missionaries is to be attributed to their great zeal and earnestness. They are the most zealous men I have ever met." He challenged Roberts to "debate" the "proposition":

Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Young or the original founders of the Mormon Church, and compilers, promoters and publishers of the Mormon Book, or Bible of Mormons, were liars, frauds, knaves and ignoramasses, and that the Book of Mormon is unworthy of credence, belief or respect and that Mormonism is a delusion, a fraud, and a lie, the same as modern spiritualism. [^52]

Learning of this rag-bag of negativisms, a reporter asked Roberts if he would reply to Colbert. Roberts said: "I have engaged in [debates] but only in cases where the circumstances were of an exceptional character. In this instance, my first impulse would be to decline the challenge. But, I am not yet prepared to say that I shall do so." Further deliberation convinced him to decline. He had seen the futility of being on the defensive. [^53] He yearned instead to present, and present in the atmosphere of love, divine affirmations. He had written home, "I often think if the talented writers and speakers of the world had such a cause as we have and so much truth behind them they could make the very stones believe in it and learn to love it." [^54]

Thus in St. Louis he undertook one of the most prolonged and potent speaking efforts in his life. During the next two months, for forty-two evenings, averaging an hour and a quarter each night with little repetition, he delivered a monumental series of sermons on great themes of the gospel. George D. Pyper, who heard the entire series, thought "it was in some respects the height of his life."

233Roberts seemed to flourish under the spiritual demands which patterned his day: early morning preparation and prayer, hard labor on texts of The Missouri Persecutions and The Rise and Fall of Nauvoo, baptisms and confirmations in the afternoon, and interviews and contacts with the press, then in the evening another sermon in the crowded hall and answering soulful questions. "I thought it a marvelous accomplishment," said Pyper. Multitudes attended many of these meetings; some attended all. When the lectures were over, sixty persons had been baptized, forming the nucleus of a flourishing and vital branch of the Church in St. Louis.

On October 21, 1896, from Cincinnati, Roberts wrote to his colleague George Reynolds. He had arrived alone in Ohio the Thursday before, leaving his companions with the con verts and friends in St. Louis, and was "looking over the ground here," trying to locate halls and arrange meetings so that "friends and converts can be found of which to make a branch." [^55]

In the first week of November, Roberts wrote home from St. John, Kansas, and Cincinnati, Ohio, that he was having "abundant peace and much joy in my Ministry" though "some sorrow" at results. Yet, he said modestly, the Spirit had blessed him and led to the conversion of "a few." To Melvin J. Ballard (who had left behind a bride of only a month), Roberts seemed lonely. Ballard wrote to his family that "President Roberts seemed homesick and discouraged the entire time."

Roberts's stay in Cincinnati included "writing constantly for nearly 4 days and a good share of the nights until I could scarcely hold the pen." [^56]

The Tribune in Cincinnati reported one of Roberts's discourses in favorable terms and included a drawing of him standing with his right hand in his right pocket, his left holding a book, wearing a vest, a bow tie, and a lengthy mustache which turned down at each end. It is a handsome profile. [^57] One report described his hour and a half discourse as "graceful" and "eloquent."

234The Cincinnati Press reported on Roberts's "series of Sunday" lectures held both morning and evening at Academy Hall. At the morning lectures, which Roberts titled "A Mormon View of the Gospel of Jesus Christ," Pyper sang "Hosannah" by Granier. His evening subject was "The Relationship of Mormonism to the Christian World." At this meet-ing Pyper sang Steven Adams's "Holy City." Other lecture titles were: "Is Modern Christendom Justified in Believing That Revelation Has Ceased? "The Mission of Joseph Smith," and "The Book of Mormon-A New Witness for God."

Roberts focused on the scene portrayed in Acts 8 where the simple authoritative laying on of hands brought down the Holy Ghost. He bore witness that this same radiance and power existed among the Latter-day Saints, with all its attendant spiritual gifts. He sealed this with his personal witness, saying, "He would as soon doubt his own existence as to doubt that he felt the power and influence of the Holy Spirit." Then he spoke of Joseph Smith's prophecy concerning the Civil War and "closed with an eloquent appeal to accept the Latter-day teachings of Joseph Smith." The lectures drew some to read and study further, but there were not the same striking results as in St. Louis.

Another favorable response came in the Pittsburgh Times:

Its career [Mormonism] may justly be looked upon as one of the wonders of the century, and the rise of the Mormon Church may well engage the attention of the students of social and religious movements. [^58]

The article went on to praise the pilgrimage across the trackless wilderness "almost as inaccessible as the North Pole .... They went and found a desert but still their faith was unshaken... there is no more interesting story in the annals of the century than the rise of the Mormon Church and commonwealth; the attempt to analyze the causes which led to its success furnishes the most fascinating subiect to study."

In January of 1897 Roberts wrote home from Philadelphia that he had "found a few saints and converts" near Pittsburgh-enough to organize a small branch. Philadelphia, he wrote, was a place of "elegance and wealth and education." The first few days he "dreaded the task of speaking in such a place" because "my education is far from finished ·.. I am not a polished man."

The Philadelphia Times reported of Roberts's lecture:

235The speaker explained that the members of Christian churches believe that the Gospel of Jesus Christ, together with divine authority to administer its ordinances, has continued from the days of Christ to the present time, while the Latter-day Saints believe that, though Christ taught the Gospel and established the Church, that Church was destroyed, its doctrines corrupted and divine authority was lost, and thus a new dispensation of the Gospel became necessary. This dispensation, he said, was given to the world through the Prophet, Joseph Smith. [^59]

The fact that the reviewer uses the words "through the Prophet" instead of "by the Prophet" shows unusual alertness to the issue that makes all the difference.

In New York, Roberts was hailed as the Church's "chief orator," and George D. Pyper as "one of Mormonism's best tenor singers." Roberts told New York reporters that his present lecture tour might well last two years and take him into at least four areas: New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and the New England states. Some writers were impressed enough with his personal distinction (as were the St. Louis reporters) to opine and speculate that this trip was "simply preliminary to his elevation to the apostleship made vacant by the removal of Moses Thatcher." There was also talk that this was preliminary to a new bid for political office.

But for each New York journalist who found his lectures impressive (one paper said "he is an orator of much natural power") another reflected a sectarian reaction, and the newspaper descriptions of Roberts's speaking became sour. Thus one reporter who attended a Brooklyn meeting said the sermon of the young elder "was not grammatical and his diction lacked elegance, but he had 'the power.' He talked straight ahead without notes or reflection, weaving in Bible texts liberally, speaking in a peculiar sing-song voice with a twang at the end of every sentence." [^60]

But the New York World sketched Roberts's address in Hardiman Hall in all capitals: "He is an eloquent, graceful speaker, but Presbyterian women resent the propaganda."

236His diction is as pure as that of any teacher of the language, and he illustrates his pleasing phraseology with graceful gestures. The Elder must have been a power at the forge. He is tall and strongly built-the frame almost of a giant. His years - forty-eight, perhaps [he was forty] have brought him to the prime of physical well-being. His voice fits the setting. It is virile and resonant. It is well-controlled, with thunder for logic and softness for lights of word-painting and sentiment. Those who heard him last night agree that he was a man of brains and judgment; that the Church knew what it was about when it sent him out as propagandist. [^61]

By June he was back in Kansas City and nearby areas, where he struggled through the muggy heat of July and August, returning to Salt Lake in December. After Christmas at home he went to Pennsylvania but was back in Salt Lake by early March. [^62] In Philadelphia, the papers summarized his impact with kindliness, reporting that Roberts reviewed perspectives with Catholics and Protestants "in an impartial manner, and made comparisons to advance the Mormon doctrine." "We are here tonight," Roberts said, "to make this proposition, that the only way to bring back truth is by a dispensation from heaven. After three centuries of persecution, the Christian leaders have been stricken down and the methods of the heathen rule the Church." "We believe equal with Catholics and Protestants," he said, "that Christ founded a Church and he conferred divine authority on men. The Mormons, so called, accept Christianity, Christ as the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world. It is not true that we preach another Gospel. Through Him we hope for salvation. Because of Him was the power of life and resurrection. We believe that there is no other name by which we can be saved, except by Christ and his atonement, and that He founded the church." These sentences are close enough to what Roberts had said or written elsewhere that one wonders if the reporters simply borrowed and printed his own outline notes.

The question of polygamy arose, as it often did, during a lecture in Chadsworth Hall in St. Louis. The press report stated:

The preacher took some little time in creating a philosophical foundation for his tenet, but he did it in a way that showed his eloquence in descriptive powers to great advantage. The fact that this earth is but an atom in the universe and that human beings play an infinitesimally small part in the design of creation having been brought before the minds of the audience, he began his argument proper.

237Roberts then spoke of the new and everlasting covenant and showed that polygamy is incidental to the Mormon theory of marriage saying that the Mormon marriage covenant system is a system that rises to meet the grandeur of God's universe.

He also made the utterly obvious but utterly ignored point that if the practice was a foil for the gratification of lust it failed to explain why men chose to live with, support, and nurture the children of these unions. [^63]

The St. Louis Republic speculated that Roberts, because of his political prominence, his executive background, and his "able exposition," was bound to become a United States Senator and "an Apostle."

And how did all this look through perceptive eyes of his companions? Years later the secretary of the First Council of the Seventy asked George D. Pyper to reduce his impressions to writing. Here are excerpts:.

[It was] like a season in a religious institute. One of the first things that I discovered was that while Brother Roberts was called and probably was a natural born orator, yet his superior ability was acquired by hard study and ceaseless preparation. As a matter of fact, I could never arise in the morning early enough to find him in bed. He was usually under a lamp or at a window at daybreak, studying.

He was too, an agreeable companion, although he had his gloomy spells, especially after a lecture where he thought he had not done justice to the subject; although for myself, I never did feel that he failed to deliver his message in a magnificent way. [^64]

Pyper added: "I am not saying that Brigham H. Roberts was a man without faults. There was only one perfect man."

238In the early summer of 1896, just before his departure for the East, Roberts had been chairman of a committee-composed of Rudger Clawson, Thomas Hull, Bryant S. Hinckley and Edward H. Anderson-to evaluate the youth program of the Church. One of their recommendations was to revive a literary organ, but they were told there was no capital. That did not discourage Roberts. With "complete confidence" he, with the committee, recommended that every young man in the Church be asked for one year's subscription payment in advance for a publication that was not yet even on the drawing board. The First Presidency had sanctioned this plan. After his eastern tour, Roberts decided to pave the way for the literary project. He gathered some brilliant singing talent-"Bob" Easton, Viola Pratt Gillette, Margaret Hull, and Walter S. Lamoreaux-and the group undertook, in promotion of the proposed magazine, a six-week tour of Alton Stake in Wyoming, the Bear Lake and Cache stakes in Utah, and the Oneida Stake in Idaho.

There is a rare recorded reference from this trip con-joining Roberts and relaxation; along the way the fishing streams were, as he put it, "whipped somewhat with flyhooks." He did a little rabbit hunting too. And in between speeches, hymns, choruses, and serenades, there were many picnic lunches in which large draughts of buttermilk were enjoyed.

The momentum initiated on this tour continued, and the Improvement Era, the chief literary organ of the Church for the following seventy-five years, was established. [^65] In addition to this fund-raising for the first year's financial support of this youth organization's magazine, he helped organize the staff, functioned on or off the masthead as an editor, and, until his death in 1933, was its most regular contributor, averaging three articles a year. Writing and speaking for youth, and his identification with youth in Scouting and in pioneer commemoration, were a maior preoccupation during the last three decades of his life. On one occasion he was asked to speak at a special meeting dealing with the problems of the youth organization of the Church, held in the Salt Lake Temple. George Q. Morris records the way in which President Joseph F. Smith called B. H. Roberts forward at this meeting.

Brother Roberts, the Lord God loves you. He loves you for your integrity. He loves you for your forthrightness. He loves you for your willingness to stand for principle, even when you have to stand all alone, and against the assaults of your enemies and even your brethren. As Roberts approached, the President summoned him into a brotherly embrace and said, his voice breaking, "and I love you, too. [^66]

239On May 2, 1898, a "doctor of religion," Roman Catholic Dr. John M. Reiner of New Jersey, [^67] visited Salt Lake. After an interview with the First Presidency, he began analytic and critical discussion with the apostle James E. Talmage and Elder B. H. Roberts. The man was proficient in classical languages, especially Latin and Greek. Roberts met with him almost daily, and the discussion went on for weeks. John Whitaker records, "Indeed President Roberts would hold him to a certain point and not let him leave it until it was decided according to the law and testimony." At the end of this marathon discussion, the theologian summed it up: "Elder Roberts, you have the truth, but your people do not know how to handle it. You seem to have it right at your fingertips." Reiner asked the sanction of the First Presidency for his proposal to write a history of the Mormon religion; the First Presidency demurred. [^68]

Perhaps these discussions were a stimulus for another literary project. While he had been associate editor of the Salt Lake Herald, Roberts repeatedly invited critics of the Church or any segment of Mormon culture to write their views, with the promise that regardless of their tone they would be published. There was no response. But as editor of the Improvement Era, he issued an invitation for authentic accounts of the major faiths. He solicited and received and published summary articles from the Roman Catholic, Episcopal, Presbyterian, Methodist Episcopal, Unitarian, Lutheran, Congregational and Baptist churches. Since no one volunteered to do the article on the Greek Orthodox Church the "Junior editor of the Era" (Roberts himself) wrote that essay and "every care was taken to state the claims and doctrines of the Greek Church fairly."

This was a generous gesture, an honest attempt to publish for the readership of the Church not only sympathetic but authoritative statements of the leading faiths of Christendom. Included was an essay by W. H. Lamasters on agnosticism. With these articles as background, published during the mid 1890s, Roberts undertook in 1897 to present the claims, doctrines and organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and this entailed four essays. [^69]

240241Travel, hard public lecturing, and research and writing were, as usual, highly concentrated and consuming activities for Roberts through the year 1898. They had replaced or at least overshadowed his political impulses. His journals for the early 1890s showed deep admiration for statesmanship but reticence about his own involvement ("the barriers looked insuperable"). But in 1895, after his nomination, he had written to his mother in jubilation that Congress in the United States was the equivalent of Parliament in Britain. "Tell me, Mother," he wrote, "if in the wildest pitch of your fancy you have felt such a thing would ever happen to your son." By now that hope had been put behind him. Or had it?

Notes

Chapter 11

1 Roberts successfully supported Mr. Rawlins again in 1892 while the government was still territorial; see BN, p. 353.

2 Journal of Wilford Woodruff, vol. 12, 4 October 1892, Wilford Woodruff Papers, Church Archives.

3 Ibid.

4 Abraham H. Cannon Journal, 12 December 1895, p. 204.

5 Diary of George Q. Cannon, December 1892.

6 John Whitaker Journal, 1 December 1895.

7 Diary of George Q. Cannon, 31 March 1893.

8 BN, pp. 355-56.

9 Charles Varian, a non-Mormon Republican attorney in Salt Lake, was an able delegate and, Stanley Ivins concludes, the most influential of them all. Debate involved a total of 1,129 speeches. Roberts was one of eleven men who dominated the speech-making. (See "A Constitution for Utah," Utah Historical Quarterly [April 1957]: 113-14.) Roberts's primary counter-personalities were Varian, Whitney, Wells and Thurman. He had called the suffrage battle "the effort of his life" (see Abraham H. Cannon Journal, 3 April 1893, p. 52), and the press caught it up saying it would be the effort of his death. The reactions of Utah women were mixed. "Some of his remarks grossly offended the ladies," Abraham H. Cannon records, "but others it pleased." It was also an opportunity to contrast the styles of his admired friend Orson F. Whitney and himself. It was as if he used a club and Whitney a rapier and fencing mask; he expanding the issue toward historic and even cosmic considerations, Whitney carrying the voice of present sentiment. Roberts was blunt and prosaic whereas Whitney was discreet and poetic.

10 Proceedings and Debates of the Constitutional Convention, 2 vols. (Salt Lake City: Star Printing Co., 1898), 1:470-72.

11 Ibid., 1:468-73.

12 BN, pp. 367-68.

13 Roberts viewed the "expediency" argument as favorable to the Church and therefore assumed it would be attractive to most Church leaders, who apparently were interested in taking advantage of the national sentiment in the push for statehood. But Church leaders generally took a different view of the issue as to both principle and timing. On the other hand, they did not wish prohibition to be included in the enabling legislature lest it be used as a means of defeating statehood.

14 The section stands in the constitution as follows: "Legislative Art. VI, Sec. 31: The Legislature shall not authorize the state or any county, city, town, district, or political subdivision in the state to lend its credit or subscribe to stock or bonds in aid of any railroad, telegraphy, or any other private, individual or corporate enterprise or undertaking." (See Utah State Constitution, p. 1862.)

15 See CHC, 6:179.

16 B. H. Roberts to Charles W. Nibley, 11 June 1908.

17 BN, p. 405.

18 After the Ann Arbor proposal, Roberts had a personal visit with President Wilford Woodruff and his counselors. The First Presidency were chary of the legal profession at the time. Joseph F. Smith suggested that Roberts might take up medicine, which would "interfere less" with his duties. But Roberts had no interest in that field. (See Diary of George Q.Cannon, 23 July 1891.)

19 BN, p. 319.

20 BN, pp. 397-98.

21 Allen received 20,563 votes and Roberts 19,666.

22 See BN, p. 404.

23 Office Journal of Lorenzo Snow, 14 November 1895, Church Archives.

24 Members of these quorums were: First Presidency-President Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, Joseph Fielding Smith; Council of the Twelve-Lorenzo Snow, Franklin D. Richards, Brigham Young, Jr., Francis M. Lyman, John W. Taylor, Anthen H. Lurid, Moses Thatcher, John H. Smith, George Teasdale, Heber J. Grant, Martinet W. Merrill, Abraham H. Cannon; First Council of the Seventy-Jacob Gates, Seymour B. Young, Christian J. Fjeldsted, John Morgan, B. H. Roberts, George Reynolds, J. Golden Kimball.

25 Wilford Woodruff Journal, 5 March 1896.

26 Diary of George Reynolds, March 1896, Church Archives.

27 Many years later Heber J. Grant related this to his physician, Dr. Gill Richards.

28 Recollections of Heber J. Grant in oral interview with Axel A. Madsen.

29 Perhaps Roberts had this struggle in mind when he said of President Heber J. Grant three decades later that no man "by the texture of his nature and character [and] by the purity and uprightness of his life can be more loved of God than he," adding, "we have had some experiences together, not always, I was going to say of a pleasant kind, but I think I ought not to say that, for when the outcome of things has been reached the fulfillment has been good, but the way has not always been smooth." (Conference Report, October 1929, p. 88.)

30 Heber J. Grant to B. H. Roberts, 28 May 1896.

31 John Whitaker Journal, 16 March 1896.

32 Journal History, 16 March 1896.

33 BN, pp. 400-401.

34 BNG, pp. 193-94.

35 Diary of George Q. Cannon, 3 March 1889. See also Improvement Era 2 (August 1899: 761; George Reynolds Diary, 5 March 1896.

36 Recollections of Harold I. Bowman and Harvey Taylor, who heard Roberts recount the story ten years later in Juarez, Mexico. Oral history tape in possession of author.

37 Journals of John Henry Smith, book 19, 26 March 1896, Church Archives.

38 John Whitaker Journal, p. 88.

39 Ibid., 13 February 1896.

40 See Remarks of B. H. Roberts at YMMIA Board meeting, 29 January 1919, Church Archives.

41 B. H. Roberts to Moses Thatcher, 6 November 1896, Church Archives.

42 One embellished version of Roberts's reconciliation is that his "dead relatives appeared to him and made known to him the importance of his retaining his standing to enable them to receive the blessings of the Temple." But during the Smoot hearing in Washington, Roberts, under oath, denied ever having said that. (The Salt Lake Tribune had printed the story based on some remarks made by Francis M. Lyman in Logan.) But in Roberts's letter to Thatcher there is an appeal to the impact that decisions have on one's friends. "No man in the world stands or falls alone, much less a man in the Church of Christ .... Who has a wider circle of friends and relatives in the Church than you? No one. Who has a greater influence among the youth? No ene."

43 B. H. Roberts to George Reynolds, 12 October 1896, Church Archives.

44 CHC, 6:322.

45 Abraham H. Cannon Journal, vol. 11, 19 September 1899, pp. 213-14.

46 Heber J. Grant recounted this at the funeral of B. H. Roberts.

47 See Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper, 10 November 1877; also Omaha Daily Herald, 3 June 1877.

48 Phil Robinson, Sinners and Saints (Boston: Roberts Brothers, 1883), p. 245.

49 Richard Burton is quoted in Roberts's tract written in 1884-85; original in Church Archives, Pamphlet Collection, no. 8830, p. 9.

50 Ibid., p. 13.

51 See Sinners and Saints; see also Roberts's report to the First Council of the Seventy after his trip to the East; also CHC, 6:84.

52 St. Louis Republic, 1 September 1896.

53 Kansas City and St. John were strongholds of the Reorganization movement, and Roberts was counseled by the First Presidency not to enter into public debate with them. It was, for him, difficult counsel to follow.

54 B. H. Roberts to his mother, 17 September 1887.

55 B. H. Roberts to George Reynolds, 21 October 1896, Church Archives.

56 B. H. Roberts to Louisa, 25 November 1896, copy in possession of author.

57 Tribune (Cincinnati, Ohio), 16 November 1896.

58 Pittsburgh Times, 11 January 1897.

59 Philadelphia Times, 25 January 1897.

60 See Georgia Roberts's scrapbook.

61 World (New York, New York), 22 February 1897.

62 See Journal History for these dates.

63 St. Louis Republic, 1 September 1896.

64 N. B. Lundwall, Assorted Gems of Priceless Value (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1944), pp. 59-60.

65 See Improvement Era 28 (July 1925): 869-72.

66 As reported by Elder George Q. Morris to Axel A. Madsen of the MIA General Board.

67 See "Reiner-Roberts Correspondence," Improvement Era I (September 1898): 807-819.

68 John Whitaker Journal, vol. 2, 2 May 1898.

69 See Improvement Era 1, 2 (July, August, September, October 1898): 665-80; 754-63; 820-35; and 914-27 respectively.

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
[^23] 23 Mrs. William Reed to Ann Roberts.
[^24] 24 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^25] 25 Late in their lives, on 3 May 1928, B. H. and Annie Brynie, a half-sister, and Mary arranged for the temple sealing of Ann Everington and Benjamin Roberts and all of the children including the twins and baby Thomas. See BHR Temple Book.
[^26] 26 Roberts kept one sample of his father's handwriting from the original wrapping of the photo given his mother. It is preserved in the family collection.
[^27] 27 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 1 September 1883, Roberts Family Collection.
[^28] 28 Research has failed to establish where and when Ben died. The marriage date is 15 June 1848 (he was twenty-two) in Poplar, Middlesex, England; from the Book of Remembrance of Haven R. Day.
[^29] 29 B. H. Roberts to Ann Everington, 21 April 1880, Roberts Family Collection.
[^30] 30 Mrs. Charles H. Wilcox recorded these impressions from a conversation with B.H. Roberts at his home prior to his call to the Eastern States.
[^31] 31 BN, p. 10.
[^32] 32 See Juvenile Instructor 49 (February 1914): 85.
[^33] 33 Fifty years later, as chairman of "Vocations and Industry" in the youth program of the Church, he wrote, "We shall take the ground that no vocation of honest industry need be ignoble or debasing in its effects, but by properly correlating it with the general welfare of human life can be in effect both honorable and glorious." Improvement Era 15 (October 1912): 1083.
[^34] 34 Liahona 12 (20 October 1914): 364.
[^35] 35. Salt Lake Herald, 8 January 1899.
[^36] 36. So Roberts later told his children.
[^37] 37. BNG, p. 8.
[^38] 38 See History of Utah, 4:689.
[^39] 39 In a notebook under "Roberts, B. H." is this handwritten note: "Warrington-Town of, my birth place. Warrington, at the head of tide water on the Mersey River. It was a station of Romans (Veraterium) in the time of Agricola - (69-84 A.D.) and many Roman relics have been found in the neighborhood."
[^40] 40 Beniamin's father's brother.
[^41] 41 N. B. Lundwall, Roberts's secretary for twelve years, recalls him saying this incident occurred when he was seven.
[^42] 42 BNG, p. 16. Roberts spoke in later years of this spiritual impression (which one tradition says was repeated three times) as evidence that "the promptings of the Spirit of God" can come early - several years, in his case, before his official baptism and confirmation in 1867.
[^43] 43 The word gomin - rather than urchha - was endeared to Roberts through the Victor Hugo story of Gayroche who, in the midst of battle, went along the pavement gathering unfired cartridges from the corpses of fallen men, gaining strength at each step.
[^44] 44 Memoirs, p. 4.
[^45] 45 BN, p. 18a.
[^46] 46 Apparently Tovey's periodic alienations from the LDS Church did not interfere with his desire to preach.
[^47] 47 This was republished by Harvard University Press in 1962. The book was originally issued in fifteen separately stitched parts from July 1854 to September 1855.
[^48] 48 BN, p. 20.
[^49] 49 BN, p. 56.
[^50] 50 Memoirs. Crossing the plains, mules would somehow detect the nearby presence of Indians and bellow-often soon enough to enable the emigrants to take crucial precautions (see Roberts's chapter on the exodus in CHC, 3:170).
[^51] 51 "Diary of William Driver," New Mexico Historical Review (January 1943): 57.
[^52] 52 Northwest Nebraska News (Crawford, Nebraska), located in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University.
[^53] 53 See Jenson's Church Chronology.
[^54] 54 See Eliza R. Snow, "A Sketch of My Life: 1804-1887," Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley.
[^55] 55 CHC, 3:304.
[^56] 56 BNG, pp. 32-33. Here, sixty years later, he addressed five thousand Boy Scouts. "On the occasion of an historic visit," where a great gathering brought to mind this early visit of Harry's boyhood, and now "an old and broken man," he remembered and told the story of his little adventure in passing the Sweetwater Ford.
[^57] 57 BNG, p. 33
[^58] 58 Memoirs, p. 4.
[^59] 59 J.M. Tanner, Biographical Sketch of John Riggs Murdock (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1909), p. 128.
[^60] 60 Hinckley's relief train returned to the valley on Sunday, October 7. See Jenson's Church Chronology.
[^61] 61 "When boys go back on the Plains to encounter storms and rescue the suffering, as did David P. Kimball, Stephen Taylor, Joseph A. Young, Ephraim Hanks, and many others, it makes me feel well. David took the consecrated oil and went forth, like a man of God, and anointed the sick and afflicted, and commanded them to arise; and those boys acted valiantly, having been trained up amid the Saints." (Remarks by Heber C. Kimball at funeral of Jedediah M. Grant; see JD, 4:137.)
[^62] 62 Church News, June 1970. Chimney Rock is twenty-three miles west of Fort Kearney.
[^63] 63 BN, p. 58.
[^64] 64 Salt Lake Tribune.
[^65] 65 Harry learned about the misinformed Johnston's Army ("President Buchanan's folly") and the account of Governor Cumming, who, in the phrase of the anti-Mormon historian T. B. H. Stenhouse, was kept in "a continued strain of feverish expectation" by a delicious hoax, He was halted about every fifty paces by three men who had built a fire, and who made him "advance and be recognized" and checked his credentials. Cureming became convinced the place "swarmed with mountaineers to resist Johnston." According to the story, it was only a trio. After each encounter they skirted the trail, passed him and then confronted him anew. They took turns being commander, lantern-holder, and inspector.
[^66] 66 CHC, 3:xx.
[^67] 67 "To the Youth of Israel," Contributor 6 (May 1885): 294.
[^68] 68 CHC, 3;231.
[^69] 69 B.H. Roberts Personal Papers, Church Archives.
