Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

12 The Lone Fight

Roberts was in Kansas City during the National Democratic Convention in 1896. In its wake, and in Chicago, Roberts had another encounter with William Jennings Bryan, who had been present at the Utah Convention when Roberts was nominated to run for Congress in 1895. Bryan, the Democratic nominee for United States President in 1896, was, Roberts recalls, "in the very heyday and pride of his remarkable political career." [^1] He was easy to approach, frank in conversation, and confident in himself and his future. "It was magnificent to contact him under these circumstances." The friendship grew through the years, and Roberts later introduced Bryan to a Salt Lake City audience when Bryan was in his final years as President Woodrow Wilson's Secretary of State.

242It is reasonable to assume that Bryan and Roberts recognized the political drive in each other. The press often compared their political and religious speaking styles, though few journalists were perceptive enough to recognize that Bryan's form of hardened Christian fundamentalism was incompatible with Roberts's Mormon heritage of the continual, expanding, present-day revelation of Jesus Christ. Both had vigorous commitments to the Democratic platform, including the silver issue. They were the same age, barely forty.

In some respects, Roberts was undergoing a new self-appraisal. The "period" he had put to his political ambitions was beginning to look like a "comma." "Everyone is 'plumb wild' about election," he wrote to George Reynolds. "I have hard work to keep my own feet at times." [^2] The press coverage of his speaking tour generated political side effects. Reporters had already presumed to say he was "undoubtedly headed for higher posts of leadership in both Church and State." Utah Governor Heber M. Wells had written him in early July 1896, praising his speaking tour and commending him as "one of the foremost citizens of the new state." "Upon your return," he added, "I am sure that political distinction will be conferred upon you by your people if it is your wish.' [^3] In the Church, aspiring to office or calling is often viewed as a disqualification, as vain ambition. But Roberts did not see it so in politics.

The initiative for his mission tour to the East had been his own, and the assignment apparently had no time limits. Considering the political tensions of 1898, his decision to travel on the Lord's errand probably brought a sigh of relief to many of his colleagues in the higher councils of the Church -a sigh that later became a groan.

243On his return to Salt Lake in August 1898, Roberts placed himself in the thick of the congressional election. There is no indication that he sought permission of the First Presidency. He counseled with President Lorenzo Snow but not with the First Presidency. His notes say his friends "began a somewhat systematic effort for my nomination." It would be more precise to say that he was the systematist; for his nomination he had to convince one party leader, James H. Moyle, who protested at first that Roberts's candidacy would open old sores. Congress had turned down George Q. Cannon as a representative in 1882 when Utah was a territory, and, should Roberts be elected, the church-state hullabaloo would begin anew. Moyle's biographer, Gordon B. Hinckley, writes that Moyle "greatly admired the abilities" of his fellow student from the University of Utah days. [^4] But Moyle was not easily convinced. He and Heber J. Grant, a Democrat, felt strongly that a non-Mormon in Congress would be better for both the Church and the state.

Roberts told Moyle, "I shall not ask anyone else to nominate me until and unless you say positively that you will not do it." Rumors quickly blossomed that there was a "Moyle-Roberts alliance." Party members brought pressure on Moyle, since the major Democrats were all against Roberts except Joseph L. Rawlins, who had several political IOUs to his former campaign manager and who was quick to say that in terms of sheer ability Roberts outclassed all other candidates.

At the Democratic convention in Ogden, September 14, 1898, Moyle was stiffened rather than dissuaded by the opposition. (Two party workers predicted his own political oblivion if he supported Roberts.) He arose and said in the presence of William Jennings Bryan and other national party leaders, "It is our binding duty to place in nomination only the best, the most eloquent, the best equipped man that can be found for the place... there is but one man in all Utah that so completely fills the place, and it is that favored son and peerless speaker, the Blacksmith orator of Utah, B. H. Roberts." [^5] Roberts received the Democratic nomination to seek a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives.

The morning after his nomination the Salt Lake Tribune, which remembered his stance on suffrage, began an editorial and cartoon attack. Many women of Salt Lake County were indignant. Emmeline B. Wells went to the First Presidency recommending a convention of protest. [^6] Old sores were opened. There was much talk of Church-state meddling and of Roberts's "secret" and "defiant" violations of the manifesto against polygamist living. [^7]

Among those who stumped in Roberts's behalf in Salt Lake City, Grantsville, and Tooele, was his friend Orson F. Whitney. For doing so Whitney's own plural marriage relationships were harped upon by political opponents, and the Tribune cartooned them together. In behalf of Roberts he said, "I know B. H. Roberts I will stake my all that he never lived with a woman who was not his wife, nor ever had a child he was ashamed to father." [^8]

244 Roberts's campaign strategy was to repeat: "You know me. Settle this at the ballot box." Few asked, "Is the candidate able, and can he win?" Apparently in the public mind the answer to both questions was yes. The opposition turned to another question. What will happen if and when he does win? Utah's Republican Governor Heber M. Wells, with expert timing (on November 5, just a few days before the polls) did not hesitate to answer. Roberts's very candidacy, he announced, would prove a "great detriment to the State of Utah ... every financial interest... the interests of the dominant Church... [and] the liberties of the very class of people" [^9] he sought to represent. The publication of this statement so upset Roberts that he gratified reporters and shocked Church members with a blistering attack on Wells as a "traitor to his own family." "When I think of his noble character [referring to Daniel H. Wells] I can only wonder that he begot so unworthy and craven a son." George Q. Cannon noted this acrid outburst in his diary as "the worst attack I ever heard made by one Latter-day Saint upon another." Roberts later made a personal apology.

Despite Roberts's attack on Wells, and as part of a Democratic sweep of Salt Lake County, Roberts was elected by a seven-thousand-vote majority and was "very jubilant." But his election sparked a series of explosions throughout the state that surpassed the internal party friction he had dealt with during the campaign. Non-Mormon opposition had been coalescing during the year; a group of sectarian ministers claimed that polygamous marriages were still being performed in Utah. Roberts's candidacy and campaign gave them just the instrument they wanted to exhibit and dramatize their claim on a national scale. Failing to prevent his election, they were determined to keep him from being seated in the House.

245Shortly after Roberts's election, Dr. Thomas Iliff of the Methodist Episcopal Church, [^10] W. M. Paden of the First Presbyterian Church, and Clarence T. Brown of the First Congregational Church, [^11] all of Salt Lake, formally requested that Roberts be refused his seat in Congress. Roberts coined a term to describe these men and the opposing editors of the Republican Salt Lake Tribune: "storm starters." Attorney A. T. Schroeder, editor of an incendiary anti-Mormon paper, Lucifer's Lantern, became another virulent voice. The four points these men and their allies hammered were: that Roberts was a Mormon elected by Mormons to serve the Mormon cause (he had had almost no support from the Church or the Church-owned paper, the Deseret News, and had, in fact, been most successful in non-Mormon precincts); that Roberts was not a U.S. citizen-either because he was still a British subject or because he had been imprisoned for unlawful cohabitation (he was actually a full naturalized citizen); [^12] that to seat Roberts would be to sanction polygamy (polygamy, of course, had never been seated, if that means approved, in or out of the U.S. Congress, and one polygamist, George Q. Cannon, had been unseated); and that Roberts was "openly and defiantly" failing to keep the compact to obey the new laws against polygamy (the new laws said nothing about unlawful cohabitation and he had undertaken to live the principle of plural marriage prior to the Manifesto).

If all the publicity had centered on the last three objections, the situation might have moved in Roberts's favor. But church groups rallied against "the Mormon cause" issue; almost overnight ad hoc anti-Mormon committees flourished nationwide. Petitions wrapped in American flags from various sections of the country poured into Washington. One petition, which was signed "by millions of devoted Christians" (Roberts said they were mostly "long-haired men and short-haired women"), portrayed the Congressman-elect as "the avowed polygamist and covenant breaker." Expulsion, not exclusion, was often the battle cry of these petitions. [^13] Roberts was billed as a "threat to the American Home" and everything decent, and a barbarian who espoused one of the "twin relics of barbarism."

The movement snowballed until seven million signatures, the greatest number of Americans to ever seek congressional action, were pasted together and "rolled up like cheeses and wheeled into the House of Representatives." [^14]

246There were varied responses within the Church to Roberts's election. Joseph F. Smith, a solid Republican in sentiment, and "in no sense in sympathy with the political views of B. H. Roberts," nevertheless took the position that, "having been duly elected," Roberts was entitled to his seat. [^15]

George Q. Cannon had remained unsympathetic to Roberts's cause. Only a day before the election, in a statement clearly aimed at Roberts, he had said in a press interview, "Any man who cohabits with his plural wives violates the law. [^16] In late December, Roberts visited President Cannon in his office. Eider Cannon said: "Had I been asked about his candidacy I should have said it was inadvisable for him, occupying the position he did in relation to this mooted question, to become a candidate for Congress. That had been my judgment." But Cannon added, "You are in the fight now, and you ought to be sustained." [^17] He also advised Roberts to "let them prove what they alleged" and to avoid agitating the question of unlawful cohabitation-"by no means for him to take the position of defending what is called unlawful cohabitation." Roberts, it turned out, followed the first half of this advice; but he could not, or at least did not, avoid agitating the cohabitation issue.

In that same week (during December 1898) Church President Lorenzo Snow spoke "very encouragingly" to Roberts and "felt quite hopeful" about his being seated. Four months later the President, during another visit with Roberts, remarked that "whether Brother Roberts would have succeeded or not was not clear to him, but it was clear to him that the purposes of the Lord would be accomplished through his trying to get it [his seat]." [^18] He did not say whether he felt those purposes were related to constitutional clarification, the benefiting of the state, or purposes in Roberts's personal life.

247Roberts now had the qualified encouragement of the President for the right to be seated in his elected office. There were those outside the Church, however, who for various reasons-the polygamy issue being the primary one -did not approve of Roberts's election to the House. It is clear President Snow did not fee] great apprehensions. His response to the press through the months of controversy was basically, "This storm is temporary." At the very height of the tempest, when every maior newspaper in the country had joined in the outcry, President Snow met with the Council of the Twelve; the journals of those present show him discoursing on the unprecedented unity and love of Christ among the Brethren, and saying to them in a variety of ways that, as Roberts later put it, "the storm was the equivalent of a mosquito lighting on the moon." He also expressed the assurance that "such troubles had beset us, the Church, in the past that it was inconceivable we could have worse ones in the future." [^19]

Aside from the constitutional question, which from beginning to end Roberts believed was the only issue, another issue was agitated. Was the Manifesto intended simply to abate further plural marriages; or was it intended in addition to break up pre-Manifesto plural marriages?

Page after page of Roberts's biographical notes on the election period argue that the Manifesto applied only to future marriages, and that this was clear even in the minds of non-Mormons-for example, his campaign manager, anti-Mormon Orlando W. Powers, and the even more severe anti-Mormon Judge R. N. Baskin [who had proposed in 1890 that "everyone who belongs to the Mormon Church be disen-franchised," [^20] but who a decade later said he agreed with Brigham Young in everything but polygamy [^21] ). These were men of legal acumen, well acquainted with the situation in Utah. According to Roberts, at the Enabling Convention Charles S. Varian, a Republican and prosecuting attorney who had sent many members of the Church to prison, and others had deliberately distinguished further plural marriages from unlawful cohabitation. Under territorial law both offenses could be prosecuted, but with the coming of statehood and national amnesty, only further plural marriages were against the law.

The entrance of Utah into the Union was expected to cancel all the political distress that had been attached to already existent polygamous families. The years, it was supposed, would eventually dry up the stream, so to speak, of further polygamous unions. [^22]

248In retrospect it seems irrelevant to Roberts's election or to the sequel that this distinction be established. The qualifications of Roberts to sit in Congress did not really hinge on his family situation. His case might well have been as strong, perhaps stronger, if he had argued that the distinction was still unclarified, and that the abrupt reversal of any cherished religious practice, and especially one that goes to the root of a man's home and family life, cannot be instantaneous. He felt that it was an absurdity on the part of the nation to make a political issue out of the Church's loyal attempt to bring its stance into harmony with the national temper. Nevertheless, he and the whole state of Utah were accused of "breaking compact with the nation." The compact might in calmer times have been tested in court. In Roberts's case it was subjected to a fifteen-month marathon of public protest and tumult.

George Q. Cannon, while in Washington, had been assured repeatedly by influential congressmen that if further plural marriages would cease, no action would be taken on already existing plural marriages. And he later said that if Roberts had not made such a public spectacle of himself, "we might have gone along undisturbed." U.S. District Attorney Charles Varian had said to the First Presidency that he not only wanted to maintain the distinction between furthering and perpetuating plural marriages, but he wanted Congress to "suspend all anti-polygamy laws for one year," to provide the Church with a period of adjustment. He said that he was in favor of some legal measure to enable polygamous husbands to associate with their families; otherwise, "marshalls can harass and annoy the people and there will be no cessation to this." Roberts later urged that congressional power to exclude or to expel a member did not extend to "alleged or even proven moral delinquency; and more especially when said alleged or proven delinquencies were known to the constituency which elected him." [^23]

249The clamor against Roberts had many voices; in the press the Hearst Syndicate was the most strident. Roberts was aware that men looked upon polygamy as "something pandering to the brutal passions of man," and he respected those feelings when conscientious. But he could only smile at the strange forms the conscientiousness took. There had been for instance an effort to flood Utah with Bibles. This campaign foundered when it was discovered that there were more Bibles per residence available and more Bible reading per capita in Utah than anywhere else in the country, and that unmistakable Hebrew sanction for polygamy was found in the Old Testament. The government established a home for "victims," escapees from the practice of polygamy; no one ever came. Five thousand United States troops were sent to put down Mormon traitors-"Buchanan's folly." Roberts's long-range conviction of the "cruel administration" of law was that "if the labors and sufferings of the Church of Christ for the principle have done nothing more, this much at least has been accomplished-the Saints have borne testimony to the truth." [^24]

The opposition, whose apparent motives were mixed-often neither religious nor moral, but political-attacked the Church both for doing and not doing; for fathers supporting more than one family and for their failing to support all families; for believing plural marriage to be God-given, God-inspired, and for abandoning it; for giving up the practice, but not the belief in it; for excommunicating offenders, and for harboring them; for sustaining the government, and for "knuckling under"; for loving and honoring the children of former polygamous unions, and for failing to do so.

Roberts had already proven his indifference to external pressure when, only weeks after his imprisonment for cohabitation, he undertook a third family by marrying Margaret Shipp; and only months after the issuing of the Manifesto, his wife Celia bore him twins. And she bore him children again in 1896. Roberts had summarized his intentions with, "I will not abandon these women even if the Church tells me to." Was this stubbornness or "being firm in [his] integrity"? Whatever it was, it cost him the support of his Church, his state, and his nation.

250There were a few positive reactions to Roberts's cause. [^25] Roberts's own papers include law notes that were published by Edward Thompson and Company in Long Island, New York, just four months after his election. They express "grave doubts" as to the binding effect of congressional rulings against polygamy in the state and even more doubts about "retroactive" laws. They hold that "to inquire into the morals of the House member is to interfere with States' rights," "nor could Congress justly enforce a code without interfering with State sovereignty." They allow that Congress is not prohibited by the Constitution from passing laws ex post facto and that both houses of Congress are to judge the qualifications of its members. The Constitution, however, and not Congress, provides what these qualifications are. "For the House to refuse Mr. Roberts a seat would be in effect to punish him Ex Post Facto or would trench very closely upon it." The notes concluded that, in any legal aspect of the case, Roberts was entitled to his seat. [^26] These legal aspects had little public appeal.

Roberts felt a special gratitude for the support of two prominent Americans who made strong statements in his favor: Charles W. Elliot, president of Harvard, and Mrs. Susan B. Anthony, famed woman suffragette. Their support moved him because both recognized that the constitutional issue rather than the emotional reactions of the press was paramount; and both defended what most voices were condemning. Elliot said:

If Mr. Roberts was a polygamist before polygamy became illegal in the territory, I think he was absolutely right in continuing to maintain his wives and their children, if there were any. In my judgment, that was the only proper thing for a Mormon to do. I should not consider him an unsuitable member of Congress on the ground of polygamist relations if these were the facts. [^27]

251A year before, Susan B. Anthony had written a letter, published by the Salt Lake Tribune, [^28] urging the women of Utah not to vote for Roberts. But after his election, at a convention in Rochester, New York, where a petition was presented against Roberts, she said: "I should hate to see this federation going on record as asking Congress to do something unconstitutional. Congress has not the power to seat or unseat a man. He was elected by the voters from his State and the Constitution does not give Congress the power to throw him out." [^29] Miss Anthony wrote a personal letter of support to Roberts and then arranged to have it published in the national press. The largesse of that action touched Roberts deeply.

By summer of 1899 the barrage had become so heavy that Roberts may have had second thoughts about resigning his seat. "My nerves," he said in a closed hearing in Washington six months later, "have been trained in such a school that I do not feel to withdraw." Yet he had made a covenant in early 1893: "My Father in Heaven, I have never sought to guide my own destiny, have trusted in Thee to shape all my ends. I still trust in Thee." [^30] And on a dark day in Tennessee years before he had prayed that, rather than his ever becoming "an instrument of the forces of evil," he might be taken in death. On June 4, 1899, with a copy of that journal in his hand and that page open, he knelt in prayer and in blue pencil wrote, "I again subscribe to this prayer, B. H. Apparently he felt reassured to continue the struggle.

Roberts, in preparing his case, gathered a list of precedents of House expulsions. They showed that in all cases either the House had refused to rule because the offense was committed prior to the election of the accused member or had ruled against a member when the crime was subsequent to his election. [^31] Roberts considered himself safe on either ground. But though he publicly took the customary posture of optimism, Roberts recognized early that all precedent and all rule could be swept aside. There were insistent calls in the press for him to resign. He announced that he never would. [^32]

The Journal of Society in New York urged that Roberts's ability ought to prevail and that his election was not, contrary to the cultivated hysteria, the reenthronement of plural marriage. "If the credentials of the State of Utah are respected, Congress will be no more committed to polygamy by the admission of Roberts than it was to lunacy by the admission of Bryan, or to despotism by the admission of Reed." [^33]

252Several magazines gave him fair-minded interviews. Arthur McEwan wrote that in spite of harassment "there were no traces of dissipation about his bright eyes and clear skin." He came away admiring Roberts's pluck. [^34] The New York Press said, "Congress-elect Roberts is a cleancut man, of excellent physique and neat appearance. " [^35] The Woshington Post affirmed that Roberts had "the manners of a Chesterfield" and spoke in modulated tones. [^36] Apparently the emphasis on his appearance did little to counterbalance the malicious cartooning.

But to satisfy the public appetite, news was created: he was "hiding" in New York to avoid criminal prosecution in Utah; [^37] his last child had been spirited away from Centerville; [^38] his wife Celia had just delivered a baby and the baby had been kidnapped (Deseret News reporters visited the mother and found this tale to be pure fiction, but the Tribune refused to retract); [^39] a "reliable source" disclosed that he had "made up" the Tennessee massacre story and had claimed "a revelation" for his "fictional" journey to Cane Creek. On a national scale the press revived the "tramp picture" of Roberts without indicating that he was in disguise or what the circumstances of his being in disguise were. He was portrayed as a vagrant "sitting on a tree stump," and the captions warned the nation that here was a man of "bulldog tenacity," a "desperate character." [^40] The hint was that he was a "fugitive from justice."

The opposition had another move up their sleeve. After the election, Roberts had repeatedly asked that, if he were esteemed guilty of a crime, a subpoena be served him. In spite of that challenge, until the opening of the congressional hearings no warrant had been issued. Then through an unfair, if not an illegal, proceeding, a warrant was issued, "manifestly intended only to put Mr. Roberts at a great disadvantage," as both state and federal attorneys well knew. Since there was no extraditable offense, this was a barefaced stunt, all the more flimsy since no prosecution witnesses were listed. [^41]

253In September 1899 Roberts took a room at 199 West 34th Street in New York City and concentrated on organizing materials for his battle in Washington. He made frequent visits to the Church's mission home in Brooklyn where his lifelong friend, John Whitaker, was then serving a mission. They had many open, honest, confidential chats. Roberts wanted to serve at the national level, and for years, since working on the Herald, had sharpened his knowledge and awareness of affairs of state. He had dreamed of his House seat as "the first rung of the ladder leading to the U.S. Senate." [^42] But Whitaker records in his journal that "the obstacles looked insurmountable." On October 12, after press reports that Roberts was "hiding like a fugitive from justice" at the Mormon headquarters in New York, many newspapers sent reporters. Roberts "gave all his time to Mr. H. S. Reese of the New York World and the New York Press"; both articles were favorable.

Roberts was a perennial missionary; on Sunday, October 15, he put politics aside and spoke at the chapel in Brooklyn. "Many came out of curiosity to see Congressman B. H. Roberts .... It was perhaps the greatest meeting I ever had here in the mission field." [^43]

His presence in New York generally seemed to infuriate the media. For instance, Winifred Black, in her syndicated column, set a rhetorical tone which appealed to many latent and irrational fears:

There is a great deal more than politics in this fight, there is religious fanaticism-a religious fanaticism as fierce and as desperately sincere as is that which inspires the mad courage of the fighting Dervishes. The Mormons are no superstitious children. They are bright, practical American citizens, with all an American citizen's knowledge of practical politics. They can talk well and bargain well and prosper well. They work like bees. They are an intelligent, progressive, ambitious people-but they are Mormons and they believe in the doctrines of their religion as firmly as any fire worshipper believes in his, and they will stop at nothing to carry it [sic] out [^44]

Roberts was pleasantly surprised when a favorable article appeared in the New York Journal in October; reporters from the New York Telegram Sun, Artist, and from the Brooklyn Eagle, the New York World, and the New York Press followed.

On October 18, Roberts brought in an article from the New York Daily News which reported that "a son has been born to B. H. Roberts by a plural wife." He was, Whitaker recorded, "worked up," saying his enemies had arranged and timed the story to help defeat him. "No, it is not true!" he cried out.

254A week later he wrote his mother from New York that his experience convinced him that the newspaper thunder was "staged rather than the real thing," more noisy than dangerous, and he again counseled her to be at ease. He acknowledged loneliness, and "of course I have those fearful periods of depression, inherited, I suppose, in part from you; but I never lose faith in the outcome." But, he reminded her, he had been in worse trouble in the South and therefore could take this present trouble more calmly. "What a deuce of a time I generally have, anyway." He hoped he was gaining experience that would be of use, his worst trial being "the contemptible course the enemies take in dragging my families into the matter."

At the mission home he welcomed a number of prominent visitors who were aroused in his favor. One was Madam Von Ficklestein Moundford, who was on tour speaking about "Jesus in His Homeland." She told Roberts that she had been asked to lecture against the Mormons and had refused. She "knew the Mormons first hand and they were the opposite of what the press was now publishing." [^45] (She later joined the Church.) It was at this time also that Bernard Moses, the Jewish merchant whose compassion and quick loan had helped Roberts through the Tennessee crisis sixteen years earlier, came to Washington to give an interview to the press in support not only of Roberts's rights but of his character as well. "He thinks as little of persecution now as he did then," Roberts gratefully said.

None of these heartening gestures are mentioned in his own notes, but he does record the fact that the New York Times, who "favored my cause," permitted him to write a statement and published it verbatim:

255It is falsely charged that the Congressman from Utah was elected to represent polygamy. That if he is seated and retains his seat it will mean that Congress endorses polygamy, and that there will be an immediate revival of the Mormon plural marriage system in Utah. In the name of all that is consistent, I would like to know how the Mormon people could hope to base a revival of the practice of plural marriage-even if they had the disposition to do so-on the fact of the Representative from Utah taking and retaining his seat in the House. Does the House of Representatives endorse membership? If Socialists should, from some Congressional district, elect a Congressman, would his admission to the House say to the world that the American Congress endorsed Socialism? Surely my enemies give the Mormon people and even Congress little credit for common sense when they trump up such a charge as this. I don't go to Washington as a representative of polygamy. I am not sent there by my constituents to ask Congress to consent to the repeal of the clause in our State Constitution which defines, prohibits, and punishes polygamy. And it should be remembered that this particular clause in our State Constitution cannot be repealed without the consent of the United States. I shall not go to Washington to advocate or even defend polygamy. The question has passed the point where either is necessary in the American Congress. By the settlement of the matter between the people of the United States and the people of the State of Utah the question has been taken from the field of political Controversy. What views and beliefs individuals may entertain is a matter of indifference in this connection. We have not yet undertaken, I think, the task of prescribing opinion, or barring men from political preferment for mere opinions they may entertain.

Respecting "danger to the American home" he wrote:

It is falsely charged that the Representative from Utah now advocates polygamy-that is-the present contracting of polygamous marriages, notwithstanding the Utah Constitutional prohibition of such marriages.

256The only evidence deduced in support of the charge is a quotation from a magazine article written some two years ago in response to inquiries of a number of gentlemen in New York who asked on what ground the Mormon Church in the past had justified the doctrine of plural marriage. [^46] The question was presented in such a form that it involved the consideration of whether or not the Bible sanctioned polygamy; and my answer to that question is now so misrepresented as to make it appear that I am an advocate of polygamy in the sense of advocating plural marriages now, whereas in every way I stand committed to sustain the settlement of that question as fixed by the terms of the Utah Constitution forever prohibiting plural marriages; and my article merely explained the grounds on which the Mormon Church in the past based its justification of plural marriage. Would the men trying to unseat the Representative from Utah hold that one may not make an explanation of past conditions without offense? Are these sectarian ministers who are at the bottom of this agitation against this Representative so sensitive over the fact that it was by the force of representative and harsh legislation, often cruelly administered, that led to the suppression of Mormon plural marriages rather than their "Christian Love?" The arguments of the Rev. Dr. Newman [^47] against Orson Pratt, or their own little pop-gun arguments on the same subject-are they so sensitive on this matter that they can bear no explanation of this past controversy without stuffing their fingers in their ears and running through the Nation screaming "The Mormons are advocating polygamy, the Mormons are threatening the American home"? It would be interesting to learn what views these gentlemen entertain on the freedom of opinion and freedom of speech. Where were they reared? In Spain or Russia or some petty despotism of the Orient? Surely they never breathed the free air of the great Western Republic? Come they down from the ninth or the thirteenth century? Surely they do not belong to the class of the nineteenth century! [^48]

Roberts arrived in Washington about a week before the hearing. In his briefcase were sheaves of notes on presidential decisions pertaining to the Mormons (those of Rutherford B. Hayes, for example) and all of the Mormon-related Supreme Court decisions, beginning with the appeals of the Edmunds-Tucker Act. Roberts had a complete set of The Messages and Papers of the Presidents, 1789 to 1897. [^49] He was prepared to answer questions that might arise pertaining to his election or the relationship of Utah to the nation, and he was prepared to make a lengthy presentation dealing with ill-conceived objections. He also had documentary evidence that the president of the United States had appointed polygamous postmasters in Utah after Utah's statehood and had then upheld that decision against protest. He intended to argue that the election of a polygamous congressman ought to have the same standing.

Roberts's eldest daughter, Adah, had come to Washington to be with him. Pauline Pry, a reporter with the Washington Star, wrote:

257I have given Mr. Roberts of Utah a very great shock-the opportunity to talk to a woman disposed to do him justice. There was another woman present rendering Mr. Roberts honor and devotion. The latter is a very charming young woman, about twenty years old, of attractive face and figure, immeasurable force of character and most womanly dignity.

She has a peculiarly pleasing manner of speech, entirely free from affectation of any sort, her style of address being characterized by a simplicity and directness which, together with reserve, wins your heart and respect at once. Her voice is gentle and well modulated; bears every evidence of culture and refinement, is graceful in her bearing, unusually self-possessed for a woman of her years, and taken altogether would appear an irresistible argument in favor of polygamy, if Mr. Roberts chose to present her in Congress.

However, she is not here for that purpose, "You were very courageous to bring your daughter to Washington," I said to Mr. Roberts.

With a single impulse the father and daughter turned toward each other and clasped hands.

After a moment, Mr. Roberts answered me saying: "There's a story of a hard battle behind her coming here, and I confess it is her triumph. I was not in favor of it at first, but her persistency won the day. She thinks she can be a sort of help to me I'll need, that no man can give me, and when it was about settled that a man who wished to be of assistance to me should join me, she wrote to me begging so hard to take his place that I was forced to yield. She said she was like Gavroche, in the case of Jean Valjean; she wanted to be in the fight, and, insignificant as her defense might be, she was bound to give it. So here she is."

Now, you know, I'm a woman, which is to say, emotional and impressionable, and I'll admit the devotion of his daughter and his appreciation of it caused the celebrated Mr. Roberts to quite lose his dreadful identity in my sight. As a father he is eminently to be trusted and much to be admired.

258In the character of the representative elect from Utah whom the women of the United States proposed unseating by "Brushing aside all technical defense" and taking a stand of the "broad principles at stake," Mr. Roberts impresses me as a man somewhat to be feared-rather outside all calculations that have yet been made about him. He seems to possess a certain immobility of purpose that looks at you out of his clear, steady blue eyes, that inspires you, caution appearing in the firm lines of his square-cut clean-fleshed jaw, and, above all, that addresses you in the rare poise of the whole man, the impressive quiet of his voice and telling moderation of his language. The keynote of his character is self-control. He knows Mr. Roberts perfectly, believes in him implicitly, and in any event directs the destiny of Mr. Roberts without reference to contrary opinion or storms of opposition. He will fight to defend his principles and his position. I think he will give us a very interesting chapter of the coming Congress. [^50]

Roberts found this tribute to Adah's motivation insightful. He was aware that he himself lacked what he later called "the politician's gift"-the ability to remember names, faces, and personal incidents about people, and the grace to use them. He praised "Adah at Washington" as the embodiment of the trait. Sitting by congressmen's wives, at receptions held at the hotel, at introductions and visits, and in response to phone calls and invitations, she was described by many as "simply brilliant."

He expected attacks on his motives for bringing Adah to Washington, and there were some. The Troy Press, for example, wrote: "His daughter was a failure as a pleader for her polygonistic [sic] Papa. A bright young woman trying to extenuate bigamy [sic] presents a pitiable and disgusting spectacle." It was reward enough, however, that they found her "bright and young."

259Meanwhile, back in Centerville, Roberts's families were under a publicity siege. Writers, photographers, and reporters swarmed into Centerville seeking journalistic trophies. The children were dogged by "What is your name? .... Stand still while I take your picture!" Sometimes the small children scampered by prearrangement when Celia or Louisa called from the window "Kodak." The twins were especially sought after. Some reporters were courteous; most were not. Photographers actually "stationed" themselves all day outside the two homes then sent pretended "salesmen" to the doors. Once a woman reporter knocked at the front door, which Grandmother Dibble opened. The woman, saying not a word, burst in, went to the cradle, scooped up the infant girl (Joanna), and held her up to the window, where outside by prearrangement a photographer was stooped behind his tripod. "News" was generated out of trivia. A trip to the flour bin or a glimpse of Louisa and Celia walking to church together was flashed to the national wire services. In Salt Lake, Margaret reduced the problem simply by prolonging her house calls and hospital rounds and leaving her home lightless.

On December 1, 1899, Roberts wrote to his mother and assured her that "I have that within which makes me feel alright, and win or lose I shall be alright still-and, by the way, I am going to win." "Be assured," he adds, "I will have some friends when the hour of trial comes; and in that supreme moment when it does come I shall remember that my mother prayed for me, and that the prayers of a righteous woman availeth much. I think that God will not desert me then, and that I shall be able to do my full duty-and that is the main thing in this world, whether appearances indicate defeat or victory." He adds that Adah has "helped to dispel the loneliness. [^51]

On December 4 Roberts took his seat on the floor of the House; he was involved in the voting for the Speaker and in other ways functioned as a representative-elect. [^52] But on the next day, he was required to face the crowded chamber to defend his right to that seat. There were more than the usual number of women in the gallery that day. In addition to Americans, Oriental Minister and Madam Wee Ting Fang and British diplomats were present. The British novelist H. G. Wells came also. The handsome wife of Speaker of the House Henderson was there with her only daughter.

The minority leader, Mr. Richardson of Tennessee, argued on the first day of the House hearing that the law of the land and all of its precedents made it necessary to seat Roberts and that his elective right did not turn upon guilt or innocence of polygamous living.

Mr. Cannon of the House, who had likewise insisted on the right of a state, not the Congress, to pass upon the qualifications of representatives, stood to oppose Richardson. Richardson immediately accused Cannon of yielding to pressure from his wife, who was a member of the Anti-Mormon Women's Organization. "Engulfed in a stream of opposition and prejudice," he charged, "he [Cannon] changed his view." [^53]

Representative Littlefield of Maine arose to give an argument in favor of Richardson's position; Roberts later said that "even while Littlefield was making his argument he was confident of being seated." [^54]

260Then Richardson offered Roberts part of his time, thirty minutes, which was extended ten minutes by M. Tayler. Roberts arose, aware that under a House rule any single member might silence him at any time. The New York Press reported:

No one except a man with a rope around his neck, addressing the mob that is going to hang him, ever made a speech under more depressing conditions that day than Roberts did when he faced a hostile country, as well as a hostile House, but he did not quail. [^55]

The New York World wrote:

There were two law-books and a little pile of papers [his notes have been preserved in a scrapbook; they outline several points which he did not have time to make]. First, in a low voice, Roberts asked the clerk to read his naturalization certificate. That took care of the citizenship claim. For ten minutes he talked in a soft, high-pitched voice, very slowly with the school master's precision. His right hand was thrust into his bosom.

Then he dropped a bombshell saying, in effect, "If I have broken compact with the nation, so has President McKinley in appointing two Postmasters who are known polygamists." His exact words were:

So, sir, I take it that the resolution offered by the gentleman from Tennessee [Mr. Richardson, minority leader on the floor of the House] is directly in point and that it would be better that the entire investigation of this case be referred to the committee on the judiciary. For I tell you, sir, that making a charge against a sovereign state for breaking its "compact with its government" is a very serious matter, especially since it may involve a question in regard to the action of the executive of this nation in relation thereto. For, I assert this, that if the people of Utah were guilty of breaking a compact by electing a man charged with being a violator of these particular laws about unlawful cohabitation, the administration of the government may also be charged with breaking that contract by also appointing to federal offices [men] against whom like protests supported by affidavits were made. Therefore it is eminently proper that they [such charges] should go to a committee that we will be assured are men of trained abilities and learned in the law. [^56]

261A number of representatives sprang to their feet:

Hopkins: Does the gentleman know that the appointees practice polygamy? [^57]

Roberts: They are so charged in sworn affidavits filed with him.

Hopkins: My question can be answered yes or no.

Roberts: Does the gentleman wish to cross-examine me? I refuse to be interrupted. [^58]

In his closing remarks, Roberts's earnestness was impressive. And if there was little approval, there was much applause for him.

Richardson then introduced a substitute resolution to seat Roberts. It lost by 247 to 49.

As usual there were conflicting reactions to Roberts. Judith Ellen Foster, prominent woman legislative aide, in a letter dated Wednesday, December 6, 1899, wrote:

Mr. Roberts made a poor defense. Once or twice he rose to some dramatic effect, but for the most part it was halting and weak. It was a terrible ordeal for any man, saint or sinner, to pass; however, I was surprised that he did no better. [^59]

In contrast, British writer H. G. Wells, with characteristic empathy for the underdog, shed some stereotype views of Mormons and was elated at Roberts's intellectual power.

While I was in Washington there was a gentleman by the name of B. H. Roberts, who was an inspiration to me, for he was making a fight for his seat in Congress They arrayed five of the best attorneys in the Congress against him. Mr. Roberts stood like a giant and defended himself and his Church. I never heard a more eloquent or cogent speaker in all my travels. [^60]

For these remarks we are dependent on the report of a Mormon missionary who met Wells at the Paris Exposition shortly after the Washington hearings. A more disinterested reporter wrote (and Roberts pasted this in a scrapbook):

This bold and impressive Westerner, fighting for his seat, gave the most eloquent talk I ever heard. I would classify Mr. oberts in oratorical ability as second only to William Jennings Bryan, the silver-tongued orator of the Platte. [^61]

On December 7, and for five more days, a special committee appointed by the Congress met in a closed hearing with Roberts. It was chaired by Robert W. Taylor of Ohio. [^62] Roberts appeared as his own counsel. [^63] He soon learned that the committee was essentially a fact-finding body, and that he could speak in his own behalf, cross-examine any witnesses, question or interrupt at will. Roberts then requested that both the agitators and the press be present. In a fatal stroke, Chairman Taylor admitted the agitators and barred the press.

A critical reading of Roberts's demeanor on the first day (the hearing lasted five hours) shows him somewhat disjointed, groping for legal footing. But beginning with the second day his arguments became crystallized.

After pursuing in vain the states' rights issue, Roberts confronted directly the charge of polygamy. He admitted that he had been lawfully convicted in 1889, showed that there was no affidavit pertaining to the period since, specifically denied that he had contracted any plural marriage since October 1890, and pleaded not guilty to the charge that he had lived in polygamous relations in violation of the law. Chairman Taylor was nonplussed at Roberts's wholesale denials. Ex-Senator Joseph Rawlins of Utah, Taylor said, had led him to believe there would be only minor factual disagreement in the hearings. Roberts replied he was in no way bound by Rawlins.

Roberts then asked two things: that the committee immediately consider his prima facie right to his seat, because every minute they delayed, Utah was without representation in the House; [^64] and that the committee recognize that they had no right whatever to inquire into his polygamous relations as a condition of his retaining his seat, since such inquiry presumed to add qualifications to the Constitution, denied him due process of law, and presumed to try an alleged crime out of the point of jurisdiction.

263In this entire closed hearing, Theodore Schroeder was a conspicuous and vocal participant. A study of Schroeder by the political scientist David Brudnoy (who consulted the extensive bibliography in Harvard's Houghton Library) shows how enigmatic a man he was. Schroeder had spent nearly a decade in Salt Lake City at the time he began his assault on Roberts. He was a self-styled agnostic who dabbled in psychoanalytic theory and made the Mormons his whipping boy. On the other hand, he was a Democrat, and Harold Nelson called him "America's most prolific advocate of radically free speech and press." Such allegiances might have made him an ally, rather than an antagonist, of Roberts. Instead, in an incendiary sheet titled Lucifer's Lantern, he launched a heavy attack against the Mormons. To account for his vitriolic style, Brudnoy speculates that Schroeder was "delighted in flaying dead horses," and "out of touch with recent developments," or "himself sex-obsessed." Schroeder, he concludes, had no personal vendetta with Roberts but corn-bated him because Roberts was a symbol of "sanctified lust." [^65]

Roberts's notes record a statement of a legal historian named Maurice: "The lawyer is jealous of the interference of church men with the affairs of State"; a marginal note adds, "a universal feeling among lawyers." Roberts found it curious, then, that congressional lawyers permitted a set of churchmen-the Utah storm starters-to use the machinery of the churches to interfere with affairs of state under the claim that they were thus protecting the separation of church and state. It is equally curious that an attorney, Schroeder, should have aided and abetted them.

Though the committee was authorized to "examine witnesses on oath," no witnesses were brought from Utah, nor was a legal staff sent to Utah to take testimony there. One wonders if Roberts hoped the committee would travel to Utah and observe conditions firsthand. Instead, testimony was taken from the originators of the protest.

Though there is not a tradition of trial-like strictness in such congressional committee hearings, Roberts proceeded as if there were. In at least one respect he was right: as the sequel showed, the facade of courtesy covered a fairly solid decision against him. The "closed hearing" procedures were mainly for "constituency visibility." In a private letter, one House member wrote on the morning of the first day of the open hearings, "We have concluded that he [Roberts] shall fight his way in, instead of our fighting him out." [^66]

264Among the procedures that conspired against fairness was the endorsement by Chairman Taylor of Theodore Schroeder to act in the role of committee counsel and the decision to curtail Roberts in cross-examination. Since, upon Roberts's inquiry, it was admitted that Schroeder was present neither as witness nor as counsel, his participation was improper. Roberts's objections to this were never answered, however. To compound the duplicity, Chairman Taylor refused to let Roberts discredit Schroeder on integrity charges (he had been disbarred for unprofessional conduct in Utah) but permitted Schroeder to charge Roberts at will.

Under Roberts's cross-examination, the animus of the storm starters surfaced. Reverend Thomas Iliff acknowledged he was anti-Mormon and had stumped the country attacking Roberts for rather handsome pay. Roberts also led him to acknowledge he had plagiarized a sermon. He asked further if Iliff had been a "common informer," paid to assume the role of a pencil salesman in order to interview Louisa Roberts at Roberts's home in Centerville. This charge he denied. It was then revealed, through Roberts's questions, that Schroeder had been disbarred in Utah under censure of the Supreme Court for unprofessional conduct. Schroeder countered, "I am not on trial here," and was backed by Chairman Taylor, who asked Roberts what his motive in such questioning was. "I wish to show that these men who are bringing forward these charges belong to a class of men who are unworthy of the confidence of this committee or the American people... a low order of man in the community." [^67]

265A "Brief on Demurrer" in the Roberts case was published by Roberts December 12, 1899, summarizing his conclusions, in legal form, on the rights of members of Congress. He argued that he was being judged guilty of a crime without due process; that he was being disqualified on grounds which had been rendered inapplicable in the state of Utah due to the amnesties of Presidents Cleveland and Harrison; and that earlier in the Cannon case the House of Representatives had held that polygamy was a basis for disqualification but that he (Roberts) had been charged only with unlawful cohabitation. He further pointed out that the "protest by certain sectarian ministers from Utah" had begun several months prior to Roberts's departure for the East and more than a year after Theodore Schroeder had attempted to gather charges against Roberts including the "Brandon affidavits.' [^68]

Throughout this harrowing process, Roberts managed to retain a sense of humor, or at least of irony. Indeed, he was noted for "keeping himself under control." One evening, in the upper corridors of the capitol building, he encountered the Salt Lake antagonists: Theodore Schroeder, the Tribune editor, Pat Lannon, and others. In the startled silence Roberts said with a smile: "Gentlemen, I am looking for the Utah lobby. Can you tell me where it is?" Then turning his head right and left as if searching, he slowly walked away.

For the Christmas holidays Roberts left Washington with his daughter, Adah, and visited friends in New York and Philadelphia, returning to a "whole mountain" of accumulated mail. Just before Christmas, Roberts had written an appeal to the First Presidency asking for a public statement supporting his position. He well knew that President Joseph F. Smith had spoken officially in his conference address of the prior April conference, [^69] saying Roberts was not the candidate of the Church and disclaiming the Church's intent to be aggressive in favoring any political party. On New Year's Day Roberts received a telegram from President Lorenzo Snow, which the press instantly caught up. The Church was required to say that any man who cohabited with plural wives was in violation of the law. The conclusion was foregone.

Yet in January Roberts was still maintaining hope. He wrote that the newspapers "do not express as much confidence in my ultimate success as I myself entertain." He reported that he was through with his argument before the committee and was awaiting their findings and their report to the House. He didn't think that a two-thirds vote could be mustered against him. [^70]

266In his final presentation to the Congress on January 23 (and to what he called the "Third House"-the gallery), Roberts, whether or not he believed his seat could be salvaged, seemed intent on vindicating Utah and the Mormon people. "They [the Mormons] and their religion have been beset by a class of men not of the first order intellectually or of sound judgment in a manner that was irritating and not Christian." He expressed profound respect for "men who consecrate their lives to the good of their fellow men" of any religion-a Cardinal, a Quaker, a Salvation Army Captain-"but I despise those who make merchandise of such a profession and who make vicious warfare upon people who chance to differ from them in religious convictions." He added, "If you go to the teaching of the Great Master, who, I take it, we all revere, although he denounced every crime, every sin that man can commit, you will find no word of His condemnation of the conduct of the law relating to this matter [plural marriage] as it was given by Moses to ancient Israel." Of the appeals of the Mormon Church to the Supreme Court he said, "They believed that they were protected by the clause in the Constitution."

Then he argued as a statesman, "What mighty emergency has arisen that demands this disregard of Constitutional limitations?" His final plea was that they "clear their vision" and find justification, neither for exclusion nor expulsion. Citing the journalists who had written, "Brand this man with shame and send him back to his people," he said that, whether the House expelled him or not, he would leave with "head erect and brow undaunted and walk God's earth as angels walk the clouds, with no sense of shame upon me." Sporadic applause came from the floor and hisses from the gallery. He looked to the gallery and said, "If in response to the sectarian clamor that has been invoked against the member from Utah, you violate the Constitution of your country, either in excluding or expelling me, all the shame that there is in this case will be left behind me and rest with this House." [^71]

267The closed committee had voted seven to two to exclude Roberts. [^72] The House voted 244 for exclusion, 50 against; 36 abstained. [^73] To his death Roberts believed his exclusion was "unprecedented," that it had come about by the "ship and spur of popular sentiment," and that, even taking the ground of antipolygamists, there was little excuse for the "extraordinary efforts put forth throughout the country to crush a system of marriage already practically dead and abandoned. [^74] Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes once said, "The Constitution is what the judges say it is." In this case the Constitution was what the Congress said it was. A later Supreme Court ruled, apropos of the Adam Clayton Powell case, that this was a critical blunder; [^75] but this was far too late to make any difference to B. H. Roberts.

In earlier years, Roberts had shown a talent for blistering denunciation, but throughout the congressional proceedings he spoke mainly in the language of moderation. When a reporter asked him if he were not tempted to complain of the immorality of his judges, he replied, "There is little reason... what is the use?" But some in the press-and the Texas legislature-did not hesitate to exploit the point, finding it strange, for example, that William Randolph Hearst should be clamoring through his newspaper empire for the "protection of the American home" when he himself had been "publicly branded a degenerate." "Roberts has three wives," said one. He has children by them and "all of them love him." "He is surrounded by scores of members of the House of Representatives who live with thirty or forty or any number of women, whom they do not support, and whose children they repudiate. Roberts of Utah stands convicted of being more honorable than scores of those who are ready to vote to ostracize him." [^76]

Back in Brooklyn, among friends, Roberts said in a sermon:

268One thought that thrilled my heart in the midst of the personal attack upon me within the twelvemonth, the one rift that gave a silver, nay a golden lining in all the dark storm clouds that gathered about me in the Capitol at Washington was that hundreds of thousands would learn what Mormon-ism really is because of the concentrated storm upon my uncovered head, for if I am conscious of light and darkness, sorrow or joy, then I tell you friends, I know that the message Joseph Smith came and delivered to the world is true, has in it the power of God to work the salvation of those who believe and accept it .... The manifestation of sectarian bigotry that was exhibited in my case ended in a triumph for us. It's a case of "the faster you pluck us the swifter we grow." It is an agitation that will lead to the propagation of the faith. There has been a marked increase in inquiry ever since. [^77]

Unprecedented opportunities for sympathetic presentation of the message of the Restoration arose. One mayor said: "Gentlemen, I can see what a great injustice has been done you here. I am a Catholic, but I shall accord you the same fairness, attention, and consideration as any other denomination. [^78] The case was also influential on the judiciary. "I shall regard with great care the judicial and constitutional rights of the Mormon people," said Judge Edward Stake. Judge Jackson (a direct descendant of General Stonewall Jackson), of the U.S. Court of Appeals, said, "I have no sympathy with the attacks against the Mormons. [^79]

Many newspapers in the East were moved in favor of B. H. Roberts and carried several follow-up stories on the Mormon contribution. [^80] Of such coverage Roberts remained unaware. But in Washington, an attaché of the Russian Embassy came directly to him for material for an article in the St. Petersburg Gazette (in Russian). Roberts rejoiced in the result: a "serious, unbiased exposition of the faith," where distance and intolerance had formerly prevented any hearing whatsoever. [^81]

There are those who did acknowledge Roberts's talents. Seeing in him a steady courtroom manner, Clarence Darrow offered Roberts a full partnership in his Chicago firm. Roberts had to refuse. "My, my," Roberts later sighed, as he mused over the financial phase of the offer. "I would have earned more in a month than I have ever earned in a year." Among publications which gave Roberts support in the aftermath were The New York Times, [^82] The Outlook, [^83] The Conservative [^84]and The Texas Legislature. [^85]

269Roberts returned to Salt Lake unceremoniously. The Tribune asked for an interview, but he replied gruffly, "I have absolutely nothing to say to the Salt Lake Tribune." Reporters noted that he was dressed in the height of fashion "with a shining new silk tie, black overcoat and his Prince Albert suit and well-shined shoes." George E. Hill, his secretary, met him and went with him to the office of James H. Moyle. Within a short time he was served with a charge of "polygamous living," which had been awaiting him since the "storm starters" issued it some two months earlier. Attorney Moyle arranged for him to avoid the inconvenience of appearing before a justice of the peace, and Roberts returned to the "cozy residence" of his wife Margaret who, the Tribune said, had achieved "considerable prominence during the investigation." Back in Centerville, Roberts drove away a cluster of reporters by saying, "My home is my castle."

In a statement prewritten for the Salt Lake Herald, Roberts said of his exclusion, "I had not betrayed and refused to betray the women who had trusted me in the past under the Mormon system of plural marriage." [^86]

Roberts made a formal request of the House for two thousand dollars in fees. Precedent justified this, for in the case of contested seats this was the customary remittance. It was refused. The San Diego Union suggested Congress "compromise the matter by giving him a free ticket home." He received, however, not a penny.

One may speculate about the "might-have-beens." What, for example, if Roberts had waited four years before he attempted his congressional campaign? What if he had hired legal counsel? What if the Church had arrayed its own witnesses in his behalf, as years later it did with Senator-elect Reed Smoot? One conclusion is clear: As Catholic analyst William G. White has shown, eighty of the Congress-men who voted against Roberts acknowledged that the prime factor in their decision was pressure from their constituents, and a heavy proportion of those constituents were women organized into feminist groups. [^87] Had that one segment of society supported him, or been less vocal in their objections, Roberts might well have retained his seat.

It is lasting irony that Roberts was listed after 1900 in Who's Who in America as an "ex-Congressman." The Who's Who for 1916 and 1917 gave his address as 79 C Street, Salt Lake City, which is where he lived with Margaret. [^88]

270Roberts never affected to despise politics. Twenty-five years after his hearings, he confided to his missionaries in New York, "How I would have loved to be in Congress, representing our people, using the talent and strength God has given me, to promote and maintain peace, and to see that every man had an opportunity to enjoy the benefits of citizenship in this country- the land of Zion- my adopted country." It was the consensus of Utah Senators William H. King and Reed Smoot, and Congressman Don B. Colton, and Idaho's Senator Borah that Roberts might well have become one of the distinguished American statesmen of his time. [^89] George Q. Cannon believed, however, "We could have gone along undisturbed had it not been for the candidacy of Brother Roberts." [^90]

Another way to look at it was that Roberts, as a voluntary scapegoat, made possible a national catharsis. Seven years later, Reed Smoot, elected as a Utah senator, faced a similar contest before being seated, not for the practice of polygamy but for believing in it. He was finally seated, due largely to the support of President Theodore Roosevelt, but not until after a protracted, laborious set of hearings to which the leaders of the Church were summoned.

After Smoot was vindicated, Roberts addressed the sectarian opposition, but not in a vindictive spirit:

Through four long years you raked the country as with a fine-toothed comb to gather up your evidence and to convince the United States Senate that they ought to follow your dictation to assail the Latter-day Saints, and to break up and terrify as a few years ago our community was broken up and terrified by a severe, rigid, and I may say, cruel administration of this law against polygamous living; and after you've done your best, submitted your evidence-employed your best counsel you could find and after you have awakened all the prejudices to which you could appeal, the court [the Senate] has turned you down, gentlemen] Your power is no longer equal to your malice. [^91]

271The resources of the Church, including the extended testimony of President Joseph F. Smith, were rallied to aid Senator Smoot. In contrast, Roberts later said, "I was crushed and mangled in the lone fight, for it was a lone fight so far as human aid is concerned." [^92] This was the hardest thing of all for Roberts to face-"the greatest disappointment of my life." [^93] But he convinced his family that strength for endurance transcended "human aid." Whenever Roberts visited Washington after the congressional ordeal, he stayed in the same room in the Metropolitan Hotel he had occupied while fighting for his congressional seat. Even when it was much out of his way to stop in Washington, he made special effort to do so. Why return to such a scene of trauma? His family believed that the room had become his refuge for a place of earnest study and prayer, and that he there enjoyed his "one unfailing resource." Whenever the subject was raised, Roberts said, "I still held on," and, "He never left me."

Politically, Roberts remained active until his death, but more from the wings than from center stage. He called himself an "intense Democrat." But he was in fact an independent, and was not only flexible but reversible. Among the issues and events into which he threw his energies after 1900 one must include: radical excoriation of Reed Smoot for many years, which was paradoxically attended by his best personal effort to aid in the research and in the giving of testimony that finally resulted in Smoot's gaining his senatorial seat (over a period of four terms Smoot became a major influence in tariff law and a key figure in Republican politics); [^94] opposition to prohibition in the 1890s, which he reversed when he nominated and campaigned for Simon Bamberger as governor of Utah, who was a known "dry"; hostility to big business and support for the cause of labor, a stance which he began to modify when he saw signs of exploitation from organized labor; much vocal support for the League of Nations during Woodrow Wilson's presidency, and criticism of the plea of Major J. Reuben Clark, Jr., for isolation and national sovereignty; a brush with renewed ambitions to be governor of Utah in 1920, and then withdrawal and successful re-election campaigning for Democratic Governor George A. Dern in 1920; partisan enthusiasm for Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal with NRA and WPA, and then, with his lifetime friend, Heber J. Grant, the beginnings of disenchantment (President Grant simply gave up on Roosevelt and joined the Republican cause).

272His strenuous efforts to help delineate the full implications of the separation of church and state, and his gadfly activities in writing the Brethren (for example, a long disquisition in January 1901 to Francis M. Lyman on disentangling the Church from its old postures, and a Salt Lake Theatre speech in 1908 against Reed Smoot), were so vigorous and contentious, and some felt erratic, that some brethren in his own quorum recommended to the First Presidency that he be disciplined. But President Joseph F. Smith chose instead to make one or two direct pulpit preachments, and told his brethren that would suffice. ("Even when I was out of favor with him he arose above his displeasure and was fair with me," Roberts later said.)

Overall, Roberts's rationale for political involvement was that of Edmund Burke: the forces of evil triumph when enough good men do nothing. But he was not unaware that the struggle of the political arena may diminish a man's honest thirst for truth and shake his confidence in human virtue and result in abuse of power. But if men are not by nature political animals, Roberts was.

In the end he would write, "It is the mission of the church to make men, leaving the men to make the state-the community." [^95]

Notes

Chapter 12

1 Elder Melvin J. Ballard's diary, which records this incident on 16 July 1898, declares, after hearing Bryan speak, that "he was the greatest orator since the days of Webster." See Bryant S. Hincldey, Sermons and Missionary Services of Melvin Joseph Ballard (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1949), p. 38. The Democratic Bryan received 82 percent of Utah's vote in his 1898 bid for the presidency.

2 B. H. Roberts to George Reynolds, 12 October 1896, Church Archives.

3 This letter was later reproduced by Roberts on the front page of the Salt Lake Herald, in November 1898, as a partial answer to Wells's reversed endorsement.

4 Gordon B. Hinckley, Life of James H. Moyle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1951), pp. 231-33.

5 Roberts would later return the compliment to Moyle by saying before Mormons, non-Mormons, Democrats, Republicans, and Jewish Governor Barnberger that "Friend Jim" Moyle, because of his "rugged honesty" and "integrity," deserved to be what he soon became, the United States Assistant Secretary of the Treasury. (See Life of James H. Moyle, p. 277.)

6 Diary of Emrocline B. Wells, 15, 17 September 1898, Church Archives.

7 Both John Henry Smith and President Joseph F. Smith, Republicans in sentiment, nevertheless in the spirit of fairness went to Pat Lannon, editor of the Tribune, and presented a paper certifying that no plural marriages were being performed by the Church. Lannon was not subdued and continued the bombardment. (See John Henry Smith Journal, 23 September 1898.) Orlando W. Powers went through the state dutifully stumping for Roberts, apparently with considerable effect. (See one of Powers's speeches, Salt Lake Tribune, 15 October 1898.) He had formerly been Democratic State Chairman and a vigorous opponent of Church leaders' influence in politics.

8 Orson F. Whitney, Through Memory's Halls (Independence, Mo.: Zion's Printing and Publishing, 1930), p. 224.

9 Salt Lake Herald, 5 November 1898.

10 The theological school at the University of Denver (Methodist) was later named for him.

11 See Jenson's Church Chronology for 1899.

12 The franchise was returned to him 6 September 1882. Certificate in Marriott Collection.

13 U.S. Congress, Congressional Record, 56th Cong, 1899, 33:1518.

14 Roberts believed many of the signatures were those of Sunday School children who had only the remotest idea of what they were signing; there were many duplications of signatures.

15 Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1938), p. 328.

16 Salt Lake Tribune, 7 November 1898.

17 Diary of George Q. Cannon, 1898, p. 183.

18 Office Journal of Lorenzo Snow, p. 75; cf. George Q. Cannon Diary, 28 December 1898.

19 Office Journal of Lorenzo Snow, December 1899.

20 Abraham H. Cannon Diary, January 1890, p. 31.

21 Diary of Brigham Young, Jr., 1 June 1901, Church Archives.

22 Roberts devotes ten pages of his Biographical Notes to this issue (pp. 408-18).

23 Roberts's Personal Papers, Box 3, Church Archives.

24 Mormonism, Its Origins and History 86, Utah Pamphlets (Salt Lake City: University of Utah, n.d.), p. 67.

25 James Cardinal Gibbons went on record that the Utah Constitutional prohibition of polygamy was not retroactive and was meant only to prevent future plural marriages. (See "Shall Congress Admit a Polygamist?" The Independent [21 December 1899]: 3407.) But Gibbons went on to say that women of the United States deserved "highest praise" for preventing "the slightest recognition of Mormonism."

26 Roberts's Publicity Scrapbook, Church Archives, p. 10.

27 President Elliot visited Salt Lake City in March 1892, and he and his wife dined with President Wilford Woodruff; he then addressed a large assembly in the Tabernacle. President Woodruff's journal portrays his remarks as "beautiful and pleasing." Elliot compared the epic landing of the Pilgrim fathers in New England with the "superb" and "Christian" Mormon pioneer drama, the voyage across the plains. Both conquests, he said, grew out of vital religion. He added that "the women are the most heroic part of any new colony." Eastern newspapers responded in "loud lamentation" at these comparisons, but Elliot, on return, refused to retract. When President Elmer G. Peterson of Utah State University invited him to come west again and address the student body, he agreed; but his health required postponements and a correspondence grew between them. In one letter he wrote (according to the wife of the late President Peterson): "I am interested in studying more of the Latter-day Saints. It seems to me there is a crying need of our time for a religion that will reach people where they are and change their lives but also offer a meaningful grasp of the problems that attract and hold the most refined and intellectual of men. Mormonism seems to me to do both of these more than any contemporary religion." (See Deseret News, 17 March 1892; CHC, 3:291.)

28 Susan B. Anthony had come to Utah for the Intermountain Woman Suffrage Convention on 13 May 1895. She presided. See Church Chronology, p. 209.

29 Roberts's Scrapbook of 1899, p. 84.

30 From a journal orB. H. Roberts, 16 May 1893.

31 Roberts's Notes in Personal Papers, Box 3, Church Archives.

32 Deseret News, 15 November 1899.

33 The Journal of Society, December 1899.

34 North American, 7 December 1899; quoted in Deseret News, 8 December 1899.

35 New York Press, 14 October 1899.

36 Washington Post, 24 November 1899.

37 Ibid., 13 October 1899.

38 Ibid., 31 October 1899.

39 Salt Lake Tribune, 17 October 1899.

40 See Arena Magazine 21 (June 1899): 715-36.

41 See Journal History for these dates, the last being 24 November 1901. Only after he was denied his seat, on 14 May 1900, was it announced that Roberts would be tried in court. It was a token ceremony. He was tried on June 18 and on June 23 the court announced it would exact no promise, and on June 24 he was given a suspended sentence. After typical legal delays his "unlawful cohabitation case" in the Salt Lake District Court was "quashed and dismissed."

42 Conference Report, October 1929, p. 10.

43 John Whitaker Journal, vol. 2, pp. 486-93.

44 B. H. Roberts Scrapbook.

45 John Whitaker Journal, 18 October 1899.

46 This is a reference to "Reiner-Roberts Correspondence," Improvement Era I (May 1898): 465-82. Dr. Reiner, a Roman Catholic, had visited leaders of the Church, and had said Luther and Carlstadt secretly advocated polygamy and that in comparison Brigham Young and his followers "deserve to be called Saints." Roberts approached the original question -Can polygamy be justified from a biblical standpoint? - with a double answer: No, not without further commandment and authority from God to do so; yes, if one wants actual historical examples of people (Abraham, Jacob, and other prophets) approved by God.

47 The Reverend L P. Newman, chaplain of the United States Senate, in the Metropolitan Methodist Church in Washington, said that polygamy was not (as had been said in the House of Representatives) a biblical doctrine. Present were the president (Ulysses S. Grant), the vice-president (Schuyler Colfax), and other high officials. A non-Mormon paper (Salt Lake Daily Telegraph) suggested that Newman come to Salt Lake City and debate on the subject: "Does the Bible Sanction Polygamy?" In the debate Orson Pratt not only undercut Newman's misreading of original Hebrew in Leviticus, but more than matched him. "Bigger guns," someone opined in Washington, "than Dr. Newman must be sent to the Mormons." (See CHC, 6:287-94.) It might have helped in the polarizing process if biblical students acknowledged that the Bible both does and does not sanction polygamy, and that for the Jews as for the Mormons its practice was surrounded by special conditions. That would have helped abort the almost universal (but misled) assumption that all Mormons practiced polygamy and that if they had their way they would legalize it in all the world. Roberts taught what his church taught: that polygamy was neither permissible nor obligatory except on the basis of modern revelation, and even then on an individual basis.

48 Roberts wrote this statement on 17 November 1899; it was printed in the New York Times, 18 November 1899.

49 James D. Richardson, ed., The Messages and Papers of the Presidents, 1789-1897 (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1899).

50 Washington Star, 30 November 1899.

51 B. H. Roberts to his mother, 1 December 1899.

52 There is indication that he received some salary from 5 March 1899 onward.

53 BN, p. 202.

54 Salt Lake Herald, 5 February 1900.

55 New York Press, 5 December 1899; see also Deseret News, 12 December 1899.

56 U.S. Congress, Congressional Record, 56th Cong, 5 December 1899, p. 48.

57 The official endorsement of Utah postmasters demonstrated that the charge of breaking compact was "trumped up." The matter had been generally discussed in Washington for days before Roberts made his speech. It was an embarrassment to the president, and it solidified Republican opposition. At home many of Roberts's own associates and, of course, the critical press, considered it a "cowardly" thing to do. One aspect of the matter went unnoticed: Joseph Rawlins, then Democratic Utah senator, had introduced into the Senate early in their session a resolution to be referred to the judiciary committee. Not just in defense of Roberts but in defense of the people of Utah, he argued, the question of whether there was a violation of "compact" with the United States by electing Roberts needed attention. He pointed out that there had been appointments of polygamists by the president before Roberts's election, that some protests against their appointment had been filed in Washington and knowingly set aside, and that the administration, by testimony of affidavits, knew these men were living in polygamous relationships. Thus Roberts was simply reiterating in the House what had already been said in the Senate. Roberts's statement, however, did not placate but only provoked the opposition. See BN, p. 206.

58 New York World, 6 December 1899.

59 Letter in B. H. Roberts Files, Church Archives.

60 See letter of A. O. Van Dyke to the Church Historian, Church Archives. Wells went directly from Washington to the Paris Exposition, which opened in 1900, where he met A. O. Van Dyke, a Mormon missionary.

61 From BHR press clippings, where the reporter's name is not stated.

62 Others on the committee were: Mr. C. B. Landis, Indiana; Mr. Morris, Minnesota; Mr. Freer, West Virginia; Mr. Littlefield, Maine; Mr. S. McPherson, Iowa; Mr. D. DeArmond, Missouri; Mr. S. W. T. Lanham, Texas; Mr. R. W. Miers, Indiana.

63 One reason why Roberts may have decided to be his own defense is that neither he nor the Church could afford the expense, and Roberts was too proud to ask someone of competence to serve without fee. There is also the fact that in the George Reynolds case of 1879, the George Q. Cannon case of 1885, and the Romney case of 1890-1891, legal counsel was retained at great expense and each time proved ineffective.

64 His prima facie right was to act as an elected congressman until and unless decisions went against him.

65 See David Brudnoy, "A Decade in Zion: Theodore Schroeder's Initial Assault on the Mormons," Journal of Church and State 14 (Spring 1972): 261-78.

66 J. Ellen Foster to Judge G. W. Bartsch, 6 December 1899. Roberts Files, Church Archives.

67 Rlection Case of Brighorn H. Roberts of Utah, p. 57.

68 Thomas Brandon, a native of Centerville, was paid by Schroeder to photograph the gravestone of Roberts's daughter Lena Roberts in Centerville, which was inscribed, "Daughter of Celia and Brigham H. Roberts." This was used against him during the closed hearing.

69 See Conference Report, April 1899, p. 40.

70 B. H. Roberts, Personal Notes, 11 January 1900, Church Archives.

71 U.S. Congress, Congressional Record, 56th Cong., 363:1101.

72 The two favored expulsion.

73 See U.S. Congress, Congressional Record, 56th Cong., 1st sess., 1900, 33, pt. 3:1127-33.

74 Washington Post, 25 January 1900. In October 1899 only 1543 polygamous families were still in existence-so few that the Tribune could argue with inverted logic that Roberts could not properly represent Utah since only 2 percent of the state was involved in polygamy.

At the time of the Manifesto there had been 2,451 polygamous families within the United States, so the figures indicate a decrease of 37 percent in nine years. (See Office Journal of Lorenzo Snow, p. 167; cf. CHC. 6:436.) In 1900 six hundred of these families at the most were still raising children. There are no figures on how many were in that interval bearing children, but the decrease was at least two-thirds.

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
[^23] 23 Mrs. William Reed to Ann Roberts.
[^24] 24 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^25] 25 Late in their lives, on 3 May 1928, B. H. and Annie Brynie, a half-sister, and Mary arranged for the temple sealing of Ann Everington and Benjamin Roberts and all of the children including the twins and baby Thomas. See BHR Temple Book.
[^26] 26 Roberts kept one sample of his father's handwriting from the original wrapping of the photo given his mother. It is preserved in the family collection.
[^27] 27 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 1 September 1883, Roberts Family Collection.
[^28] 28 Research has failed to establish where and when Ben died. The marriage date is 15 June 1848 (he was twenty-two) in Poplar, Middlesex, England; from the Book of Remembrance of Haven R. Day.
[^29] 29 B. H. Roberts to Ann Everington, 21 April 1880, Roberts Family Collection.
[^30] 30 Mrs. Charles H. Wilcox recorded these impressions from a conversation with B.H. Roberts at his home prior to his call to the Eastern States.
[^31] 31 BN, p. 10.
[^32] 32 See Juvenile Instructor 49 (February 1914): 85.
[^33] 33 Fifty years later, as chairman of "Vocations and Industry" in the youth program of the Church, he wrote, "We shall take the ground that no vocation of honest industry need be ignoble or debasing in its effects, but by properly correlating it with the general welfare of human life can be in effect both honorable and glorious." Improvement Era 15 (October 1912): 1083.
[^34] 34 Liahona 12 (20 October 1914): 364.
[^35] 35. Salt Lake Herald, 8 January 1899.
[^36] 36. So Roberts later told his children.
[^37] 37. BNG, p. 8.
[^38] 38 See History of Utah, 4:689.
[^39] 39 In a notebook under "Roberts, B. H." is this handwritten note: "Warrington-Town of, my birth place. Warrington, at the head of tide water on the Mersey River. It was a station of Romans (Veraterium) in the time of Agricola - (69-84 A.D.) and many Roman relics have been found in the neighborhood."
[^40] 40 Beniamin's father's brother.
[^41] 41 N. B. Lundwall, Roberts's secretary for twelve years, recalls him saying this incident occurred when he was seven.
[^42] 42 BNG, p. 16. Roberts spoke in later years of this spiritual impression (which one tradition says was repeated three times) as evidence that "the promptings of the Spirit of God" can come early - several years, in his case, before his official baptism and confirmation in 1867.
[^43] 43 The word gomin - rather than urchha - was endeared to Roberts through the Victor Hugo story of Gayroche who, in the midst of battle, went along the pavement gathering unfired cartridges from the corpses of fallen men, gaining strength at each step.
[^44] 44 Memoirs, p. 4.
[^45] 45 BN, p. 18a.
[^46] 46 Apparently Tovey's periodic alienations from the LDS Church did not interfere with his desire to preach.
[^47] 47 This was republished by Harvard University Press in 1962. The book was originally issued in fifteen separately stitched parts from July 1854 to September 1855.
[^48] 48 BN, p. 20.
[^49] 49 BN, p. 56.
[^50] 50 Memoirs. Crossing the plains, mules would somehow detect the nearby presence of Indians and bellow-often soon enough to enable the emigrants to take crucial precautions (see Roberts's chapter on the exodus in CHC, 3:170).
[^51] 51 "Diary of William Driver," New Mexico Historical Review (January 1943): 57.
[^52] 52 Northwest Nebraska News (Crawford, Nebraska), located in Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University.
[^53] 53 See Jenson's Church Chronology.
[^54] 54 See Eliza R. Snow, "A Sketch of My Life: 1804-1887," Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley.
[^55] 55 CHC, 3:304.
[^56] 56 BNG, pp. 32-33. Here, sixty years later, he addressed five thousand Boy Scouts. "On the occasion of an historic visit," where a great gathering brought to mind this early visit of Harry's boyhood, and now "an old and broken man," he remembered and told the story of his little adventure in passing the Sweetwater Ford.
[^57] 57 BNG, p. 33
[^58] 58 Memoirs, p. 4.
[^59] 59 J.M. Tanner, Biographical Sketch of John Riggs Murdock (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1909), p. 128.
[^60] 60 Hinckley's relief train returned to the valley on Sunday, October 7. See Jenson's Church Chronology.
[^61] 61 "When boys go back on the Plains to encounter storms and rescue the suffering, as did David P. Kimball, Stephen Taylor, Joseph A. Young, Ephraim Hanks, and many others, it makes me feel well. David took the consecrated oil and went forth, like a man of God, and anointed the sick and afflicted, and commanded them to arise; and those boys acted valiantly, having been trained up amid the Saints." (Remarks by Heber C. Kimball at funeral of Jedediah M. Grant; see JD, 4:137.)
[^62] 62 Church News, June 1970. Chimney Rock is twenty-three miles west of Fort Kearney.
[^63] 63 BN, p. 58.
[^64] 64 Salt Lake Tribune.
[^65] 65 Harry learned about the misinformed Johnston's Army ("President Buchanan's folly") and the account of Governor Cumming, who, in the phrase of the anti-Mormon historian T. B. H. Stenhouse, was kept in "a continued strain of feverish expectation" by a delicious hoax, He was halted about every fifty paces by three men who had built a fire, and who made him "advance and be recognized" and checked his credentials. Cureming became convinced the place "swarmed with mountaineers to resist Johnston." According to the story, it was only a trio. After each encounter they skirted the trail, passed him and then confronted him anew. They took turns being commander, lantern-holder, and inspector.
[^66] 66 CHC, 3:xx.
[^67] 67 "To the Youth of Israel," Contributor 6 (May 1885): 294.
[^68] 68 CHC, 3;231.
[^69] 69 B.H. Roberts Personal Papers, Church Archives.
[^70] 70 Roberts was impressed with Grandmother Ensign when she visited his Centerville home; by then she was in her late eighties or early nineties. She had crossed the plains with a handcart, and often helped prepare the July Twenty-fourth celebration. Once the Roberts children put dust and dirt on their clothing and dirt to their faces to simulate the plains companies. Grandma Ensign scolded: "We were not dirty. We kept ourselves and our clothes clean, It was wrong for you to be dirty."
[^71] 71 Richard F. Burton, The City of the Scdnts and Across the Rocky Mountains to California, ed. Fawn M. Brodie (1861; New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1963), pp. 225-27.
[^72] 72 See Georgia and Josie Roberts, "They Came Alone," Our Pioneer Heritage (Salt Lake City: C. P., 1959), 2:282.
[^73] 73 BN, p. 68.
[^74] 74 BN, p. 70.
[^75] 75 On I March 1967 Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., a Democrat from New York, was excluded from the 90th Congress after twenty-two years in the House of Representatives. On 16 June 1969 the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the House of Representatives had acted unconstitutionally in excluding Mr. Powell. See "Powell, Adam Clayton, Jr.," Who's Who in America, 1966-1967, vol. 34, p. 1702.
[^76] 76 See B. H. Roberts Congressional Scrapbook, Roberts Family Collection.
[^77] 77 Ibid.
[^78] 78 John Whitaker Journal, 5 November 1899.
[^79] 79 Ibid., 12 November 1899.
[^80] 80 Among these papers were the Boston Transcript, The Bidde-ford Record and the Bidderoral Journal (both in Maine), The Baltimore News, and the New York Journal (which accepted an article by John M. Whitaker). See John Whitaker Journal, 6 January 1900.
[^81] 81 Just possibly that article reached the eyes of Leo Tolstoy, who shortly sent inquiries for Church literature and began correspondence with the remarkably literary Susa Young Gates, Brigham Young's daughter.
[^82] 82 See issues in editorials of December 4, and the majority report on January 25, 26, and 27.
[^83] 83 3 February 1900.
[^84] 84 January 1900.
[^85] 85 See Truth Seeker, 1 November 1900. Two avowed enemies of Roberts later helped the Church's cause-one of them unwittingly. Taylor, although chief prosecutor in the Reed Smoot case four years later, actually helped discredit the opposers and seat Smoot. A. T. Schroeder of Lucifer's Lantern "greatly simplified the taking of testimony," according to the Washington Journal, 20 December 1899. He contributed to further Mormon notoriety when he revived the Spaulding manuscript story in the Salt Lake Tribune. This led to the first national publication of Roberts's history of Mormonism in the Americana and, later, the CHC.
[^86] 86 Salt Lake Herald, 4 February 1900.
[^87] 87 William G. White, Jr., "The Feminist Campaign for the Exclusion of Brigham Henry Roberts from the 56th Congress," typescript, Andrews University.
[^88] 88 Who's Who in America, 1916-1917, vol. 9, p. 2078.
[^89] 89 David J. Drakes to Truman G. Madsen, 1967.
[^90] 90 Some of the negative effects of Roberts's "lone fight" are chronicled in his Defense of the Faith and the Saints, 2:237.
[^91] 91 Ibid., 2:349. In his study of history Roberts noted there were times when, as one writer put it, "a national emotion can be wrought up to a certain temperature, and if at that boiling point nothing is done, the heat suddenly goes out and no blowing of cyclopean bellows can rekindle it. (See Justin McCarthy, The History of Our Own Times, 2:36.) This is descriptive of the catharsis of fervor that followed Roberts's own national campaign and enabled Smoot to be seated.
[^92] 92 Conference Report, October 1929, p. 90.
[^93] 93 So Roberts told one of his missionaries, Henry H. Rolapp, in 1922. Henry H. Rolapp to Truman G. Madsen, 12 January 1968.
[^94] 94 Of his outbursts regarding Smoot, Roberts confided to I. K. Russell in February 1911, that he was "happy to say that I have experienced no bad effects," that he had not been called into question and that he had retained his "official station and membership." He was surprised that Smoot had not taken up his comments and that when questioned by the press had said, "Speeches made in the excitement of a campaign could be overlooked." Roberts concluded that, as with the other members of his quorum: "I think they have concluded that I am acting within the limits of my rights, but regret that I have the boldness to do it. At any rate they cannot see that they can do anything about it; hence have concluded not to bring me to task." (B. H. Roberts to Isaac K. Russell, 13 February 1911. Russell was a Utah-born journalist, a grandson of the late Parley P. Pratt, who studied journalism at Stanford University and then went to New York and worked in newspaper, magazine, and trade journal writing.) See Journal History, 8 September 1927.
[^95] 95 CHC, 6:346.
