Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

13 Home Life

From a distance many observers have assumed that Roberts had little or no home life. Certainly his home life was not that of many of his friends and brethren, who had homes where husbandly solicitude and parental love were so intense that it "drove all darkness out of doors." With Joseph F. Smith, for example, "home life was a passion." In the last year of his life, Roberts said, "If I had my life to live over again I would spend more time with my family." His regret was never more keen than theirs. Three wives and fifteen children survived and grew, less because of his resourcefulness than that of his wives.

274In Roberts's biographical notes, unlike his letters and journals, there are only four paragraphs about his family; not because he cared little about them but because he cared much. President John Taylor, too, had rarely spoken of the "sacred center of his home life." Roberts observed that this reticence was similar to Peter, James, and John's reticence in speaking of the Mount of Transfiguration; more than an invasion of privacy, it was an attempt to enter the realm of the holy. [^1] And how could that be communicated? The public image of plural families was a mixture of the sultanesque, the prurient, and the barbaric.

But caring and communicating care are not the same. A Centerville neighbor said of Roberts: "He didn't know how to be either a husband or a father or a social being... just a writer and speaker of truth. Like Jesus he made great enemies." [^2] If he made no enemies within his homes, they suffered in the sense of neglect. His last pair of twins agreed that "he belonged to the Church, to the world. We had to face that early." J. Golden Kimball could recall only one time in fifty years that Roberts shared intimate details of his family life with him.

Once, in a statement about his mother, he broke his lifetime refusal to make public any strand of his home life. Whenever possible, Roberts visited his mother's Bountiful home on her birthday, December 18, and again on his own, March 13, to place in her lap an armful of white roses. [^3] "You are... sainted and so surely enshrined in my affections that nothing will remove you from me." In a Sunday discourse in the Tabernacle, given in response to a minister's charge that Latter-day Saints had "low ideals in the home and lack of respect for woman," [^4] Roberts referred to his mother. Only a few days before she had breathed her last in his arms at age eighty-four. "Still in the atmosphere of these things, and from the midst of these holy associations," he read a letter he had written to his mother on her eightieth birthday. This letter, he said, was "the result of much thought and reflection" and prayer-a kind of tender Midrash. He began his tribute with John's narrative of the coming of Mary to the empty tomb with arms extended:

"Touch me not"-gently, lovingly, nor harshly. And thus to a woman was it first given to carry the glad message fashioned first by the angels' tongues-"He is risen!" Also the message that the Christ's Father is man's Father; that the Christ's God is man's God; and that as consequence of this, all men are brethren.

275... the sum of the law and Gospel, all else commentary. This was where she had last seen him whom she loved-here she must begin her search for Him-and she will search for Him, for it is woman's nature to hope-O glorious inconsistency! against hope itself. And she was rewarded for her love that made her linger, though it was by an empty sepulchre; for soon angels said to her, "Why seeketh ye the living among the dead?"

Â·.. Even the glory of being "last at the cross, and earliest at the tomb" is eclipsed by the honor of being herald of this. Cherish thou this honor. Claim it in all its Christ-given splendor; for it is fitting that thou unto whom it is first given to know human earthlife perennial, should be made herald of life immortal, and its relations ....

... Next to her holy office of wifehood and motherhood, the most exalted honor Deity ever conferred on woman was that of making her his first messenger of the resurrection ....

I am taught by these high things to honor thee, and here uncovered and holily I reverence pay thee. [^5]

Long years after his mother's death, on May 9, 1926, he issued a card to a group of missionaries titled "Mother's Day in the Eastern States Mission." It said: "Woman, Behold Thy Son. Disciple, Behold Thy Mother," and was subtitled, "The Christ's Care for His Mother." Inside is the second stanza of the renowned Mormon hymn which sings of the realms of heaven: "Truth is reason; truth eternal tells me I've a mother there."

Here, as in the letter quoted, are the apotheoses of his lifetime: estrangement and reconciliation. Roberts wrote that marriage should be undertaken

under conditions that give largest promise of improving the race and bringing forth superior men and women who shall lead the way to that higher state of things for which the world is waiting; and which the first condition precedent to obtaining is a consecrated fatherhood and motherhood. [^6]

And as for plural marriage:

276The Saints did not accept into their faith and practice the plural wife system with the idea that it increased the comfort, or added to the ease of anyone. From the first it was known to involve sacrifice, to make a large demand upon the faith, patience, hope, and charity of all who would attempt to carry out its requirements. Its introduction was not a call to ease or pleasure, but to religious duty; it was not an invitation to selfindulgence, but to self-conquest; its purpose was not earth-happiness, but earth-life discipline; undertaken in the interest of special advantages for succeeding generations of men. That purpose was to give to succeeding generations a superior fatherhood and motherhood, by enlarging the opportunities of men of high character, moral integrity, and spiritual development to become progenitors of the race. To give to women of like character and development a special opportunity to consecrate themselves to the high mission of motherhood. [^7]

Roberts's three wives were different in background and in personality, but they shared the inhuman difficulty of mothering and rearing children with a frequently absent husband. Louisa came from a cultured, and for the time privileged, home; Celia's home was modest, and her mother's illness had required her to assume the role of mother from her fifth year, running home from school to prepare meals and care for the house; and Margaret came from a first marriage that had meant the birth of five children and the loss of four. She had not only witnessed but lived in polygamy in its most galling form-plagued with stillbirths-and had undertaken a career in obstetrics in the hope that she could spare other mothers her redundant grief.

Louisa had an intellectual flair that could match the quicksilver mind of her husband; she was confident, decisive, and outspoken. Celia was the most capable partner in polishing his writings and was more introspective, retiring, home-loving, patient ("too patient," said her daughters), and given to anxieties which only her faith and prayer could subdue. Margaret was a fastidious dresser and articulate, well traveled, composed, and social.

The wives differed too in age and appearance: Louisa was three years older than Roberts, and Margaret seven. Celia, his former student, was six years younger. Louisa and Celia were slight in build; Margaret was corpulent.

277However their expectations and interests differed, all three were committed to motherhood. Louisa bore seven children: two sons, Thomas and Ben, and five daughters, Adah, Loa, Lena, Hortense, and Kathleen. Celia mothered eight: Harold, Hazel, Lola, Lena, twin girls Georgia and Josie, twin boys David and Lawrence. Margaret aspired, prayed, and hoped to bear Roberts a son; but all her medical mastery and all her upreaching faith were unfruitful: she yearned in vain to be a modern Sarah, but in fact had no children by Roberts.

None of these women was kittenish or mischievous. And none made her husband a foil for her own life. There were radical inequalities imposed upon them by the polygamy persecution: Celia with her large family was a prime target during underground days; yet Louisa was able to stay home or appear in public, more or less secure; and Margaret, who married as the anti-Mormon crusade was in decline, by and large escaped.

Through the strain of pregnancy and family nurture the three cared for each other. After 1890, Margaret was midwife for Louisa and Celia; she delivered the twin boys David and Lawrence. There was a sense of "our" instead of "my."

After 1890 Roberts had three homes to maintain, two within a block of each other in Centerville, and one in Salt Lake City, some fifteen miles away. "I have built," he wrote in 1908, "my three homes; humble ones, it is true, but still homes... and no man can say he did it for me." The rock home first built for Louisa later became Celia's when he built a frame house on a high rock foundation nearby. It had three spacious stories and an attic. Eventually he managed to furnish both homes comfortably, though never lavishly. Louisa's home was the more palatial and Celia's the more secure; Margaret's was the most neglected. The homes were steam heated with large windows for cross-ventilation and were lighted by gas lights in sparkling chandeliers. Both Centerville homes had lomhardy poplars, large pines, well-trimmed orchards (apple, cherry, peach, pear, and apricot trees) and high green hedges. There were two flowing wells. Margaret's two-story frame home in Salt Lake was at the edge of residential elegance, near South Temple, two blocks from the governor's mansion and a mile due east from Roberts's office.

278Every member of the family contributed to the support of the family group. Each spring through the 1880s and 1890s Roberts hitched up "Old Kit," a white mare, and plowed, then planted many kinds of grains, fruits, and vegetables, and pruned the trees. [^8] As soon as they were able to walk, the children helped cultivate, harrow, weed, irrigate, harvest, and cook. Margaret's medical earnings went to the support of her home. Two of Louisa's children lived with Margaret during their high school years so they could attend West High in Salt Lake. The odd-job earnings of the family went primarily to necessities. Roberts divided his monthly stipend three ways. (The checks were on the average about one hundred dollars a month.)

At holiday time, Roberts sometimes combined his families. Usually he spent Thanksgiving with Celia's, Christmas with Louisa's and New Year's with Margaret's. Dinner guests were often invited. (For instance, in Centerville the John Whitakers, the J. Golden Kimballs, the Abraham Cannons, many of the Twelve and the Brethren in the Seventies were often guests; in Salt Lake, the Charles F. Wilcoxes, Orson F. Whirheys, Heber J. Grants, J. J. McClellans and Richard W. Youngs visited.) If the guests came to Centerville, they ate dinner at Louisa's larger home and stayed there overnight, then arose and walked one block to have breakfast at the home of Celia, who was, by general agreement, the most immaculate housekeeper and made the tastiest pancakes and muffins.

Equality of house care and furnishings was important; when Louisa wanted a grand piano (Margaret had one of her own) Roberts said: "All right. But not until I can buy Celia's family one too."

With these large families, health problems were incessant. Celia's children, for instance, all contracted smallpox just after the congressional battle. Celia herself had a mild case and the house was quarantined for two months and then, in keeping with contemporary rules, fumigated. The extended family gave advantages in unifying love, organization and stabilization in crises. The children were all pals.

279The large family provided natural methods of solving inter-family difficulties. When Louisa's knee began to trouble her (she was kicked full force by a cow) after her three daughters had moved away, Celia's daughter Georgia did Louisa's chores, helped her with her hair, and even stayed evenings and overnight. Rarely was there a babysitting problem; and when they were older, Roberts used his more literary daughters as secretaries: Loa, Hortense, Georgia, and Adah each performed secretarial duties at one time or another.

Roberts united the family as often as he could through outings to Lagoon, Saltair, the Great Salt Lake, and to the canyons and Liberty Park in Salt Lake. In this respect, he would later have more time with his grandchildren than he did with his children. "It has been the dream of Lou's life to have a quiet home and her husband with her always .... I am such a flyaway and all the time I am away." "I love her more than she thinks I do." [^9]

The mothers were guests in each other's homes, sharing their roles. But they were inventive in all the skills of self-sufficiency. Roberts asserted that a "queenly dignity" emerged in a woman who fulfilled her mature purpose, "calling forth in the management of her household in larger measure and use the exercise of executive ability, self-reliance, and self-control, leading to control over others in the domestic circle." This dignity, he said, "lifts the association of husband and wife out of the uxorious sentimentality that too often in monogamy renders that association half or wholly contemptible." This association, sentimental or not, was especially apparent between Louisa and Celia. [^10]

Polygamy, it was said, did not always bring happiness, but it did bring beauty of character. This statement was attributed to Margaret, who had earlier seen the pointlessness of correcting the printed word and had been openly patient with reporters. A woman essayist from Boston came, however, to ask if this sentiment were accurate. Margaret's reply was printed but not widely quoted or even widely believed. [^11] She said that plural families were not a burden or a cross and that "if there is one woman in all Mormondom who is happy, I am that woman. My life has come to be one sweet, lovely day, such as comes to few mortals I imagine. Whatever happens [in the congressional battle] I shall be a soul companion to him forever." [^12] She continued:

280The only thing which makes a woman's life worth living is love, the love of some one man in whom she believes and trusts, and the love of her children.

A good husband, healthy children, and a revealed religion -these are the three things that help a woman stand being alive.

A lady told me just the other day that she wondered what it was that made the Mormon women look so peaceful and contented. The idea! How could she help knowing it was our religion, the perfect faith and trust that everything is for the best, that gives us peace that the world cannot know. Why, how could we live without it? [^13]

Affliction and endurance were the order of the day for the children. Here is a letter from Lena to her father, who was away on one of his multiple missions:

Centerville, September 20, 1895

Dear Papa

I have been going to write you for a long time but I have just gotten around to it. Friday was my birthday and I was eleven. I was going to have a little birth-day party but the east wind blew. But I'm going to have my party some fine day and call it my birth-day. Friday afternoon I sprained my wrist. That is all I got for my birth-day. Tensic and Katie have got the mumps. Tensie is real sick today. Little Naola is well now and she is just as cunning as ever she can be when we ask her where Papa is she will creep in Mama's room where your picture is and get up in the center of the room and say Papa and everyone she sees she says hello. Hazel says she is Papa's and Ada's girl. Say, Papa, if you find any mistakes in this letter please answer and tell me where they are. Answer soon.

Yours with love, Lena [^14]

When Lena was barely three, she was one day playing in the sandpile when Bishop Randall and an associate called at her home. They approached out of her line of vision. When suddenly she saw them she became hysterical, convinced that they had come to take her father "away." She grew to be very sensitive and spiritually encouraging, pushing Roberts gently out of the door to his Church duties and being overanxious that her brother Harold be baptized exactly on his eighth birthday, even if that meant cutting a hole in the ice.

281At age twelve Lena showed signs of weakness and the doctor diagnosed heart disease. She asked Bishop Randall to administer to her in lieu of her father, who was away. Against the doctor's decree that she would die, she lived.

In another crisis a year later Roberts administered to her and, heartened by her visible improvement, accepted a conference assignment in Bear Lake, Utah, a hundred miles north. That night Lena was suddenly aware she was dying, and a telegram was sent. Roberts arrived ten minutes after her last breath. [^15]

The children never took B. H. Roberts for granted, and every homecoming was a celebration. During his marathon periods of intense writing, Roberts came to Centerville in the night and woke up the children at outrageous hours to talk to them or hold them limp and half asleep on his shoulder. He often left again before sunup, but the neighbors knew when he had been home because of the small change the children had the next day. [^16]

Celia's first genuine home with her husband was in Colorado. There she found herself among fine and genteel women, such as Georgia Snow Thatcher (daughter of Erastus Snow), who became an "aunt" to Celia, giving counsel and quiet reassurance; and Emily Wells Grant, the charming and intellectual wife of Heber J. Grant, a daughter of Daniel H. Wells. These were among the "Edmunds widows," sharing a strong interdependence in the rustic little town.

Roberts spent some of the "longest" periods Celia and her children ever had with him in this home-two weeks out of each four months. He built her a huge fireplace ("I practiced masonry in the black smith shop, and now I shall build a masterpiece for you," he said). For the rest of her life Celia savored the memory of this fireplace and the stormy Colorado winters during which its high flames comforted her. Around this home Celia planted marigolds as well as vegetables, and the morning glories outside the door were a welcome mat to B. H. In that small home at Manassa came her third child, Hazel.

282From Manassa, Celia wrote at Thanksgiving time that little Harold was beginning to speak and that were he not "full of life" and of "little innocent prattle" she would more often feel homesick and blue. "I fight against these feelings all I can but I expect Henry thinks I am getting to be an old grumbler. I was in hopes he would be out to our conference but was disappointed. It seems an age since I saw him." [^17]

In a letter written a year later to "Grandma Roberts" she recounts an all-too-brief visit with Henry and confides, "It seems lonesome sitting alone." A letter to Roberts's mother shows that by now the arrangement had become unbearable for both of them. Roberts had encouraged Celia to come back to Centerville in the spring to stay. "But this would be on penalty of 'of course' obeying the law" which meant they could not see each other. "How do you think I will stand it? I think I should try it at any rate. If I could keep out of his sight I think I would get along alright." [^18]

In a notebook Roberts paraphrased Goethe: "A wife who is in competition with her husband, or who has just enough time to detect his faults, is the extinguisher of genius ... she becomes executioner of her own power to give, encounter and elicit and regenerate, that in him which is of God."

B. H. Roberts's three wives saw in him a prophet; and in polygamy the opportunity for the best of women to share life and love with the best of men, rather than being forced to find companions among the less worthy. In their eyes polygamy, ideally speaking, freed rather than enslaved, and exalted rather than debased love.

Margaret shared B. H. Roberts's sensitivity to music; J. J. McClellan, the Salt Lake Tabernacle organist, was often invited to their home. His chordal variations had won him the plaudits of royalty. In her autumn years Margaret undertook the secret study of the piano in order to master some of Roberts's favorite pieces from Mozart or Schumann or Bach. Each day while he was away she secretly practiced her elementary pieces. One morning he returned for a forgotten book and slipped in unobserved. There was a moment of wordless comprehension, then a lasting embrace.

283Celia's collection of letters from Roberts over three decades bulged out of two large shopping bags, in spite of what Roberts called, "my utterly miserable record as a correspondent." Before her death she burned all his letters, putting beyond reach what might have been known of Roberts's feelings for her at home and abroad.

But scraps of intimate letters he wrote Louisa and Margaret remain, and they are their own testament to his devotion. In a letter written from New York he wrote: "You already know that with me, in things of the mind, distance, separation by distance-counts for little. That is why you are so near to me. At times I feel your presence. Some day we shall overcome that separation of distance." Another letter from Los Angeles records, "At least I have my own company-lonesomeness-and my own thoughts, and sweet, dear memories."

Louisa often quietly read or sewed at her husband's side as he wrote deep into the night. The sense of her nearness put creative fervor into his work. (But he never dedicated a book to any member of his family except to his mother.) Inscribing a mint copy for Louisa of one book from the mission home in Brooklyn, he wrote, "It is always so when I think of things I hope to do-I long for you in the picture." He felt his literary labors belonged somehow to Louisa-he inscribed a book to her, "What a pleasure to send you first things! I feel that they belong to you." Louisa had had the captive charm of the summer of their courtship in their youth; she retained the John Hafen portrait of Roberts, a painting he did not much like, in her living room. Roberts inscribed a smaller portrait of himself to Louisa, "Your thorn in the flesh."

In each of his three homes he had a hideaway study. In letters he invited his wives to evoke his presence by visiting this room, "whenever you have an hour you think you would like to spend in my surroundings where I have worked and sweated and suffered."

He cultivated a nostalgia: "I feel more in fellowship with myself since this writing began, because I am talking with you! Well, goodnight, I kiss your hand... just the tops of your fingers."

284The quiet intensity of Roberts's love for his wives arose from the endearments that come through harsh trial, for it is "calculated all the more to draw them closely to each other in their affections." They had "stood hands clasped by open graves and known the purifying effects of great sorrows." They had endured his imprisonment and their exile from their homes, from their kindred and their friends (Celia in northern Utah, Idaho and Colorado), where their lots were cast among strangers, rather than sever the ties by which they were bound to their husband. Back of it stood the conviction that they were doing God's work, upholding the "principle he had revealed and entrusted to them for vim dication." [^19]

That Roberts's deep romantic sensitivity was not confined to his earlier life is demonstrated by these lines written in his late years. He loved beauty, as he himself wrote, "almost to adoration."

I recall that early morning a ride down the banks of the placid river that would soon plunge over the precipice in thunderous foam; the arrival and walk across the international bridge; our admiration for the stately streets, the well-kept undulating lawns, the stroll along the river bank-all the falls in view-Canadian and American; the dash through the windblown spray; the touch of added beauty it gave to your smiling face for you seemed happy that morning! Then the donning of the ugly black rubber suits for the descent under the falls; the flitting from point to point to get under the cataracts for the best view; the mist that gathered on your face, curling a few locks that had escaped from the hood and breaking the severity of the band frame of your feature; the mist that bedewed your face with seeming tears, and you smiling all the while! A madonna smiling through tears! Ah, my dear, they may dress you hereafter in clinging draperies-silk and lace veils and jeweled crown and orange blossoms added-but they will never make you more beautiful than you were that morning in that ugly black rubber suit and heavy boots standing before me .... I shall never visit Niagara again. I want its visions and memories undisturbed.

285Roberts wrote several articles about marriage. [^20] He emphasized the distortion in Christendom of the notion of marriage. Wedding symbolism with Jesus Christ portrayed as the Bridegroom permeates the New Testament. Many Christians wish it were otherwise. Where in Christendom is the teaching that a woman who has mothered and nurtured children is in every way a more sanctified, even more physically beautiful, woman than what the world calls a virgin? Roberts wrote:

What a revelation is here! Instead of the God-given power of procreation being one of the chief things that is to pass away it is one of the chief means of man's exaltation and glory in that great eternity which, like an endless vista stretches out before him. [^21]

In his view the commandment, "be fruitful and multiply," is as holy and everlasting a commandment as "repent and be baptized."

Roberts recognized that those most against marriage often had ulterior motives against women or men, and were therefore against themselves. Could detractors understand that what had been revealed of God replaced something worse with something better?

To those who express the fear that all this is too concrete, too matter-of-fact, too sensual, we answer that such has been the refining influence of women upon men, developing the purest and best part of his nature; such has been the influence of the home upon civilization in this world, that we cannot believe but that the joys of heaven will be heightened and rendered purer by it; and even the conception of its community life must be made grander by thinking of it made up of indestructible families. [^22]

God himself had proclaimed the timelessness of eternal marriage and made of it the highest sacrament. And as Roberts agonized over his own lapses from the ideal home, he said, "Thank God for the eternities."

Young B. H. Roberts near the time of his graduation from the University of Deseret.

The'Tramp Disguise Picture,' taken in Nashville, Tennessee, August 1884

B. H. Roberts at about age forty

Newspaper cartoon following RobertÂs exclusion from his congressional seat January 1900

B. H. Roberts in his study as assistant Church historian about 1901, Salt Lake City

B. H. Roberts in chaplainÂs uniform, January 1919

B. H. Roberts, chaplain, taken sometime in 1918

President Roberts with Margaret and mission staff, 1925, Eastern States Mission Home-273 Gates Avenue, Brooklyn, N.Y.

B. H. Roberts with President Heber J. Grant, Eastern States Mission Home.

B. H. Roberts about 1922, at time of his call as Eastern States Mission President

286B. H. Roberts bust, now at Brigham Young University, sculpted by Mahonri M. Young

Notes

Chapter 13

1 See his article in Arena Magazine (23 February 1900): 113-15.

2 Spoken in a conversation with the author.

3 In a youth meeting, Roberts once referred to the remarkable fact that "through the conversion of that one woman by a humble elder more than a hundred were today active members of the Church and they all honored and revered the faithful one who had brought the message to them." (See minutes of MIA general conference, May 1898.) At her death in 1910 she had five children, forty-four grandchildren, fifty-eight great-grandchildren-a total of 107 descendants. (See Deseret News, 12 January 1910.)

4 Liahona 7 (12 March 1910).

5 Roberts sent a letter with this tribute to his mother, 13 March 1906. The full discourse was published as "Woman's Place in Mormon-ism," Liahona 7 (12 March 1910).

6 "The Truth, the Way, the Life: An Elementary Treatise on Theology," B. H. Roberts's unpublished masterwork, Church Archives, vol. 3, p. 28; hereafter cited as TWL.

7 From an Appendix on Marriage to TWL, vol. 3, p. 32; see also CHC, 5:796ff.

8 "Old Kit," the white mare, with a small carriage served as transportation for every one of the Roberts children, from the oldest, Adah, to the youngest, Dave and Lank. But the family could never afford to buy a saddle, so all the riding was done bareback. Roberts never owned a car and never learned to drive.

9 B. H. Roberts to his mother, 5 February 1888.

10 CHC, 5:299.

11 The woman essayist was Anne Laurie, who wrote for the New York World and the San Francisco Examiner.

12 Arena Magazine (June 1899): 118. Theodore Schroederinsinuated that B. H. Roberts wrote this-or outlined it. It is more consistent with Margaret's attitudes and behavior.

13 Ibid.

14 Lena Roberts to B. H. Roberts, 20 September 1895; letter in possession of Georgia Roberts.

15 In a letter Roberts once wrote a biography of sorrow. "The griefstricken breast will weep itself empty of its frantic grief, sad-eyed sorrow will gradually take its place, then gentle sadness will settle over the mind and the remembrance of the loved one lost will finally become a sort of sweet mingled with a little bitter."

16 After 1900 there were approximately 130 families in Centerville. Of that number only seven, including Roberts's, were polygamous. Anson Perkins (a Centerville native) to Truman G. Madsen, 10 July 1970.

17 Celia Dibble Roberts to Ann Everington, 22 November 1891.

18 Celia Dibble Roberts to "Grandma Roberts," 4 January 1892.

19 Improvement Era, 20:722.

20 See, for example, "Complete Marriage -Righteousness Mutilated Marriage-Sin," Improvement Era 31 (January 1928).

21 See B. H. Roberts, New Witnesses for God, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons, 1895), 1:462.

22 Liahona 7 (12 March 1910): 602.

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
