Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

14 The Literary Harness

In late summer of 1900, Roberts found himself and his family in abysmal financial straits. He had mortgaged his home and sold part of his land. A mutually beneficial agreement between Roberts and George Q. Cannon was worked out at Roberts's request. Cannon and Sons Company purchased the copyright on all of Roberts's published books for a flat fee of five thousand dollars "to him in hand paid.' [^1] By this time he had written seven volumes: The Gospel, The Life of John Taylor, Outlines of Ecclesiastical History, Succession in the Presidency, New Witnesses for God, volume one, The Missouri Persecutions, and The Rise and Fall of Nauvoo. So far as the records can be traced, that is the only remuneration he ever received from these writings.

287Shortly after his return to Salt Lake from his unsuccessful efforts to gain his seat in Congress, Roberts read in the Salt Lake Tribune an article revamping the discredited Spaulding theory of the origin of the Book of Mormon. Convinced that these claims could be effectively refuted, he contacted Colonel Nelson, the editor, asking if they would print his reply. He learned that the articles were from a magazine published in New York-the New York Historical Magazine-and were authored by the all-too-familiar Theodore Schroeder, who had led the campaign against him in Washington. The editor of the New York Historical Magazine was so impressed by Roberts's responses to this assault, that he offered the pages of his magazine for a "detailed history of the Church." [^2] Roberts replied that it was a big order, and that a monthly magazine twice the size would take several years to tell the story adequately. The title of the magazine was changed to Americana, and over a period of nearly six years Roberts wrote his articles on Church history, richly illustrated with choice steel engravings, which became the basis for his eventual A Comprehensive History of the Church. [^3]

Beginning in 1911 and continuing through 1915, Roberts's articles covered an average of forty-two pages in each issue. The magazine in 1915 was tottering, and Roberts hurried through his account of the administrations of Lorenzo Snow, Wilford Woodruff and Joseph F. Smith. After 1915 he spent another two years "verifying its numerous references and improving its arrangement." [^4]

288In the winter of 1901, two Salt Lake City Protestant ministers gave a series of lectures on the Protestant understanding of God and directed much of their polemic against Mormon theism. Roberts delivered a response at a youth conference, entitled "The Mormon View of Deity," which expanded on his conviction: "I can see in this doctrine of God the highest spirituality of which man is capable." It was published first in the Deseret News and then in the Improvement Era. A Roman Catholic Jesuit priest, Cyril Van Der Donckt, wrote a classical critique-an exercise in scholastic analysis in the idiom of Thomas Aquinas. Roberts then had the entire text of Van Der Donckt's article published in the Improvement Era along with his own carefully written rejoinder. The original discourse by Roberts was 40 pages, the Van Der Donckt critique 22 pages, and Roberts's rejoinder 102 pages: "the subiect enlarges as one gets into it." [^5] The result was, according to Sterling M. McMurrin, "the most impressive theological piece to come from a Mormon writer." [^6] Roberts confronted the metaphysical God of the ancient creeds with the biblical personalism enhanced by modern revelation. [^7]

Roberts congratulated Van Der Donckt [^8] for not indulging in ridicule or sarcasm; which was generous, since Van Der Donckt had charged that the Latter-day Saint understanding and experience of God was "awful blasphemy," "soul destroying," "the lowest kind of materialism," "destructive of all truly religious sentiment," the "crudest possible conception of God," "absolutely incompatible with spirituality," and "worse than the basest forms of idolatry." Roberts's analysis shows that Van Der Donckt's objections are invalid when put to the test of appealing to Jesus Christ.

Van Der Donckt demonstrated that under the weight of the Thomistic tradition one can never, while wearing the spectacles of Greek philosophy, see that Christ the Son is in exact similitude to God the Father. Christ's statement to Philip, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father," is reinter-preted to mean "I am the temporary incarnation of a metaphysical mystery."

Such misunderstandings are instructive because they continue to occur when persons are confronted with the anthropomorphic understanding of God in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The intrusion or superimposition of the philosophical "clothing" not only covers but consumes the person of Christ.

Roberts's response is straightforward: the conception of God as "pure being," "immaterial," "without form" or "parts and passions," has its origin in Greek philosophy and not in Jewish or Christian revelation.

289And now as to the whole question of God being "existence," "pure being," "most simple," "not compound;" also his "ira-mutability," as set forth in Mr. Van der Donckt's "philosophical argument." What of it? This of it: Whatever "simplicity," "immutability," or other quality that is ascribed to God, must be in harmony with what Jesus Christ is. I meet Mr. V's "philosophical argument" as I meet his scriptural argument. I appeal to the being and nature of Jesus Christ, as a refutation of his philosophical conclusions. Is Jesus Christ God? "Yes," must be my friend's answer. Very well, this is my premise. Jesus is God in his own right and person and he is a revelation of what God the Father is. He is not only a revelation of the being of God, but of the kind of being God is. And now I test Mr. V's argument by the revelation of what God is, as revealed in the person and nature of the Son of God. While I am doing so, let it be remembered that Jesus is now and will ever be what he was at the time of his glorious ascension from the midst of his disciples on Mount Olivet-God, possessed of all power in heaven and in earth, a glorious personage of flesh and bone and spirit. And now, is Jesus Christ without form? No; he is in form like man. Is Jesus Christ illimitable? Not as to his glorious body; that has limitations, dimensions, proportions. Is Jesus Christ without parts? Not as to his person; his body is made up of limbs, trunk, head; and parenthetically I may remark, a whole without parts is inconceivable. Then it follows that God's "infinity," so far as it is spoken of in scripture, does not refer to his person but evidently to the attributes of his mind-to his intelligence, wisdom, power, patience, mercy, and whatsoever other qualities of mind or spirit he may possess. If it is argued that it is illogical and unphilosophical to regard God in his person as finite but infinite in faculties, that is finite in one respect and infinite in another. My answer is that it is a conception of God made necessary by what the divine wisdom has revealed concerning himself, and it is becoming in man to accept with humility what God has been pleased to reveal concerning his own nature, being assured that in God's infinite knowledge he knows himself, and that which he reveals concerning himself is to be trusted far beyond man's philosophical conception of him." [^9]

In a similar manner, Roberts treats the ideas of unchangeability, passionlessness, and "eternity."

290While he was a missionary in Britain with access to the back issues of the Millennial Star, Roberts systematically gathered together and bound into three volumes the entire "History of Joseph." It had been published in serial form over a period of years. Some volumes of the Star were rare, others unavailable, but finally he had all the important volumes from fourteen to twenty-six (the articles had been, most of them, copies from the Deseret News and, earlier, the Times and Seasons). Thus his compilation of the journal of Joseph Smith, much of it gathered and dictated with the help of scribes, and composed from various other contemporary documents, was a functional reference book.

Elder Francis M. Lyman, learning of Roberts's collection, suggested to his Quorum that Roberts be appointed to organize, supplement and publish it. When Roberts was consulted his estimates of the costs were "rather high," and George Q. Cannon proposed to undertake the work through his own publishing house. It was begun as a "simple reproduction," with no effort to unify or annotate. Within a few months Eider Cannon died in California. Only ninety-six pages of the work had been printed. President Lorenzo Snow invited Roberts to continue the work. But Roberts's plan was more complex: He recommended introductions written to harmonize the volumes, footnotes, marginal explanatory notes, and the inclusion of all of the revelations received by the Prophet Joseph Smith in their chronological order, with marginal references to the current editions of the Doctrine and Covenants and with reliable historical data. Roberts expected this would require "at least 6 volumes."

Upon hearing the proposal, President Snow authorized Roberts to carry out his original purpose. The result was the publication of the history of Joseph Smith as the six-volume History of the Church, Period I, averaging six hundred pages per volume.

291Anthon H. Lurid was Church historian in 1900. (Andrew Jenson, Orson F. Whitney, Amos Milton Musser and Brigham H. Roberts were sustained as assistant Church historians on April 6, 1902.) The work of reviewing the Millennial Star "History of Joseph Smith" was then begun. The entire third story of the old historian's office was turned into a historical archive, with an office for each of the assistants. From April 15, 1902, "almost indefinitely," every forenoon Anthon H. Lund (and later A. William Lund), Joseph Fielding Smith, B. H. Roberts and occasionally other staff members went line by line through the history. Volume one was completed in 1902 and the successive volumes in 1904, 1905, 1908, 1909, and 1912. In 1932 Roberts added a seventh volume, made uniform with the style of the first six, and based upon the Manuscript History of Brigham Young and other related documents. This seven-volume work has become an indispensable tool in the quorums, classes and libraries of the Church. [^10]

Little that Roberts wrote ever escaped controversy. His editing of History of the Church (often called the Documentary History) has been soundly censured by history-minded readers within and without the Church. A complex matter can be summarized by some observations on how Roberts went about his task. First, the "changes," 90 percent of them, are matters of spelling, grammar and diction, and these were made often as committee decisions aiming at clarity.

Second, Roberts's three bound volumes of the Millennial Star articles are still in the Church Archives for scholars to examine. In the margins of these one may here and there see his mind at work. A celebrated example is the elimination of the phrase from an early account of Joseph Smith's first vision, "for as yet it had never entered my heart that all [churches] were wrong." In the margin of his own first volume Roberts has written, "contra. st. in Wentworth letter." The Wentworth letter says Joseph had wondered, "are all wrong together?" One might argue that what had entered into Joseph's mind had not yet entered into his heart (because in his heart he still hoped that his own family, not to mention others, belonged to a divinely approved church). But for Roberts this was a contradiction like the contradiction in Paul's two narratives of his experience on the road to Damascus recorded in Acts. Roberts chose the later source written by Joseph himself in preference to earlier sources which were dictated to scribes.

292Third, letters in the files of the First Presidency show the rationale of some of Roberts's deletions and additions. For example, on February 16, 1906, Roberts wrote asking to omit an article on election and reprobation. "I doubt if the Prophet is the author of those words," his letter says. The First Presidency approved. In the same spirit and for similar reasons Roberts sought to eliminate from the official history the account or definition of the word Mormon as "more good." He had found evidence that the editor of Times and Seasons, W. W. Phelps, rather than Joseph Smith, wrote this paragraph and that it was "based on inaccurate premises and was offensively pedantic." He asked permission to leave it out. This was granted.

Again, on March 2, 1906, Anthon H. Lund encouraged Roberts to write to the First Presidency concerning a credulous article that had been published in the Times and Seasons on the "Signs of the Son of Man." Roberts and others on the committee had reason to doubt that Joseph Smith was responsible for this essay. President Joseph F. Smith approved its omission.

Fourth, of the 187 changes which, according to critics, are "significant," careful study shows many to be inconsequential (for example, "spiritual and temporal welfare" is changed to "temporal and spiritual welfare"; there is no mention of an ordinance establishing a ferry at Nauvoo and of Joseph's speech for the repeal of Nauvoo's hog law). Twenty of the "changes" critics list are "mechanical errors." For example, Roberts has been accused of leaving his readers in ignorance of a given event or a letter or a speech. Actually Roberts inserted footnotes and summaries for the essential parts of the deleted documents. In one case what is called a "missing revelation" is simply relocated on another page, and that change is indicated by Roberts in a footnote. [^11]

293Forty changes remain upon which to base the case for tampering in a misleading way. There are three kinds of changes: first, omissions of some early tempestuous acts of Church enemies [the omission, for example, of a line in a story where one J. B. Nicholls kicked a Presbyterian minister "on his seat of honor"); second, deletion of whole documents (for example, Joseph Smith's vehement response to a letter from presidential aspirant, Henry Clay); third, vernacular changes (for example, Hyrum Smith's reference to Judge Birch as a "cannibal" is changed to "ruffian"; "old lady," apparently spoken respectfully in the nineteenth century, is changed to "my mother," in concession to the connotations of the twentieth; and the easily misunderstood phrase "our ladies" is changed to "our wives"). Overall, there are also additions of material, biographical notes, and a deletion of large segments of material which earlier had only British and European interest in the Millennial Star series.

Enough has been said to suggest this approach to Roberts's editing: Where changes have been made (and that is easily discoverable by comparing Millennial Star "History of Joseph" with Roberts's edited History of the Church) one may assume that changes were made under constraint of such considerations as above, and not, as some allege, by comparing a published history with a "hidden history." One must go to more trouble to check the original Times and Seasons documents with the earlier construction of the history itself. It would be nearly half a century before LDS historians would achieve that objective. It would be characteristic of Roberts to see it done, be the first to say, "Let the chips fall where they may," and the last to argue for "Mutilating history." He made a beginning and only a beginning. But he was as thorough as, and perhaps more conscientious than, many of his critics. [^12]

Roberts himself would have expected and acknowledged the relevance of criticism on the other side: Could he not have done a still better job by invoking the services of other historians in sifting through the superb archives of the Church Historian's Office and "padding out" the history with more extensive annotations and corrections? The restraints of time, his otherwise feverish assignments and activities, and publication costs were all restraining factors.

As editor of the Improvement Era, as a member of the superintendency of the young men's and young women's organizations (first with Presidents Wilford Woodruff and Lorenzo Snow, and then with Joseph F. Smith and Heber J. Grant), and as a member of the First Council of the Seventy, Roberts spent much time preparing manuals. For nine years he contributed much of the substance of the manuals to be studied by the youth, and he wrote the annual course in theology for the seventies. In his own eyes he was the pioneer expositor formulating the doctrinal teachings of the Church.

294His redoubtable Book of Mormon analyses continued to appear in the Improvement Era and in MIA manuals. In March 1902, for example, Roberts answered the scriptural problem raised in Alma 7:10 which states that Jesus would be born "at Jerusalem." Alexander Campbell had raised the question but inaccurately asserted that the Book of Mormon said Jesus was born in Jerusalem; that Jesus was born in Bethlehem is common knowledge. Roberts replied that the Book of Mormon does not say Jesus was born in Jerusalem; it says Jesus shall be born of Mary "at Jerusalem which is the land of our forefathers," not the "city of our fathers." There is no difficulty when it is realized that the Nephite historian referred to the land and not the city of Jesus' nativity. Roberts cites Alma 8:7, Mosiah 1:11, Mosiah 7:20, and Hela-man 16:19 as instances of the practice of calling large districts of country after the chief city in each case.

Another common obiection raised by detractors was that the Book of Mormon both prophesies (and later recounts) that three days of darkness would cover the earth at the time of Jesus' crucifixion. Critics found this in conflict with the New Testament statement that there were three hours of darkness. Roberts replied that those critics had overlooked that the New Testament statement refers to the period Jesus was on the cross in Judea, and the Book of Mormon statement refers to an event that took place in the Western Hemisphere after the Crucifixion. A careful reading of the passage shows that the darkness was to extend "unto those who should inhabit the isles of the sea," especially the house of Israel (1 Ne. 19:10). In comparison, Hel. 14:20, 28 suggests that the phrase "this land" means America. Third 1 Ne. 8:17-18 uses a similar phrase. In the New Testament, Luke writes of "a darkness over all the earth." [^13] And one might ask how he was using earth.

295In 1903 President Joseph F. Smith received a series of letters from an attorney concerning passages in the Book of Mormon that have a biblical ring. Roberts published the letters with his replies, demonstrating the great number of passages which are identical with or very similar to passages in the four New Testament Gospels, and showing the reasonable expectation that there would be similarities but also important differences. He utilized the King James and Douay Bibles in coniunction with the Book of Mormon to show that similarities would be the clear results of Christ's visit to the Western world, since he manifested himself to the Nephites in order to teach them the same message he had presented in Palestine, to give the same ordinances of the gospel, and to establish a similar church organization and teach the same ethical principles. Many Book of Mormon passages show differences which are superior in sense and clearness as compared with the King James renderings. Linguistic studies done by scholars since that time show that some Book of Mormon passages are closer in meaning to early documents in Hebrew, Arabic, Aramaic and, in a few cases, Greek. [^14]

Roberts's Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association Manual of 1903-1904, chapter seven, dealt with the question of the translation of the Book of Mormon; his analysis has been a focus of discussion ever since. Here the Prophet Joseph Smith's reports are accepted as reliable and the opinions of others who had no firsthand observation as less reliable. Roberts concludes that, consistent with the wider doctrine of revelation, translation was not a simple mechanical process. It is a mistake made by both defenders of the book and its critics to suppose that "the instrument did everything and the prophet nothing." Rather, all of the Prophet's intellectual and spiritual efforts were required; it was exhausting work. [^15]

296September and October 1905 were spent by Roberts on another phase-"the originality of the Book of Mormon." In an MIA manual to be studied that year he stated that the Book of Mormon is the most vulnerable point in the defense of the Church, in the sense that to deflate that book is to reduce Mormonism to no more than humanism. Yet, once mastered and understood, Mormonism is invincible because of the Book of Mormon; those to whose hearts and minds the truth of the book has been revealed "will not be shaken." Following the methodology of his earlier books, Roberts divided his evidences into external and internal evidences. Two chapters provide biblical anticipations of the Book of Mormon, and two chapters on the organization, doctrine and history of the Church attest to the fruits of the gospel. Christ gave the test: "Ye shall know them by their fruits." [^16] The internal evidences deal with style and language as they relate to the theories of construction, and show both the unity and the diversity of style. Roberts demonstrates that there is more than stylistic diversity among the first nine authors in the first four hundred years of the Nephite culture, while the later segments, which are an abridgement of other records, have all the marks of an abridger and the story is told in the third person. Roberts also wrote a chapter on the originality of names-"to produce names is the most difficult thing in the world." Yet in the Book of Mormon there are several hundred different names. The names themselves differ with the historical periods covered; the names of Nephites and Jaredires differ from the later peoples, whose names reflect root words, derivative names, and compound names from their respective backgrounds.

Roberts wrote a chapter on the forms of government in the Book of Mormon: monarchies, ecclesiastical governments, and republics. "On examination you will find there is not a modern idea, but they are in strict harmony with the ancient ideas. The Nephite republic has no conception of the representative idea in it." [^17]

Roberts's literary expertise was not confined solely to doctrinal exposition. Corianton was published in serial form in the Contributor in 1889. In August 1902, Roberts saw his periodical series, Corianton: A Nephite Story, come into new demand as a book and a play. It sold over three hundred copies in one weekend. His original effort had brought him some plaudits from such literary allies as Orson F. Whitney, Junius F. Wells, and David McKenzie. Inundated as he had been with his work as a Seventy and nearly two years of political assault and battery in the congressional race, little of his energy had been turned to fiction, short story, or drama. But a young dramatic artist, Orestes U. Bean, had been attracted by Roberts's serial and had written a script and rehearsed it for presentation in the Salt Lake Theatre. The marquee advertised the play as Corianton: An Aztec Romance.

Actress Gladys George, later associated with David Niven, played the part of Joan. Roberts, the book, and the play all sprang into a new and pleasant notoriety. The play enjoyed "the most phenomenal run ever seen at this playhouse" [the Salt Lake Theater). [^18] Even before it was presented in Salt Lake, producer-director Bean had sold the rights to a New York production syndicate to tour the Midwest and then go on to New York and Broadway. [^19]

297 The play involves dramatic embellishments not found in Roberts's book. Not just one man-Corianton-but several are the central figures. The scheme of the Zetamites who wished to manipulate and exploit Corianton is political as well as religious, and he is a moral dupe. There is also a tragic death in the person of Shiblon, Corianton's brother; and Joan (in the play, Zoan), out of her love for Corianton, warns him of the plot and calls down her own death at the hand of the Zoramite leader for his betrayal. Corianton finally attempts to kill the Zetamite leader, but is at the last minute prevented by the righteous Nephites. He repents and submits to his father's will, thus saving his own city from invasion.

Critical reviews in both papers were favorable. The Deseret News called it "too ambitious an event to be ranked with local theatrical events." Popular demand required extension of its run. A further review reported that only two plays, Fannie Davenport and The Bostonians, had approached the success of this run in the Salt Lake Theater. It grossed more than seven thousand dollars in the first week. Its one defect, reviews said, was its length. It lasted an hour longer than the usual production time, closing its final curtain well after midnight.

In April 1907, Roberts published a landmark paper on the uncreate self-existent intelligence of man. Entitled "The Immortality of Man," it is accompanied by a foreword by the editors (Joseph F. Smith and Edward H. Anderson), indicating that the paper was submitted to the First Presidency and several of the Twelve Apostles, "none of whom found anything objectionable in it, or contrary to the revealed word of God." It resulted from discussion both as to the scriptural rootage and the material implications of the doctrine.

298Roberts understood Joseph Smith to be teaching an un-create, eternal cosmos of which our eternal Father is an orderer and organizer. Roberts saw the vast consequences of this doctrine. In his own files is a statement of the First Presidency which corrects Orson Pratt's notion that there must somehow be a "first god." [^20] The statement teaches that "from all eternity there had existed organized beings in an organized form." And there have always been eternal elements under the control of eternal beings in a co-existent relationship.

This teaching replaces three almost universal assumptions in occidental philosophy and theology: first, the idea of ex nihilo creation; second, the notion that there is only one necessary being upon whom all other existences depend for their existence, affirming instead that "the elements are eternal" and coexistent with God; and third, that there is an absolute, indeed an infinite, unbridgeable gap between the nature of the creator and the nature of the created. Roberts rejoiced in these insights. In all of his doctrinal and historical writing he presupposed them.

He saw that the restoration of these truths had "twisted the nose of Dame Orthodoxy rather severely." But it was not normarive Christianity but the creedal distortion of Christianity that was transcended. Many scholars in religious studies today concede that the earliest teachings of Christianity, including the roots in Judaism, are often closer to Joseph Smith than to the creeds. [^21]

During these same years (1907 through 1919) Roberts wrote, compiled and published four of his five manuals or course books titled Seventy's Course in Theology.

299These volumes represent the constant intrepid upreach of Roberts toward making the standard, the maturity, and the effectiveness of the quorums of seventy equal to their scriptural role. His heavy writing is symbolic of a crusade in his life. It was stepped up as he increased in sensitivity. He could never shirk his calling over a period of nearly forty-three years (from the time he was called as a President of the Seventy until his death in 1933). These challenging lessons ranged from an outline history of the seventy and an overview of the scriptures to a history of the major priesthood dispensations and the Mormon doctrine of deity, the atonement of Jesus Christ, and divine immanence and the Holy Ghost. They blend Roberts's double talent as historian and doctrinal expositor. During this period, attendance increased in the seventies quorums to 60 percent, and elders in the Church became eager to be called into the quorums of seventy.

He also agitated for programmatic changes. A summary of the issues he analyzed, discussed, and took up with the Brethren (much more elaborate and difficult than this outline) would include the following questions:

One: Were the seventies to focus on missionary labor "instead of [which he took to mean in preference to] any others?" (D&C 107). He himself often ordained elders as seventies while they were in the mission field and was even known to encourage seventies to avoid being called as high priests. In some periods of his service the First Presidency deemed this expedient and in others not.

Two: Is the First Quorum of the Seventy to preside over all other quorums independent of the "stake and ward lines of authority"? Roberts insisted that it was. But in the actual operation of priesthood functions stake presidents were, under the direction of President Heber J. Grant, given presiding authority over the quorums in their stakes.

Three: Were the first seven Presidents to ordain what Roberts called "multiples of themselves" in order that there be an entire First Quorum of the Seventy? And what would their function be? Roberts would not live to see the day when the expansion of the Church worldwide and the acceleration of its missionary program would make this implicit unit into a full functioning body with vastly increased responsibilities in the ministry at home and abroad, replacing the interim expedient (1941-1976) of Assistants to the Twelve.

Four: Did members of the First Council of the Seventy have apostolic responsibilities? Roberts insisted they were "especial witnesses" and that they ought as General Authorities to have authority to ordain stake presidents, organize high councils and, if authorized, perform sealings in the temples. Today they do.

Five: Can a high priest be ordained a seventy as well as vice versa? Roberts saw no reason why not. Fifty years later that has sometimes been done.

300Six: Should the seventies quorums be expert in historical and doctrinal background, have the most commanding knowledge of the principles of the gospel, and be the "traveling ministry" (Roberts called them "minutemen") "according to the genius of the new dispensation"? Roberts cherished that dream and threw his entire weight on fulfilling it. He was sometimes impatient, and in his worse moods contemptuous, of turning the seventy's role to administrative functions. He saw their role as teaching and witnessing, through a masterful grasp of the glories of the new era. He dreamed of a central library, second to none on earth, where they might study, of ceaseless self-teaching as well as quorum-teaching throughout the Church, of a body of men equipped from their earliest years with workman-like habits of ever-increasing depth as well as breadth.

301"Being a Seventy," he wrote often, "means mental activity, intellectual development, and the attainment of spiritual power." Fewer came to that vision than he wished, and few of his generation could match the zeal and productivity of his example.

Notes

Chapter 14

1 This contract, dated 15 August 1900, is on file in the Church Archives.

2 BN, p. 447.

3 BN, pp. 214-15.

4 See Conference Report, April 1930, p. 42. See also T. Edgar Lyon's account in "Church Historians I Have Known," Dialogue 11 (Winter 1978): 15-16.

5 See Seventy's Course in Theology, 2:169. Overall (with perhaps the exception of Sterling McMurrin's "Theses on the Idea that God Is a Person"), Reberts's is the most formidable statement on the personal nature of God in Mormon literature. Following the actual rejoinder, Roberts printed a separate chapter and a separate discourse of Joseph F. Smith's "Jesus Christ: The Revelation of God," testifying once again, as befits the Church of Jesus Christ, that "Jesus Christ is the complete and perfect revelation of God; that such as Jesus Christ is, God is."

6 Sterling M. McMurrin, The Theological Foundations of the Mormon Religion (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1965), p. 108.

7 Mormon Doctrine of Deity and Jesus Christ: The Revelation of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1903). This work drew instant widespread attention. For the Van Der Donckt discussion see "The Form of God," Improvement Era 5 (November 1901): 29-42; "The Plurality of Gods and the Future Possibilities of Man," Improvement Era 5 (December 1901): 119-130.

8 Van Der Donckt was a graduate of the Louwain University of Belgium, gained national recognition for a four-hundred-page volume of poems, Metrical Memories, and became one of the leading prelates of the Catholic Church in California. (See Salt Lake Tribune, 8 April 1937.)

9 Mormon Doctrine of Deity, pp. 119-20.

10 See Autobiography of Andrew Jenson (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1938), pp. 423, 523.

11 D&C 92.

12 See Truman G. Madsen, "Guest Editor's Prologue," BYU Studies 9 (Spring 1969): 235-40, for information on work under way on "the historiography of the official history."

13 A third objection had to do with the date of the birth of Christ, as well as the date of his crucifixion. Roberts found the scholarly date inconclusive. But his opinion, from D&C 20 and the Millennial Star, 14:388, was that both took place on April 6.

14 See Improvement Era 7 (January 1904): 179-200.

15 Ibid., p. 192.

16 See Improvement Era 8 (August 1905): 785.

17 The historian Richard Bushman, in an unpublished paper, has pursued this point in detail.

18 Salt Lake Tribune, 17 August 1902.

19 See Deseret News, 9 August 1902.

20 Millennial Star 27 (21 October 1865): 659-63. The First Presidency was Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Daniel H. Wells.

21 See Reflections on Mormonism, ed. Truman G. Madsen (Provo, Utah: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1979).

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
