Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

15 Oldest Chaplain

The year 1917, someone later wrote, was "the twilight of man's innocence." In the prior decade there had been much ideological assurance of worldwide goodwill, of high enlightenment, and of the obsolescence of war. But war, indeed world war, could not come as a surprise to any informed Latter-day Saint. Hundreds of prophetic verses in LDS scriptures detail an eschatology of tension, conflict and bloodshed-and "the saints shall hardly escape." Latter-day Saints are commanded to "renounce war and proclaim peace," but they are also under covenant to "give their lives for freedom, sustaining the native government."

302As America geared up for World War I, Utah Governor Simon Barnberger, at Roberts's request, appointed Roberts as chaplain to the First Utah Light Field Artillery, subsequently known as the 145th Artillery Unit. He and Bamberger were political friends-Roberts had served for two years on the Utah State Board of Equalization. [^1] Chaplain Roberts soon demonstrated that he did not care as much for his rank of captain as he did for action. In an intense recruiting campaign he represented the governor's staff up and down the Rocky Mountain Corridor, and soon won the honorary title of major. [^2] In his meetings and conversations Roberts motivated hundreds of young men to enlist in the military rather than wait for the draft. [^3] To anxious but committed parents Roberts said, "You send your sons and I will be a father to them." The response was strong. At a patriotic rally in the Ogden Tabernacle on March 27, 1917, he said, "I want to tell the fathers and mothers of Utah that if their sons go to the trenches I will go with them." For a full three minutes the audience cheered.

In September of 1917 the entire 145th Unit was called up for active duty. Roberts was determined to be with his unit all the way to the front and sent an appeal to Washington for active status as a chaplain. But he was past sixty and, though vigorous in health and appearance, far too old for service; he was flatly rejected.

His daughter Georgia remembers his agitation at this refusal as he strode up and down in the living room of the old rock house in Centerville, muttering that he would not take no for an answer. The more he worked himself up, the more he distressed Celia. Within a few minutes he wiped away many years of political feuding with Senator Reed Smoot, saying he would beg if necessary to get a reversal of the decision. He telegraphed Senator Smoot, "You must get me in." Senator Smoot soon reported that transition from the United States Army Reserve to the regular army would require Roberts to be "broken" from the rank of major to the rank of lieutenant. Roberts immediately replied to go ahead. Washington then imposed a further provision: an appointment to serve overseas depended on his passing qualifying academic and physical tests at the Officers and Chaplains School at Camp Zachary Taylor in Louisville, Kentucky. To the chagrin of his family, and perhaps also of the army, Roberts welcomed the appointment on these terms. [^4]

303To many it was a curiosity that a grandfather, dignified by civic service over four decades but refused a seat in the House of Representatives, should want at his late age to serve in the army. [^5] Aside from his public declarations Roberts had complex reasons. In April 1915 he had read James M. Beck's The Evidence in the Case and pondered the question of moral responsibility for the war. Beck concluded that the major onus rested with the Kaiser and his followers in Germany, but Roberts raised the more personal question: Was America responsible for ending the war by force? He was convinced that the answer was yes; the cause of France and England had become the cause of America. In the British Mission in 1888 he had embraced through Hallam's Constitutional History of England the Anglo-Saxon right to defend country, home or self against possible invasion, [^6] and he found religious confirmation of it in what he called Joseph Smith's "noble doctrine of human rights." Britain was his native land, America his adopted country. He wished to prove himself loyal to both. A nation could exist in liberty, he believed, only so long as a sacrificial public spirit was maintained. He wrote: "How just the expression! And how it associates with the other idea, when the wicked rule the people mourn."

There were religious reasons too. Roberts collected excerpts from periodicals written in 1916 which showed that the war symbolized a worldwide failure of churches and their leaders. He had a fond hope that the war effort would help break down the unnecessary divisions of Christianity, uniting them in a one-for-all principle which might revivify the churches. For him to conscientiously object to the war, he had to become a conscientious participator. That was, of course, the spirit of the American slogan under Woodrow Wilson-a war to end war.

Family and personal motives moved him likewise. His grandnephew George Day, grandson of Mary (Polly), had joined up and would give his life in the Argonne ("struck by a piece of shrapnel") late in September 1918. When the sealed coffin arrived in Bountiful, Roberts's task would be to steady the widow and her little six-year-old son Haven. Roberts sincerely wrote in tribute that this youth was "the most distinguished of my father's posterity." [^7]

304One other strong motivation to serve in the army was to actively demonstrate that the charges waged against him during his congressional battle that "his life has been one of disloyalty" were unjust. [^8] Though these charges had been directed specifically at Roberts, the same general view was held of Utah and the Mormons. Roberts had told the United States House of Representatives, "The Mormon people are not disloyal, but they are true to their country and history will yet vindicate them." [^9] He had been part of that vindication in peace; and now he wanted to prove his mettle in war. "You are in all things the theorist," a "talking machine," Charles W. Nibley had chided him. He wanted to act.

In a sermon given in October 1914, Roberts said, "I am a man of peace, I love peace and I praise it ... but more do I join in a prayer with you that justice might prevail." Upon reading for the several-hundredth time a revelation given to Joseph Smith in Missouri (D&C 87), Roberts interpreted it to mean that the American Constitution would someday be for the "rights and protection of all flesh" everywhere. He said:

In my own reflections I have come to a very happy state of mind. In the midst of all this strife, I have learned... that God lives in His universe... with widely diffused influence and power... that destructive forces will not go beyond what His wisdom shall decree to be their bounds.

Destructive forces, he added, "contain in themselves the prophecy of reconstruction," and "out of waste shall come even greater and higher things." [^10]

Roberts defended the Monroe doctrine as having international scope, advocated a league of free nations "to guard against arrogant influence of autocracy," and said in blunt candor that "some of the sons of Utah might be sacrificed in this cause, as such has been the price of liberty in all ages." [^11] He could not condone the "fanatically expressed hope" that all of their sons could escape the casualties. "My faith does not extend that far." [^12]

Roberts left for Fort Kearney on October 10, 1917. Poetess Ruth May Fox wrote a tribute for the farewell party given in his honor by the general board of the Mutual Improvement Association. [^13] "The world should deal gently with him," she wrote, instead of "girding him in armor." [^14] Yet like many in the Church and community, she saw the war effort as an extension of Roberts's calling.

305Roberts taught the young men that there were two wars to be fought: one within and one without, though they were interrelated. Of utmost importance was to live above the moral barbarism of the battlefield and not lose their sense of the sacred.

Thou wilt not yield the vandal toll, Nativeland. My Nativeland!

Thou wilt not crook to his control. Nativeland, My Nativeland!

Better the fire upon thee roll, Better the ship, the blade, the bowl. Than crucifixion of thy soul, Nativeland. My Nativeland! [^15]

At Camp Kearney, near San Diego, where the unit received its basic training, Roberts held weekly sacrament services for the Latter-day Saints and nondenominational services for the whole regiment, and his example spread to other Mormon units through the United States. [^16] He was tireless in daily counseling interviews with soldiers and dispensed fifteen hundred khaki editions of the Bible to his men (paid for from funds provided by the Church's MIA). In this setting, one of his Centerville nephews, David W. Smith, found him "still a man of reserve but much warmer than before." He spent time with the sick, counseling them and helping them write letters home. Many of the young soldiers, not members of the Church, full of doubts and dreads about "getting over," came to his open-faced tent. It meant much to him to elicit the deeper moral and religious reserves of these men.

Roberts of course received letters from many anxious parents. One that he preserved is from Tabernacle organist J. J. McClellan, pleading for a "dear young friend of ours in your regiment (Harry Sims, Jr.)." "Please put your loving arms around this good lad and make him feel that you, his chaplain, are interested in him." [^17]

306Roberts's passion for history led him to a genealogical survey of the troops. He found that at least seventeen of the young men in his unit were grandsons of the original five-hundred-member Mormon Battalion, which had made the longest sustained infantry march in history (two thousand miles, from Iowa to San Diego). He arranged a special hike from Camp Kearney to Old Town, San Diego, where their forefathers had camped after their march. Later Roberts helped persuade the people of Utah to build a monument in honor of the battalion, "to commemorate in some enduring form" the event. [^18]

Now came his own qualifying ordeal, at Camp Taylor, in Kentucky.

The train from San Diego to Kentucky passed through Salt Lake City during the Church's April general conference, but Roberts was under orders to remain aboard the train, and so missed both this spiritual feast and a visit with his family. "I leave you all to imagine," he wrote home, "how great my disappointment was." He occupied himself on the journey with two French manuals and a book, Facts About France. In his common prayer book, and Douay, Vulgate, and King James Bibles (in a variety of editions), he pasted copious notes for sermons and strategies overseas.

At Camp Taylor in Louisville he was immediately thrust into classes, drills, war simulation exercises, obstacle courses, full-pack marches, and camp-outs. He was obliged to qualify in marksmanship, and succeeded on the pistol range. The cavalry challenge he met without strain, quickly recovering his native horsemanship. Most of Roberts's associates were young men who had recently left their seminaries. The dean of the college offered to excuse his gray-headed lieutenant from the strenuous, daily setting-up exercises. Roberts replied, "No sir, I came here to take the full course." [^19]

Returning to his unit, from Camp Taylor he took the train across the country, again to Camp Kearney, without furlough. To the surprise and sometimes envy of other chaplaincy candidates, he had successfully passed his examinations, "although," he wrote home, "I must say that it was the most strenuous and anxious six weeks within my experience, so far as I now recall that experience." [^20] From Camp Kearney he wrote to Celia:

307Things here seem so deserted that I have felt several twinges of homesickness for the first time since my enlistment. Long before now, of course, I thought we would all be in France and in the thick of the war, but alas, we have been doomed to disappointment. Our opportunity, however, may yet come, I hope it will, and come soon.

Well dear, it has been some time since I wrote you but you see I have made up for it by writing you a long letter now. God bless you all and have you in his keeping.

Lovingly your husband and father, B. H. Roberts [^21]

Most of the 145th Regiment not yet en route to France were on a coastal hike north of Camp Kearney in the California mountains when Roberts arrived back. To join them he was offered a sedan. He chose instead a spirited horse. He rode most of the morning and as he approached the regiment, he kept out of sight until he was at the head of the column. Then he galloped into view, reining his horse high on its haunches and lifting his hat to sweep the sky in a symbolic gesture that electrified the men. He had made it. Sixteen hundred men, including the officers, broke rank and cheered him. Then the chaplain left his mount, shouldered the standard sixty-pound pack, and joined his men in the hike on equal terms. In the following seven days the regiment hiked 190 miles to Santa Aria, took three days of rest, and then in six days hiked back to camp. "Though he had avoirdupois, he carried it well." [^22] The chaplain, like the young men, slept in a pup tent. [^23] "No one else in the whole command stood so close to these young soldiers," C. Clarence Nelson recalls. [^24]

In his efforts to encourage and spur the men, Roberts dipped into his reservoir of material on ancient and American political history. The men were soon accustomed to hearing quotations from Disraeli, Burke, Pitt, Thomas Jefferson, and the United States Constitution. He explained the operations of parties, the motives of men, and how men either worked for their class or all men; and he gave detailed accounts of the intricacies of the American Revolution.

308By July 24, 1918 (the anniversary of the arrival in Salt Lake Valley of the Mormon pioneers), the 145th Regiment was on its way from California to New York for embarkation. Arriving at the train depot in Salt Lake City, Roberts by prearrangement brought the 145th Unit band to the front lawn of the Beehive House, where President Joseph F. Smith lived. [^25] They played martial airs, and President Smith came to the window, smiled and waved appreciatively, and then beckoned Roberts in. From the balcony, with Roberts by his side, President Smith gave the men a kindly reception and reminisced in a touching manner about his associations with Chaplain Roberts. For Roberts, it was "one of the sweetest recollections that I have to carry with me during the remainder of my life." [^26] Back inside he responded to President Smith from his depths: "There is no root of bitterness left in my heart at all. I love you with the love I had for you in my boyhood days." President Smith pulled him close and blessed him in the Master's name. "That touch of his life with mine was great and enduring," Roberts later told Anthon H. Lund. This personal peacemaking became the preface to the wider world of battle.

The unit moved on east to New York. Two months later they boarded the Scotian, a troop ship which carried three thousand soldiers as part of a convoy of fourteen troop ships and cruisers carrying forty-two thousand troops. Ten days before they sailed, twenty vessels had been sunk by German U-boats off the Eastern Coast of America. The convoy sailed up past Iceland and then into the Irish Sea, where Great Britain provided escort ships. Here the Americans had their first exposure to the high-seas battlefront. Depth charges were dropped, and after several explosions word came that the U-boat had been sunk.

Roberts spent his time during the fifteen-day crossing interviewing the men individually. Two soldiers, Reuben Hep-worth and Edwin Garrett, recorded the gist of his appeal, which he felt must be made one to one: that each man guard the sacred order of love and marriage. He counseled them that camp followers in France would try to entice them to profligacy but that their duty and their privilege was to remain pure, no matter how fierce the pressure or searing the loneliness. He assured them that Christ could bid unworthy passions to depart, and would empower them for worthy love here or beyond the grave. He made the image of such love live, not just by moral arguments but by his testimony of their filial relationship with God the Father. The spirit of what he labored to achieve in these interviews is reflected in one of his last sermons:

309You have stood with me this day on these heights where we have contemplated the things of God-things more especially about God. I challenge you to leave these heights where we have contemplated God, and felt His presence, where the veil between earth and heaven became so thin that we could hear the vibrations between the two worlds and know that celestial voices were hymning into our souls the high truths that could but come from the things that God has revealed. I challenge you to leave these heights and descend into the purlieus of sin and revel in iniquity. After standing here you dare not blaspheme things holy. There is a spiritual uplift in the contemplation of God and the things of God; inspiration to righteousness does come from contemplation of great truths. One may not have lofty contemplations and indulge low desires. God said of Joseph Smith that he "gave unto him commandments which inspired him." [^27]

Many men returning from such an interview said, "After talking with Chaplain Roberts, I wouldn't dare be immoral!" [^28]

On September 5, 1918, the Scotian docked at Liverpool, England, Roberts's native area. Elder George F. Richards, president of the European Mission of the Church, met with Chaplain Roberts, and then a sacrament meeting was arranged with Roberts as the speaker. Brigadier General Richard W. Young was present on the stand with him. The Millennial Star account of his sermon includes a reference to modern prophecy:

President Roberts then referred to the Revelation on War, given to the Prophet Joseph Smith on December 25, 1832, and pointed out how it had been fulfilled. The Prophet said in that remarkable prediction that the days would come when war would be poured out upon all nations, beginning with the rebellion in South Carolina, and that the general outpouring of war would come when Great Britain would find it necessary to "call upon other nations in order to defend themselves against other nations." (D&C 87:3) This, he said, had come true. Great Britain, he pointed out, until only a few years ago, gloried in its "splendid isolation," but after the formation of the Triple Alliance, France found it necessary to enter an understanding with Russia and Great Britain again joined this coalition. Then the time came when two of the powers of the Triple Alliance opened the flood gates of armed conflict, and war was literally poured out upon all nations. [^29]

310"The people of the United States are determined that this war shall not be won by the Entente Allies, no matter at what cost," Chaplain Roberts concluded.

Although nineteen years had passed since his political wars, and thirty-seven since his public spectacles with Jar-man, a newspaper claimed that a "citizen protest" was made upon Roberts's arrival in Liverpool, petitioning that "he be sent home." Dr. James E. Talmage refuted this curious fiction at the Pittsburgh Conference on Mormonism in November 1918. [^30]

After three weeks in and around Liverpool, the 145th crossed the English Channel to La Havre, France, and then by rail traveled via Rouen, Tours, Poitiers, and Bordeaux to Camp DeSouge, seventy-five miles from the battlefront. Here they began final training maneuvers.

Chaplain Roberts's Sabbath addresses at Camp DeSouge were well attended.

Each Sunday morning the 145th held services in a large pleasant grove of trees. Men from many other units came, mostly the more matured and sober-minded men, both officers and men from the ranks... a larger audience each time. There were no chairs or seats except on the grass, but almost to a man those in attendance stood very quietly and deeply interested during the complete lecture. [^31]

Lectures they were, being longer and more systematic than an action-oriented sermon. Roberts projected but did not complete a series of twelve sermons, six on "Man's need of God," and six on "God's need of Man.' [^32]

He spoke on other themes to smaller groups-who were mostly Latter-day Saints-in the camp mess hall. Elder S. Dilworth Young recalls, "He spoke to fifty of us, or twenty or ten, as carefully and as oratorically as if he had addressed ten thousand." [^33] His prayers were softer and to some more impressive, exhibiting his consuming trust and faith. A rare snapshot shows Roberts standing in prayer before his group. [^34] The soldiers are kneeling on the ground or standing with heads bowed; but Roberts stands erect, his head up and his right arm out, uplifted to heaven. [^35]

311Some of the soldiers found their chaplain tedious and labored in his preachments, others chafed against his unyielding moral constraints; yet he had from most a certain respect. Though only about half the men were Mormon, "all regarded the chaplain as theirs... they were glad to have him and were proud of him."

The weeks in Camp DeSouge resulted in a rapid turnover in manpower as replacements were sent to the trenches and soldiers from the States joined the unit. During this period the average size of the Utah group was about one thousand. On November 9, the entire regiment was ordered to action; but this order was countered by a twenty-four-hour delay. During the delay, the rumor of armistice reached them. Four days of uneasy doubt passed; November 12 airplanes over the city of Bordeaux dropped packages of leaflets announcing that in the eleventh month of the year, on the eleventh day of the month, and at the eleventh hour of the day the armistice had been signed, and peace was now assured. The regiment did not reach the front. "That was not our fortune," Roberts wrote. "I am happy to know it was not our fault." There was no immediate enthusiasm manifested among the French people, but gradually the spirits of the people awoke and they demonstrated affection for the American soldiers. Roberts described the thronging of the churches and the kneeling multitudes by St. Andreas, followed by hilarious joy and the idolizing of the maimed and wounded soldiers.

On Thanksgiving Day 1918 a worship service was arranged by representative chaplains from the major denominations. Roberts was assigned a seat at the rear of the review stand and had not been asked to participate on the program. During the service the conducting officer abruptly announced, "Elder Roberts, the Mormon chaplain from Utah, will now step up and lead the Thanksgiving Psalm." Dazed, Roberts arose and walked forward; he was familiar with the Psalms but not with that title. The impression then came that he should read "The One Hundredth Psalm." Opening his Bible he read aloud the lines:

312Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye lands. Serve the Lord with gladness: come before his presence with singing. Know ye that the Lord he is God: it is he that hath made us, and not we ourselves; we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise: be thankful unto him, and bless his name. For the Lord is good; his mercy is everlasting; and his truth endureth to all generations.

Returning to his seat, Roberts noticed that his fellow chaplains were looking not at him but at the floor. He concluded that this public invitation had been an attempt to embarrass him and the Church. Back at his tent he knelt in prayer, thanking the Lord for coming to his aid in this moment of need. [^36]

Roberts and his regiment soon entered a different kind of war. Spanish flu, savage and virulent, struck thirty thousand soldiers in and near Bordeaux. At the height of the epidemic the death toll reached two hundred a day. "The severity of the sickness," even for those who survived, Samuel A. Dunn writes, "was terrific." The men were racked with nausea, raging fever from 102 to 105 degrees, and fits of coughing up blood due to bronchial pneumonia. [^37] The disease struck with terrifying speed. Utahn George Gygi recalls wrestling one day in early afternoon. One hour later his strong opponent was in the hospital, critically ill. [^38]

The Chaplain almost lived in the hospital wards. Day and night I would take Brother Roberts in my motorcycle side car and go to the detention wards and hospitals to visit the men. He was unafraid of the vicious malady. He never hesitated to go into the sick rooms and never seemed to worry about the risk of getting the disease himself. Many times, especially when visiting the Latter-day Saint men, he would administer to them and the blessings Brother Roberts would give were tremendous and would kindle encouragement and hope to the men. [^39]

When the epidemic was over, fourteen from the 145th Unit were dead-a token percentage compared to the death toll in other units. On behalf of these fourteen comrades, Mormon or not, Roberts forwarded personal effects to the bereaved families and wrote compassionate letters. "They are henceforth and forever identified with the great historic event that secured world peace and incoming reign of peace on earth, good will to man. God's soldiers they. And so peace to them." [^40]

313 He records that on November 24 his company moved to the north bank of the River Gironde preliminary to embarkation. On Monday, December 23, the regiment broke camp and marched to the America dock and at about 11:00 A.M. boarded the SS Santa Teresa. [^41] The voyage home is logged in two note-books-from Bordeaux to New York, 3380 knots, 3802 miles, from December 14, 1918, to January 4, 1919.

In January, at Logan, Utah, the unit was formally mustered out, and Roberts gave his last official address as chaplain. His men who had "cottoned to him" kept him shaking hands until late afternoon. That evening in Centerville his daughter Georgia espied him walking home and rushed to meet him. "He lighted up as I came, swept me high in his arms, hugged and hugged and twirled and hugged and almost loved me to death." [^42]

On Memorial Day, 1932, the Deseret News reproduced the full text of his final address at Camp DeSouge, but the cold prose of the printed page disappointed members of the regiment and they asked for a recording. So Roberts read portions of the original speech into an electronic recording device.

Roberts participated in military affairs, reunions, memorials, and the activities of the American Legion. He kept his uniform, leggings, buttons and all, sometimes breaking it out from his little trunk and traveling to various functions reeking of moth balls. When his family chided him he would say, "We love what we serve."

Roberts, as a former chaplain, was later invited by the California governor to offer the invocation at the monument erected at Camp Kearney to honor those trained at the camp who had given their lives in the war. He notes in a letter from the 40th Division, which he was associated with, 2,700 had fallen in battle. Among all the units processed through Camp Kearney, his own unit ranked seventh in its number of casualties.

314The dream of a conclusive and permanent peace remained strong in him. On September 3, 1919, Major J. Reuben Clark, Jr. (twenty years before his call to the First Presidency) addressed a crowded Salt Lake Tabernacle arguing against ratifying the League of Nations. Roberts was on the stand in this meeting, and he arose saying he represented no one but himself but that he would in a later meeting in the Tabernacle "answer the arguments presented by Major Clark."

Clark insisted that the league was a step toward the loss of sovereignty of the United States, and an entangling alliance which the Founding Fathers would have condemned. Its linkage would enable the five major powers to impose their will on the minority (he saw no signs that the league was, as some believed, an approach to the Millennium). On the ninth of September Roberts replied that the league might well be as inspired as was the Constitution, that it was not a guarantee to stop war but that the Book of Mormon (2 1 Ne. 12) pointed to that possibility. [^43]

Roberts arranged for the Utah military units to be "linked in unbroken continuity" with the Mormon Battalion and the Mormon soldiers in the Philippines. This was done, by an official order of the United States War Department, by assigning colors to the 145th Field Artillery Unit. [^44]

315Roberts's chapter on the World War in the Comprehensive History of the Church cites non-Mormon and often anti-Mormon Charles C. Goodwin. Speaking of more than six hundred Mormon soldiers who went to the front in France, Goodwin said, "They never retreated, never lost a battle or a flag, never started for the foe that they did not scatter it as the wind scatters the chaff from the threshing floor." [^45] Roberts rejoiced that Utah and the Mormons had done their duty, and that he had had a small part in it.

Notes

Chapter 15

1 Roberts agreed with Frank]in S. Richards that every county in Utah, no matter how small, should have at least one representative in the legislature. After he won the victory on this point, Roberts resigned from the state board in order to enter the chaplaincy. (See Autobiography of Edward Snow, BYU Special Collections, p. 18.)

2 Improvement Era 29 (August 1926): 945.

3 The records indicate that Utah contributed a higher proportion per capita of able youths than any other state in the Union. According to Noble Warrum, there were 24,382, of whom more than half (12,832) were volunteers. See Noble Warrum, Utah Since Statehood (Salt Lake City: S. J. Clarke Publishing, 1919), 1:458-59.

4 Some notes say that his appointment was obtained by Burieson, of President Woodrow Wilson's cabinet; others say that the Secretary of War, Newton E. Baker, obtained special orders for him to go overseas with his regiment. Both may be true.

5 Elizabeth S. Wilcox, wife of Dr. Fred M. Wilcox, wrote Roberts in March 1923: "I know of the great efforts made on account of age limit to get into the Army... you became one of the heroes of the nation . . . ready and willing in your heart to die for the cause." Elizabeth S. Wilcox to B. H. Roberts, 7 March 1923, in possession of the author.

6 See Roberts's address at a quarterly conference in Pioneer Stake, 29 April 1917, entitled "The Great World Controversy." (Deseret Evening News, 26 May 1917.)

7 B. H. Roberts to George Day, 25 August 1930, Church Archives.

8 Salt Lake Tribune, 1 January 1900.

9 CHC, 6:171.

10 Conference Report, October 1917, pp. 102-103.

11 Deseret Evening News, 27 August 1917.

12 Salt Lake Tribune, 27 August 1917.

13 This poem was published in Young Woman's Journal (January 1918): 32.

14 Personal papers of Georgia Roberts, Marriott Collection.

15 Written by B. H. Roberts to the tune of "Maryland, My Maryland," from a Camp Kearney clipping, 19 February 1917. As far as we know, Roberts attempted only one other poem. It was titled "The Glory of God." See Improvement Era 23 (January 1920): 261.

16 From the notes of Howard R. Driggs.

17 J. J. McClellan to B. H. Roberts, 14 February 1918, Roberts Personal File, Marriott Collection.

18 On 16 March 1915, Governor Barnberger appointed him chairman of the Mormon Battalion Commission to select a site, raise the requisite funds for a suitable monument, and to prepare the program for its dedication.

"If the time ever comes," Roberts wrote later in an attempt to arouse the people of Utah to build the monument, "when the people lose the disposition to commemorate in some enduring form the heroic events in their history, or fail to perpetuate the memory of heroic characters among their ancestors, that people will have lost the power to do heroic things, or produce heroic characters; they will have lost touch with heroism." (From the Mormon Battalion circular and a speech he gave 30 May 1927.)

19 Deseret Evening News, 31 August 1918.

20 Letter of 7 June 1918; personal papers of Georgia Roberts.

21 B.H. Roberts to Celia Dibble Roberts, 7 June 1918.

22 Harold R. Jenson to Truman G. Madsen, 30 January 1976.

23 See photo in Improvement Era 24 (April 1921): 482.

24 From the first day of mobilization, Roberts kept a day log and a scrapbook of the regiment. These documents were later presented to the Utah State Capitol but cannot now be located. Searches were made in the files of the Daughters of the Utah Pioneers and the Utah Historical Society by Kate B. Carter and Dr. Everett Cooley, but without success. Fragments are in his personal papers.

25 Under Roberts's leadership, the band which played for President Joseph F. Smith that morning later toured Utah in order to collect sufficient funds for a monument in Memory Park (Salt Lake City) honoring those who died in World War I. (See Salt Lake Tribune, 28 September 1933.)

26 President Joseph F. Smith and B. H. Roberts had been at variance several times-on woman suffrage, on Roberts's political aspirations, over the 1896 election and the bluster in Congress, over Roberts's hammering of Senator Smoot. to cite only the major strains which somehow never resulted in a final rift. "I came in contact with his mind," Roberts said a decade after President Joseph F. Smith's death, "and sometimes it was flash against flash." (Conference Report, October 1929, p. 89.) Roberts later said that President Joseph F. Smith, no matter how provoked, was just and fair. He died in November 1918. While Roberts was still at Camp Kearney, he had written President Smith to console him on the passing of his son, Hyrum M. Smith, who from 1909-1917 had helped Roberts with his Americana manuscripts. Roberts's letter says that Hyrum was a "noble minded and splendid man" whose death was a personal loss for him, for he had a "deep attachment" to him. (Deseret News, 25 January 1918.)

27 Sermon given 18 June 1933; reprinted in Deseret Evening News, 24 June 1933.

28 Roberts once said, "I have no patience with those who seek to discount the value of moral precepts and the force of godly admonitions by air-sniffing, sneering expressions-'platitudes,' 'common places.' Beauty and value remain even in the most threadbare of such counsels." (See Improvement Era, 21: 766.)

29 Millennial Star (5 September 1918); also see Journal History, same date.

30 Pamphlet in Church Archives.

31 Lieutenant Erwin Clawson to Truman G. Madsen, 17 March 1967.

32 These were later polished and abbreviated in two articles: Improvement Era 24 (July 1921): 811-17; Improvement Era 24 (August 1921): 907-11.

33 S. Dilworth Young to Truman G. Madsen, 12 December 1965.

34 The photo was taken by the wife of a French Army major living in Castle de Roche. The artist, Lewis R. Ramsey, was later asked to sketch this candid photo for an oil painting, which the Roberts family then presented to the Utah State Capitol to be placed alongside the silver tea set which had belonged to the U.S. battleship Utah. Underneath the painting is written, "Somewhere in France."

35 See D&C 88:135.

36 See Church News, 22 November 1975. Roberts told this story to President Floyd E.G. Eyre during a ride to a Church conference.

37 Roberts's Chaplaincy Datebook, 8 October 1917, Roberts Family Collection.

38 Clark Young (son of Richard W. Young) to Truman G. Madsen, 17 February 1976.

39 Lieutenant Wesden to Truman G. Madsen, 5 November 1969.

40 From outlined notes for these letters and sermon.

41 Loose notes in B. H. Roberts files on chaplaincy, Church Archives.

42 Interview with Georgia Roberts, 10 January 1967.

43 See Deseret News, 12 September 1919. See also "Personal Faith and Public Policy: Some Timely Observations on the League of Nations Controversy in Utah," by James B. Allen, an address delivered to the Mormon History Association, Salt Lake City, Utah, 5 April 1973.

44 CHC, 6:465.

45 CHC, 6:458.

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
[^23] 23 Mrs. William Reed to Ann Roberts.
[^24] 24 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^25] 25 Late in their lives, on 3 May 1928, B. H. and Annie Brynie, a half-sister, and Mary arranged for the temple sealing of Ann Everington and Benjamin Roberts and all of the children including the twins and baby Thomas. See BHR Temple Book.
[^26] 26 Roberts kept one sample of his father's handwriting from the original wrapping of the photo given his mother. It is preserved in the family collection.
[^27] 27 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 1 September 1883, Roberts Family Collection.
[^28] 28 Research has failed to establish where and when Ben died. The marriage date is 15 June 1848 (he was twenty-two) in Poplar, Middlesex, England; from the Book of Remembrance of Haven R. Day.
[^29] 29 B. H. Roberts to Ann Everington, 21 April 1880, Roberts Family Collection.
[^30] 30 Mrs. Charles H. Wilcox recorded these impressions from a conversation with B.H. Roberts at his home prior to his call to the Eastern States.
[^31] 31 BN, p. 10.
[^32] 32 See Juvenile Instructor 49 (February 1914): 85.
[^33] 33 Fifty years later, as chairman of "Vocations and Industry" in the youth program of the Church, he wrote, "We shall take the ground that no vocation of honest industry need be ignoble or debasing in its effects, but by properly correlating it with the general welfare of human life can be in effect both honorable and glorious." Improvement Era 15 (October 1912): 1083.
[^34] 34 Liahona 12 (20 October 1914): 364.
[^35] 35. Salt Lake Herald, 8 January 1899.
[^36] 36. So Roberts later told his children.
[^37] 37. BNG, p. 8.
[^38] 38 See History of Utah, 4:689.
[^39] 39 In a notebook under "Roberts, B. H." is this handwritten note: "Warrington-Town of, my birth place. Warrington, at the head of tide water on the Mersey River. It was a station of Romans (Veraterium) in the time of Agricola - (69-84 A.D.) and many Roman relics have been found in the neighborhood."
[^40] 40 Beniamin's father's brother.
[^41] 41 N. B. Lundwall, Roberts's secretary for twelve years, recalls him saying this incident occurred when he was seven.
[^42] 42 BNG, p. 16. Roberts spoke in later years of this spiritual impression (which one tradition says was repeated three times) as evidence that "the promptings of the Spirit of God" can come early - several years, in his case, before his official baptism and confirmation in 1867.
[^43] 43 The word gomin - rather than urchha - was endeared to Roberts through the Victor Hugo story of Gayroche who, in the midst of battle, went along the pavement gathering unfired cartridges from the corpses of fallen men, gaining strength at each step.
[^44] 44 Memoirs, p. 4.
[^45] 45 BN, p. 18a.
