Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

16 Mission President

In the spring of 1922, when Roberts was sixty-five years old, he was called to be president of the Eastern States Mission. The First Presidency had asked him to express his preference for any mission in the United States.

He was set apart to be president of the Eastern States Mission on May 29, 1922, under the hands of Heber J. Grant, Charles W. Penrose and Anthony W. Ivins. President Grant promised him that his memory would be strengthened, that he would have greater liberty, if possible, of utterance than he had had in the past, that his influence and prestige with the elders and the sisters would be "remarkable and wonderful," and that he would inspire them. He was also promised wisdom, protection, and great joy. President Grant ends, "We bless you for your labors in the past, for your diligence in writing and proclaiming the truth and in defending it at home and abroad." [^1]

316At this time the Eastern States Mission comprised Pennsylvania, New York and the New England states. Roberts recommended expanding it as in earlier times to include West Virginia, Maryland, and the District of Columbia, bringing it to twelve states organized into twelve districts or "conferences." His proposal was instantly approved. Thus, the largest industrialized segment of the nation was circumscribed in this mission area, containing some thirty-three million people.

For the first time in his life Roberts had a Church calling that included his family,. They could be together in the mission home in New York. But it soon became clear that no one could go: Louisa was almost immobile with a knee inflammation and in constant need of care from her children. Celia had heart trouble and high blood pressure; after prayerful deliberation she too felt that she could not leave home, at least for a time. Margaret, though in good health, was weighed down with professional medical commitments. At a family council it was decided that Celia's daughter Georgia would go to the East with Roberts to help him "settle in," and then if Celia's condition improved Roberts would return for her.

As it turned out, Celia was never well enough to move east. Georgia remained in the mission home "looking after [his] own comfort for the first eight weeks." Her father then sent her to Albany, New York, to get "a little real missionary experience-because it will be a means of your finding the Lord more completely than you have ever done before." When he released her early, in September he expressed two hopes which she came to feel were prophetic: that she would someday serve a full-time mission (she was later called to the Eastern States Mission under President George Q. Morris), and that she might have the joy of bringing a minister into the Church (with the conversion of Abraham Silverstein, a former rabbi turned Congregationalist minister, that too came to pass). In the meantime, the four months they were together was for both of them the most intimate and satisfying era of their relationship. Roberts afterwards said, "In my family,...you are... the first one to represent me in the mission field." [^2] He did not live to see his grandchildren carry on the tradition.

317Georgia's remembrance of this initial labor in the mission home gives us a glimpse of Roberts in harness. He interviewed not only the missionaries but Church leaders from all over the area, trained and instructed new missionaries, delegated effort to the mission staff, and corresponded continually with the missionaries, who, at Roberts's request, grew in number from 150 to 250 and were assigned in pairs throughout the mission. Most of all in those first weeks Georgia remembered his prayers. "I can't think of anyone who prays as he prayed .... He just talked with God. I don't know how anyone could hear his prayers about his family at home and his sons and daughters, his daily terrible struggles and the missionary effort, without being moved to tears." [^3]

From the mission staff elders who lived in the mission home we learn that Roberts's tremendous literary efforts, which produced two sets of tracts, were the result of long nights in his study, writing and rewriting till 3:00 A.M. or later in the morning. Staff members carried out reams of discarded drafts.

In addition to his missionary responsibilities, Roberts kept in touch with the First Council of the Seventy through correspondence and discussion. In April he returned to Salt Lake for conference and to catch up on his Seventy's duties. At home he found that Louisa's leg condition had worsened; she had been on crutches, and the doctors recommended surgery. Roberts made the arrangements at the LDS Hospital, was assured by doctors that there were "many years left in her solid heart," and, under the pressure of launching the "summer campaign," only briefly visited her and then caught the train east. On May 17, 1923, following the operation, Louisa died. The funeral was held immediately, and Roberts was notified too late to return home in time. President Grant tried to assuage the grief of the children by writing to the eldest son, Ben E. Roberts, expressing his sympathy in Louisa's release after "long years of suffering." [^4]

318Roberts was very moved by his wife's passing, though, which was evidenced at a later time when one of Roberts's young elders was called in and told that his father had passed away. Roberts offered to arrange for travel immediately if the lad wished to return home for the funeral. The missionary (Elder Job Hems. Icy) asked for time to pray, and when he returned to the president's office he said, "If my father could speak he would want me to stay on my mission." To Elder Hemsley's surprise Roberts began weeping and said, "Elder Hemsley, I never reached home to see my first wife buried I am sure the Lord and your father are pleased with your decision." [^5]

The mission home in New York, at 273 Gates Avenue, Brooklyn, was a two-story brick home with a large study on the ground floor. Roberts added to the library the theological and Christian history works he had brought across the country, as well as periodical literature he felt to be necessary to intelligent missionary labor.

B. H. Roberts cherished a particular hope to reach descendants of Abraham, those of the covenant promise for restoration in the latter days. "My mission here is to convert the Jews. More Jews live in Brooklyn and New York than anywhere else in the world. I do not want to leave until we have a branch of Jewish converts meeting here." [^6] For forty years Roberts had accumulated an impressive file on Judaism-notes, excerpts, handwritten studies-and the dominant theme was the sensitive recognition of the intimate connection between Jesus as a Jew and the great traditions from the Old Testament Law and Prophets. Christian apologists had supposed that Jesus could only be defensible if he were unique and original, but Roberts knew that the truth was the opposite: one can see Jesus as the full Messiah, the Anointed One, only if he knows the history of the dispensations from Adam and the Patriarchs on, and realizes that the Jehovah of the Old Testament is the Christ of the New Testament. Roberts's dream of a Jewish branch was not fulfilled during his tenure.

319A good deal of travel, mostly by train but sometimes by borrowed auto, was involved in presiding over such an extensive mission, and in his first three months Roberts visited each district from Bangor, Maine to West Virginia. There were branches of the Church in Portland, Bangor, Burlington, Boston, Hartford, New Haven, Brooklyn, Manhattan, Rochester, Buffalo, Albany, Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, D.C., Charleston, Fairmont, and Huntington. All were organized, using local members in leadership. Their resilient growth heartened Roberts. In a letter home he acknowledged that it was "rather strenuous for an old man" to travel over the mission and visit with local leaders as well as interview his entire missionary force and hold three-hour meetings on Saturdays and Sundays. "I find myself very weary after the long summer, but having mastered a world of details I am beginning to feel a little at home with my work and settling down in the harness ready for a long pull and a strong pull which I hope somehow along the road will bring us adequate returns for our labors." [^7]

Wherever he went he said of the task laid upon them by the Master to preach the gospel to all the world: "It confronts us. It must be done; and that without evasion or faltering. Let us perform this duty with manful courage and make it successful." He invited the elders to let him hear their "heart tones through the letter" written each week to give him "the evidence of your faith .... in your reported works and expressed intentions." [^8] "God bless you, fellow servants. I love you, and what's infinitely more and better, God loves you." Routine statistical monitoring of missionary activities was insufficient data for Roberts; these personal letters gave him insight for leadership and a closeness to the young people who served under him.

He never suggested to his missionaries that it was easy to be a missionary.

I would like to create a state of wholesome discontent with our present easy satisfaction. Jesus suffered intensely. So all who have followed him in the work of regeneration have suffered intensely with him in bringing the message of salvation to the world. The intensity of the desire should hurt and make us one with them. It is then that we shall have larger success and more profoundly enioy our mission. [^9]

320Though taxed to the limit by the schedule pressures of his mission presidency and the continuing work of the First Council of the Seventy, Roberts undertook other prodigious tasks. He wrote a new series of tracts which were titled The Lord Hath Spoken and another series Why Mormonism, as well as one called On Tracting. He did much writing at night, the lights burning at full wattage, and distilled some joy. (G. Stanley McAllister recalls, "The light showed under his door until 4 and 5 in the morning.") For sometimes, when alone, one has feelings of the closeness of the Spirit, "in solitude, where we are least alone." [^10] He "tested" these tracts by delivering sermons in the Brooklyn chapel on each of them, inviting the press, the local dignitaries, and the Church membership. He participated with the missionaries in their activities-tracting, street meetings, cottage meetings, and baptisms-and even overtook them in the byways of the counties and joined them in evening meetings in the Connecticut and the Mohawk and the Hudson valleys.

At the approach of the centennial of the Prophet Joseph Smith's first seeing the gold plates, Roberts called a special memorial conference to be held at the Hill Cumorah in western New York. It was a mammoth undertaking. His missionaries were to tract their way to Palmyra "without purse or scrip." His plan for the Cumorah conference was to recapitulate the events of the Restoration: the visits of the Angel Moroni, the Prophet's first beholding the plates in 1823, and the delivery of the plates to him by Moroni in 1827 for the translation and publication of the Book of Mormon. Further, the organization of the Church on April 6, 1830, was to be memorialized along with the First Vision of the young Prophet in the Sacred Grove. For the Sabbath of the three-day conference the focus was on the atonement of Christ and his appearance and message to the Nephites in America after his resurrection. The beginning and the end of the programmatic effect was Christ.

Roberts invited the First Presidency of the Church, and President Heber J. Grant felt impressed to go. Later he wished he had encouraged many others to attend; as it was, "hundreds of Latter-day Saints were present, and over 1500 guests." President Grant brought his wife Augusta Winters and three members of the Council of the Twelve: Rudger Clawson, James E. Talinage and Joseph Fielding Smith. Each took an important part in the three days of meetings. Of the service held on September 23, President Grant said:

321I cannot remember when my heart has been more stirred; and when I have had my affection called out to the Lord more perfectly than upon the occasion when Brother Roberts uttered that prayer in the Sacred Grove, where the Lord God Almighty and Jesus Christ our Redeemer, had appeared and conversed with the boy Joseph Smith, afterward the Prophet of the Living God. [^11]

On the summit of the Hill Cumorah, Roberts painted a verbal picture of the Jaredite and Nephite civilizations, which ended so tragically in battles of extermination. "He made events come alive with the use of beautiful and expressive language." [^12] The continual drizzle on the assembly of seven thousand people did not dampen their spirits. For Roberts, a gratifying result of the memorial conference was the news release in the Rochester Herald. The editor wrote:

Unfolding like some graphic panorama of the past, epic in implications and dramatic in content, the story of an ancient civilization that peopled the plains and hills in this vicinity was the chief topic of discussion before the Centennial Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints today. Reaching so far back into the dim yesterdays of history, back to days more than twenty-five hundred years ago, this story came with a strange emphasis in the very places where its climaxes and denouements are supposed to have been reached. The narrative is the very basis of Mormon theology, and belief, and leads directly up to the revelation given through Joseph Smith of the foundations of the Mormon Church. [^13]

The speakers at the Conference told the story with the simplicity and directness of a Norse Saga. When point after point of the drama of the lost tribes, of their rise to a great civilization and of their final downfall in the bitterness of war was related, those not conversant with the tale were gripped and fascinated by the strangeness of the recital, and when a speaker [Roberts] dramatically pointed to the earth and mentioned that upon the very spot where he stood some of the epic events might have taken place there was a decided thrill to being there. [^14]

In a letter to Celia, Roberts wrote that the publication of these two paragraphs by a non-Mormon newspaper justified the entire effort.

322On the evening of the first day of the three-day conference, Roberts had a series of nervous chills which alarmed his secretary, though Roberts said it was "just a cold." Some of the brethren present administered to him. His fever broke and he improved somewhat. The next morning a physician checked him carefully and then soberly announced, as a complete surprise to Roberts, that he had a "dreaded and incurable disease"- diabetes. Though ordered to bed for several days, Roberts insisted upon addressing the Hill Cumorah gathering and spoke for over an hour the next afternoon. The last morning Elder LeRoi C. Snow substituted for Roberts by reading Roberts's paper on the destruction of the ancient nations in America-the Book of Mormon warning to the gentile nations occupying the land. It concluded, "These prophetic warnings are to our nation, the United States of America ... one of the most important messages of the Book of Mormon to the modern world." In the afternoon Sister LaPreal Jones delivered Roberts's carefully written text, "Christ in the Book of Mormon," which centered around the theme that this "fifth gospel" was not just to be added to but to authenticate, clarify and revivify the four Gospels of the New Testament, to "increase the witnesses of God that Jesus is the Christ, the eternal God, manifesting himself to all nations as the Savior of the world and the Savior of men individually that dwell therein." [^15]

Roberts voiced his vision that this commemoration might become an annual affair, so that in time "the eyes of the world would look toward this spot." Within five years, Wayne Driggs, who served as a missionary under Roberts, wrote the script for the Hill Cumorah pageant. Now over a hundred thousand gather each summer to relive the events memorialized at that first conference.

Ashen and ill, Roberts was encouraged by President Grant to return to Salt Lake. Dr. Charles F. Wilcox met him at the train station and within an hour administered insulin, which had just that year come into medical use. Roberts remained bedfast in Centerville for several weeks. His summary of being cared for by Celia, Margaret, and his daughters is a novelty in his biographical notes:

323In the days that followed, the loving care and rest afforded me by my family was sweet. I was grateful for the relaxation and sense of security which all accorded to me. Gradually I began to be restored to normal conditions except that I appeared emaciated and weak. In the course of a few weeks, however, I mustered the strength and courage to return to my field of labor as if there had been no break in health.

The effects of the disease would trouble him the rest of his days: blurred vision, especially when blood sugar ran high (he compensated by burning high wattage lights), sudden lapses into exhaustion, recurrent burning thirst (helped by drinking "charged"-carbonated-water) and a dangerous slowing of circulation and a resulting numbness in his limbs. "Thank God you can feel pain," he said to afflicted people in his later years, "it means you are alive." Amputation was the spectre that he well knew might await him as the disease progressed.

Before his return in mid-October, Roberts dictated identical letters to all of the missionaries in the Eastern States, enclosing printed copies of President Grant's account of the conference and also the typescript excerpts from the Rochester Herald.

Roberts became senior President of the First Council of the Seventy in 1924 and was preoccupied for the final decade of his life with upgrading the quality of preparation, learning, and missionary zeal among the quorums of seventy throughout the Church.

When he was ready to return to Brooklyn, Celia again felt physically unable to move to New York, though she felt the old emotional sting at being left behind. Roberts then asked his sister Polly (Mrs. Mary Day) to be a matron in the mission home, but her health too was failing. Though several of his daughters were able and willing to come (Adah, Hot-tense, Georgia), he could not feel justified in uprooting their husbands and families for an indeterminate absence. The wise choice became clear to all of them: now that Roberts was diabetic and dependent upon medical care, Margaret, an expert physician, would close her clinic and be with Roberts to care for him. It took Celia a day to muffle her own disappointment and come to peace over this decision. In the next three years Roberts visited Celia three times.

324An anecdotal history of his mission presidency indicates that at times he increased rather than eased the burden on the young missionaries by stalling letters from home, delaying the monthly checks from parents "to test their faith," censuring parents who sent more than forty dollars a month, and insisting on summer country work as a form of spiritual shock treatment. He was firm in rebuke and sparing in praise-"excellence may be noted and moderately praised, but benefits will naturally arise chiefly from having defects in matter and manner pointed out." [^16]

Roberts believed in hard, long, active fasting and prayer vigils for all the missionaries. He believed in patient forbearance with his missionaries, and hoped that the spirit life, though seemingly a stillborn seed, would at some time assert its power and gain its victory as it had in his own life. "He hated ignorance," Elder John Emmett recalled. "He just loved anyone who would get in and work and produce and try to better himself." He counseled his missionaries to "be definite and let the distinctiveness of your message stand out in bold relief. Make clear the difference between your faith and that of the false systems of religion in the world."

The New York mission home in that period was not just a residence for the mission president's family. It was an embassy and the prime nerve center of the Church membership in the area, pending the organization of stakes. B. H. Roberts and his wife Margaret gave an atmosphere to the home that teenacted their own personalities. It became "a spiritual and cultural center." [^17] Margaret provided Roberts with better care than he'd ever had before; she administered his insulin shots before meals and ran interference while for the first time in his life he napped after lunch. Together they set up morning and evening devotionals, complete with music, scriptures pre-selected and memorized, and prayer, for the staff which usually numbered from six to ten. It became a custom at the table for Roberts, following dessert, to give a brief account of one of his many colorful experiences. Other table talk was structured for participation from the young missionaries. They were encouraged not just to discuss the gospel and mission events but also current events, New York Times editorials, and international issues. Very often there were Church dignitaries visiting with them in the mission home on their way to and from other assignments. [^18]

325 Managing the busy mission home was a new experience for Margaret, though she was no stranger to sustained labor and long hours. She had the aid of a full-time cook, and Roberts chose missionary sisters who were congenial. "All that pleased her was precious to me," he later wrote. Her lasting impact in the mission home was as a mother and counselor, a woman distinguished in her own medical profession, and an able speaker. She taught the young people: "A woman is no better than her husband. So if you are truly wise you will see that your husband becomes someone in the image of Christ." She also instructed: "Keep abreast of your husband's work. Learn to be a congenial listener."

On rare weekends, when the crush of detail and crisis made solitude impossible and when Margaret's unending labor in the mission home took her beyond her strength, the president would take her to the Waldorf-Astoria for a rest. Even there Roberts himself rested little, spending the hours working on revisions of the book version of the Americana series, sifting through his notes on Book of Mormon antiquities, and preparing sermons. Sometimes he was able to take Margaret with him when he travelled.

326Of himself, he said, "I am... stern, obdurate"-and most of his missionaries agreed. On every letterhead was inscribed "a mission in the Eastern States means absolute consecration of oneself to the service of God and his fellow men, with all folly, light mindedness and sin eliminated." This strict and unceasing discipline President Roberts tried to inculcate in the Eastern States Mission school which he held five times during his presidency for four to six weeks at a time. Attendance at the school was voluntary, even though his letter of invitation seemed almost a warning. In capital letters he set the tone: "INTENSIVE WORK, expenses to ABSOLUTE MINIMUM, A WILLINGNESS to be criticized sharply and corrected as to your exercises, general work appearance, and conduct." In the mission course section on the qualifications of missionaries is found a document autobiographical and revelatory of Roberts's own aspirations and struggles. His list of qualifications for a missionary is derived largely from the Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 4, and from the New Testament. But he added practical counsel from his experience as to what these qualifications meant-indeed, what it meant to be chosen of God. "You are divine sparks struck from the white anvil of God," he said, when infusing the missionaries with a sense of God's love for them and their potential. Doctrine and Covenants section 12 contains the second grouping of qualities needed. Later Roberts refined his notes on missionary qualifications in the article, "The Mormon Missionary," printed in the Improvement Era. [^19]

To these five mission schools held during Roberts's presidency, an average of fifty to seventy-five came each time. The first one was in 1924; there were two in 1925, one in the spring of 1926, and one just after the New Year in 1927. Practical application of the fundamentals of teaching and speaking rounded out Roberts's curriculum. He would take twenty or thirty elders at a time out into what he called "crowded thoroughfares" for on-the-job training in teaching and speaking. [^20] Pittsburgh, Baltimore, Albany, Boston, Portland, Charleston, Hartford, and New York were street scenes for his instruction in proselyting. An advance notice in a Boston newspaper, for example, brought two hundred people to the corner of Washington and Tremont Street to listen amidst the din and bustle for two and a half hours to Roberts's discourse on "The Meaning of Divine Intervention in Our Time." Civic holidays gave his themes patriotic definition; "America Is a Land of Promise," "The Need of True Americanism," and "A Land Choice Above All Other Lands" were some of his addresses. A thousand people heard the last of these in downtown Brooklyn from the steps of city hall.

His hopes for these missionary schools are clear in his printed Final Word:

327You ask me for a final word to the school. It is the hardest thing you could have required of me. Not that there is nothing more to be said to you, but because there is so much to say, and I have a deep desire to say all of it in the parting word you would have me speak. I am painfully conscious that this that I would say cannot be said. I find myself, I think, very much in the condition that Paul declared himself to be in when he said: "My little children, I travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you." Not, however, that like him I am in "doubt" of "my children."

But anxiety is always inseparably connected with every phase of parenthood, natural or assumed. And that is what the members of this school and of this mission have become to me-"my children" - my sons and daughters in Christ; and I have the anxiety for you that naturally follows such a consciousness of this relationship, and its responsibility.

My anxiety is for your success in your ministry; and I know that success will not be assured to you until that "mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus." Hence, "I travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you." That completely done my anxiety will merge into joy, for I shall know that the connection needful for all reasonable success will have been made. You will then be united with God and that spells safety as well as success. That means you will be in fellowship with God, with Christ, who is God-the One and Only perfect Teacher; and with Him as your Friend and Teacher I can, with confidence, leave you for future and further development. That has been the sum of my efforts in this school-to lead you into a consciousness of the presence in you of a teacher infinitely greater than I-greater than any man-greater than all men. Have I succeeded? Let each heart answer for himself.

I do not know; and can not know until your ministry and life reveals it. The one word of farewell, and love that can convey to you at once my highest wish for you, my deepest wish, is our word, EMMANUEL: God be with you, and in you, now and forever more. [^21]

The response of his missionaries to this concentrated six weeks was rarely superficial. "It was here," writes one, "that the doctrines of the church were first presented to me in their grandeur." "I learned to love the truth and scorn hearsay and loose thinking and talking and to preach the Gospel as it is found in the standard works of the church," writes another. "I remember," writes a third, "being impressed with his explanation of the personality of God and his reconciliation of the scriptures on that doctrine. His thinking was very logical." [^22] Another adds, "We did not have the maturity to fully appreciate our contact with him."

328A consequence of the personal relationship forged between President Roberts and his various missionaries is seen in their loyalty. At this writing, those who served under Roberts still meet annually to commemorate their time under his direction. His influence on their speaking styles, modes of leadership, scholarly preoccupations, and even personal habits is also apparent.

In September 1926, twenty-seven years after the traumatic Tennessee massacre, B. H. Roberts was a guest of Bernard Moses in Baltimore, Maryland, on Rosh Hashanah, the Hebrew New Year. To commemorate the friendship, in December of 1931 he would present to Bernard Moses a copy of volume five of A Comprehensive History of the Church, with the inscription, "I was given insight into that festival spirit - Family, Union and Reunion, Israel's unit of life since the dispersion."

Earlier, on June 14, 1926, Sister Alda Fugal brought to Roberts a copy of the Redeemed Hebrew, written and published as a monthly organ of Jewish-Christian influence by Abraham Silverstein in Rochester, New York. In this issue Silverstein had posed the question, "Who will defend Jesus Christ before Rabbi Rasha?" This Canadian rabbi had written a tart reply to a booklet of Silverstein's, a reply Silver-stein then printed.

[Roberts] looked up from Rasha's letter which I had handed him [reprinted in the Redeemed Hebrew] and exclaimed, "Sister Fugal, this is a Godsend. All my life I have desired to give this message to the Jews and have compiled material on it but the proper time had not arrived. Now I will answer."

329Roberts's first article reached Silverstein by December, 1926; it was immediately published. Roberts wrote two more and Silverstein published them; but after the first article, Roberts became embroiled in hard, textual analysis of Isa. 26:19: "Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise." The learned Hebrew objected that, in the first place, "thy dead" is all the Hebrew means and there is no such meaning as "with my dead body shall arise." [^23] The Hebrew word simply means "corpse." Roberts answered from eight different commentaries, including the highly esteemed Authorized Version. Then he argued from the context and the text that Jehovah was to become incarnate-taber-nacled in the flesh-and have a body; that Jehovah was in a real body to suffer the pains of all men and to die; and that Jehovah was to be raised from the dead-and with him many of his ancient Saints were to be raised from the dead.

A Binghampton philanthropist was so moved by the articles that he volunteered to publish a million copies of each of the first and second, to be distributed throughout New York. Roberts simultaneously had tens of thousands printed for his missionaries as tracts. These tracts were disseminated throughout the United States and western Europe, and were then reprinted in the Millennial Star in England. Finally they were printed as a book, Rasha the Jew.

Roberts met Silverstein not long after at a Rochester conference. At his home they talked "like two brothers coming out of amnesia." Abraham Silverstein had been born in Bulgaria and had been taught in childhood to despise Jesus. At age nineteen he underwent the soul journey from Sinai to Calvary, became a Congregationalist, and emigrated to America. He married a student missionary and began in 1907 to travel throughout Europe, especially Syria, where he and his wife established twenty-three congregations before World War I. He and Roberts were thrilled with each other, and Silverstein dubbed Roberts "that grand old Christian Spartan." He set up a meeting featuring Roberts in his Plymouth Congregational Church for Monday, March 7, 1927, and printed circulars announcing the meeting under the title, "Do You Wish the World to Go Mormon?" (In the same series he also invited a Christian Scientist, a spiritualist, and a Mohammedan.) That meeting cost Silverstein his pastorate.

330Soon he began sending copies of the Book of Mormon to interested rabbis and fellow Christians and became notorious and suspect as a "Mormon sympathizer." He was denied his pulpit and shortly the Depression ate up his savings. On Christmas night of 1935 his uninsured home burned to the ground. He lost his printing plant, and the sponsors who might have helped establish another abandoned him. He could not even get a hearing as a visiting pastor. But he worked his way back to solvency and the care of his wife and six children. Roberts did not live to witness the sequel. On February 5, 1937, Silverstein wrote to Alda Gardner of his gratitude for "the important change in my spiritual life [that came] through your ministration and kindness," and ends:

And now we will wait and see what the Quorum [^24] will pronounce... the answer will in no way influence me with regard to my faith, opinion and determination with reference to the True Gospel. The eighteen million Jews in the world are now riper for the presentation of the Gospel than at any other time in the history of the world. Europe especially presents the greatest opportunity as does Palestine, where the Jews have been greatly persecuted and through that been made more receptive. [^25]

The name of Adolph Hitler was becoming known in America, but Roberts and Silverstein would be in their graves before the horrifying Holocaust and the exodus of world Jews to Palestine. The regathering had only commenced.

Toward the end of his five-year stint as mission president, Roberts wrote, "Mere administrative work, if I confined myself to that, would not be so laborious," [^26] but he had also written thirteen tracts (including a tract On Tracttrig), had reprinted three of his books with revisions and proofreading (The Gospel, Outlines of Ecclesiastical History, and New Witnesses), had held five mission schools, and in the midst of all had prepared his Rasha Jewish tracts which were now being pulled together into book form. As usual his work load was prodigious.

331Where Roberts could not be present to speak to the Church membership in the mission he composed long epistles to them which were consciously modeled on Paul's. "What beautiful spiritual forces may be applied by a little thoughtfulness in writing." [^27] Addressing these epistles to "the saints at Cumorah" or "to the saints at West Virginia," Roberts dubbed them his "pastoral letters" and requested that they be read in all Church congregations on specified Sundays. The letters reflect his grasp of contemporary issues as well as the roots of authentic spiritual reassurance. His climaxes were usually a prayerful expression of thanksgiving-in this Joseph Smith was his model rather than Paul-rhapsodic reviews of reasons to rejoice. He had a gift for the memorable phrase. He signed mission letters "Emmanuel" and personal letters "Mizpah"-a motto. He renamed and titled his struggling missionaries. Ambassadors was a term of praise for all who served well. Across the ordination certificate of young elders whom he ordained as seventies, he wrote in a large hand, "Knighted in the Field."

As matron of the mission, Margaret was in charge of the twenty-five Relief Society organizations in the mission. She often attended conferences with her husband and with his encouragement "took a big part" in speaking to members. [^28]

For such a meeting, in March 1926, Roberts took Margaret to Fairmont, West Virginia. The night before the Sabbath she had a prescient dream that her time was near. During a Sunday conference session, Margaret, who was seventy-six, was stricken with a cold and a deep cough, and she recognized the seriousness of these symptoms.

She and her husband returned in haste by Pullman car to Brooklyn, where Elizabeth Skolfield, Elsa Cook, and Luella B. Owen, young missionary sisters to whom she had taught some nursing skills, assisted in her care. A doctor confirmed her own diagnosis: acute pneumonia. He ordered her to the hospital. She refused. He remonstrated without effect; in fact, neither Margaret nor President Roberts even considered it. They had a quiet firm agreement that she would spend her last hours in the "old mission home."

Just after midnight, on March 13, Roberts's birthday, Margaret called the sisters to her bed and counseled them on the management of the mission affairs and the disposition of a little jewelry and a keepsake or two, and gave them personal messages to be relayed to loved ones. Roberts stayed constantly at her bedside; the sisters rotated. At 6:30 A.M. Margaret said to Sister Skolfield, "Elizabeth, when life has been hard for me, I've always sung 'I Know That My Redeemer Lives'; will you sing this-for me?"

332I knelt down by her and took her hands and sang it through. Only my Heavenly Father could have brought it to my mind. And then President Roberts sang it through once more with me. It was so soft and peaceful. Then she told me to bring the drink, so I flew down and finished the boiling (she had told me to bring two cups up). I brought them up and told President Roberts, "This is what Sister Roberts wants." Hers was too hot, so I knelt down, took her in my arms, and put the cup to her lips. But she looked at me and died. I said to President Roberts, "She has just died." I laid her down and sat for a few moments while he told me he knew she was going to die and she knew she was; they had talked about it several weeks before. But he didn't think it would come so soon. [^29]

Before an hour passed Roberts dictated a letter to his missionaries:

Her life was one of mingled great joys and great and deep sorrow;... every experience that can come to mortals came to her, and in acutest forms. She well earned the rest, which I am sure is hers, and great peace. In this hour I shall not think of what I have lost, but I remember God's goodness to me in giving me such a companion for more than thirty-six years. She has been friend, pal, and sweetheart-wife all through those years, never faltering in her integrity and love for me. Surely God was good to me when he brought us together. I shall never fail in my gratitude to him for her and her sweet, pure love. Peace to her ashes. I know her spirit is, or will be, with God who gave it. [^30]

While Roberts was in Salt Lake City for Margaret's burial, he visited with President Grant, who chose not to release Roberts from his mission presidency. [^31] Instead, at the end of April he came to the East with his wife Augusta and, while fulfilling other Church assignments, spent many hours with Roberts to heal wounds and offer familial counsel. [^32]

Roberts did not consider taking Celia east with him when he returned to the mission field; her heart condition had all but disabled her. Nor did he ask any of the family to join him; he planned to finish his presidency dependent only upon the missionary staff. A year later, leaving Salt Lake once again, he wrote Celia, revealing his haste and his emotional burden:

Salt Lake City April 1st, 1927

My Dear Celia-

Please find enclosed the usual check for current month.

Called back from Los Angeles on some special church business; but am leaving Saturday for field of Labor in New York.

333Have been excused from Conference as it is constant torture to have one's wounds opened afresh by nearly every one who meets you. The very kindness of those one meets .... I find it necessary to see as few people as possible and so I am going to say good bye to you by this note, as it will be barely possible to get things done I have to do before starting East.

So good bye Dear, for now, take as good care of yourself as you can. Love to you and to all our group. They may be assured I love them.

As always, Father [^33]

At this time his daughter Georgia offered to join and assist him in New York until his tenure ended. He said "No, thank you" and from New York wrote a letter explaining why:

I can carry on, with their [mission staff] assistance until I have finished my course in the mission field.

When that "finish" will come, I haven't an idea, all I can say is that my affairs are very unsettled, and may take a turn anytime leaving me to return to such activities as may be required of me among the organized stakes in Utah and the West. Of course, I know that I will always have to work. The calm age of a retired old gentleman with leisure on my hands to do just the things I would like to do, has long since gone glimmering, and for me it is work to the end. My work here in the Mission is really more congenial to me than work would be in the stakes of the West where so much is done it seems to me almost unnecessary to do! But always I shall leave that to the determination of such fate as may befall me, without any effort to control it; and this, perhaps, you may think strange.

334I have always had profound admiration for men who took their own destiny in their hands and shaped it to some definite end, and while both believing in and admiring that course and that sort of character, no one within my acquaintance has been more neglectful of it than I have been; and allowed chance, or providence, or what you may call it [to] whirl me along the line I have followed. Sometimes I have been tempted to think that there was a Divinity that shaped my ends, at other times I have reproved myself for thinking that I could be of enough importance to have "Divinity" take any interest in me or have anything special for me to do in the great economy of His universe. I feel like putting my hand over my mouth and my face down in the dust with humiliation that I allowed such a thought to take possession of my mind; but such thought has come at various times, and I have followed what has seemed to me to be the Light that has from time to time given me direction. It is too late now to change all that, and try to direct my own course. The bulk of life has passed. There are but just a few years in which to go on.

Fortunately, or unfortunately, I know their number and I know the day the end will come. I tell you this, my dear Daughter, so that when the matter happens you will know I knew of it. But I will ask you to keep it in confidence, and someday I will tell you the time. I am asking my stenographer, who is writing this for me, to hold this item in confidence. [^34] I did not intend to say this when I started this dictation. I have confidence in her that she will do what I ask.

This letter sheds light on Roberts's urgent literary pressures in this period: his Americana series on the history of the Church had never been published in book form; his analysis of the Book of Mormon needed rewriting; he wanted to pull together all of his doctrinal writings in one inclusive volume. Preoccupied with these projects, he delegated more and more mission work to secretaries and assistants. He reduced supervisory meetings to the bare minimum and withdrew at all hours into his den or into the New York Public Library to read, write, and take notes. "I am a hermit," he acknowledged in a letter home.

This compounded the feeling of some of his missionaries that he was "all business," distant, formidable. Members of the congregation in Brooklyn too were finding him even more unreachable. He was cold, they said; he did not go around shaking hands; he bolted from Church services. They called a meeting to express their concerns and he was asked to come. Before anyone else could speak, Roberts arose and said:

335Brethren and Sisters. I am so guilty of the things which trouble you. I am not cold but I know I appear at times indifferent. In all my life I have had little time for play or for pleasant times to cultivate friendships. But I love the Lord. And I do not love you less. I am writing every free minute I have. I have much to do before I die. Please forgive me and know that I am your humble servant. Good night. [^35]

At the end of May 1927, Roberts had made a special trip to Salt Lake City to dedicate the Mormon Battalion Monument. Back in 1915 the governor had appointed him chairman of the Mormon Battalion Commission to select a site, raise the funds, and prepare the dedication program for the monument. For the formal program and souvenir brochure dated May 30, 1927, Roberts wrote an account of the monument and a history of the Battalion itself, a digest of its book form, The Mormon Battalion: Its History and Achievements. It was published by the Deseret News in 1919 to spur sentiment in favor of the monument. President Grant gave Roberts the full support and sanction of the Church, including two opportunities to plead for financial aid in general conference. [^36]

The original impetus for the monument had come in 1905 through the daughters of the men of the Mormon Battalion. Even while he was presiding over the Eastern States Mission, Roberts organized committees throughout the state of Utah and set about raising one hundred thousand dollars, which the state appropriation required in order to secure matching funds. As so often with the passing of time, costs increased, and in 1925 Roberts was under the necessity of mounting a second campaign for funds. He personally solicited prominent and wealthy men throughout the state and utilized the faithful 145th Utah Artillery Band, which was at the time in national service. In the end, some fifteen thousand people contributed. Gilbert Riswold, a sculptor, was commissioned. Ground-breaking took place in April of 1924, and the cornerstone was laid almost exactly a year later.

Roberts was a natural choice to spearhead the monument project, for he saw the Battalion as an extension of America's manifest destiny-the opening of a national highway to the Pacific, the discovery of gold, and assistance in the development of settlements in the Great Basin. He compares the Battalion with the "men of Concord-men of the same race, of like spirit-Americans all!" [^37]

336Roberts's address at the unveiling was, it appears, a bit startling. "In a manner that was quite unexpected," one account reports, "Roberts showed that the enrollment of the Mormon Battalion was desired by Brigham Young and the Church leaders as much, if not more than by the government." [^38]

In addition to traveling to Salt Lake for the monument dedication, Roberts made other trips-though to nearby destinations: the Joseph Smith birthplace in Vermont, the Sacred Grove, and Palmyra, New York. From missionary reports of these pilgrimages, his typical pursuit was the top of a hill or mountain, a place felt to be consecrated, a natural temple instructive of the nature of temples. At one such spot, above Joseph Smith's birthplace in Vermont, Roberts said to his mission secretary Elder Henry D. Taylor, "Let us prepare ourselves for prayer by recalling from sacred writ many of the places where manifestations of Christ came to mortal men atop mountains." Through the exact wording of the Testaments and modern revelation, Roberts then recalled Adam-ondi-Ahman, Enoch's confrontation with the Lord, Abraham's ascent of Mount Moriah, Moses amidst thunder and lightnings on Mount Sinai, and Christ on the Mount of Transfiguration with his chosen three, and again on the Mount of Olives. He ended with the glorious visitation of the Father and the Son to the Prophet Joseph in a grove near Palmyra, and of the Son in the Kirtland Temple.

Elder Taylor was asked to pray first as they knelt. Then Roberts, who observed that "all the prayers given of God are brief," undertook a long epic prayer, an "ecstatic review" of the life and ministry of the ancient prophets, Christ himself, and of his modern prophets.

As he prayed his voice choked with emotion, tears filled his eyes, and a glow came into his face; his snow-white hair waved in the gentle breeze. As he continued pouring out his soul to the Lord, the veil grew very thin. Surely the Lord was near. [^39]

337Only three days before the final announcement of his release from the mission presidency, and while en route to general conference, Roberts wrote a letter to his mission family, beginning it "My Dear Children." Traveling over familiar landscapes by train to Salt Lake spurred many old recollections. He wrote:

I have held each of you in thought many times enroute, pictured you at our family devotions and in pleasant evening gatherings in the dear old home. There is no use denying our headquarters are more home to me than any I have had for many years. I love it and its inmates. Uphold its standards and revere its spirit, I pray you. [^40]

338Though released, Roberts returned to New York after April general conference with Elder George Albert Smith of the Council of the Twelve and shortly thereafter welcomed his successor, President Henry H. Rolapp. From May 3 to May 31 he transferred the affairs of the mission to President Rolapp's direction. A missionary bulletin of May 31 indicated Roberts's immediate plans: "He will remain in the East where he will have access to the large libraries, and where he will devote his time to the writing of another book."

Notes

Chapter 16

1 Deseret News, 10 May 1922.

2 B. H. Roberts to Georgia Roberts, 31 July and 7 September 1922.

3 Recollections of Georgia Roberts, Oral interview with author, September 1967.

4 Heber J. Grant to Ben E. Roberts, 18 May 1923.

5 Job Hemsley to Truman G. Madsen, 12 November 1969.

6 Statement to the author by Dr. Harvey Fletcher, then a branch president in New York and physicist with Bell Laboratories.

7 B. H. Roberts to his son Harold, 1922, Roberts Family Collection.

8 History of Eastern States Mission, 1922, Church Archives, p. 756.

9 Ibid., October 1922, p. 747.

10 See Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, canto 3, stanza 15.

11 See President Grant's opening remarks at general conference, Conference Report, October 1923.

12 Ethel Sonntag (former missionary of Roberts) to Truman G. Madsen, 4 May 1966.

13 Rochester Herald, 23 September 1923.

14 Roberts read this paragraph of the article into the conference record, Conference Report, October 1923, p. 90.

15 "Christ in the Book of Mormon," Improvement Era 27 (January 1924): 188-92.

16 Seventy's Course in Theology, 1:5. In testimony meetings if an elder spoke too long President Roberts simply clapped his hands once, and that meant "sit down." And one recalcitrant missionary who wanted to go home was brought in to the mission home for Roberts to "encourage him." At the dinner table Roberts explained: "I know his old father. It would break his heart if his son were released early. I'll break his neck before I'll send him."

17 BN, p. 466.

18 For instance, President Heber J. Grant, Anthony W. Ivins, Charles W. Penrose, Melvin J. Ballard, Rey L. Pratt, and David O. McKay all called. Prominent students in colleges and universities in the area also visited; for example, J. Orville Ellsworth in economics at Cornell, Dr. Thomas A. Clawson in medicine at Johns Hopkins, Gustire O. Larson at the new School of Social Research. There was also a sort of Mormon colony of artists in or near New York with whom Roberts kept personal touch: T. Earl Pardoe in drama; LeRoy Robertson, a composer; Hazel Dawn, an actress; Moroni Olsen, an actor; Florence Jepperson at the New England Conservatory of Music in Boston; and Margaret Romaine, who sang contralto with the Metropolitan Opera.

19 Improvement Era 31 (May 1928): 547-51.

20 Reported in Conference Report, October 1905.

21 Eastern States Mission Papers, Elsa Cook Collection.

22 Ethel L. Sonntag to Truman G. Madsen, 4 May 1966.

23 In the eventual book, Roberts included a whole chapter on messianic prophecies from the Old Testament-Shem and Abraham, Balaam, Jacob and Judah, Isaiah, Malachi, Moses-and showed the parallels between the life of Moses and the life of Christ, leading into the twofold mission of the Messiah. See chapter 4. Then he offered the Jews the new testimony of Jesus as contained in "their own book," the Book of Mormon, and recounted the visit of Orson Hyde to Israel in 1842 and his dedicatory prayer. There is also a treatise on the names of God.

24 "The Quorum" meant the Council of the Twelve Apostles. Silver-stein had requested that simultaneous with his baptism he be given a missionary call to Jerusalem to work with the Jewish people. Conditions there, in his family, and in the Church prevented the call.

25 Alda Fugal Gardner to Truman G. Madsen, 25 February 1970.

26 B. H. Roberts to Georgia Roberts, 9 March 1927.

27 B. H. Roberts to Bishop James Walton, 25 August 1930, in author's possession.

28 In February 1926 Margaret had reorganized the Relief Society in Washington, D.C., appointing wives of Congressmen William H. King, Ernest L. Wilkinson (later president of Brigham Young University) and Don B. Colton.

29 Elizabeth Hinckley (nee Skolfield) to Truman G. Madsen, 6 March 1966.

30 Elsa Aiwohi stenciled this note on the morning of 13 March 1926. A letter from Elizabeth Hinckley containing this information was sent to Truman G. Madsen on 28 October 1967.

31 An account of the brief memorial service for Margaret in New York was published in the Deseret Evening News, 20 March 1926.

32 Elizabeth Hinckley to Truman G. Madsen, 6 March 1966.

33 This letter preserved by Georgia Roberts is now in author's possession.

34 Elsa Cook, the stenographer, did keep the confidence.

35 Elizabeth Hinckley to Truman G. Madsen, 15 September 1969.

36 See Conference Report, April 1920.

37 For a succinct summary of the impact of the Mormon Battalion on American history, see a one-page article in the Improvement Era 35 (July 1932): 521.

38 Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine (July 1927): 98-99.

39 Henry D. Taylor to Truman G. Madsen, 9 December 1965.

40 Letter written 13 March 1927. On 17 October 1927 he wrote: "How does it seem to be home? Well, I awake to find that I have no home, nor do I expect one. Home feeling is a past phase of life for me, and henceforth .... Self-exiled Harold is likely to be my doom. Nothing seems natural here. I am not co-ordinated yet. Have been attending funerals mostly since returning."

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
[^23] 23 Mrs. William Reed to Ann Roberts.
[^24] 24 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^25] 25 Late in their lives, on 3 May 1928, B. H. and Annie Brynie, a half-sister, and Mary arranged for the temple sealing of Ann Everington and Benjamin Roberts and all of the children including the twins and baby Thomas. See BHR Temple Book.
[^26] 26 Roberts kept one sample of his father's handwriting from the original wrapping of the photo given his mother. It is preserved in the family collection.
[^27] 27 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 1 September 1883, Roberts Family Collection.
[^28] 28 Research has failed to establish where and when Ben died. The marriage date is 15 June 1848 (he was twenty-two) in Poplar, Middlesex, England; from the Book of Remembrance of Haven R. Day.
[^29] 29 B. H. Roberts to Ann Everington, 21 April 1880, Roberts Family Collection.
[^30] 30 Mrs. Charles H. Wilcox recorded these impressions from a conversation with B.H. Roberts at his home prior to his call to the Eastern States.
[^31] 31 BN, p. 10.
[^32] 32 See Juvenile Instructor 49 (February 1914): 85.
[^33] 33 Fifty years later, as chairman of "Vocations and Industry" in the youth program of the Church, he wrote, "We shall take the ground that no vocation of honest industry need be ignoble or debasing in its effects, but by properly correlating it with the general welfare of human life can be in effect both honorable and glorious." Improvement Era 15 (October 1912): 1083.
[^34] 34 Liahona 12 (20 October 1914): 364.
[^35] 35. Salt Lake Herald, 8 January 1899.
[^36] 36. So Roberts later told his children.
[^37] 37. BNG, p. 8.
[^38] 38 See History of Utah, 4:689.
[^39] 39 In a notebook under "Roberts, B. H." is this handwritten note: "Warrington-Town of, my birth place. Warrington, at the head of tide water on the Mersey River. It was a station of Romans (Veraterium) in the time of Agricola - (69-84 A.D.) and many Roman relics have been found in the neighborhood."
[^40] 40 Beniamin's father's brother.
