Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

17 "The Truth, the Way, the Life"

Now began Roberts's last major effort to systematize his doctrinal writings under the title: "The Truth, the Way, the Life." For the next six months he did almost nothing else. He lived alone at 380 Riverside Drive, overlooking the Hudson River, in New York City, and followed a strenuous routine. He arose at 5:00 A.M., collected notes and wrote outlines for two hours as he worked on what he intended to be the climax of his doctrinal writing-"crystallizing practically all my thought, research, and studies in the doctrinal line of the Church." He was then served a heavy breakfast, being required by medical decree to eat balanced, regular meals as well as to take daily tests for sugar content in his blood half an hour before meals. After breakfast he donned a dark striped morning coat, derby hat, and gray gloves, then, cane in hand, took a "constitutional" (exercising) walk up and down along the Hudson. At 9:00 A.M. his typist came for dictation, which was given as he paced up and down. Elsa Cook was his secretary, as she had been at the mission home. But now she sensed new resolve and concentration in Roberts. Some days he would dictate with hardly a pause for four consecutive hours.

A notebook from this period says, "Sometimes when I have come to my work empty, I have suddenly become full." Such flashes of writing insight brought distinct excitement to his labor rathe calm excitement of the Spirit which he so cherished. [^1]

At the same time he was plagued by diabetic fatigue. Loneliness, restlessness, and impatience with a too-slow project compounded the struggle to gain creative composure. There were also bouts with depression.

For a lifetime Roberts wrestled for self-understanding and for control of his "sombre hue," or what George Q. Cannon called Roberts's "gloomy spells." Whether these had a physiological or a psychological base, or both, is not clear. He knew it was more than a mood; but he would not ever allow that it was a disposition. At times he supposed his "black dog" was an inheritance from his mother. [^2] He occasionally had, as she had, headaches, perhaps migraine, which led to vertigo that "drives me nearly wild." On these occasions he could hardly move from his bed.

Sometimes melancholy had immediate and observable stimuli, as when, while on a conference assignment in Manti, he heard two women's voices singing sweet but sad songs from a nearby home "that had the effect of arousing all the melancholy of my soul." Once, while he was in a restaurant in the Mormon colonies of Juarez, Mexico, the presence of a poor, deformed waiter so touched him that he lost his appetite and wept in helpless compassion. Again, when he was thirty-six (and had forgotten it was his birthday that day) he wrote in his journal that he did not expect to live to be three score and ten and that "sad thoughts come whenever I think about this." In other letters he speaks of the "spirit of sadness" coming over him inexplicably "like a cloud over the summer sun." And he elsewhere speculates, saying it is "all unaccountable" and that "I think it is caused by loneliness and comes in fact by a desire for companionship." Yet he sometimes adds that there is "a sweetness about it that is almost pleasant."

340Whatever depression's sources, and whenever it came, he tried to withdraw from others, including his loved ones, to spare them the proxy torment. His long nature walks in the canyons and foothills of Centerville (or in the surrounding greenery of Vermont), or now in the steel and concrete canyons of New York, were prompted by more than his consuming love of nature. In addition, his mode of coping was a combination of driving will, immersion in physical and, more remarkable, mental work with focus that was always fierce and sometimes desperate, and above all persistent, dogged faith in the living God.

This passage is autobiographical:

Standing in the midst of all the varied seekers after truth, is he who seeks it by faith and prayer, by appeals to God; by the pursuit of it through holy thinking and righteous living; by faithful vigils of the night and words and deeds of charity through the day; who now and then pauses in the solitude of mountain tops, or of desert plains, or silent cloister, or in the crowded streets; and fancies, nay, hears the whisper of the still small voice which tells him, confirming his work by giving him assurance that his faith is not vain, and that his spiritually touched mind really sees God and angels as his co-laborers, and not mere phantoms, creations of the subjective mind. These are, par excellence, seekers after the truth, since they seek the truth at the very source of it by communion with and service to God. These are your prophets, world teachers in the ways and in the things of God. Seekers after truth and teachers of it, with whose services the world may not dispense without sustaining great loss. [^3]

While he was laboring on his final doctrinal treatise, his "faithful vigils of the night" were most often a combination of kneeling prayer, scriptural analysis, and introspection-the whole process taking as long as three hours or more. And he worked with heavy-weighing urgency. This was a project he had been working at on and off for more than thirty years. As early as 1906 he had written:

341My love for the gospel grows out of the partial knowledge I have of the great truths it contains. In it I feel the presence of a marvelous system of truth, a philosophy that gives unity to all history and proper relationship to all existing things; that fills life with a real meaning, and makes existence desirable. And if I could only intelligently grasp these great truths in the presence of which I feel I am standing when I contemplate Mormonism and reduce them to some orderly system which I am sure they are capable of, I would account myself most happy. [^4]

In 1923 the editor of the Improvement Era, Edward H. Anderson, had written to Roberts on his birthday, "There are fifty thousand young men in Zion waiting for a message from you, visioning their way to lives of service in the work of the Lord. [^5] Though not writing "The Truth, the Way, the Life" just for members of the Church, Roberts had in focus the youth within the Church, for he felt that this work, once published, would "catch like wildfire" among the youth. [^6]

Roberts felt qualified to write a book on Christ as the center of the cosmos, with the Atonement as Christ's central mission, because of the vast scope of modern revelation and of his own conversion and commitment to the Christ. The spiritual and the intellectual had come to fusion in him. Thus he had written of an earlier study of the Atonement:

This late inquiry into that subject [the Atonement] has had a wonderful effect upon my own thought and state of mind. I have for many years believed in the Atonement of Jesus Christ and have accepted its symbols in baptism and in confirmation and have repeatedly renewed my acceptance of that atonement by accepting the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. It has been a matter of faith with me and of knowledge, by the testimony of the Spirit of God to my soul.

But upon close inquiry, by deeper delving into the subject, my intellect also gives its full and complete assent to the soundness of the philosophy and absolute necessity for the Atonement of Jesus Christ. That this atonement, the method and manner of it, is the only way by which there could be brought to pass an at-one-ment, a reuniting of soul of man with soul of God. I account it for myself a new conversion, an intellectual conversion, to the Atonement of Jesus Christ; and I have been rejoicing in it of late exceedingly. [^7]

Roberts also felt that his calling as senior president of the First Council of the Seventy, which dated from December of 1924, made it imperative for him to address the message of the new dispensation to the whole world, recounting the basic principles of the everlasting gospel.

342Roberts eventually subtitled his three-volume work "An Elementary Treatise on Theology." But it was not exactly elementary, nor was it limited to "theology" in any narrow sense. Here Roberts carries on an undersurface dialogue with the major philosophers, theologians, Christian historians and apologists, and with the harbingers of the "new renaissance" in science-astronomers, physicists, biologists, geologists. His treatise is freckled with allusions to all of these and to prominent and popularizing scientists of his day, ranging from Darwin, Haldane, and Huxley through Eddington, Millikan, and Jeans.

He was not primarily aiming at scientific evidence in confirmation of certain theses of Mormonism. But he was trying to present interpretations and implications of the gospel, viewed as a coherent whole, which were at least compatible with if not required by the assumptions, methodologies, and attitudes of empirical theology. "How can we reason but from what we know?" he begins. Implicit in much of his work is an appeal to analogy, to the similarity of relations between what we know of the cosmos and what may be in the world beyond, which, he insists, is an extension of, not an abrupt break with, this world.

The project was ambitious and stunningly presumptuous, as he himself knew. "What are you working on?" one of his former missionaries, Fred Markham, asked him shortly after his return from New York. "I am trying to summarize and reconcile all truth-all truth. But it is so hard. So hard!"

343In several ways he fell short, far short, of his dream in this magnum opus. First, as a survey of his prior writing will show, little in his new manuscript was new or ground-break-ing. The ten chapters on the sequential dispensations of the gospel, for example, are a modest reworking of his outline history of the seventies, supplemented by brief accounts of world religions. His analysis of the ways of religious knowing, which might be called a synoptic approach to all methods, had already been dealt with in piecemeal fashion in several articles (as, for example, in his lucid little volume Joseph Smith: Prophet-Teacher). [^8] His sections on the atonement of Jesus Christ are in basic form part of his Seventy's Course in Theology, volume four. He mainly reorders but does not rewrite his earlier expositions of logical and cosmic implications of modern revelation. For example: "The elements are eternal." All intelligence is free to act for itself. Mind is a form of matter, and matter refined is spirit. Worlds without number have been created. Law exists through all time and space and is itself subject to "certain bounds and conditions." The universe is a pluriverse without limits and therefore without center. Most of these insights are derived from D&C 88 and 93 of the Doctrine and Covenants and key passages in 1 Ne. 2.

In his passion for inclusiveness, Roberts aspired to do more, much more, than he achieved. His "little collection I dare not call a library" (now in the Church archives) includes notes, scraps, article tear-outs, and self-addressed summaries which are marked "use in TWL." But almost none of these finally found their way into his manuscript. There are clippings and book sections summarizing the lives and thought of many notables in the scientific and philosophical world. A dog-eared copy of the Conception of God (featuring Josiah Royce and others) contains so many of Roberts's reactions, criticisms and responses that it would make a complete volume in itself. Whole notebooks contain quotations written in his own hand on topics as varied as the relation of space and time; alternative explanations of "the tides"; planetary rotation; excerpts from early journals of contemporaries of Joseph Smith which suggest that there are systems within systems within systems in an astronomical ascendancy; the nature of life in the cell and even in what is allegedly inanimate; modes of creation as taught by classical Western philosophers and Eastern religions; and notes on the transformation and deification of man. In addition to these materials, which represent years of collecting and writing, are Roberts's own personal scriptural studies. With a fine-point red pen he was rereading and remarking all of the standard works and even some noncanonical texts, seeking crucial passages that bear on the ultimate significance of Christ viewed as the truth, the way, and the life. His markings in the Pearl of Great Price Book of Abraham, for example, are almost dazzling in their detail.

344On October 20, 1928, Roberts wrote to a reviewing committee, "I am assured by the Deseret News publishers that this book [TWL] can be printed and bound thirty days after the manuscript (which is now perfected) can be placed in their hands." But it did not immediately pass review, and in May 1929 he wrote, "other book TWL suspended. [^9] Some learned men don't see some of its chapters so am letting it ride until I have more time. Will not change it if it has to sleep" [^10] In any case, he was completely inundated with the completion of .4 Comprehensive History of the Church. By the fall of the next year a reading committee of which Elder David O. McKay was chairman called Roberts to say "that they were all anxious to have it [TWL] printed for textbook use this year throughout all the Church."

But there were two chapters that troubled the committee: one that argued that an entire race of human beings had inhabited the earth prior to the advent of Adam (not sub-human creatures but begotten children of God); and one that tried to reconcile the scientific theory of catastrophism with the creation scriptures.

Roberts was characteristically adamant. The book, he insisted, would be published in toro or not at all. Just before the publication of Roberts's Comprehensive History, he wrote: "My book [TWL]... is still on the 'laps of the Gods.' Meantime I am getting back to routine-filling appointments at stake conferences and carrying on in the office." Still another six months passed. In January of 1931 he wrote a letter that reveals how strongly he had come to feel.

I have been passing through the severest mental and spiritual strain of my life during the past two months-Doctrinal questions before the Twelve and the First Presidency in connection with my book The Truth, the Way, the Life, respecting which there seems to be little prospect of settlement.

345Because Roberts saw himself as a reconciler, his very passion for inclusiveness required his systematizings to be open and in that sense tentative. No one more than he expected further progress in the scientific prediction and control of environment (an optimism characteristic of his time) as well as further clarifyings of revelation beyond present written revelation. Fifty years since his death, both forms of expansion have "dated" his book. Elder John A. Widtsoe once commented that in his eighty-year lifetime the fundamental assumptions of chemistry, and some of its theoretical constructs, had been radically revised three times. Roberts stretched, related and reconciled much of the thought of his time into a semblance of harmony. But in the sciences, where he had become something more than a dabbler (in astronomy, paleontology, geology, biology), dramatic revisions continue to occur. Most of the authors he cites are in that sense obsolete. Were he alive today, he would likely be anxious that the book remain unpublished. He had, in fact, begun to feel that way before his death.

"That book may not likely be printed in my lifetime," he wrote to President Grant in 1932. "Comment will not be necessary." President Grant had explained to him that his official status as the senior member of the First Council of the Seventy would give an unwarranted "authority" to his work, especially to its speculative chapters. The First Presidency issued a statement which refused endorsement either of Roberts's view or of the counterviews which had been presented by Elder Joseph Fielding Smith. "Neither side of the controversy has been accepted at all," the statement read. Pleading that these questions could best be left to the sciences, the Presidency counseled that to prevent misunderstanding and division the Brethren get on with the preaching of the gospel. [^11] It was some consolation to Roberts that he put the most essential elements of his testament of Christ into public and recorded discourse. His "protest against a dying universe," for example, is an extension of one chapter of his book. And his final discourse, "God," was his empirical theism represented as a way of breaking classical deadlocks (for example, immanence versus transcendence, personality versus all-extended presence, oneness versus manyness).

Today, Roberts's volumes can be seen as a kind of historical workbook of science and Mormon theology, showing one mind grappling, after solid homework in world thought, with a driving concern to "pull things together." He remained convinced that the Church was not behind, but in many ways ahead of, scientific and philosophical inquiry; and that God had not only provided hints and clues to his grand design in nature, but with his light and Spirit was furthering men's creative efforts in every culture, in every time, and in every place. The generation after Roberts would not embrace all of his conclusions. In the quest, though, it certainly would be moved by his example. [^12]

346

Notes

Chapter 17

1 Hibbert Journal: A Quarterly Review of Religion, Theology and Philosophy 19 (April 1921): 505.

2 "Black dog" was Winston Churchill's expression for depression.

3 TWL, vol. 1, pp. 12-13.

4 Improvement Era 9 (September 1906): 844.

5 Edward Anderson to B. H. Roberts, 5 March 1923, Elsa Cook Collection.

6 B. H. Roberts to Elizabeth Hinekley, 8 September 1929.

7 Conference Report, April 1911, p. 59.

8 Revelation itself, he shows, involves all of the "methods" respected among men-self-evidence, authority, reason, sense-confirmation, and a kind of intuition or seership, distinct from mysticism in its classical sense.

9 The title was still those three words but in a different order: Life, Truth, Way.

10 The "learned men" included Dr. James E. Talmage, Joseph Fielding Smith, Anthon H. Lund, and others.

11 B. H. Roberts Papers, Church Archives.

12 For an extended analysis of the work see Truman G. Madsen, "The Meaning of Christ-The Truth, the Way, the Life: An Analysis of B.H. Roberts' Unpublished Masterwork." BYU Studies 15 (Spring 1975): 259-292.

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
