Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

18 B. H. Roberts: Speaker

His style is somewhat dramatic, but I think that he is without doubt the best orator in the Church-at least I have heard no one that in my opinion equals him in oratory." So George Q. Cannon described Roberts in the late 1890s. [^1] In lifetime perspective Roberts looms large as a master of the spoken word. President Hugh B. Brown, who listened and learned from B. H. Roberts in his own formative years, often said that there were three contemporary expositors of that earlier generation who were gifted both in writing and speaking: Orson F. Whitney, James E. Talmage, and B. H. Roberts. President Brown saw Elder Whitney as poetic and subtle, Elder Talmage as precise, methodical and restrained. But as defender of the faith, culturally sensitive, and versatile, he found B. H. Roberts without peer. He added: "I would rather debate anyone in the world than B. H. Roberts. No one struck a firmer blow for truth than he."

347In the half century since his death, several doctoral dissertations have been written on Roberts's style, approach, and methods in public address. And the interest continues. Such studies often reveal the paralysis of analysis. They miss the man. Clearly he was impressive, but what was his own conscious effort, and how, in the context of his times, was he unique? William James once observed that "there is very little difference between one man and another, but what little there is is very important." The attempt to distinguish Roberts's oratory from that of others is one of the challenging facets of his life.

Roberts lived in an era of great oratory and an era that admired eloquence. Such men as William Jennings Bryan, Phillips Brooks, S. Parkas Cadman, Robert Ingersoll, and Clarence Darrow won wide public acclaim through the spoken word. J. E. Hickman, a longtime admirer of Roberts who heard these and many others, tried to distinguish Roberts from them. He said:

His oratory consists largely in his magnificent flights of thought and imagery clothed in forceful language and withal given by one of the most charming and power-impelling voices I have ever heard. In fact, when his soul became aglow with the fire of his theme, his oratory became a contagion with his audience.

Roberts's appearance at the pulpit gave force to his words. He stood with an almost military posture, especially after his chaplain days, and though his build was stocky his demeanor led many to speak of him as tall and even towering. His full thatch of hair, which in his last decade was white, and his bushy eyebrows, which became heavier as age advanced, were somewhat daunting. He gestured frequently but not in a choppy or bumptious way.

His voice was a high baritone, given greater range by his amateur singing, and he worked at modulating it both in volume and in tone. One of his associates says his voice was much like that of Shakespearean actor Sir John Gielgud. T. Earl Pardoe, a teacher of speech in universities in the western United States, says his voice "boomed out in resonant strength" in the days before the microphone. When he had a choice, Roberts preferred speaking outdoors or in the acoustical richness of the Salt Lake Tabernacle.

348One editor spoke of his eyes as "miniature search lights." In their hazel intensity they were deep and compassionate, but they could also be withering. He once said: "Whenever I see my enemy shifting his ground; whenever I see that his eye is not steady but shifts to the right or to the left, or looks behind, that tells me that I am his master." [^2]

Some of his power, both of voice and personality, arose from his boldness. To his missionaries he had written: "Do not mistake timidity for humility. Humility... does not require trembling knees, down-cast eyes or low pitched voice ... be bold, then!"

He was a slow starter, devoting his introduction not to jokes and stories but to what Adam S. Bennion, himself adept in public address, called "random thoughts" for up to fifteen minutes. S. Dilworth Young, who listened to him often during his chaplaincy period in France, diagrams his voice style as going from low-key up to a resounding climax and then returning almost to a whisper. He adds significantly, "Roberts spoke to a group of ten men the same way he would address 10,000." [^3] The comment reflects a lifetime psychological fact about Roberts-that he was warm and comfortable before an audience or congregation but rather halting in counseling or one-on-one encounters. Other speakers had the opposite talent: to address masses of people as if in intimate conversation with one person.

Roberts preached what he practiced. He believed in a constant return to the basics, whether in religious, political or literary efforts. "A frequent recurrence to fundamental principles is essential to the maintenance of liberty and of spiritual well-being." [^4] "Back to bedrock" was one of his mottos and alongside it, "By principles conquer!" The result in his personality and style was a combination of heavy, lengthy concentration and dramatic fervor. He cared more about content than about form, and worried less about "polish, faultless rhetoric or studied climax" than about clarity." To secure the quality of clearness in thought-expres-sion," he said, "sacrifice anything, everything, seeming elegance, high-sounding phrases, harmonious sounding sentences, brave tautology even, but make yourself understood."

349He had faith that power of statement is "power of agreement," and especially in the clarion truths that center in Christ:

There is a force and power in truth itself, apart from any bolstering up by arguments or reasons-a direct power in truth itself that carries conviction of the effect of it to those who are "of the truth." [^5]

His most frequent advice to speakers was, "Pray, study, think, get prepared, then let nature caper." [^6]

His preparation was prodigious and constant. David W. Cummings recalls:

The first newspaper reporting I ever did was as a conference reporter and always a tremendous thrill went through me when Roberts was announced, I knew when he arose that that which would come out of his lips during the next three-quarters to one and one-half hours would represent not minutes but hours of careful preparation. From the first ten words to the last paragraph you knew that Brother Roberts had thought that thing through. It was nothing of your lazy habit of standing on your feet without a thought to say and then taking 30 minutes just to prove it. He never used to waste other people's time. He was there to do the best that God would permit him to do in the preaching of the Gospel and he did it, and what he told you, you remembered. He thrilled you, he held you, he fascinated you. You could feel the result of those nights of work... the painstaking effort to learn the English language and how to use it; and yet there wasn't anything affected about it. There were none of the tricks of oratory. [^7]

Roberts cared about the language more, not less, because he had lived eleven years as an illiterate. He was not interested in the frills of word usage but in its vitalizing, vivifying, convincing power. Before semantics and philology were available to the layman, he labored hard to develop a vocabulary that could reach to the higher levels of thinking and feeling. He believed that a word is a "race experience," and he thumbed his dictionary of synonyms to help. It troubled him that the English language is crippled in its reach toward ideal and spiritual connotations, and that there are at least four times as many words for the negative and unpleasant concerns of man as for loftier ones.

350He was systematic, but not in a closed, confining way. He usually spoke without notes, but in advance made outlines of his main points and subheadings of illustrations. He loved to begin ostensibly "with empty hands." "I have but one idea in mind with which to begin, after that we will have to take our chances." [^8] But his speaking was not really random.

He will build up his discourse on exactly the same principle as an architect will erect a massive structure. First preparing for a solid foundation, then everything in its right order until the capstone is reached. Many otherwise able speakers lack this constructive talent, hence they are unable to present in logical succession and in acceptable, profitable form the varied divisions of their theme. [^9]

That he spoke without notes may seem difficult to reconcile with the claim of lengthy preparation and orderly treatment. But Roberts could say with Charles G. Finney, "I have studied all the more for not having written my sermons." [^10] He "loaded up" on his subject, memorized central themes and even clinching phraseology. It was as if he could only think in book lengths. The sentences of his recorded discourses are, on the average, twice the length of discourses of contemporary notable speakers (for instance, Wendell Phillips, Woodrow Wilson or Winston Churchill), and this strained the attention span of his audience. He also spoke more slowly than some, especially in contrast to Elder Charles W. Pen-rose, who could deliver over two hundred words a minute. [^11]

351This was a frequent complaint against him-that he not only made his points and decimated his opponents, but, as it were, dragged them around the courtyard interminably. Listeners conceded that the last fifteen minutes of his speeches, many of which lasted two hours, were illuminating and powerful but that he was sluggish at first and "it took him too long to get there." Speakers were crowded off the agenda by his length ("I should stop now but I have started this thing and I am going to finish it if it takes all night"), Once at a meeting he spoke nearly an hour and left his colleague, J. Golden Kimball, only five minutes. J. Golden arose and said in his dry falsetto: "B. H. Roberts is the senior president of the Seventy and has taken all the time. Someday he will be dead and I will be president. Then I will take all the time." He then sat down.

Roberts knew what observers often said: that he did much of his best work facing a challenge; that he was calmest and most lucid in conflict. If he did not have an antagonist, he often imagined one. And more than one of his critics acknowledged that he was a "fair controversialist." It was this ability to perform under pressure which somehow became part of his personality. "You are the great war horse of the Church," Joseph Hyde wrote him. This facility gave added depth and excitement to his addresses. During his forty-five years as a General Authority he was expected to give a major discourse in the April and October conferences of the Church. In one out of every three of those talks he spoke on the latest assault or challenge to Mormonism or to the implications of Mormonism or to the source materials. "In light of the present controversy .... "he would often begin. [^12] He would present the clashing viewpoints with greater clarity and force, sometimes, than their own advocates, before turning upon them his own response. [^13] And after rebuilding the case for the depth, expansiveness and insight of the Prophet Joseph Smith, he would say: "Match it! Match it, I say, or with hand on lips remain silent when his name is spoken."

The core of his aspiration, and he believed of his occasional but not universal impact, was the quest for the Spirit. He wrote several essays and manuals which punctuated this. But he constantly reminded the Brethren that the Spirit would not draw on an empty well. The divine promise, which he took literally, "it shall be given you in the very hour" what you shall say, had an absolute precondition: "Treasure up in your minds continually the words of life." He stressed the "continually." [^14] "Mormonism is for thinkers!" he often said. He loved the statement of the Prophet on the things of God: "Time and experience and careful and ponderous and solemn thoughts can only find them out." [^15] To him that meant "brain sweat." "Eternal, restless thought that keeps out from the frontiers of discovery is as much a weariness to the slothful, as it is a joy to the alert and active and noble minded." [^16]

352Once one had paid the price, he could expectantly seek for "my Spirit and my word, yea, the power of God unto the convincing of men." [^17] To receive this blessing, he said over and over, one must yearn, plead, sacrifice, fast and pray. And one must recognize that when the Spirit is not granted, not given, the words spoken are stillborn. For Roberts, the law of communication lies in the words of the Master: "Without me ye can do nothing." And he taught that "an inspired speaker requires an inspired audience." [^18]

This kind of public speaking-that is, speaking from a fullness of information under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, must ever be the most persuasive, the most effective. It may lack that smoothness, the rhetorical excellence of prepared or written discourse; but what it lacks in those respects is more than compensated for in its marvelous power, its magnificent boldness, and its adaptability not only to the occasion but to each member of the audience-giving a portion of meat in due season to each present, a thing which God alone may know how to prompt. In this as in all other things it will be found that the works of God, or those which he inspires, far outshine the works of men. [^19]

"We are not to display oratory," he once wrote in a notebook. "We are set on getting a verdict in favor of Christ or what amounts to the same thing-the Gospel and the New Dispensation of it-on the spot."

With such expectations it is not surprising that he often failed. In his own eyes he failed miserably. Subjectively, these occasions were among the most stinging, and were more painful to him than other setbacks in his life. For days afterward he could not be comforted. At one conference, scheduling pressures led President Grant to ask Roberts to take no more than twenty minutes in the closing session. Roberts, as usual, had prepared, and in this case written, a longer address, and abrupt time censure "made me suffer fiercely." [^20]

353... Nothing to do but abandon the written speech and in a cold sweat [I] grabbed at what I could and let it go at that. Result? A broken man, that got away from the crowd as soon as possible-went up to the Mormon Battalion monument and sat down where I had something written in bronze and granite. Thence wandered upon the hillside until driven home by the chill and the mist of the night-and so broken for several days? Who invented this speaking game anyhow? Let him be anathema at any rate!, say I. [^21]

But there were also times of what he called the "thin veil" experience. At a Sunday conference in Burlington, Vermont, while he was mission president, he was discoursing on brotherly love. He beckoned a young missionary, Elder Wesley T. Benson, to him, grasped him by the right hand, and held on through the last minutes of his sermon, testifying that by just such "closing of the spiritual circuit" came vital brotherhood. Not only President Roberts but the young missionary went home drained.

I was shaken to the very soles of my feet. It was no mere token. My spiritual study and reflection convinced me that the transmission of the Spirit of God through the spoken word can be both enervating and energizing. Make no mistake about it-only a man with great spiritual power could share such an experience with one of his brethren. [^22]

Many who heard him in his last years have high praise for sermons attended by such an outpouring. When that happened his own gratitude knew no bounds. Once a conducting officer arose at the end of a stirring sermon and said mechanically: "We want to thank Brother Roberts for his remarks tonight." At this Roberts sprang up, put his arm around the man, and said, with tears in his eyes, "Brother, when the Lord has so magnified us in contemplating heavenly things, when the Spirit has been so powerful and the heavens so near, brother, thank the Lord. Don't thank me, brother, thank the Lord!" In his private prayers Roberts did just that.

In all of this some felt he perhaps took himself too seriously. Yet he was convinced after much personal experience that, though no speaker can reach everyone, every speaker can reach someone. Many of his missionaries recall his citation of J. Golden Kimball's sage remark: "They say I can't talk like Roberts. Well, neither can Roberts talk like me. I reach the ones he misses." Many who asked for help with their own speaking efforts were told: "Don't try to be like James E. Talmage, or me. Be yourself!"

354And yet his gifts could be intimidating. Antoine R. Ivins of the First Council of the Seventy recalls a trip he made with B. H. Roberts to Los Angeles, where they took turns ordaining seventies. Ivins saw himself as a plodding, reserved speaker; Roberts's speech, in contrast, flowed. "I was, naturally, in no way equal to him in this service and consequently much embarrassed." Other colleagues in the Council felt inadequate when, for example, Roberts arranged three evenings for systematic doctrinal instruction to new seventies quorums. He himself delivered the first three evening lectures and set a pattern which "could not be, or at least was not, duplicated and after two attempts was abandoned." [^23]

His prayers too were floods of eloquence. At home his children sometimes crawled behind chairs to avoid being called on to pray after him. At times he leaned on a small table in his Centerville home and actually clenched his fists as he pleaded with the Lord for blessings. Such prayers brought deep responses in the formal setting. A young lady missionary, for example, who with six or seven others came to his office to be "set apart" for missions, found him austere in his instructions and was wishing she had been assigned to someone else.

And then he put his hands on my head and gave me a blessing -such warmth and gentleness and understanding I shall never forget. The blessing was so mine-all the things I had wondered about he made clear. The Spirit of Heavenly Father was there in rich abundance. [^24]

When Howard Driggs, Roberts's fellow-historian of the plains, became dangerously ill in his apartment home, his wife, Eva, summoned President Roberts to administer to him. "Through the fire of his faith I truly began to rise above my illness while his hands were yet on my head," he recalls. For Roberts to "forge the link" or "close the electric circle" with God was difficult and elusive. He jotted once in a notebook:

Prayer is not a mechanical function. One may not always pray when one chooses. Something more than words is needed. Prayer is soul of man communing with soul of God-the infinite of man reaching upward to touch the infinite of God. God must be a party to the blending of souls, else there is not prayer. [^25]

355As with prayer, so with speech. In civic and cultural settings he could be enthralling. At a mass meeting held in Salt Lake City at which Roberts delivered a formal declaration of grievances with Congressman John T. Caine, with the congressman present, Roberts gave an address that would have lasted no more than fifteen minutes had he not been interrupted at least twenty-five times by applause. [^26] In the Salt Lake Opera House, addressing an audience of nine hundred on political themes, he was met by bursts of applause which lasted up to four minutes; at the end he was given a five-minute standing ovation. Pleading for the nomination of Clarence Bamberger as Utah's governor, Roberts described the needs of the contemporary statesman, praised Bamber-ger's Jewish heritage, and said, "If ever a man had reason to be proud of his racial origin, that man is the Jew." Barn-berger was nominated forthwith, and he arose in awe.

I did not tell Mr. Roberts what to say, but while listening to him, I felt as if I were in a dream. While he was eulogizing me, I was lifted up and up and up until I thought I was among the angels. I have hardly come down to earth yet!' [^27]

But his highest reach and deepest impact was spiritual. As a girl, a Mrs. William Palmer heard Roberts discourse on the greatness and majesty of the universe, placing Christ as the Master, Organizer, and Creator, who was genuinely the light of the sun and the stars. "I was just a child. But I never forgot it." A woman visitor to the Tabernacle who had never heard of Mormonism listened to Roberts discourse on the resurrection and the three degrees of glory. She was so moved and uplifted that she requested baptism. "If you feel a thing you can express it," he taught, "if you can't, you do not feel it strongly enough." [^28] Once in a sermon delivered in Logan, Utah, he described Christ and the raising of Lazarus. So vivid were his images and so moving his presence that the audience was carried with him. When in a loud voice he repeated the Master's words, "Lazarus, come forth," the entire congregation involuntarily came to their feet. [^29]

356In 1929 he delivered a series of lectures in the Salt Lake Twenty-first Ward on the Possibility, Probability, and Certainty of Revelation, and brought together a lifetime of assurances. It was a mellow climax with not a nay-sayer present. One woman recalls: "He stood at the pulpit, seventy-two years upon his face, not just with sincerity and an absence of self consciousness... but with light of the Lord he had come to recognize as the mantle of those who have come up through affliction. He knew the Shepherd as he knew himself." [^30]

Roberts saw his role as an instrument of conversion-that commission weighed upon his shoulders for fifty years; and also as an instrument of re-conversion, to bring the gospel to bear on the dilemmas, the doubts and the fears, the grinding needs of those who gladly came to hear him. ("Just the name of B. H. Roberts meant a full house.") That even his closest brethren and most stable admirers felt the same is clear from this review of his life. Heber J. Grant was not the only one who taught his large family that they should try to hear B. H. Roberts whenever and wherever he spoke, "even if it means a half day's travel." And after Roberts's classic discourse titled, "Has Missouri Paid?" President Joseph F. Smith arose and said, "I thank God for the truth and for someone able to teach it." [^31]

Governor Thomas Ford in his History of Illinois wrote a brooding and uneasy prediction that someday there might arise "some gifted man like Paul" who would make the names Palmyra, Adam-ondi-Ahman, Nauvoo and Carthage Jail "holy and venerable names," as the Mount of Olives, the Garden of Gethsemane and Jerusalem are to the Christian, or Mecca and Medina are to the Turk. By his historical writing, by his rich biographical sensitivity to the names and places of the origin-events of the Restoration, by his flair for the dramatic combined with his mature intellectual conscience, by his very personality, B. H. Roberts as much as anyone in Mormonism's first hundred years did exactly that. [^32]

357

Notes

Chapter 18

1 Diary of George Q. Cannon, 30 October 1897. This entry was recorded after an all-day MIA conference where Roberts had spoken.

2 Conference Report, October 1903, p. 73.

3 S. Dilworth Young to Truman G. Madsen, 12 December 1965.

4 Conference Report, October 1926, p. 122; cf. Conference Report, October 1929, p. 86.

5 Conference Report, April 1928, p. 107.

6 Harold Glen Clark to Truman G. Madsen, 25 April 1966.

7 David W. Cummings in a tribute to B. H. Roberts, delivered in Hollywood Ward, September 1933. Manuscript in possession of author.

8 Conference Report, October 1929, p. 86.

9 Salt Lake Herald, 22 April 1897.

10 Charles G. Finney, Memoirs of Charles G. Finney (New York: A. S. Barnes and Company, 1876). Roberts underlined this sentence in Rochester, New York, 7 June 1922.

11 According to Frank Otterstrom, the conference reporter.

12 See Conference Report, April 1924, p. 80.

13 "Let the theory you intend to overthrow be presented in absolute fairness; so far that those who are advocates of it could have no possible grounds of complaint against you if they were present and listening to your discourse. Assume that they are present, and so proceed as if they were to answer you." Seventy's Course in Theology, 2:70.

14 D&C 84:85.

15 TPJS, p. 137.

16 Seventy's Course in Theology, 5:v-vi.

17 D&C 11:21.

18 Conference Report, April 1914, p. 101.

19 Liahona, 5:209.

20 He once said of those who had to speak and those who had to listen, "I am sure I do not know which suffers most." (Conference Report, October 1909, p. 101.) After addressing graduates at the commencement exercises at the BY college in Logan he wrote: "My speech was a great failure thad not liberty, much confused and suffered intensely on account of it. Feel as if I never wanted to speak again. Why is it I suffer so much on this account? Truly I know, Father, that without Thine aid I am nothing. It cannot be that I am so often left to myself in order to teach me a lesson I already know so well." (B. H. Roberts Journal, 26 May 1893.)

21 The discourse, though brief, is an Easter message which he ended with a prayer. (Conference Report, April 1928, pp. 106-117.)

22 Wesley Taft Benson to Truman G. Madsen, 6 November 1965.

23 Antoine R. Ivins to Truman G. Madsen, 9 November 1965.

24 Jean Dunn to Truman G. Madsen, 2 November 1965.

25 A comment on Newell Knight's attempt to pray, HC, 1:83.

26 Salt Lake Herald, 3 May 1885.

27 Proceedings of the Democratic State Convention, 18 August 1916, Utah Historical Society Parnphlet 2561.

28 See his pamphlet On Tracting, Church Archives, p. 18.

29 Reid Nibley to the author, as told him by a member of his family.

30 Recollection of Mrs. Joseph J. Cannon to the author.

31 Conference Report, October 1926, p. 125.

32 See CHC, 2:341-42. "What historical associations will yet gather about these localities! Fayette! Seneca Lake! I venture to predict that these places will in the ages to come be as famous as Capernaum and Lake Gennesaret." (Missouri Persecutions, p. 22.)

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
[^23] 23 Mrs. William Reed to Ann Roberts.
[^24] 24 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^25] 25 Late in their lives, on 3 May 1928, B. H. and Annie Brynie, a half-sister, and Mary arranged for the temple sealing of Ann Everington and Benjamin Roberts and all of the children including the twins and baby Thomas. See BHR Temple Book.
[^26] 26 Roberts kept one sample of his father's handwriting from the original wrapping of the photo given his mother. It is preserved in the family collection.
[^27] 27 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 1 September 1883, Roberts Family Collection.
[^28] 28 Research has failed to establish where and when Ben died. The marriage date is 15 June 1848 (he was twenty-two) in Poplar, Middlesex, England; from the Book of Remembrance of Haven R. Day.
[^29] 29 B. H. Roberts to Ann Everington, 21 April 1880, Roberts Family Collection.
[^30] 30 Mrs. Charles H. Wilcox recorded these impressions from a conversation with B.H. Roberts at his home prior to his call to the Eastern States.
[^31] 31 BN, p. 10.
[^32] 32 See Juvenile Instructor 49 (February 1914): 85.
