Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

of the Church

In Roberts's personal memo of suggestions as a member of the Church's Centennial Committee which met in 1928, he suggested that a chronology of the Church's history be prepared. [^1] The suggestion was adopted. But the case for having his own Americana series updated and published in book form was made by Elder George Albert Smith of the Council of the Twelve.

358Though B. H. Roberts did not claim professional status as a historian, he is probably best known for the writing of history, which consumed much of his life. Critics have said that his passionate involvement in much of the work of history was a disqualification; few were astute enough to see the correlative strength: that his passion to present the polarities without manipulation was often strengthened by participation in the events he attempted to chronicle. "I have lived so much of these things that it seems to me that I have been a member of the Church from the day it was organized until now." [^2] He made no claim to being an impartial spectator on events significant to the restoration and growth of the Church. But he tried to put his biases out in the open and challenged others to do the same.

At the time of preparation for the Church's centenary, Roberts had focused his energies beyond the political, beyond the thwarted hope of publication of doctrinal writings, and even beyond his previous enthusiasm toward administrative innovation in the callings of the seventy. Two years earlier he had written to I. K. Russell that he appreciated Russell's esteem of the Americana series,

into which really I have poured the spare energy of my life and at a time when judgment, I think, has been matured ....

I derive a certain amount of satisfaction from having formed that piece of work even though I may not see it brought to full fruitage by a proper publication during my lifetime. When I think of it, it makes me very sad and almost as if I had lived in vain, but I have done what I could and there I shall have to let the matter rest. Our present administration seems to take no interest in it. [^3]

Nudged by the upcoming centenary, the administration now took a lively interest in Roberts's history. An enormous and exhausting task descended upon him: to bring the history up to the year 1930, weave in new data, revise and harmonize the format, check bibliography, and develop an adequate index. All in all it was, as Roberts put it, "a rather immense undertaking." [^4] It became his full-time assignment.

The task might have been less difficult had Roberts been less conscientious. He was incapable of reading a page of copy without revising.

It was useless to retype anything he had blue-penciled unless you forbade him to touch the new draft; otherwise he would just mark it all up again. He was never satisfied; always he had an afterthought. I often wondered how his publishers induced him to give up even one page of manuscript. [^5]

359Yet his concern was much more with content than with style; his quest was for fullness. He thought and wrote in elastic paragraphs rather than clipped sentences, and his expressions were often heavy at the expense of lucidity. He willingly put in around-the-clock hours of work. Weeks and weeks were spent checking and double-checking footnotes. By May 1929, only eleven months away from the final deadline, only the first of six volumes was finished. Yet Roberts felt it possible to complete the others in time and committed himself totally to the effort.

"Really," he wrote to a missionary-secretary three months later,

I am no good for anything but the work that has fallen into my hands. I am spoiled as a social creature if ever I was one. I see no one; I have well-nigh ceased to be a family man; I live and walk alone, am cross as a bear, speak shortly, cuss, usually under my breath, but sometimes it escapes into audibility, to my shame. I am irritable, disappointed, unapproachable, impatient-especially with stupidity of which the world is full. My escape from all this is work, work, by day and night. [^6]

Present-day physicians discern in these words an advanced case of diabetes. Roberts was driving himself in defiance of his body signs. He needed circulation and movement; yet his sedentary around-the-clock writing and proofreading ignored this. He needed consistency in diet, in sleep, and in insulin. But Roberts was too preoccupied to be consistent. He needed to avoid stress that pushed his body chemistry out of balance. But he was doing stress-inducing work at the ages of seventy-two and seventy-three, when his disease was far along. Overstrained and brittle as he was, his description of irritability is a familiar diabetes symptom. Once again he had to double and redouble his reach for spiritual aid to be mild and kindly in his personal relations. There is exaggeration here for effect, but Roberts knew this might well be the culminating effort of his life, and his exhausting routine continued. His daughters were harnessed into typing, proofreading, and checking footnotes. His wife Celia seldom saw him. His administrative work in the Church was reduced to a minimum and he worked "adding night to day and Sunday to the week." During this period he did still carry on some correspondence and gave speeches that were the overflow valve for the heavy technical apparatus of historical lore that was in him.

360On one such occasion he spoke in the Lehi Tabernacle and described the work on his book as "tedious," then said jubilantly, "but tonight we can revel in the riches of eternity."

His one-word themes for each of the six volumes were: Origins, Martyrdom, Exodus, Ensign, Expansion, Consolidation. By the end of March 1930, five of the six volumes were complete, though unindexed. [^7] The work now totalled 189 chapters and 3400 pages. An additional three hundred pages had reached galley proof stage without pagination. Elsa Cook was his methodical, precise proofreader, and he utilized her to the limit, sending her sheaves of manuscript even while she was in the hospital for a goiter operation. Her familiarity with Roberts's intent and modes of thought made her invaluable. A writer and a geologist at the University of Utah, Frederick Pack, offered to reorder the entire manuscript for clarity and to smooth out the long sentences. Roberts refused him, "No, no," he said. "Then it would not be my work."

A faithful correspondent received this brief reply:

Perhaps it will be enough if I tell you that in getting out the six-volumes of history... in about one year and one month we have completed a volume of work which ought to have been required of no one within less than three years. [^8]

He added that the general index, "a much more arduous task than I dreamed, most maddening," had slowed him down terribly, and the final volume (volume six) was three hundred pages in excess; rather than run into a seventh volume, he cut it drastically, recording that it was "no light matter" to do so and still keep unity and "fullness of chief incidents."

361"Have you noticed that I don't like to talk about things until they are done?" Roberts wrote in a family letter. Here at last was his magnum opus, the result of his lifelong gratitude for the soul voice that had come near the black thorn hedges of Britain, telling an illiterate boy that he would write books. On April 6, 1930, the centennial of the Church, Roberts had a magnificent setting to present to a congregation of eight thousand and all the Brethren in the councils of the Church the product of a lifetime. To the assembled congregation he said that his work had been "prompted and sustained through the years by deep love of the subiect, and my desire to leave on record one sermon on the New Dispensation of the Gospel." He chose to call this thirty-four-hun-dred-page offering a sermon, because Brigham Young had taught that no one revelation is complete in itself and that the only adequate gospel sermon is Jesus Christ himself. When Christ had drawn together the scroll of eternity, then would his complete sermon be preached.

Roberts offered A Comprehensive History as his answer to critics like Bernard De Voto, affirming that the Church was not "winding down" and that its second century would be more glorious than the first; and he predicted it would emerge as "not a tolerated minor sect, but a world movement." The classicist and historian Hugh W. Nibley, just one hour home from a mission in Europe, sat in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on the day of this presentation, and he remembers the tone of Roberts's voice as he said, hauntingly, "one hundred years... one hundred years!"

Roberts had wanted to have all of his family sitting on the front row to share this hour of completion. They had known the work through deprivation and irritation-as well as through participation-for most of their growing-up years and beyond. Georgia, not realizing her father's personal wishes, returned to teaching assignments in Logan and did not attend. Celia's heart was too feeble for her to come to witness the event. She listened instead on a battered radio in the old rock home in Centerville.

With the volumes on the pulpit "as if an altar," Roberts closed his address with a prayer:

And now, oh God, the Eternal Father! Here as to an altar, I bring this work of mine, and dedicate it unto Thee and to Thy cause. If there is any way of excellence in it, I am sure it is of Thee, and unto Thee belongs all glory and praise and honor. As Thy dear Son, the Christ, in the council before the world began, when accepting the mission to redeem the world, said, "Father, the glory be Thine!" So now, in this so infinitely smaller matter, but I trust in that same spirit, I say in the presence of all these people, "Father, the glory be Thine for this work accomplished." [^9]

362Roberts gave the copyright to the Church. "It will not bring me one dollar for its preparation," he said to the assembled conference. "If it did I should shame to mention it here as advertising my own wares. But this is not so. It was prompted and sustained through all the years by my deep love of the subject."

Six months later, in the 1930 October conference, President Heber J. Grant, in his closing address, gave Roberts the public tribute expiring time had prevented in April:

I want to express my gratitude, my thanks, my love and my blessing to Brother Brigham H. Roberts for the marvelous and inspiring energy that he has put forth in producing the six great volumes of history of this Church. It is a monumental labor and he has worked at it day and night. I know of no man who has been more diligent in his labors for the Church, day in and day out, than Brother Roberts has been in preparing this great history, and he has the gratitude of all the brethren, of the Presidency and the Apostles for the diligence, the great care and attention that he has given to the production of these volumes. [^10]

The publication of the Comprehensive History had and yet has its major influence among Church members. But for Roberts there were also spin-off effects elsewhere: the poet-historian Carl Sandburg in Chicago learned of the work and asked for an advance set in order to collect some authentic Mormon ballads; Professor Harry J. Carman of Columbia University earlier asked Roberts to contribute a paper on "Economic Aspects of the Career of the Mormons"; several encyclopedias, including the Britannica, involved Roberts in accounts of the Mormons, the Church, and its theology and history. Invitations came from universities as well as churches for presentations on various phases of the work. And a new wave of correspondence on difficult research problems reached his desk.

363In the aftermath, too, Roberts was approached by editors of several national magazines for answers to imponderable questions. What, he was asked near Christmas time, is the world's best hope? He answered, "The world's best hope is the world's continued progress in knowledge of the truth," [^11] later explaining that the ultimate truth is Christ. Another questioned that since the restored Church claimed the. ancient Church had faltered and failed, was not the newly established Church liable to be brought down? Roberts answered, "By no outside force." [^12] Again asked, "What does your faith mean to you?" he replied that his "subconscious" relationship with the early prophets and pioneers had helped him cope with "allurements" of the world, and the cause of Christ had become "second nature to me to defend." [^13]

For the events in which he himself participated, Roberts either kept himself out of the history or referred to himself in the third person. The Tennessee massacre is detailed without mentioning his name, as is the Church's involvement in World War I, the building and dedication of the Mormon Battalion Monument, and the presentation of A Comprehensive History of the Church. Even when he mentions his own involvement in the congressional battle, he uses the third person. [^14]

In appraising his work it is important to know how he felt about the task. In the spirit of caution, he had omitted the questionable "Martyrdom Miracles," [^15] and this aroused feelings. To one protest, for example, written with "anonymosity," Roberts replied:

Suppose your youth receive their impressions of church history from "pictures and stories" and build their faith upon these alleged miracles [and] shall someday come face to face with the fact that their belief rests on falsehoods, what then will be the result? Will they not say that since these things are myth and our Church has permitted them to be perpetuated ... might not the other fundamentals to the actual story of the Church, the things in which it had its origin, might they not all be lies and nothing but lies?

Some felt there was no harm in circulating such stories, since many people believed them. But Roberts sternly replied: "Because one repudiates the false he stands in danger of weakening, perhaps losing the truth. I have no fear of such results. I find my own heart strengthened in the truth by getting rid of the untruth, the spectacular, the bizarre, as soon as I learn that it is based upon worthless testimony. [^16]

364In his studies of world religions, Roberts witnessed the phenomenon-for example, in Buddhism-that the disciples attempt to recall sayings and doings of the Master, and all criticism, supported or not, is wiped away. Careful weigbing of evidence is replaced by polarization into unbeliever and heretic. In Egypt, in India, and in creedalized Christianity the phenomenon repeats itself. As a historian, Roberts wished to prevent that from happening in Mormonism.

Roberts found abundant testimony for the fundamental, crucial origin of the Restoration, as well as for its continuity; he saw Mormonism as the best accredited religion in the world. He did not want his history to say members of the Church know what they don't know or to say they don't know when they do. Thus he troubled dogmatists of two varieties. He was unwilling to include material that had no credentials, however well-entrenched in Mormon or non-Mormon minds. But he was equally unwilling to exclude material that was "supernatural," or to opt for any of the fashionable artificial ways of avoiding taking a position on it. Roberts did not want to smuggle his premises in from anywhere.

His own comment on his work, written three years after its publication, manifests his intent:

One day, meeting me in the Church offices, David McKenzie said, in his broad rich Scot dialect: "Well, I have read your story in this month's Americana. And aye, Mon, the frankness o' it! How dare you do it, Mon!" This "frankness" which is another name for fairness was sometimes subject to criticism by others. They would have been glad to yield to the weakness of making everything pro-Mormon. But I was of the conviction that to have this history both advocate and defense of the New Dispensation it must be kept unbiased and fearless, and as full of the unfavorable tide of events as the favorable. [^17]

In this same context Roberts approved and paraphrased a statement of Theodore Roosevelt: "I believe history would be worse than useless if it doesn't tell the exact truth; and if it doesn't tell our disasters and shortcomings as well as our triumphs." [^18]

As a writer and historian, Roberts was temperamentally independent and unfettered; he had no professional reputation to hedge and no "official" endorsement from the Church. And he had nothing to gain financially. Nor was he much concerned about impressing or mollifying the generation in which he lived; in his own eyes he was writing more for a generation to come.

365Yet Roberts did not imagine his work to be definitive. While updating and polishing segments of the Americana series in Brooklyn, he told his secretary, C. C. Cowan, "It will all be done over, better." Nor did he have illusions about perfect objectivity or his own stance as an ideal spectator; he simply and openly tried to put his stance honestly. And he often said: "It takes a hundred years for the dust and friction to diminish enough to do justice to any set of events. We are still too close to much of our history." (That is what his critics, even sympathetic ones, have said of his history.) If he had a minimum hope it was that later histories would be indebted to his work and that the "plans" he had laid would be useful if not irreplaceable. To this end he listed many unused notes and memoranda for future reference, "especially if any part of the history should be assailed by unfair and ill-informed critics.' [^19] He also recognized that methodologies shift as do acceptable forms of evidence; that is, the meta-history or presuppositions of an age change garb with every generation.

By their training historians are suspicious, as they winnow through mountains of detail and the morass of unrelated subjective data and impressions. T. L. Pardoe remembers that when a person recounting an event faltered or contradicted himself, Roberts abruptly changed his line of questioning. He was in such ways a combination of detective and debunker. His major task as he saw it was to push resolutely for accuracy. But he was most himself as an interpreter, struggling to make sense of the past, a task which he knew was prodigiously difficult.

Your historic statement, your history must not be merely a recital of events. The events must be coordinated and so linked together that the ratiohole of successive events shall be made apparent; and how they link in with the world movements which but spell out God's purposes struggling to get expressed. [^20]

Who dares to undertake such a momentous task? He did.

366After half a century, the judgment of Roberts's writings by professional historians within the Church is mixed and hesitant. The grand style of historical writing has declined, and specialized monographs and positivistic methodology tend to dominate the field. The new wave of introspective "participative" writing and psycho-history have had little impact on Mormon historians or on historical Mormonism. Yet from a variety of backgrounds critics acknowledge some of the strengths and recognize the limitations which Roberts himself avowed. He is praised for his national outreach, which "made some American writers aware that Mormonism has a history, and that it might be told in the setting of American history," [^21] and for being able to recognize proximate causes in the context of the larger sweep of a divine-human setting. He is praised for refusing to rely upon hearsay, and for exposition which, though often pro-Mormon, is nevertheless candid both in presenting opposing viewpoints and in acknowledging its own biases. He is approved for his avoidance of "insipid journalese," and his ability to revise and rework. A Comprehensive History of the Church, it is said, is "far superior to any history of Mormonism which has yet appeared. Even today it is a work which no serious student can afford to ignore." [^22] Even those critical of Roberts's polemic style, political focus, and reliance on oratory acknowledge that "Roberts composed a strong and carefully researched comprehensive historical statement, laid out many of the fundamental issues and basic problems, and did so with courage and honesty." [^23] In Roberts's entry in the Dictionary of American Biography is recorded, "He was able to see the history of his people with the perspective of one viewing it in terms of the entire sweep of history." [^24]

367Roberts once said, "It takes so much of the past to bring reason to the present." But he knew it takes much more than reason to bring the past to life. Some of Roberts's critics have sought to discredit the approach to history that makes it a passionate part of one's own being-lived through-and they make it instead a specialist's retreat, a professional game for which only the detached are qualified. Those critics build their reputations by poking at the ashes. At his best B. H. Roberts took from the altars of the past not the ashes, but the fire. And in the pages of his best writing, the fire still burns.

Notes

Chapter 19

1 N. B. Lundwall Papers, part 2, BYU Special Cellections.

2 Conference Report, April 1914, p. 106.

3 B. H. Roberts to I. K. Russell, 16 July 1926, BYU Special Collections.

4 B. H. Roberts to Elizabeth Hinckley, 8 September 1929.

5 Ora L. Knecht to Truman G. Madsen, 24 May 1969.

6 B. H. Roberts to Elizabeth Hinckley, 8 September 1929.

7 The printing cost for the full six volumes was a hundred thousand dollars, fifty thousand dollars more than the original estimates. M. Ross Fox, who was at Deseret News Press in 1930, reported that there were five thousand sets (thirty thousand volumes) in the first edition, the largest order the press had ever filled.

8 B. H. Roberts to Elizabeth Hinckley, 9 July 1930.

9 Conference Report, April 1930, p. 49.

10 Conference Report, October 1930, p. 138.

11 TWL, vol. 1, p. 9.

12 As reported by Jean Dunn to Truman G. Madsen, 2 November 1965.

13 Instructor (March 1932).

14 CHC, 6:89-94, 363-74, 544.

15 Stories such as an "attempted beheading of Joseph Smith at Carthage and a shaft of light preventing it."

16 Original letter in Church Archives; see Deseret Evening News, 26 June 1926.

17 BN, p. 217.

18 Henry F, Pringle, "Review of Biography of Theodore Roosevelt," New York Times, 8 November 1931.

19 B. H. Roberts to Elizabeth Hinckley, I September 1930.

20 Conference Report, April 1930, p. 45.

21 T. Edgar Lyon to Truman G. Madsen, 2 November 1965. See also Lyon's "Church Historians I Have Known," pp. 16-17.

22 Davis Bitton, "B. H. Roberts as Historian," p. 25.

23 Sterling W. McMurrin in introduction to the republished Joseph Smith: Prophet-Teacher, p. 8.

24 Lowry Nelson, Dictionary of American Biography, p. 4 .

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
[^23] 23 Mrs. William Reed to Ann Roberts.
[^24] 24 Memoirs, p. 3.
