Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

20 Return to the Sacred Grove

For nearly two years Roberts had day and night been "chained to his desk." Now, just days after the final corrections on the six-volume Comprehensive History, in mid-July 1930, he traveled by train to his beloved fountainhead.

I never visit that place [the Sacred Grove] but when I feel that I am living in the atmosphere of the great events that took place there. The most uplifting, sanctifying, and glorifying inspiration that I have ever experienced has been in the Sacred Grove where the Lord appeared unto him who was to become the New Witness for God in the dispensation of the fulness of times. I am happy in the opportunity of visiting that place and of receiving the sacrament of the Lord's supper there, from time to time. [^1]

"I am hoping and praying," he had written to one of his former missionaries two weeks earlier, "that the way may open for a vacation for myself in the east, a visit to New York-the one place of my dreams and memories and loves and sense of contentment. [^2]

368 Some 150 missionaries gathered at the Sacred Grove. James H. Moyle, president of the Eastern States Mission, had arranged this meeting in accordance with Roberts's request. It was held in the evening in a natural amphitheater with coal oil lamps. One missionary recalls:

We came by invitation, some from long distances. We were aware that this meeting had been called by Brother Roberts, that it was his wish. We wondered why. I had never heard him before and knew almost nothing of his life. But I have felt since that he had made great preparation for this occasion. Great preparation! And there was no way to escape the question, "What must he have been through?" As he stood there, his head upward and his stance solid, I thought of an angry tumultuous sea. The feeling was that he had found the power to ride the crest of the most angry waves. [^3]

After a hymn and a prayer Roberts began: "We have asked you here that this night might become a memorable occasion, memorable forever. It will be a night of rededica-tion. We want you to know what happened here... and what it is beginning to mean to the whole human family." He had written: "The groves were God's first temples... and now came one to this grove as to a solemn temple, to submit his mind and his will to God, man's highest act of worship-self-surrender."

Caught in the penetration of this vision of how the Father and the Son came amidst an outpouring of light, "in the full light of an all-glorious day," even those who thought their assurance and understanding were deep became aware of their own spiritual myopia. [^4] Louise Lake recalled:

369No matter how great he was as a speaker, and he was great, he could not have so gripped and melted us without the inspiration and presence of the Lord. We did not look to the right or left. We sensed that others, like ourselves, were weeping, not in a sporadic burst but in calm, silent releasing of tears that comes under the enduring influence of the Spirit. Every cell of his being was bearing witness. In the dim light his eyes were filled with the testimony of that Spirit. I do not believe anyone could have heard B. H. Roberts as we heard him that night and doubt his knowledge. For his testimony of Christ was overwhelming. "I bear witness that He can be known," he said. "I bear witness to you that He is known. I bear witness that He stands revealed. For I know Him."

Then he prayed in a unique way. He asked that we join him aloud sentence by sentence. [^5] Over the years the exact words of that prayer have faded. But the spirit was something like this: "O, Father, may the Holy Ghost reveal and seal upon our hearts this knowledge until we are filled therewith until we are of Thy Truth, until our lives grow into the very likeness of Thee and Thy Son. And bless us to be true to what we know, and to build upon this knowledge, this rock." [^6]

In the hush that permeated the missionaries, Roberts turned away and walked slowly, and for the last time, from the Sacred Grove.

The following is a written echo of that sermon:

In the truth of principles we have received from God we are strong; not so much, either, because of the little truth that has been revealed to us; the little knowledge to which we have attained, but more because of the great ocean of knowledge that we have access to, through one of the great principles we announce as a doctrine to the world, namely: revelation. Through the acceptance of that doctrine we have access to God's hidden treasure of knowledge; which, in comparison to that which men in this world have received, is as some mighty ocean to a lakelet.

370In this new dispensation of the gospel, we indeed have received great truths, and precious withal. God has revealed Himself unto His Witness of the New Dispensation, Joseph Smith, in a most effective splendid manner. We know some, thing of the character, and even something of the form and features of that Mighty Intelligence that stands in the councils of the Gods, and out of whose wisdom and power creation and guidance comes as to the affairs of this universe. God has made known unto us that Jesus Christ is the express image of the Father, and that as the Christ was, in form and feature, in intellectual and moral quality, the attributes of soul, so indeed also is the Father. To know this and to know it well, to have it take possession of the consciousness, so that when God is spoken of, the image of Christ, holding-as He announced to His disciples that he did hold-all power in heaven and in earth: to have such a consciousness of God, so that when His name or title is spoken this vision of God, revealed through the person and nature of the Christ [comes to the soul], is a very great truth indeed.

"Mormonism" teaches man that he is the child of God: it tells him that he has in him divine elements that partake of the nature of God; that he may live forever, and that he may go on from one degree of excellence unto another until he shall attain unto something that is truly grand, truly great, worthy of a God to give, worthy of a son of God to receive. [^7]

During this period Roberts also contributed to the Church News a weekly series that began August 30, 1930, and continued until March 28, 1931, consisting of brief essays under the general title, "In the Realm of the Church," and "LDS Doctrine, Discourses, News, and Views." With thorough scriptural backing, he here lists the dispensations previous to our time, citing biblical scriptures for the promise of this last dispensation of the fulness of times. [^8] He stressed the importance of the Book of Mormon as another witness for the divinity of Christ, brought forth in this dispensation to stand with the Bible as a witness of the truth of God's work among men.

371In April 1931, Roberts was confronted with a medical dilemma. From the time he was diagnosed as a diabetic, he was aware that circulatory failure in his extremities might require amputation. He had told his family he would "rather die" than give up an arm or leg. Dr. Charles H. Wilcox and Dr. John Sharp, after consultation with the Mayo Clinic, found it necessary to recommend amputation of his right leg, stating bluntly, "It will need to be a high operation." Two months earlier J. Golden Kimball had joshed Roberts about his ailment: "He's just walking around to avoid funeral expenses." "The Brethren need to appropriate money to the First Council to buy wheel chairs for each of us in order to wheel us out on the lawn and shoot us. It would be a good thing for the Church." Now the repugnant notion of a wheelchair on the immediate horizon was a reality. After consultation with the doctors, Roberts startled his family by reversing his earlier declaration; he told them he would "gladly" give his foot or leg in order to live "a few short years more." His family circle and the Brethren fasted and prayed for him. He came through the operation, which removed a part of his right foot, and was touched to learn that in a prayer in the temple Elder Antoine R. Ivins had besought the Lord, "O Lord, we ask Thee to preserve Brother Roberts for us because we need him so very much."

Within hours after the forty-five-minute operation, he awoke and said to his son Harold and daughter Loa, "Oh, it's good to see those dear faces again." Soon he asked for Elsa Cook, his secretary, to bring the manuscript of volume seven of the History of the Church so he could read proofs. During the next week, she worked with him each day from 11:00 to 1:00 P.M. on the 1845 period of Church history. She also reported his progress in letters to concerned former missionaries. Celia and the children were regular visitors also.

But the daily visits of President Heber J. Grant, who lived in a brick bungalow only two blocks from the hospital, and the series of conversations that they held, took Roberts's mind off pain as much as his writing. They discussed subjects of interest to both, and Roberts was encouraged to write a letter on his historical understanding of the role of the Seventy, based on Brigham Young's speech in a meeting in the Nauvoo Temple on January 25, 1846. [^9] The letter is permanent evidence that his illness had in no way diminished his cognitive skills nor his motivation to magnify his calling as senior member of the First Council of the Seventy.

Roberts's positive outlook lasted three weeks, then a wave of despondency and withdrawal overtook him. He had shown an allergic reaction to his daily insulin shot, which alarmed the doctors, and he had had too much time to brood.

Just at this time, his longtime friend and fellow-historian, Orson F. Whitney, was admitted to the hospital with "leakage of the heart," and in a few days died. The news discouraged Elder Roberts. So did complications: he had attempted to get out of bed alone and had injured himself in the hard fall to the floor. Listless and sullen, he built an emotional moat around himself, refusing to see anyone. He had a scrawled note put on the door: "Absolutely no visitors, B. H. Roberts."

372Roberts's friend of five decades, John M. Whitaker, was impressed to visit him and ignored the sign. Whitaker found Roberts fast asleep and, without awakening him, gingerly anointed him with consecrated oil and blessed him to recover. Roberts awoke in great agitation and announced, "I told you... I have finished!" [^10]

Before he left the hospital, Whitaker told Roberts: "No, no, Brother Roberts. You have not completed what you came here to do. No one in the church has the information, facts of history, and ability to finish what you have begun. You must change your attitude and live and do this work for yourself." [^11]

The next morning Dr. Wilcox told Roberts there was no reason at all why he should not get well if he would "have a will to." Four days later, May 23, 1931, he was released from the hospital. Dressed in a red bathrobe, he asked to go immediately to the Church offices, where he was warmed by the reception of many of the Brethren.

Brooding over the significance of his tenuous reprieve, he wrote:

I sincerely hope my life has been preserved for the accomplishment of something useful in the future. If it has not been so preserved then I feel that there was little need of keeping me alive, as it would have been much easier to have passed on than to continue in conscious [mortal] existence. If nothing comes of it but just to remain, I shall not doubt but what there is a divine wisdom in it, but I, poor mortal, shall not be able to discern it. [^12]

His convalescence lasted five months. When he returned to the Tabernacle, he thanked the members for their prayers of faith.

The ordeal through which I passed was an extremely trying one and brought me deep down into the shadows of another world. In fact, I feel as if I had passed through the experience of death, and was now trying to adjust myself to a new phase of experience where everyone seems new yet going on so fast from the world from which I have just emerged. [^13]

In personal letters he acknowledged that some of his plans had "faded somewhat into the distance," and that the changes he wanted to institute in the Seventies organization he no longer had will to pursue.

373I have to console myself with the thought that this is God's work and if he does not come to its rescue, I am helpless. You can see at once that I am not in a very encouraged mood, but I shall watch the developments with keen interest. [^14]

Fighting both disease and age, Roberts wished to not simply "blink out," but to somehow climax his life with testimony. He had shifted priorities to the exercise of "my duty as a special witness for the Lord Jesus Christ," he confided to his son Ben. [^15] He spent part of his convalescence

in revising and having printed the sixteen radio addresses delivered in 1929 with appendix of forty additional pages-it makes a book of about 300 pages. It is finished and now only awaits binding. I hope you will enjoy it when your copy comes. It has kept me employed during my convalescence. I have dared to think rather well of it, but... vanity? [^16]

He made occasional public appearances, in one of which he spoke at the funeral of Lieutenant Ames of the 145th Battalion. His discourse was on broken harmony. "We come to live in perfect harmony with those we love and suddenly there comes a parting-a broken harmony. Sometimes the harmony is resumed again only to be broken again later on ... eternal life is the promise of never-ending harmony of love's reunion."

It was a mellowing experience for him to be visited by many during his weeks of recovery.

During my... retirement [convalescence] in the Roberts Hotel, I have been greatly surprised by so many of my eastern states missionaries and members of the General Authorities calling on me and meeting me on the streets in going to and from my office in a wheelchair. I could scarcely believe one could have so many friends. It made me very happy. [^17]

But his most satisfying hours were spent at the pulpit. In official settings where a clerk could record his discourse, Roberts presented themes from chapters in his unpublished "The Truth, the Way, the Life.' [^18]

His last seven discourses were delivered in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. Harold B. Lee, then the young president of Pioneer Stake, recalled:

374The last sermon I heard President Roberts preach was in the Salt Lake Tabernacle at an afternoon session of the Pioneer Stake Quarterly Conference. Those were the days when we had an afternoon session every day in the Tabernacle, particularly for tourists and visitors who might want to hear the Tabernacle choir at which time someone was assigned to explain principles of the gospel. President Roberts had been our conference visitor. He had just had a serious illness which had necessitated the amputation of a part of his foot. When I asked him if he felt strong enough to speak at the Tabernacle session he said he believed he would like to try because he had some few things he would like to say to the Church in places where it would be recorded. [These sermons in the Tabernacle were always taken down by court stenographers.] President Roberts spoke in his usual vigorous way until he seemed to be near exhaustion. He turned to the Choir and asked if they would sing while he rested. At the conclusion of the singing he then announced that he believed that the most significant part of his sermon was now to be found in what he would say in concluding his talk. [^19]

He was also invited by Ephraim E. Ericksen, president of the American Philosophical Association and chairman of the Department of Philosophy at the University of Utah, to address a select faculty meeting. Roberts's address, "Protest Against a Dying Universe," was directed, he confided, to "some of our members who are following the philosophies of the world and are in danger of slipping from their moorings." Roberts's remarks were not recorded, but Professor Ericksen recalls:

He said after a coherent and vigorous presentation that he loved books; indeed, that in some degree books had made him. But then in a most vehement way he said, "But I am not dependent on books. I am dependent for what I really know and really trust, on the direct experience of God." He made us feel like little bits of fellows, just little bits of fellows. [^20]

Not being condescending or patronizing to the academicians, Roberts was, like Paul of ancient times, "determined to know only Christ and him crucified." [^21]

375 On July 9, Roberts wrote an article for the Deseret News entitled "Organization of the Seventy, Why Seven Presidents?" He recapitulated the revelations and documentary history, stressing that the Seventy "constitute the foreign ministry of the church; that their special calling is to travel and preach the gospel in all nations, first to the Gentiles and then to the Jews." [^22] His own travels were diminishing.

On Sunday, July 31, 1932, at the funeral of John G. M. Barnes in Kaysville, Roberts startled the audience by stating, "I am not here to quote the scriptures to prove the resurrection from the dead, I am here to challenge the universal justice and to say to that justice, 'we demand for this man immortality and eternal life,' and nothing else will possibly be justice to him and worthwhile to God." He closed with, "Suppose instead of 72 years, he had lived... a thousand million-what a career awaits."

He then addressed the dead man directly:

All right, John, this is not goodbye, but au revoir. You will soon meet with our friend, your splendid father, and all the fine groups of pioneers that began the work of the redemption of the wilderness of this part of the west. Take a word from us to them. Remember us to President William R. Smith and John Hess, and all the other men who played such prominent parts in the development of this north end of Davis County. You will meet them and we want to be remembered. [^23]

Early in 1933, B. H. Roberts began dictating during spare office hours his "biographical notes"; some corrections or emendations are pencilled in. He tried to be sequential, but the narrative was often piecemeal and the dates inaccurate. Roberts was hopeful that his literary resolves, his "work undone," would "bend the Lord" to extend his life, but a diabetic weakening was apparent and his energies were diminishing. In reviewing his life for what he called the "biographical notes," he sometimes gave way to emotion-a most unfamiliar experience for him.

Elsa Cook, his secretary, said of this time:

I wrote as he dictated, as fast as my shorthand would allow, with few pauses or interruptions, almost breathlessly. It seemed to me that the room was a holy place. Hours would slip by. As I showed signs of weariness, President Roberts would apologize and say, "Oh, I'm sorry, Elsa. I wanted to complete that thought. [^24]

376Two former missionaries who had heard rumors that Roberts was at work on an autobiography wrote inquiries and received this glimpse of Roberts's own appraisal of what he called his "biographical notes";

I do not think much of them. The conviction grows upon me that they ought not to be published. First, because my life is not of sufficient importance for a biography; [^25] second that it could not be fully told without arraigning others, and if told it must be fully and of course truthfully told; if that were done all Israel would be greatly shocked. The only thing that would induce me to publish it would be to prevent someone else half and weakly doing it. [^26]

Actually, he realized that his published writings made the understanding of his life crucial to his readers. Still, it is a curious omission that among his dictated notes there are only nine paragraphs that refer directly or indirectly to his writings. There is no mention of his final manuscript, "The Truth, the Way, the Life," nor is there mention of Joseph Smith: Prophet, Teacher, Mormon Doctrine of Deity, the two-volume Defense of the Faith and the Saints, or Succession in the Presidency. He only speaks of his efforts in editing the History of the Church and in writing A Comprehensive History of the Church, though the manuals he wrote over a period of nine years for the MIA are mentioned, especially the three on the Book of Mormon, New Witnesses for God. "By many [they are] regarded as my great contribution to the literature of the church."

He also says nothing of his service as chaplain, little about the Brethren, and still less about his family. He chose to dictate his recollections in the third person, perhaps in part because of a historian's quest for impartiality, and in part because his very subjectivity needed the protection of methodic obiectivity. [^27]

On the day of his death, the press would announce that Roberts's autobiography was "virtually completed." [^28] In fact, much of it was never really begun.

377Roberts was still pushing his Seventy work with vigor, and met almost daily in council meetings as well as fulfilling weekend conference assignments throughout the western states. By early summer, he sometimes mentioned as explanation for his tottering and bumping into things that he was having "bouts with dizziness."

Elder Adelbert Cazier and Roberts had made a pact in the 1880s, when they were missionaries in the South, that "whichever of us outlives the other will preach his funeral sermon." In August 1933 Adelbert Cazier died. The funeral was in Nephi, Utah, nearly a hundred miles south of Salt Lake, and Roberts was driven there to deliver the funeral address. Refreshments had been prepared for the family afterwards, and Roberts was invited. Before he reached for rich pastries, he searched for the needle essential for his daily insulin shot. It had been lost, so he went without the shot. [^29]

In the "down spell" of the next few days he was newly aware that his diabetes was becoming critical. (He was thin and gaunt, N. B. Lundwall recalls.)

In spite of his deteriorating health, he was heartened by the approval of his "Correspondence Course for the Seventies," by which he hoped to help the seventeen thousand seventies in the Church. [^30] This was an individual home study course, bringing to bear scriptural sources to help prepare his charges for a more informed and effective missionary effort. The lessons were to be read or previewed at home before group or quorum discussion. In July, four form letters initiating this program were sent to the quorums throughout the world, but there was only a feeble response.

Roberts sensed that word of his decline in health had circulated, and that the seventies wondered if either he or the home study program would long survive. Aggressively he wrote again, a form letter to the seventies quorums, reiterating the slogan he had made a banner for three decades: "To be a Seventy means mental activity, intellectual development, and the attainment of spiritual power." "Where is the power manifest in this dead silence? Let us have no dawdling." [^31] This time the response was substantial, and Roberts arranged a model class for seventies to be held in Salt Lake City in connection with October general conference.

378Roberts's September lesson to be reviewed at conference was titled "The Revolt Against God." It dealt with the agreement shown in quotations from three contemporaries, H. G. Wells, Rufus Jones (a Quaker mystic), and C. E. M. Joad (a British philosopher), on the fading religiosity of mankind and the need for a re-creating of the contemporary church. The burden of Roberts's lesson was that the world "still needs the new dispensation of the Gospel." Roberts blocked out later lessons on "the needed qualifications of missionaries," and "methods of delivering the message." [^32]

After his operation, Roberts had lived in the Roberts Hotel in downtown Salt Lake, later moving into the Hotel Utah. His daughters took turns staying with him; for, in spite of his frequent urgings, Celia would not leave the rock home in Centerville. She knew her own health problems might add to his and be a burden. Most Sundays she did manage to visit Roberts at the hotel.

On August 23, Roberts took a sleeper car on the train to Chicago to attend an assembly of "263 eminent speakers of all faiths, races, and countries, seeking spiritual solution to man's present problems." He was listed with many prominent figures-Mrs. Margaret Sanger of New York (whose address was titled "Woman and the Future"), Dean Roscoe Pound ("Faith and Civilization"), Wisconsin Governor Philip F. LaFollette ("Where Are We Going?"), the architect Frank Lloyd Wright ("The Sociological Basis for Unorganic Architecture"); Roberts's discourse was "Economics of the New Age." He impressed so many that he was invited to give his second address, "Standard of Peace," which he delivered on August 29. This World Fellowship of Faiths was held in connection with the Chicago World's Fair.

Roberts came away from the World Fellowship encouraged at the great feeling of tolerance and goodwill and at the number of Orientals who had come to the session, but he was troubled that the veneer of goodwill arose less from a confluence of conviction than from its absence, a lack of assurance ("we can join hands because we no longer have anything unique to give"). He was troubled that not just the world, but Christianity itself, had "ceased to believe that the redemption of the world will be through Christ." He observed and rejoiced in the marvels of technology in the hall of science but lamented its contrast to the great decline in religious understanding. [^33]

379In his last three years, Roberts had been frequently invited as a funeral speaker. In Los Angeles at the funeral of his colleague in the First Council of the Seventy, Joseph W. McMurrin, he read the "Title of Inheritance," his name for Joseph Smith's revelation on the three degrees of glory. At the funeral of his eighteen-year-old grandson, Paul, on whom he had built great hopes, whose life was ended by a car accident in North Bountiful, he cried out at the graveside:

I know, Paul, thy spirit has been permitted to attend these services, and may you now take your departure to mingle with your loved ones on the other side as we take our departure from this sacred place to carry on and on until our missions are performed and we too shall go to join thee.

O, Paul, we bid thee farewell.

On September 17, 1933, Roberts spoke at the funeral of a longtime Davis County friend, John Hopkins. Elder Hugh B. Brown was present in the service and observed Roberts's drowsiness, bloodshot eyes, and perspiring brow. As he spoke, his usual vigor seemed clouded. As he finished his tribute, he looked over the heads of the gathering and said: "So long, Jack. I'll be seeing you in a few days." No one realized this was his public declaration of his own departure only days away.

The observable symptoms of his diabetes had increased rather than decreased with age, and some may have supposed them to be signs of a drinking habit. Diabetic drivers have been arrested and jailed, and in some cases have died in jail, because even professional law enforcement officers mistake symptoms of intoxication for those of diabetes: seeming alcoholic breath, precarious balance, slurred speech. In a diabetic person these symptoms indicate either too little insulin or too much sugar. Roberts, especially in his last years, was afflicted both ways. But President Joseph Fielding Smith told the author, acknowledging that Roberts had a "tendency" to alcohol in his earlier years, "I worked by his side, shoulder to shoulder, every day for the last five years of his life. He lived above reproach."

380Considering the example and environment of his early life, Roberts might well have gone to a premature grave an alcoholic. Instead, in the words of an intimate friend, "He is not likely to receive just credit in this world for all he has overcome."

After an enervating Sabbath in late September, which included five consecutive hours of meetings, Roberts too eagerly responded to a call from Price, Utah. There was a coal-worker strike. He thought the trip, a hundred miles southeast of Provo through the autumn leaves, "might be a rest." He had proven a just, equitable mediator with management heads (for example during a Salt Lake City streetcar strike). He hoped to compose this matter too. Early Monday he traveled there, took the lead in the discussion, and after several hours was successful. But he returned to Salt Lake bone-weary and ill, more resigned to his imminent death then anyone except he himself knew. The next afternoon, in the midst of preparations for October conference, he dictated a note: "I do not want a public funeral. I do not want any of the Brethren to speak except President Grant." His secretary, Elsa Cook, wrote nothing but said in a composed voice, "Why, of course you will have a funeral, and of course the Brethren will speak." Roberts replied: "No. Write it down. Just let them put me away." Elsa smiled, "This time you won't get your way."

Always forward-looking, Roberts had many unfinished dreams. For example, he had hoped to visit South America where he might pursue firsthand what he had only studied in commentary literature-the antiquities of the Book of Mormon. He told assistant Church historian Preston Nibley that he wished to "call in" his New Witness series and "start over." His historical passion led him to project several volumes on less prominent figures in early Mormon history, for example, Oliver Cowdery, Frederick G. Williams, perhaps Sidney Rigdon. His penchant for memorializing led to a plan to organize a "Sons of the Utah Pioneers Battalion" who would follow annually in the footsteps of the "march never equaled." He also envisioned the establishing of an annual "Centennial trek over the Mormon trail." His "magnificent ideas" for the seventies included the dream of a twentieth-century School of the Prophets, as at Kirtland, where there would be systematic study of languages, history, geography, and a whole range of truth "in theory, in principle, in doctrine."

381His theological interests had led him to gather materials for a volume on the Mormon doctrine of creation, including the newest data from the life-sciences. He aspired, too, to greater competence in world thought and especially in Buddhism and Hinduism and Confucianism. (He had borrowed the word avatar from the Hindu sacred texts as the symbol of man's divine potentiaL) His biblical interests were fueled by new discoveries of extracanonical books-a book of Abraham and a fragment of Kallicrates on baptism for the dead. He wished to pursue further parallels between Mormonism, Judaism and early Christianity. His acquaintance with the collapse of absolute idealism (he read much in Royce and American Hegelians) gave him interest in more scientific but at the same time more introspective approaches to reality, as in William James. [^34] He had careful notes on Alfred North Whitehead for whom God is "the Great Com-panion-the fellow sufferer who understands. [^35] He read the beginnings of the so-called "new supernaturalism" and wanted to present Mormonism as the "balance-staff" between irrationalism on the one end and a data-excluding scientism on the other. Finally, he had hoped to "fling the torch" to a spiritual heir. "He grieved about this," remembers one of his missionaries, "for he did not see an obvious successor coming along on whom his mantle might fall."

On the morning of Tuesday, September 27, 1933, President Grant received a call from Dr. Gill Richards that Elder Roberts was "failing," almost unconscious. President Grant called an ambulance. By 10:00 A.M. Roberts was in the LDS Hospital under intensive care; by 11:00 A.M. he was slightly better because of a steadying injection. A few moments later he turned to the nurse and said, clearly and brightly: "You had better give me my coat. I am not going to stay here in bed. I have stayed long enough." Those were to be his last words. Within minutes, he was slipping into a coma, his pulse fading, rallying and then fading again. With the doctor present, he coughed and a nurse leaned over him and said, "He has just died."

From around the world, quorums of seventy relayed feelings of sympathy to Celia for the loss of a "noble husband" and a "great teacher." In the Church many echoed J. M. Whitaker's journal entry, "He was a genius." [^36]

382 His funeral was held October 1, 1933, in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, where a capacity crowd convened. The "war-horse of the Church" was at peace. [^37] In speech and in print he was praised for hard work, strong faith, and a long fight to aid his fellowmen without selfish aim and with the focus on the right. New York papers gave him prominent attention and said that his written history would be a permanent monument. The First Presidency announced, after paying tribute to his role as defender and patriot, "He will live forever through the many writings to which he has devoted much of his life."

His coffin was covered by an American flag, and his pallbearers were clad in khaki, two majors among them. A thunder of volleys was fired across his open grave, and the bugler from the 145th sounded "Taps." A year and a half later, hundreds of his former missionaries would assemble at his grave for a sunset service to place a monument inscribed, "B. H. Roberts, Churchman, Soldier, Statesman." His own wish for a tombstone inscription was expressed only once to his mother, just before the Tennessee massacre: "He has performed a good mission, he has fought the good fight, he has kept the faith."

B. H. Roberts died within two months of the passing of Elder James E. Talinage on July 27, 1933. The Church was doubly bereft. As conference convened in April 1934, many of the speakers referred to the void. Elder David O. McKay praised "that marvelous store of knowledge and information" that these two men had acquired and transmitted. Elder Stephen L Richards spoke of Roberts's "monumental work" and "voluminous writings." President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., dubbed Roberts and Talmage "the great Crusaders": "They were armored in truth; they loved truth for truth's sake; they did not depend upon the approval of the world for their inspiration nor for their courage." [^38] J. Golden Kimball, who had been asked to pray at Roberts's graveside but not asked to speak at his funeral, had muffled his disappointment by saying, "Well, it takes a better man to pray than to preach." Now he acknowledged his own sense of loss:

383I never felt more lonely or helpless .... Brother Roberts has been my mentor; he has been my teacher; he has been my chronicler... he had the most wonderful mind and memory of any human being I have ever known, right up to the very last. A great light has gone out of my life." [^39]

384President Grant had expressed this sense of immense loss when he reached the hospital on that last morning of Roberts's life and the doctors confided to him that there was at most an hour or two. Often President Grant had wondered what to do with this hard-to-handle giant of a man. Now, standing over his bed with moist eyes and cheeks, he said to Roberts's son, "Oh, Harold, what will I do without him!"

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
[^9] 9 This phrase is from John Greenleaf Whittier.
[^10] 10 Memoirs of Mary Ann Martha Roberts Day, private manuscript preserved by Haven R. Day, a grandson, p. 1; hereafter cited as Memoirs.
[^11] 11 See Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons Co., 1892-1904), 4:688; see also Deseret News, 11 January 1910.
[^12] 12 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes; hereafter cited as BN. These notes were dictated by Roberts to his secretary in January, February and March 1933.
[^13] 13 Born 3 May 1826. See B. H. Roberts Temple Book, Roberts Family Collection; hereafter cited as BHR Temple Book.
[^14] 14 Another child named Benjamin, birthplace unknown, died at birth.
[^15] 15 Three thousand members were excommunicated between 1850 and 1860 in the British Mission. See Statistical Records, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That department is hereafter cited as Church Archives.
[^16] 16 Memoirs, p. 2.
[^17] 17 Matt. 10:37; Col. 3:18.
[^18] 18 B.H. Roberts, Biographical Notes, typescript by his daughter Georgia, p. 5; hereafter cited as BNG.
[^19] 19 BNG, pp. 7-8.
[^20] 20 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^21] 21 It was seven years before she could pay back the hundred dollars advanced to her by the Perpetual Emigration Fund in England.
[^22] 22 It appears that, unless she was divulging less than she knew, she was unaware that Harry and Polly were still in England.
[^23] 23 Mrs. William Reed to Ann Roberts.
[^24] 24 Memoirs, p. 3.
[^25] 25 Late in their lives, on 3 May 1928, B. H. and Annie Brynie, a half-sister, and Mary arranged for the temple sealing of Ann Everington and Benjamin Roberts and all of the children including the twins and baby Thomas. See BHR Temple Book.
[^26] 26 Roberts kept one sample of his father's handwriting from the original wrapping of the photo given his mother. It is preserved in the family collection.
[^27] 27 B.H. Roberts to his mother, 1 September 1883, Roberts Family Collection.
[^28] 28 Research has failed to establish where and when Ben died. The marriage date is 15 June 1848 (he was twenty-two) in Poplar, Middlesex, England; from the Book of Remembrance of Haven R. Day.
[^29] 29 B. H. Roberts to Ann Everington, 21 April 1880, Roberts Family Collection.
[^30] 30 Mrs. Charles H. Wilcox recorded these impressions from a conversation with B.H. Roberts at his home prior to his call to the Eastern States.
[^31] 31 BN, p. 10.
[^32] 32 See Juvenile Instructor 49 (February 1914): 85.
[^33] 33 Fifty years later, as chairman of "Vocations and Industry" in the youth program of the Church, he wrote, "We shall take the ground that no vocation of honest industry need be ignoble or debasing in its effects, but by properly correlating it with the general welfare of human life can be in effect both honorable and glorious." Improvement Era 15 (October 1912): 1083.
[^34] 34 Liahona 12 (20 October 1914): 364.
[^35] 35. Salt Lake Herald, 8 January 1899.
[^36] 36. So Roberts later told his children.
[^37] 37. BNG, p. 8.
[^38] 38 See History of Utah, 4:689.
[^39] 39 In a notebook under "Roberts, B. H." is this handwritten note: "Warrington-Town of, my birth place. Warrington, at the head of tide water on the Mersey River. It was a station of Romans (Veraterium) in the time of Agricola - (69-84 A.D.) and many Roman relics have been found in the neighborhood."
