Truman G. Madsen, Defender of the Faith: The B. H. Roberts Story ( 1980)

Epilogue

Not long before his death, Roberts copied into a small notebook the legend of "The Well of Bethlehem by the Gate." [^1] In the story, David desperately thirsted for the waters of this spring. At the cost of human peril and loss of life, the well was won; immediately it ceased to be water and became the blood of the men who had risked or given their lives to secure it. For all his thirsting, David could not drink but had need to "pour it out unto the Lord." That became Roberts's definition of civilization-the willingness of some to postpone satisfaction for the benefit of those who came after. It was also his testament of Christ.

385His life can be viewed as a series of frustrated entitlements. It was not only that, like all of us, he was often frustrated; he was also denied what he merited and had within his grasp. Our narrative has touched on many of these denials: He yearned for and fully earned an academic career, but gave it up for ever-extending missionary labors. He aspired with the best of motives to a "quiet home" and a concentrated family life, but was repeatedly pulled away from home and children by Christian warfare. Offered prestigious and lucrative legal partnerships, he refused them to accept and honor the call to the spartan life of a General Authority. He fairly and fully won election to the United States House of Representatives, but the achievement was wrenched away as a result of the very covenants and obediences which were the measure of his integrity. He wanted to be and to help others to be a full-functioning seventy, but sometimes, one becomes convinced, his energetic crusades in the Quorum generated rather than diminished the difficulties of bringing this to pass.

He must have known-for it was often said by speculating journalists as it was by well-wishers in the Church-that higher office in the Church itself might well have been his had he not more than once clashed with his brethren in passionate independence. But he also came to recognize that titles and office are of far less importance than spiritual influence, the silken and enduring influence of which Christ is in every way the most moving prototype. He combined that insight with one from his friend and brother John A. Widtsoe, who had written, "The missions of men differ widely." [^2] He observed in his early reading of the Book of Mormon "the dramatic fact" that John the Beloved was preordained to write but that Nephi was forbidden to write what both were privileged to see in apocalyptic visions. He concluded that for all men, and therefore for himself, "within a sphere assigned to one, others are not allowed to intrude." He came to believe that a calling had been reserved to him, which he sometimes sought to ignore or shake. But somehow a divinity continued to shape his ends. Others he knew might well write the history of the Church. But he saw it as his province to write the Comprehensive History of the first century in a mode and manner which no one else could. Also he saw himself as "by nature" a Seventy-an especial witness called to travel to the ends of the earth. And "doing his best work when difficulties mount highest," he felt uniquely fitted as well as honored as well as burdened for his incessant "defense of the faith and the saints."

386The tuggings of his life seem to be matched by the tensions and sometimes the paradoxes of his personality. Here was a street waif, a country lad who became a citizen of the sophisticated world; a man whose home and heart was always in Centerville but much of whose psychic life was in London, New England, and New York; a poet, a dramatist, a romantic, and yet "a slow-going prosy historian"; an outdoor man comfortable in the canyons on foot or on horseback, under the sweep of Orion, yet a lover of books and every manifestation of culture; a man all wrapped up in the vision of the future who was a thorough-going student of the past; a man tough in coping with iron fortune and bleak disappointment and at the same time so tender he could weep in the consciousness of others' tears and bear their burdens in compassionate vicariousness; a man of exuberant physical strength yet acquainted for most of his adult life with at least four chronic ailments-sinus, migraine, recurrent depression, and diabetes; a kind of orphan who found his fulfillment in reaching out for the glory of family; a soloist and a "hermit" in writing who was at the same time an organizer, an orchestrator, a committee man; a man of incredible self-control yet buffeted by the impulses of his life; a man of the world who was at the same time a man of the super-world; a man who was "a law unto himself" who at the same time insisted that law is eternal and uncreate and that the highest freedom consists in self-surrender; a man of knowledge as of wisdom, of resilient faith as also of insistent rationality, and of utopian idealism and hard-headed realism; a man capable of masterly patience and fairness yet sometimes reckless in waging "war to the knife and knife to the hilt"; a man indifferent to fashion and the praise of the world who could yet write from Chicago in the midst of rejection: "Tell me mother, mine, why it is that at every turn I meet opposition. I cannot look back into the past for anything I have attempted that. is not met with obstacles either from without or from within." Often he talked with the bravado of Cyrano de Bergerac as one "gloriously free" of the need for prince's favors. Yet he could confide with almost pathetic candor of the desolation of being "splendidly alone"-"I wish I had a brother to share some of this work with me!" [^3]

387He was self-taught and indifferent to degrees and emoluments, and his work shows a native distinction which needs no official stamp. Yet he was sorrowed that he had not been before outstanding teachers in fine universities earning the distinctions of a "real scholar."

When Leonard J. Arrington once sent out a questionnaire to fifty Mormon professionals in the academic world asking them to rank in order of importance the first five intellectuals in Mormon history, they mentioned men of specialized and degree-laden backgrounds: Orson Pratt, James E. Talmage, John A. Widtsoe. But far and away the first choice of the majority was a peerless blacksmith-B. H. Roberts. Vastly improbable this may seem. Yet a Church which essays to teach and transform the whole family of man must learn the lesson he demonstrates: teach yourself or remain untaught. He loved simple faith if simple meant un-cluttered and strong. But he was troubled that the phrase is sometimes used as a synonym for "simpering acquiescence." And he could find nothing in the scriptures, ancient or modern, to excuse anyone from brain sweat and from the arduous lifetime burden of seeking "revelation upon revelation, knowledge upon knowledge," the expansion of truth and light until one is "glorified in truth and knoweth all things." Toward the end of his life a letter came from a young stu-dent-admirer concluding, "Education is too hard a barrier to overleap with poverty as a drag." Roberts's bust, sculpted by Mahonri Young, now presides in the Joseph Smith Building library of Brigham Young University, and somehow conveys the message: One can achieve education and skills even with poverty, and much else, as a constant drag.

388He saw Joseph Smith as a modern Paul-one who, like Paul, felt to glory in tribulation and to swim deep water. [^4] In his youth he found in young Joseph little of fault or failing, but his respect matured to an even more endearing admiration as he learned that Joseph too grew, failed, struggled and grew again, and that no matter where one invades his life he finds the weight of sanctifying suffering. Among those who survived the Mormon crucible and brought with them into the western desert firsthand knowledge of lingering memories of Joseph, many transmitted their impressions to Roberts. In addition, for more than fifty years he was officially and daily involved in a feast of documents. And his witness was based not on faith in probabilities but on knowledge poured down into his hard-won research, that Joseph Smith belongs to the ages as one of the greatest of all times.

Emmeline B. Wells was an indignant political critic of Roberts. But as a beautifully literate descendant of the Nauvoo era she was so moved by Roberts's depth that she wrote him when she was eighty-two saying that she yearned to "interchange thoughts with one of superior intelligence." "You who have studied the Prophet deeply will know," she said. Then she wrote as one of the "few intimate friends of the Prophet Joseph" who had sat in his presence, and how his inspiration "seemed to fathom the depths of eternal wisdom, and with a grace so modest, yet so sublime, that one sat as it were entranced, listening as one would to music of celestial beings."

Surrounded by a group of missionaries in the hall of the Brooklyn mission home, Roberts was once asked an intricate question on the life and teaching of the Prophet. As he answered, the elders saw their beginning curiosity expanded to vast proportions. They nodded in grateful admiration.

All of a sudden he looked up and raised his hands up and said, "Brother Joseph, I have fought for you, I have defended you, I have loved you..." and made one of the most spiritual and emotional outbursts. It impressed me so. I have never heard a stronger testimony of the Prophet. [^5]

Roberts said toward the end of his life that he hoped he might be counted worthy to meet-meet and embrace-the Prophet in a better world; then he would say, "You have given me a lot of trouble." It was true; as historian, as doc-trinarian, as witness, as exponent and thunder-advocate, he had borne the burden and the heat of the day. Through Joseph Smith as through a clear bay window he had seen the Lord Jesus Christ. And that had made all the difference.

389The rewards of related disciplines had been incalculably precious to him. But more precious still was the marked impress of the still small voice. The Lord Jesus Christ spoke to him, taught him in His words as in the recurrent stream of affliction. His life refutes the doctrines of bereft religion-that the Spirit never speaks in a voice, that revelation is never reducible to language, that a God comprehended would be a God dethroned, that the heavens move the heart but do not convey information. These and all other attempts to "set up stakes" for the Almighty were swept away in a flood of light, unanswerably transcended in his own experience. His life was, like Mormonism itself, a manifestation of a revela-tory breakthrough from on high-a "heavenly treasure in an earthly receptacle."

What is absent in all of his utterances and writings, private and public, is any concession to despair. Nowhere is there the sound of the inchoate existential pronouncements of the generation that followed him-"the point is that there is no point." Can anyone read any page of his life and not recognize that he knew, and knew intimately, "the dark night of the soul"? Yet out of that crucible came his most abiding religious assurances: the mission and the atonement of Jesus Christ; [^6] the "everywhereness of God"-the extension, by God's emanating Spirit, of the very attributes and powers of the Father and the Son; his teaching that Christ often is administering to us in the fire of celestial love by his unrecognized presence as by his deliberate absence; his avowal of the need, indeed the spiritual necessity, for raw contrast in human life, all we can stand and even more, as the premium cost of an exquisitely beautiful outcome-growth into the likeness of God. For B. H. Roberts there was no "cheap grace" and no wisdom in applying the term bad to the bitter herbs of his experience. "All these things," he heard the Son of Man say through Joseph Smith, "shall give thee experience and shall be for thy good." He understood that all depths must be known before all heights. And he spoke of his sense of the nearness of God as "my greatest treasure in the gospel." [^7]

390His family recalls impressions that are suggestive. He had confided to them as he emerged from the hospital that he felt pressed to "exercise his privilege as a witness" more than ever. His last letter to his daughter Georgia says that he will not live to the second coming of Christ but that he will be privileged soon to come into his presence and, said his letter, "that is just as satisfactory with me." His sons recall him taking the deer trails up his favorite and rugged canyon east of Centerville, fasting, praying, vexed of spirit. He gave them to believe that there the veil was thin and he received words of sublime reassurance as to his eternal reward.

He loved the statement of Joseph Smith:

The word of Jehovah has such an influence over the human mind-the logical mind-that it is convincing without other testimony. Faith cometh by hearing.

In his view no generation of men, and no individual man, could ever be lifted or condemned until confronted with a living testimony of a living witness who had come to a living awareness of the living God. There is a sense in which, though dead, his witness remains alive. Just before his death he wrote, as had Gladstone, "I have no hope for mankind except as the human consciousness is brought in touch with divine revelation."

Some have said that Joseph Smith was not really an original (few even a century later recognize how pervasively revolutionary his teachings were and are) though his life was laid at the feet of the Master. It has been said in turn that Brigham Young achieved no great original contribution but was merely a disciple side-by-side with Joseph Smith. All his life Roberts took pride, sometimes it seemed even a disabling pride, in standing alone. Yet his life, fully viewed, demonstrates another insight. He wrote of Brigham Young what might well be said of Roberts himself, that his greatest quality was

the quality that linked him [Brigham Young] to God; that added in large measure the strength and wisdom of God to his own strength and wisdom. To possess such a quality as this is to be great indeed. And if the proud of spirit say that such a quality leads but to a borrowed greatness-a shining not by reason of an innate luminous spirit, but by a borrowed light-the answer is that the man who so walks in the light and wisdom and power of God, will at the last, by the very force of association, make the light and wisdom and power of God his own-weaving those bright rays into a chain divine, linking himself forever to God and God to him. This [is] the sum of Messiah's mystic words, "Thou Father in me, and I in thee." Beyond this human greatness cannot achieve. [^8]

Notes

Chapter 20

1 Conference Report, October 1926, p. 125.

2 B. H. Roberts to Elizabeth Hinckley, 9 July 1930.

3 Louise Lake to Truman G. Madsen, 15 January 1970. Louise Lake, at that time a missionary, was a few years later smitten with polio and paralyzed from the waist down. She became the star "rehab" in Dr. Howard Rusk's New York Rehabilitation Center, was named "Outstanding Handicapped American" by President Dwight D. Eisenhower (the first woman ever so honored), and undertook a "wheelchair" career in aiding other handicapped. A glimpse of her story is in Each Day a Bonus (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1971).

4 "The Mormon Missionary," Improvement Era 31 (May 1928) 543.

5 He was enacting here a teaching mode he had penned in some notes on leadership: "Let him see thee speaking to thy God: He will not forget it afterward."

6 Louise Lake to Truman G. Madsen, 15 January 1970.

7 These excerpts are from a conference address and were republished in the Book of Testimonies, compiled by Joseph E. Cardon and Samuel O. Bennion (Independence, Mo.: Zion's Printing, 1915), pp. 677-7.

8 See Acts 3:19-21; Eph. 1:9-10; Rev. 14:6.

9 Eisa Cook to Elizabeth Hinckley, 27 April 1931. Concerning the role of the Seventy, Roberts wrote to President Grant from the hospital that he had recently come upon an entry (14 December 1845) in Brigham Young's Manuscript History. Brigham Young stated that "the Seventy were ordained apostles, and when they went forth into the ministry they are sent with power to ordain high priests and also to ordain and organize the high council." (See B. H. Roberts to Heber J. Grant, p. 3.)

10 john Whitaker Journal, 27 September 1933, p. 893.

11 Exactly forty years before, Whitaker had been desperately ill and the Brethren of the First Council of the Seventy had surrounded him and Roberts "pled that I might be made strong and be able to do all that is required of me, that I might live to become exceedingly useful and a great advocate of truth and justice. I was grateful for this . . . refreshing . . . needed help." (See John Whitaker Journal, 23 March 1892.)

12 B. H. Roberts to Elizabeth Hinckley, 30 June 1931.

13 Ibid.

14 B. H. Roberts to Elizabeth Hinckley, 20 June 1931.

15 See foreword to Discourses of B. H. Roberts.

16 B. H. Roberts to Elizabeth Hinckley. There is no date on this note, but, since the copy was sent on 12 October 1931, it was presumably written in mid-1931.

17 B. H. Roberts to Elizabeth Hinckley, 7 March 1933.

18 See Discourses of B. H. Roberts.

19 Harold B. Lee to Eric Stephan, 5 October 1965; cf. Elder Lee's remarks, Conference Report, April 1968, pp. 128-29.

20 Remarks to the general board of the MIA, as recalled by Axel A. Madsen.

21 1 Cor. 2:2.

22 Deseret News, 9 July 1932.

23 Remarks of B. H. Roberts at funeral of John G. M. Barnes, pamphlet, Church Archives.

24 As recalled by Elsa Cook.

25 In April 1928 Roberts had refused to write a biographical sketch for publication in the National Encyclopedia because "my biography is of such little consequence, my station in life so unimportant and my obscurity so complete" that it should not go in that publication.

26 B. H. Roberts to Elizabeth Hinckley, 7 March 1933.

27 The History of the Church had been dictated by Joseph Smith in third person.

28 Salt Lake Tribune, 28 September 1933.

29 Told to the author by a descendant of Arielbert Cazier.

30 His notes for the "Seventy's Correspondence Course" were designed to continue three years. But with all their good intent his colleagues would sorely miss Roberts's combination of talents. Two lessons prepared by Roberts himself were sent out to the seventies, then four more were haphazardly constructed with scissors and paste from the notes he had left; then the plan faltered. Within a year it was given up. Later, Sunday study in organized quorums became the rule.

31 Form letter of B. H. Roberts to Quorums of Seventy, 1933.

32 J. Golden Kimball copyrighted these lessons up to May 1934. See Improvement Era (July 1933): 530-32.

33 Impressed with the Chicago population and skyline, he remembered that when the city of Nauvoo had between ten and fifteen thousand inhabitants, Chicago had only five thousand. See Deseret Evening News, 7 September 1933.

34 "Had James read of the council in heaven?" Roberts wrote in the margin of his copy of James's A Pluralistic Universe (New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1909).

35 Truman G. Madsen, Review of "A Christian Natural Theology," BYU Studies 6 (Spring, Summer 1965): 186-87.

36 John Whitaker Journal, 27 September 1933.

37 So Joseph Hyde had inscribed in a book shortly before Roberts's death.

38 Conference Report, October 1933, pp. 10, 66, 101.

39 Ibid., p. 43.

Notes to Epilogue

1 See his reference to this in Conference Report, October 1933, p. 43; cf. 1 Chr. 11:17.

2 John A. Widtsoe, Gospel Themes (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1945), p. 169.

3 B. H. Roberts to his mother, 18 September 1893.

4 See D&C 127:2.

5 John Emmet to Truman G. Madsen, 9 October 1967.

6 His favorite piece of religious art was the Hoffman painting of Christ in Gethsemane.

7 Deseret Evening News, 22 September 1928.

8 Improvement Era 6 (June 1903): 574.

---
Notas:
[^1] No man to set fire to prairies. [^38]
[^2] No man to shoot off a gun in camp.
[^3] No man to go hunting unless he is sent.
[^4] All to keep guns, swords, pistols out of sight. [^39]
[^5] 5 "The Doctrines of the Church in Respect of Man in the Gospel," Improvement Era 1 (September 1898): 828; of. "What Is Man?" He was then thirty-eight years old.
[^6] 6 The British Mission was headquartered at 42 Islington Street, Liverpool.
[^7] 7 See Deseret Evening News, 11 January 1910.
[^8] 8 Adah Roberts Naylot, "An Immigrant Mother and Her Son," The Relief Society Magazine 21 (January 1934): 1-8.
