Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Introduction

"Great Are the Words of Isaiah"

Most of us as members of the Church know that we have been commanded to diligently search the words of Isaiah. And most of us agree that that is a hard thing to do. Isaiah is indisputably one of the most challenging books in the Bible. We probably wouldn't feel as intimidated if we had been given the special commandment to search Third Nephi or the book of Luke or most of the sections of the Doctrine and Covenants. But Isaiah seems to have been written for another time and place, in a form and language that sometimes seem to defy understanding. In fact, it is common to hear Latter-day Saints say, "I've read First Nephi a dozen times, but I just can't seem to make it through Second Nephi."

What makes Second Nephi so different from First Nephi—or any of the other books in the Book of Mormon? One difference is the Isaiah sections, which Nephi quoted because of their importance and with which we struggle because of their complexity.

Tools for Understanding

This book provides a set of tools to help remedy that situation. After all, much of the book of Isaiah was written for our time. The following tools are included:

The Book of Mormon and the Joseph Smith Translation have been used to create a more correct, "inspired" version of the King James rendering of Isaiah.

The text of Isaiah has been put back into what may have been Isaiah's original format—a poetic style called parallelism, in which matching phrases repeat the same idea in different words. Seeing Isaiah's words in this form makes them much easier to understand.

The chapters are divided into separate units of thought, to help us make more sense of each part.

Each chapter begins with ideas of how that chapter can be likened unto us and our time.

Helpful background is provided for the many unique words and symbolisms Isaiah used.

A phrase-by-phrase (sometimes word-by-word) commentary is given for the entire book—all sixty-six chapters. This commentary is based principally on the words of the prophets, both ancient and modern.

It is our desire to make Isaiah accessible to members of the Church in many situations and at many educational levels. As you, the reader, apply these tools to your own study, we believe you will begin to understand Isaiah as never before—and will begin to feel for yourself that "great are the words of Isaiah" (3 Ne. 23:1).

Isaiah, the Man and His World

Isaiah's name means "Jehovah is salvation." How fitting that a man who devoted his life to testifying of the saving power of the Messiah should also have a name that so testified.

Many scholars believe that Isaiah's ministry took place between the years 740 and 700 (or perhaps 699) b.c.—approximately forty years. According to Isa. 1:1, Isaiah served as a prophet during the reign of several kings in Judah, including Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah. He had personal dealings with at least two of those kings. According to one ancient Jewish source, Isaiah's wife was a daughter of one of the kings of Judah, making Isaiah a member of the royal family by marriage.

Isaiah's wife is called "prophetess" in Isaiah's record (8:3), suggesting that she too had the gift of revelation. Isaiah and his wife had at least two sons who served as signs to Israel, as did Isaiah and his wife themselves. "Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of hosts" (8:18). As we discuss in the commentary on Isa. 8, Isaiah stood as a type of God the Father; the prophetess was a type of Mary, the mother of Christ; and one of their sons was a type of Jesus Christ.

According to Josephus, Isaiah was martyred for the faith. [^1] King Manasseh, who took rule at the early age of twelve, reportedly put Isaiah in a hollow tree and had him sawed in half [^2] (Heb. 11:37 may be an allusion to this).

What was happening in the political world of Isaiah's time? Assyria, the enemy of Israel, was expanding its borders through whatever means necessary. In 722 and 721 b.c., midway through Isaiah's ministry, Assyria invaded the Northern Kingdom of Israel and carried its inhabitants (the ten tribes of Israel) off into other lands.

In the Southern Kingdom of Judah, where Isaiah ministered, King Uzziah had attempted to burn incense in the temple at Jerusalem without God's authority, and God punished him with leprosy. He died ten years later, in 740 b.c., the same year Isaiah began his ministry. Contrast him with Hezekiah, a righteous king who sought religious reforms.

After conquering the Northern Kingdom of Israel in 721 b.c., Assyria sought to take over the Southern Kingdom of Judah, taking two decades to advance to the city of Jerusalem. Hezekiah and his people were frantic, but Isaiah gave a prophecy of reassurance and comfort: "Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there . . . for I will defend this city to save it for mine own sake. . . . Then the angel of the Lord went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand" (37:33-36).

This is an impressive instance of how the Lord spoke through Isaiah and then immediately fulfilled his word. Just as surely, all of the prophecies of Isaiah concerning our day will be fulfilled; not one will fail.

Blessings from Studying the Book of Isaiah

When we study the writings of Isaiah, we obtain several very important blessings:

We are helped in our efforts to come unto Christ. Nephi wrote, "That I might more fully persuade them to believe in the Lord their Redeemer I did read unto them that which was written by the prophet Isaiah" (1 Ne. 19:23).

We learn truths about ourselves and our circumstances in mortality. "Wherefore, they [Isaiah's words] may be likened unto you, for ye are of the house of Israel" (2 Ne. 6:5) "And now I write some of the words of Isaiah . . . and ye may liken them unto you" (2 Ne. 11:8).

We learn about our mission and destiny as members of the house of Israel. The Savior said, "For surely he spake as touching all things concerning my people which are of the house of Israel" (3 Ne. 23:2).

We can learn about the past judgments of God, which we will see repeated in our future. "I have made mention . . . concerning the judgments of God, . . . according to all that which Isaiah hath spoken" (2 Ne. 25:6).

We come to a greater understanding of our future. "And now, behold, I would speak unto you concerning things which are, and which are to come: wherefore, I will read you the words of Isaiah" (2 Ne. 6:4).

We are given cause to rejoice. "And now I write some of the words of Isaiah, that whoso of my people shall see these words may lift up their hearts and rejoice for all men" (2 Ne. 11:8).

Is it any wonder that Nephi said, "Wherefore, they [Isaiah's prophecies] are of worth unto the children of men, . . . for I know that they shall be of great worth unto them in the last days" (2 Ne. 25:8).

How This Book Will Help You Understand Isaiah

The Book of Mormon gives four keys to understanding Isaiah, which we must obtain and use for ourselves:

Be righteous—do not do "works of darkness" or "doings of abominations" (2 Ne. 25:2). Righteousness brings the Spirit, which increases understanding.

Be "filled with the spirit of prophecy" (2 Ne. 25:4), which is the spirit of revelation.

Live in the last days, "when they [Isaiah's prophecies] shall come to pass, . . . for in that day shall they understand them" (2 Ne. 25:7, 8).

Make the effort to search, which implies mental and spiritual exertion. Jesus declared twice that we ought to "search these things diligently" (3 Ne. 20:11; 23:1), and Moroni added, "Search the prophecies of Isaiah" (Morm. 8:23).

The Book of Mormon is one of our best commentaries on the book of Isaiah. Nearly a third of the book of Isaiah is quoted in the Book of Mormon, with changes in about half of the verses. In addition, several chapters and verses in the Book of Mormon provide inspired explanations and commentaries of Isaiah's writings. Understanding Isaiah brings together all the Book of Mormon insights and changes in the proper context; it also incorporates all the significant changes and insights found in the Joseph Smith Translation of Isaiah.

Nephi taught that we can better understand Isaiah if we understand the "manner of prophesying" among the Jews (2 Ne. 25:1). This manner of prophesying included symbolism and poetic parallelism. Understanding Isaiah explains the symbolism Isaiah used in all sixty-six of his chapters, phrase by phrase. And it shows how he used parallelism to teach his divine lessons.

Nephi also suggested that it helps to be familiar with the regions around Jerusalem (2 Ne. 25:6). There are 106 different geographical place-names in the book of Isaiah. Understanding Isaiah explains their significance, both literal and symbolic.

Sometimes we tend to read Isaiah's warnings and indictments as having application only (or primarily) to ancient Israel. But when we read by the spirit of prophecy, we suddenly see that they all can be likened to ourselves. We need to remind ourselves constantly that this book is about ancient Israel—and it also is about us.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie plainly taught this principle, saying, "Many prophetic utterances have dual or multiple instances of fulfillment." [^3] "As with so many ancient prophecies, these words of Isaiah are subject to the law of dual fulfillment." [^4] "The scriptures also provide clear instances of prophecies that may be fulfilled at more than one time," writes Stephen D. Ricks. "The possibility that prophecies may have more than one fulfillment indicates the richness and relevance of the writings of the prophets." [^5] Isaiah is filled with multiple meanings—and this volume seeks to explain many of them.

Even several volumes would not provide adequate space for us to say all that we desire about the words of Isaiah. For this volume, we have therefore limited our discussion of historical and cultural perspectives, and we have often not looked at Isaiah's writings from the point of view of his contemporaries. Nevertheless, it has been our goal to present our best possible interpretation of each chapter and verse, even phrases, of this great prophet, focusing on their meaning for our time. We have also sought to be nondogmatic in our views and presentation.

How to Use This Book

Understanding Isaiah is intended not to be read from beginning to end but to be used as a reference and study aid. The book is organized in chapters following the format of Isaiah, with internal sections breaking the chapters into smaller units. Each section consists of a descriptive heading, an introduction to the section, the text of that passage of Isaiah, and a phrase-by-phrase commentary.

The Isaiah text includes alternate readings from the Book of Mormon, the Joseph Smith Translation, the Dead Sea Scrolls, and the Masoretic text of the Hebrew Bible. It also includes clarifications of archaic words.

The text is arranged in poetic form where possible. Isaiah usually wrote in parallelisms (matching phrases that repeat the same thought in different words). We have marked matching sets of words with italics. If a second parallelism occurs in a set of lines (which is often the case), the parallel words are underlined. For example:

shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills;

Brackets in the text indicate a word or phrase that has been added to or altered from the Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Version of the Bible. Brackets are generally accompanied by explanatory footnotes. Scripture citations with only chapter and verse numbers are from Isaiah unless otherwise indicated. Citations such as 1:5a and 1:5b refer, respectively, to the first and second half of the verse cited. Phrases from the verse under discussion appear in italics without quotation marks or a source citation. Full references for the sources in the notes are found in the Bibliography. The transliteration of Hebrew words has been done according to the style guide of Harold Scanlin, The Dead Sea Scrolls and Modern Translations of the Old Testament.

It has been our goal to make this a work that combines divine inspiration with human scholarship. Accordingly, we have sought the guidance of the Spirit in coming to our understandings of Isaiah while at the same time seeking insight from inspired statements of prophets and apostles (both ancient and modern) and from the best thinking of scriptural scholars. It has been wonderful for us to read and study the powerful words of the prophet Isaiah. We began as typical students, hoping to find our way to deeper understanding. We bear testimony that that understanding has come, both through diligent effort and through the blessings and grace of the Spirit of the Lord. Because the Lord is just—and because he loves us all—we can bear testimony in confidence that he will help every soul to come to understand the words of his ancient prophet for our day. Those who do will have cause to rejoice, and they will marvel as we do at the greatness of the words of Isaiah.

---
Notas:
[^1] Antiquities of the Jews, 10.3.1.
[^2] Ginzberg, Legends of the Jews, 4:279.
[^3] Mortal Messiah, 2:412 n. 4.
[^4] Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:368.
[^5] "I Have a Question," 28.
