Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 1

Likening Isa. 1 unto Ourselves

The Lord through the prophet Isaiah lists the iniquities of ancient Israel, which include rebelliousness, the commission of social injustices, and the neglect of true temple worship (1:2-15). The Lord then invites Israel to repent and cleanse herself through the power of the Atonement (1:16-20). In our own day the Lord has spoken through the Prophet Joseph Smith and detailed our transgressions, which include social injustices: we "do not impart of [our] substance, as becometh saints, to the poor and afflicted" (D&C 105:3) further there are "contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires" among us (D&C 101:6; 105). We, like our brothers and sisters of ancient Israel, are invited to repent and become clean through Christ's divine sacrifice: "though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow" (1:18).

Isa. 1:24-31 also has direct relevance for us today, for this section speaks of latter-day Zion (that is, us, the latter-day Church), who will be restored, redeemed, and cleansed. Our "dross" and "tin" will be removed; our righteous judges and counselors will be restored.

The Vision of Isaiah (1:1)

Isa. 1:1 presents the name of the prophet (Isaiah), a brief genealogy of Isaiah (son of Amoz), a declaration about the prophecy (the vision of Isaiah), an explanation of the subject (the vision is concerned with Judah and Jerusalem), and the time the vision was given (in the days of the four kings of Judah who ruled during the ministry of Isaiah).

Isa. 1:1

The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. (1:1)

Notes and Commentary

1:1 The vision of Isaiah. Isaiah was a seer and a "prophet" (37:2; 38:1; 39:3). His vision was not a simple, ordinary dream. Joseph Smith, when he spoke of Isaiah and other persons from the Bible, taught that the great visions received by the ancients came after they had received the Second Comforter. [^1]

son of Amoz. According to the Jewish authority Kimchi, Amoz, not to be confused with the prophet Amos, was "the brother of Amaziah, the father of Uzziah, . . . [which] would make Isaiah of royal lineage and a cousin of Uzziah," king of Judah. [^2]

Judah and Jerusalem. The vision of Isaiah deals with Judah and Jerusalem, but Isaiah's prophecies also deal with the entire house of Israel, including the lost ten tribes, as the Book of Mormon abundantly testifies. Nephi commands, "Hear ye the words of the prophet [Isaiah], . . . which were written unto all the house of Israel" (1 Ne. 19:24; 2 Ne. 6:5; 3 Ne. 23:2).

kings of Judah. These were Uzziah (784-740 b.c.), Jotham (740-735 b.c.), Ahaz (735-715 b.c.), and Hezekiah (715-687 b.c.). Many scholars believe that Isaiah ministered between the years 740 and 700 b.c.

God Charges Israel for Her Sins (1:2-5a)

This section presents God's charge against Israel. Isaiah's words remind us of a courtroom scene, in which God is both the plaintiff and the judge (3:13: "The Lord standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the people"; 3:12-15; 5:1-7), the heavens and earth are the witnesses, and Israel is the defendant. The Lord calls his witnesses (1:2a), presents his case and indictment (1:2b-5a, 10-16, 29-31), and pronounces judgment against Israel (1:5b-9). Israel is charged with breaking the covenant [^3] and committing great sins.

Isa. 1:2-5a

Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth For the Lord hath spoken, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. (1:2) The ox knoweth his owner and the ass his master's [feeding-trough] [^4] but Israel doth not know, my people doth not [understand]. [^5] (1:3) [Woe] [^6] sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evildoers, children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, (1:4) they are gone away backward. (1:4) Why should ye be [smitten] [^7] any more? ye will revolt more and more: (1:5a)

Notes and Commentary

1:2 Hear/give ear. This is an injunction to listen intently.

heavens/earth. Both the inhabitants of the earth and the angels of heaven stand as witnesses in this formal charge against Israel. [^8]

the Lord hath spoken. Jehovah is the speaker here.

I have nourished and brought up children. God provided ancient Israel with both temporal food (manna; Ex. 16:31-35) and spiritual food (the living bread, which symbolizes the Lord; John 6:31-35), a promised land, the promise of salvation, protection in wars, and prophets; he generally nourished them with constant patience and care, as a parent nourishes a child. God also provides all these things for us.

rebelled against me. The term rebel here pertains to "the breaking of the covenant." [^9] As ancient Israel did, some members of the latter-day Church rebel against the Lord.

1:3 ox/ass. These are beasts of burden that need an owner's care and support. The Israelites, like the ox and the ass, must rely on their master (God) for food and must be led to water (Gen. 49:14-15; Hosea 8:8-9; Mosiah 12:5; 21:3). The ox and ass are dumb animals, yet they still obey their master; the children of Israel do not obey their master.

owner/master. These symbols refer to the Lord, who is the owner and master of Israel and his people. The Hebrew for owner here means someone who has purchased an item rather than receiving it through other means such as inheriting it, being given it, or simply finding it. Christ is the purchaser; he purchased us through his atoning sacrifice. This idea is taught by Paul concerning the "church of God, which he [Jesus] hath purchased with his own blood" (Acts 20:28; 1 Cor. 6:20).

1:4 sinful, iniquity, evildoers, corrupters. These words describe the sinful condition of the children of Israel, who have knowingly gone astray from the covenant of the Lord. [^10]

nation/people/seed/children. These terms speak of the children of Israel and refer directly to the Abrahamic covenant (Abr. 2:9-11). They have great relevance to us today; we too are of the house of Israel and inheritors of the promises given to Abraham.

Holy One of Israel. In the Old Testament this title for Jehovah is used almost exclusively by Isaiah, approximately twenty-four times. The term may signify "Temple One of Israel," for in Hebrew the words for holy and temple derive from the same root. [^11] Elsewhere in his book Isaiah uses the same root when he calls God the "Holy One of Jacob" (29:23) and uses holy three times in his vision of the Lord sitting on His throne in the heavenly temple, or the celestial kingdom (6:3). We are to emulate the Lord: "Ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy" (Lev. 11:45).

unto anger. The scriptures testify of the indignation of God against the wicked: "I, the Lord, am angry with the wicked" (D&C 63:32) also "And it shall come to pass, because of the wickedness of the world, that I will take vengeance upon the wicked, for they will not repent; for the cup of mine indignation is full" (D&C 29:17).

1:5a Why should ye be smitten . . . ? Isaiah asks this rhetorical question to teach us a lesson: Why do you (the house of Israel) continually choose to be smitten by the Lord because of your wickedness? Why will you not learn from the lessons of history recorded in scripture, which tell you that the wicked will be destroyed?

Description of Israel's Condition: The People (1:5b-6) and the Land (1:7-9)

Throughout the scriptures, the house of Israel, or church of God, is metaphorically compared to a woman (JST Rev. 12:7; 3 Ne. 22:6), a harlot (Jer. 3:1, 8; Ezek. 16:15-17), a bride (54:1-6; Rev. 21:2, 9; D&C 109:73-74), and a wife (Hosea 1:2- 9). Jehovah represents Israel's bridegroom (Matt. 9:15; D&C 33:17-18; 65:3) and eventual husband (54:5; Jer. 31:32).

Similar themes are prominent in Isa. 1, in which Israel is portrayed as a woman. Isaiah gives us a list of her transgressions, which include apostate temple practices (1:10-16, 29-31), social injustices (1:17, 23), murder (1:21), thievery and bribery (1:23), a lack of true knowledge of God (1:3), and rebellion against God (1:2, 4). In this section Isaiah introduces, through symbolism, a description of this woman (or Israel) in her spiritually diseased state (1:5b-6), and then presents a sketch of Israel's desolate land (1:7-9). We refer to Israel as "Lady Israel."

Much of this section also seems to apply to the time of the Second Coming: references to spiritual sickness, desolation, and burning; enemies coming on Jerusalem, the besieged city; a small surviving remnant; and a destruction that is compared to Sodom and Gomorrah.

Isaiah 1:5b-9

the whole head is sick, and the whole heart [diseased]. [^12] (1:5b) From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores: they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither [softened] [^13] with ointment. (1:6) Your country is desolate, your cities are burned with fire, your land, strangers devour it in your presence and it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers. (1:7) And the daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in a vineyard, as a [watchman's hut] [^14] in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city. (1:8) Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah. (1:9)

Notes and Commentary

1:5b head/heart. The head of Lady Israel may represent Israel's king and high officials; the heart may represent the common body of Israel. The head and the heart may also refer to a state of complete corruption, both intellectual and spiritual.

sick/diseased. These terms refer to the governing body and all the people of Israel who are spiritually ill. Lady Israel's entire body, from the sole of her foot to the crown of her head, is full of bruises and sores—spiritual sicknesses and injuries that came after she (Israel) forsook Jehovah and committed spiritual adultery by seeking foreign deities.

1:6 wounds, bruises, sores. These terms speak of spiritual diseases and injuries and could also represent the social injustices committed by the Israelites.

ointment. The term ointment may refer to the sacred oil of the temple (Ex. 28:41; Lev. 8:10-12). Isaiah's reference to ointment calls to mind some possible symbolic interpretations. That Lady Israel's wounds and sores were not treated with oil could mean that Israel had forsaken the true temple worship and was involved in apostate temple practices (see commentary on 1:10-16 and 1:29-31). Furthermore, ointment may symbolize the healing power of the blood of the Atonement, meaning that the Israelites failed to make the Atonement effective in their lives by turning to the Lord and repenting. Similarly, all who reject Christ's atonement remain spiritually sick or unhealed.

1:7 desolate/burned/devour. In addition to her illnesses, Lady Israel has suffered the ruin of her once-sacred place of residence (the covenant/promised land) and her cities. They lie desolate, burned with fire and destroyed by strangers. Even the mighty temple city, Jerusalem, now has no more glory or protective spiritual covering (52:1) than a simple cottage or a lowly hut in a garden of cucumbers.

strangers. The word is twice mentioned in 1:7, having reference to those who are foreigners (such as the Assyrians and Egyptians) as well as those who live outside the covenant between God and ancient Israel.

1:8 daughter of Zion. This term refers to the city of Jerusalem as well as to its inhabitants (Lam. 1:6-8; 2:10; Zech. 9:9).

---
Notas:
[^1] Antiquities of the Jews, 10.3.1.
[^2] Ginzberg, Legends of the Jews, 4:279.
[^3] Mortal Messiah, 2:412 n. 4.
[^4] Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:368.
[^5] "I Have a Question," 28.
