The remnant mentioned in Isa. 1:9; 10:21; and Rom. 9 has reference, in part, to us in this dispensation who have returned to the Lord, hold the priesthood, and honor the Abrahamic covenant.

Condemnation against Israel's Apostate Temple Practices (1:10-15)

Isaiah condemns the apostate temple practices and attitudes of Israel. Temple- related terms and phrases include sacrifices, burnt offerings, fat, blood, sacrificial animals (rams, beasts, bullocks, lambs, and goats), temple courtyards (courts), oblations, incense offerings, temple festivals (new moons, sabbaths, assemblies, solemn meetings, and feasts), and temple prayers. God will not accept temple practices that deviate from those he has ordained: he is "full" of apostate practices and neither "delights" in nor will endure these "abominations"; he "hateth" them and finds them "weary to bear." God hides his eyes from these things and does not hear the prayers of those in the temple.

The Lord is condemning not only apostate religious practices but also insincere obedience to the form of religion. Thus, from this section we learn two lessons: we must not change the form or purpose of the ordinances the Lord gives us, and we must not think that temple worthiness and temple attendance are enough. We also need to love God and serve him with all our hearts.

Again, the theme of covenants between God and Israel plays a prominent role in this scene. The temple and covenant-making are intimately connected, for the temple is the place where covenants are made. This section presents God, represented by several titles and personal pronouns (Lord, twice; me, four times; I, five times; God; my; and mine), standing in opposition to and accusing the people of Israel (ye, four times; your, four times; and you). In 1:2-5 the Lord makes a formal charge against Israel. Here the Lord further accuses the children of Israel.

Isa. 1:10-15

Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah. (1:10) To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the Lord: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he goats. (1:11) When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your hand, to tread my courts? (1:12) Bring no more vain oblations; incense is an abomination unto me; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot [endure]; [^16] it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting. Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth: (1:13-14a) they are a trouble unto me; I am weary to bear them. (1:14b) And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood. (1:15)

Notes and Commentary

1:10 rulers of Sodom/people of Gomorrah. These descriptions refer to those who live in the evil community (1:9). That both the rulers and the people are mentioned indicates that the entire populace exists in an apostate condition, as did the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah.

give ear. To pay spiritual attention to or to listen with your heart (Mosiah 12:27) is to "give ear."

law of our God. These are God's commandments and ordinances presented both in the scriptures and in the temple.

1:11 sacrifices/burnt offerings. In this passage Isaiah teaches that although a multitude of sacrifices are being offered, the hearts of the children of Israel are not given with their offerings, and thus their sacrifices are in vain and have no power to draw on the salvation of the Atonement. The emptiness of such offerings, offensive to God, results in condemnation (1 Sam. 15:22). We are under the same condemnation when we observe the forms of our religion without yielding our hearts.

fat/blood. The law of Moses provided specific instructions regarding the fat of the sacrificial victim (Lev. 3; 4; 7:23; 8:20) and its blood (Lev. 4; 8:15, 19, 23-24, 30). The meaning of the sacrifice, which pointed to Christ's atonement, were ignored, misunderstood, or misconstrued in Isaiah's time.

rams/beasts/bullocks/lambs/goats. Each of the sacrifices of the Mosaic temple system symbolically pointed to the ministry and atonement of Jesus Christ. Yet because this significance was not understood by the house of Israel, the sacrifices were no longer offered with real intent.

1:12 appear before me. This refers to those who worship God in his temple. [^17]

who hath required this at your hand? "Who commanded this?"

courts. This refers to the courtyards of the temple where temple participants congregated. The three-part temple of Solomon (holy of holies, holy place, and vestibule), the temple of Isaiah's time, had two courtyards attached—an inner and an outer court.

1:13 vain oblations. The sacrifices and offerings of the Israelites were presented to the Lord without the proper attitude or spirit. Vain means "empty."

incense. Incense, which here refers to the incense offering placed on the altar of incense (Ex. 30:1, 7-8, 34-36), was burned twice daily in the sanctuary. The smoke from these offerings rose to the heavens, symbolizing the prayers of Israel rising to God (Ps. 141:2; Rev. 5:8).

abomination. The offerings of Israel were an abomination because the people were wicked, despite their religious observances.

1:14 new moons/sabbaths/assemblies/appointed feasts. These are festive and sacred occasions connected to temple worship. In the Israelite calendar the new moon occurred at the beginning of each month. The sacrificial offerings associated with the new moon included two bullocks, one ram, seven lambs, and one goat. On the Sabbath, two additional lambs were offered. Assemblies and appointed feasts included, among others, Passover (Ex. 12:3-20), Feast of Weeks (Ex. 23:16; 34:22), Day of Blowing of Trumpets (Lev. 23:24; Num. 29:1), Day of Atonement (Lev. 23:26-31), Feast of Tabernacles (Lev. 23:34; Num. 29:12-38), and Purim (Esth. 9). Various sacrificial offerings were presented to the Lord at the appointed feasts. For instance, the sacrifices on the Day of Atonement comprised one bullock, one ram, seven lambs, and one goat. [^18]

1:15 spread forth your hands. This divine gesture signifies prayer or supplication. Solomon, for instance, "spread forth his hands toward heaven" (1 Kgs. 8:22) as he uttered the dedicatory prayer of the temple of Solomon. Other references to this temple practice include Ps. 28:2; 63:4; and 134:2.

hide mine eyes/will not hear. God will not consider the apostate temple rites and ceremonials to be efficacious, nor is he pleased by correct performances offered by wicked people.

hands are full of blood. Here, hands symbolize the whole person, the agent who commits evil deeds (Ps. 7:3; 26:10). Israel spread forth her hands toward God in an act of prayer, but God saw that her hands were full of blood, representative of gross iniquity (such as murder or bloodshed; Alma 5:22-25). Isaiah employs similar imagery elsewhere in his writings (2:8; 17:8; 37:19; 59:3, 6).

Invitation for Israel to Repent and Cleanse Themselves (1:16-20)

Even though the Israelites exist in a spiritually sick condition (1:5b-9) and are found in a state of apostasy (1:10-15), God nevertheless invites them to return to him through repentance, so they can worship the true God of Israel. God then tells them what they must do to become clean and temple worthy once again. God's message requires Israel to become clean through ordinances ("wash ye") and Jesus' atonement (1:18). Emphasis is also placed on having a desire to be clean and on doing good works ("if ye be willing and obedient"), which will allow them to "eat the good of the land" (1:19). Nine imperatives—wash, make clean, put away, cease, learn, seek, relieve, vindicate, and plead—serve as guidelines that will help Israel return to righteous living. The same imperatives apply to us in this dispensation.

Isa. 1:16-20

Wash [ye], [^19] make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil; (1:16) Learn to do well; seek [justice], [^20] relieve the oppressed, [vindicate] [^21] the fatherless, plead for the widow. (1:17) Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. (1:18) If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land; (1:19) But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword. for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. (1:20)

Notes and Commentary

1:16 Wash. The term may refer to washing with water the hands and feet of individuals about to enter the temple. It also points to baptism [^22] (see also the corrected reading herein of 48:1), which is a ritual cleansing from sins and transgressions. Ultimately, washing with water represents symbolic washing with the blood of Christ to become spiritually clean.

eyes. Eyes "are a representation of light and knowledge" (D&C 77:4; 88:67). "God, of course, has all knowledge and is full of light. Thus it is said of him that his eye is an 'all-searching eye' (2 Ne. 9:44) and a 'piercing eye' (Jacob 2:10), meaning there is no place that his eye cannot penetrate and nothing that he does not know. He is omniscient." [^23] Thus in 1:16, God is aware of the Israelites' evil doings, and he commands them to cease.

1:17 vindicate. This means to render a just decision for those who have been offended.

oppressed/fatherless/widow. These words are symbolic of all individuals—the downtrodden, the oppressed, the unfortunate—who need temporal and spiritual strengthening. The law of Moses required the Israelite community to care for widows, the fatherless, and strangers (Ex. 22:21-22) modern revelation instructs us: "Behold, I say unto you, that ye must visit the poor and the needy and administer to their relief" (D&C 44:6). Again we see a parallel between Sodom and Gomorrah and Jerusalem. Sodom and Gomorrah's inhabitants were destroyed, in part because they failed to care for the needy and oppressed (Ezek. 16:49), and here Jerusalem is warned to care for the downtrodden.

1:18 reason together. The Lord tells the elders of his church in our era that the purpose of reasoning together is "that ye may understand" (D&C 50:10-12; see also D&C 61:13; 45:10). Reasoning together with the Lord is a process that requires prayer and revelation.

scarlet/crimson. In this passage scarlet (a bright red) and crimson (a deep red) are both used to symbolize blood, which in turn can signify iniquity. The sins of the children of Israel were both bright and deep-seated, hence this imagery (see hands are full of blood in 1:15).

snow/wool. The Lord, through Isaiah, contrasts the bloodlike colors scarlet and crimson with two tangible materials, snow and wool, both of which are white. White symbolizes purity, innocence, and light. In addition, wool, as a product from the lamb, points to the atonement of Jesus, the "Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world" (John 1:29).

1:19 willing and obedient/eat the good of the land. God made this same promise to us: "The willing and obedient shall eat the good of the land of Zion in these last days. And the rebellious shall be cut off out of the land of Zion, and shall be sent away, and shall not inherit the land" (D&C 64:34-35). [^24] These words recall the oft- recurring Book of Mormon statement that "inasmuch as ye shall keep the commandments of God ye shall prosper in the land; and . . . inasmuch as ye will not keep the commandments of God ye shall be cut off from his presence" (Alma 36:30).

1:20 ye shall be devoured with the sword. In the scriptures, the sword symbolizes either warfare (3 Ne. 2:19) or the word of the Lord (1 Ne. 21:2; Alma 31:5; D&C 6:2). Here the sword represents warfare, but note the close connection with the phrase "for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it." Isaiah presents a graphic image with the word devoured, showing that the destruction will be complete.

mouth. This organ of speech refers to the whole person.

Lament for the Inhabitants of Jerusalem (1:21-23)

The Lord laments that the inhabitants of Jerusalem have committed gross social injustices and have become like dross and watered-down wine. The opening term how is a common introduction to a lament (Lam. 1:1).

Isa. 1:21-23

How is the faithful city become an harlot! it was full of judgment; righteousness lodged in it; but now murderers. (1:21) Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water. (1:22) Thy princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves: every one loveth [bribes], [^25] and followeth after rewards: They [vindicate] [^26] not the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them. (1:23)

Notes and Commentary

1:21 faithful city. This signifies Jerusalem, whose inhabitants were once faithful.

harlot. In the world of the Bible, cities are considered to be feminine. Here Jerusalem (speaking of her inhabitants) acted as a harlot and was unfaithful to Jehovah (her husband) by pursuing and loving other deities (see commentary on 1:5-9; 23:15-18).

judgment/righteousness. This is a word pair used frequently by Isaiah (1:27; 16:5; 28:17; 33:5; 56:1) to describe Jerusalem's inhabitants, who once were just in their dealings and were righteous but who now are "murderers."

murderers. This word may refer literally to murder or symbolically to those who guide individuals "away unto destruction" (Alma 36:14; Matt. 10:28) those who cause spiritual destruction are guilty of spiritual murder.

1:22 silver/wine. Individuals who are precious and pure are compared to silver and wine. God is like "a refiner and purifier of silver," and he will in the last days "purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver" (Mal. 3:3).

dross/water. Dross is the valueless waste material found on the surface of molten metal. Those who were once precious (like silver and wine) but have polluted themselves with the ways of the world are called dross. The Lord, through Ezekiel, said that "the house of Israel is to me become dross . . . they are even the dross of silver" (Ezek. 22:18; see Ps. 119:119; Alma 34:29). "Silver can contain some alloy and still be silver, but silver which has become dross has suffered total degeneration. Similarly, as soon as wine is touched with water no particle of it remains undiluted." [^27] Sin corrupts us as water dilutes wine and dross contaminates precious metal.

1:23 princes. This term refers to leaders and chiefs of the city.

bribes/rewards. Those who give or receive bribes love money more than righteousness.

fatherless/widow. Vindicating the fatherless and pleading for the widow are part of the requirements of repentance given in 1:17. Those who care for the fatherless and the widows are they who practice pure religion (James 1:27).

Zion to Be Redeemed, the Wicked Destroyed (1:24-31)

This prophecy speaks of our day. Isaiah prophesies of two separate groups who will live in the last days (the timing of which is made clearer by Joseph Smith): [^28] those who belong to Zion, and those who belong to the community of wickedness. In the latter days, Zion will be restored, redeemed, and cleansed; her dross and tin will be removed, her righteous judges and counselors will be restored, and once again Zion will be the faithful city—the "city of righteousness." The text makes clear that it is the Lord's atoning sacrifice that will cleanse members of Zion: "I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross" (1:25). Those who belong to the wicked community will be destroyed, "consumed," "ashamed," "confounded," and burned.

Isa. 1:24-31

Therefore saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts, the mighty one of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies: (1:24) And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin: (1:25) And I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning: afterward thou shalt be called, The city of righteousness, the faithful city. (1:26) Zion shall be redeemed with [justice], [^29] and her converts with righteousness. (1:27) And the destruction of the transgressors and of the sinners shall be together, and they that forsake the Lord shall be consumed. (1:28) For [ye] [^30] shall be ashamed of the oaks which ye have desired, and ye shall be confounded for the gardens that ye have chosen. (1:29) For ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth, and as a garden that hath no water. (1:30) And the strong shall be as [tinder], [^31] and the maker of it as a spark, and they shall both burn together, and none shall quench them. (1:31)

Notes and Commentary

1:24 Lord of hosts. See commentary on 1:9.

mighty one of Israel. The Lord is called "mighty God" in 9:6 and the "mighty One of Jacob" in 49:26. Such titles describe his great power.

1:25 turn my hand upon thee. This phrase signifies the Lord's great power and ability to keep his promises to his Zion community.

purge. This term, which means "to purify and cleanse," clearly points to the atonement of Jesus, by whom we are cleansed from sin (6:7; Ps. 79:9; Heb. 1:3; 9:22). On one occasion Joseph Smith taught that "we need purging, purifying and cleansing." [^32]

dross. The term applies both to the wicked who are as dross and to the wickedness that is within each of us (see commentary on 1:22).

tin. In biblical times (as now), metals were graded according to their degree of availability. Gold and silver were the most precious metals; tin, brass, lead, and iron were less precious (Ezek. 22:18-22; Dan. 2:31-42). Tin in this context may represent mediocre individuals who are more righteous than those identified with dross but not as precious as those likened to gold or silver (1:22).

1:26 restore thy judges/counsellors. This verse looks forward to the restoration of officials, authorities, and leaders, or judges and counsellors. Joseph Smith taught: "One of the most important points in the faith of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, through the fullness of the everlasting Gospel, is the gathering of Israel (of whom the Lamanites constitute a part) that happy time when Jacob shall go up to the house of the Lord, to worship Him in spirit and in truth, to live in holiness; when the Lord will restore His judges as at the first, and His counselors as at the beginning. . . .

". . . In speaking of the gathering, we mean to be understood as speaking of it according to scripture, the gathering of the elect of the Lord out of every nation on earth, and bringing them to the place of the Lord of Hosts, when the city of righteousness shall be built, and where the people shall be of one heart and one mind, when the Savior comes." [^33]

faithful city. This represents Jerusalem and the New Jerusalem.

1:27 Zion . . . redeemed. The righteous members of the Church have opportunity to become the latter-day Zion, which will be redeemed according to Isaiah's prophecy (D&C 100:13; 105).

her converts. Those who dwell in Zion and are pure in heart are the converts. [^34]

1:28 transgressors. Isaiah speaks of Zion and her converts in 1:27 and then speaks of transgressors in 1:28. Joseph Smith also juxtaposes Zion and transgressors when he indicates that those who do not assist in the building of Zion are transgressors. [^35]

consumed. The scriptures repeatedly affirm that the wicked will be destroyed at the Second Coming by Jesus Christ, who is "a consuming fire" (Heb. 12:29) and "a wall of fire" (Zech. 2:5). Christ will burn the wicked by the light of his glory (D&C 133:41).

1:29 oaks. Oaks are connected to the groves of the Canaanite mother goddess. God commanded Israel to destroy the groves (Ex. 34:13; Deut. 7:5; 2 Kgs. 18:4; Isa. 27:9) because they represented idol worship and apostate temple practices that often took place on high hills (1 Kgs. 14:23; 2 Kgs. 17:10). Such trees and groves are counterfeits of the tree of life, which was associated with the Lord's ancient temples.

gardens. Although gardens are typically associated with true temples (Gen. 2:8- 16), here the gardens are affiliated with counterfeit temple systems (65:3). [^36]

1:30 ye shall be as an oak . . . and as a garden. The two metaphors here (oak and garden) describe the status of the wicked (Luke 23:31; Alma 5:52; 3 Ne. 14:17-18). Inasmuch as the wicked have chosen to worship idols that are connected to oaks and gardens (1:29), they will in a sense become what they have worshiped—as valueless as an oak tree that is either dying or plagued with disease (an oak whose leaf fadeth), or as unfruitful and worthless as a garden that hath no water. The oak tree that lacks water (spiritually, Jesus represents the living waters) soon shrivels up and becomes kindling for the fire accompanying the second coming of Jesus that will burn all corruptible things. A dry garden is in a similar state.

water. Jesus Christ and the cleansing and purifying power of his atonement are represented by water (33:21; Jer. 2:13; 17:13; John 4:6-14).

1:31 tinder/spark. Tinder (or tow) is composed of short, broken fibers from flax or hemp. These two terms point to the future consumption wherein all the wicked will be burned at the second coming of Christ (Mal. 3; 4; D&C 63:32-34; 101:23 25).

---
Notas:
[^16] The KJV expression away with is an archaism, a more modern expression of which is endure.
[^17] Haran, Temples and Temple-Service, 26.
[^18] New Bible Dictionary, 1046.
[^19] JST Isa. 1:16 modifies the singular wash you to the plural wash ye.
[^20] The term justice adequately fits the description and meaning of the passage and replaces judgment. See footnote c to 1:17 in the LDS edition of the Bible.
[^21] The term vindicate should replace the KJV imperative judge used here. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 1047.
[^22] Smith, Answers to Gospel Questions, 1:51.
[^23] McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 47.
[^24] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 77.
[^25] The Hebrew term shachad should read bribes rather than gifts. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 1005.
[^26] The term vindicate should replace the KJV imperative judge used here. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 1047.
[^27] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 49.
[^28] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 93.
[^29] The term justice fits the context better than judgment. See footnote b to 1:27 in the LDS edition of the Bible.
[^30] Ye is the correct reading; they does not fit the context.
[^31] NIV Isa. correctly has tinder here.
[^32] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 329.
[^33] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 92-93.
[^34] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 76.
[^35] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 254.
[^36] Parry, "Garden of Eden," 126-51.
