Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 7

Likening Isa. 7 unto Ourselves

This prophecy has a direct application for us although it was literally fulfilled when Assyria invaded ancient Israel. Assyria is a type and symbol of the warring nations that will exist in the latter days, shortly before the Second Coming. The text provides a number of clues regarding this, including Isaiah's fourfold use of the formula "in that day" (7:18, 20, 21, 23), a phrase that often pertains to our own day. Further, if we accept the Lord's sign of Immanuel (i.e., if we accept Jesus Christ and his atonement), we will be protected during the wars in the last days.The central messages for us in this section are that we should trust the Lord's word that comes through his prophet, rather than rely on the arm of flesh, and Judah's inhabitants should find comfort in knowing that a "remnant of Israel shall return" to Israel, as the Lord has promised.

Ephraim and Syria War against Judah (7:1-9)

The last three verses of the previous section (6:11-13) refer to the deportation of ancient Israel's inhabitants from their homeland and to the ruin of their cities. These somber prophecies deal with the scattering of Israel brought about by her spiritual blindness and hard-heartedness (6:10). This section (7:1-9) nevertheless presents a prophecy intended to bring joy and hope to the people through the presence of a living symbol (8:18) named Shear-jashub, the son of Isaiah and his wife, the prophetess. Shear-jashub means "a remnant shall return," and the prophecy is that a remnant of the house of Israel will someday return to their homeland. More is said of Shear- jashub in later prophecies.

An Isaiah scholar explains that the prophecy in this section "was delivered on the occasion of Isaiah's first interview with King Ahaz, after the first alarm had reached Jerusalem that invasion was imminent. The king was apparently supervising the measures being taken to ensure a water-supply for the city in the event of a siege, when the prophet received the command to go with his son Shear-yashub." [^1]

Rezin king of Syria and Pekah king of Israel tried to persuade Ahaz king of Judah to ally with them against Assyria, their neighboring superpower. Meanwhile, Isaiah pleaded with Ahaz to trust the Lord for deliverance from the invading armies (7:1-10). Ahaz rejected Isaiah's spiritual counsel and won the support of Tiglath- pileser III, king of Assyria, who in 732 b.c. invaded the Northern Kingdom of Israel and captured many cities (2 Kgs. 15:29; 16:7). Because Ahaz rejected Isaiah's (i.e., God's) plan, the armies of Rezin and Pekah invaded Judah, slew one hundred twenty thousand warriors, and carried away some two hundred thousand women and children. Judah was slaughtered, because, in part, of the great sins of her king and her people (2 Kgs. 16:5; 2 28:5-8).

The section begins with a historical note that explains the setting and context from which the prophecy originated (7:1-2). Next, the Lord speaks to Isaiah (7:3). Isaiah delivers God's word to Ahaz (7:4), telling him that the two invading kings are but blazing firebrands which will soon be burnt out, and that Syria's plan to rule Judah, dethrone Ahaz, and place a king on Judah's throne will not be successful. Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah make evil plans (7:5) which the Lord explains will not work (7:7-9).

Isa. 7:1-9

And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up toward Jerusalem to war against it, but could not prevail against it. (7:1) And it was told the house of David, saying, Syria is [an ally] [^2] with Ephraim. And his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind. (7:2) Then said the Lord unto Isaiah, Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou, and Shear-jashub thy son, at the end of the [aqueduct] [^3] of the upper pool in the highway of the [washermen's] [^4] field; (7:3) And say unto him, Take heed, and be quiet; fear not, neither be fainthearted for the two tails of these smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the son of Remaliah. (7:4) Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have taken evil counsel against thee, saying, (7:5) Let us go up against Judah, and [cause her sickening dread], [^5] and let us [break her down] [^6] for us, and set a king in the midst of it, [yea,] [^7] the son of Tabeal: (7:6) Thus saith the Lord God, It shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass. (7:7) For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus, [^8] Rezin; and within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken, that it be not a people. (7:8) And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliah's son. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established. (7:9)

Notes and Commentary

7:1 Ahaz. Ahaz was a king of Judah (735-715 b.c.), the son of Jotham and father of Hezekiah. Ahaz chose to ignore Isaiah's prophetic words and instead followed a path of evil, which included making "molten images for Baalim," offering sacrifices and burning "incense in the high places," and sacrificing his children to false deities (2 Chr. 28:2-4, 23-25; 2 Kgs. 16:2-4, 10-16).

Rezin. This king of Syria (2 Kgs. 15:37), together with Pekah, waged an anti- Assyrian campaign. Eventually, Rezin was killed during a battle against Assyria (2 Kgs. 16:7-9).

Pekah. Pekah, who was the son of Remaliah, "conspired against" Pekahiah (king of Israel and son of Menahem), assassinated him, and became Israel's eighteenth king. Pekah's reign lasted approximately five years (737-732 b.c.; 2 Kgs. 15:22-26). Pekah, who with Rezin battled against Ahaz king of Judah, was eventually murdered by Hosea (not to be confused with the prophet Hosea), who succeeded him on the throne (2 Kgs. 15:30). It was during King Hosea's reign that the northern tribes of Israel (the ten tribes) were captured and deported by Assyria.

7:2 house of David. This refers to the Davidic dynasty, including Ahaz, who ruled over Judah.

Syria (or Aram). The kingdom of Syria, which was north of ancient Israel.

Ephraim. Here Ephraim represents the Northern Kingdom of Israel, the home of the ten tribes of Israel. Ephraim's boundaries are described in Josh. 16:5-9.

his heart/heart of his people. The hearts of Ahaz and the Judahites became afraid because of the anticipated invasion of Syria and Israel's armies into the kingdom of Judah.

7:3 Shear-jashub. Shear-jashub, who was named prophetically (Hebrew, "a remnant shall return"; Hosea 1:6-9), was a son of Isaiah and the prophetess, and the elder brother of Maher-shalal-hash-baz. The Lord commanded Isaiah to take Shear-jashub with him to meet King Ahaz at the upper pool because the boy was to become a living symbol to the Jews (8:18) and a reminder to the Israelites that a remnant would return to their land and their God (6:11-13).

aqueduct of the upper pool. The pool was probably located near the Gihon spring in the Valley of Kidron. [^9] Ahaz may have been at the pool with his officers to check Jerusalem's water supply for the pending siege. The Lord, who knew Ahaz's location, inspired Isaiah to go there with his son Shear-jashub. This is also the place where Rabshakeh, messenger of the king of Assyria, delivered a message to King Hezekiah (36:2; 2 Kgs. 18:17).

7:4 fear not, neither be fainthearted. King Ahaz had no need to fear the power of the kings of Syria and Israel, for the days of their power were numbered.

two tails of these smoking firebrands. A firebrand is smoldering wood. The might and majesty of Rezin and Pekah, who were once burning fires with the power to consume, were now nothing more than smoldering embers. The tails may symbolize two animals who are retreating from a battle.

son of Remaliah. Pekah was Remaliah's son.

7:5 evil counsel against thee. Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah (Pekah) planned to conquer Judah and set a king over her (7:6).

7:6 go up against Judah. These countries intended to make war against Judah and conquer her.

cause her sickening dread. Through intimidation and brutal force, Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah hoped to strike fear in the hearts of Judah's inhabitants.

let us break her down. These forces wished to conquer Judah.

set a king in the midst of it. These powers wanted to conquer Judah to expand their own territory and dominion by placing one of their own, a puppet king (the son of Tabeal), over the land.

son of Tabeal. Rezin and Pekah had hoped to install this puppet ruler on Ahaz's throne. The son of Tabeal is considered so insignificant a ruler that his own name is not given in the text.

7:7 Thus saith the Lord God. God is the author of these words.

It shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass. God, who is omnipotent and in charge of the affairs of humanity, sees the future. The plans of Syria, Ephraim, and Pekah, the son of Remaliah, will not succeed. Not only does God reveal to his prophets what will happen in the future but he tells them what will not happen, "neither shall it come to pass."

7:8 head of Syria is Damascus. Damascus, located at the foot of Mount Hermon, was the capital (head) of Syria, and Damascus's king (head) was Rezin. Damascus was captured by the Assyrian army, led by Tiglath-pileser (2 Kgs. 16:9).

threescore and five years. Isaiah's prophecy that Ephraim would no longer be a kingdom or a nation was fulfilled when Ephraim fell in 721 b.c. King Sargon II of Assyria deported her citizens, the ten tribes of Israel, to the north countries.

7:9 head of Ephraim is Samaria. Samaria was the capital (head) of the Northern Kingdom of Israel, or Ephraim (1 Kgs. 16:23-24, 28), where most of the kings of Israel resided. The king (head) of Samaria was Pekah.

If ye will not believe. If Ahaz (and Judah) would not believe in Jehovah and have faith in Isaiah's prophecies, then Ahaz's kingship and kingdom would not remain on the earth.

The Sign to Ahaz: The Immanuel Prophecy (7:10-16)

The Lord extended a sign to Ahaz to demonstrate that the events surrounding the plot of Rezin and Pekah would occur precisely as Isaiah had prophesied (7:1-9). The sign was to give Ahaz courage and faith to trust the prophet's word that God's power was far greater than man's armies, and although Ahaz rejected the sign, the Lord provided one anyway. The sign pertained to a specific virgin who would conceive and bring forth a son whose name would be called Immanuel.

The prophecy has a dual application, as shown by a close reading of Isa. 7:10- 16; 8:3-7; and Matt. 1:21. First, the greater fulfillment of the prophecy centers in Jesus Christ, who was Immanuel, the son of the virgin Mary. Matthew recorded this fulfillment: "She shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins. Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet [Isaiah], saying, Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us" (Matt. 1:21-23). Second, because the sign was given, in part, to nurture Ahaz's faith, it would have had some fulfillment in his lifetime. The lesser fulfillment of the Immanuel prophecy thus pertains to Isaiah's wife, the prophetess, who also fulfilled the conditions of Isaiah's prophecy when she brought forth a son. Isaiah, the prophetess, their son, and the conditions surrounding his birth all point to the birth of Jesus Christ. These similarities are shown in Table 1. Isaiah's language in both passages of scripture was deliberate, designed to show that the first fulfillment of the Immanuel prophecy was connected to himself, his wife, and their son, all of whom were signs to Israel (8:18).

Table 1

Themes

Isa. 7:14-17

Isa. 8:3-7

Mother

Virgin (14)

Prophetess (3)

Conception

Shall conceive (14)

She conceived (3)

Child is a son

Bear a son (14)

Bare a son (3)

Naming of son

Call his name Immanuel (14)

Call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz

Child shall have knowledge

Before the child shall know (16)

Before the child shall have knowledge (4)

Child before eight years

To refuse the evil and choose the good (16)

To cry, My father, and my mother (4)

Land

Land . . . shall be forsaken (16)

Damascus and . . . Samaria shall be taken away (4)

Kings

Both her kings (16)

King of Assyria (4)

Role of the Lord

Lord shall bring upon thee (17)

Lord bringeth up upon them (7)

Assyrian king

King of Assyria (17)

King of Assyria (7)

Matthew's account of the fulfillment of this prophecy in the meridian of time also fits the pattern, as shown in Table 2.

Table 2

Themes

Isa. 7:14-17

Isa. 8:3-7

Matt. 1:21

Mother

Virgin (14)

Prophetess (3)

She (Mary)

Conception

Shall conceive (14)

Conceived (3)

Bring forth

Child is a son

Bear a son (14)

Bare a son (3)

A son

Naming of son

Call his name Immanuel (14)

Call his name Maher- shalal-hash-baz

Call his name Jesus

Isa. 7:10-16

Moreover the Lord spake again unto Ahaz, saying, (7:10) Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God; ask it either in the depth, or in the height above. (7:11) But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I [test] [^10] the Lord. (7:12) And [Isaiah] said, Hear ye now, O house of David; Is it a small thing for you to [try the patience of] men, but will ye [try the patience of] [^11] my God also? (7:13) Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, [the] [^12] virgin shall conceive, and [shall] [^13] bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel. (7:14) Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and [to] [^14] choose the good. (7:15) For before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings. (7:16)

Notes and Commentary

7:10 the Lord spake again unto Ahaz. The Lord spoke to King Ahaz through the prophet Isaiah, which is often how God communicates with individuals.

7:11 Ask thee a sign. The sign was a prophecy that received both immediate and later fulfillment (8:3-7). In the Old Testament era, signs were "frequently offered by a prophet so that someone may know that God [was] fulfilling the promises he [had] made" [^15] (37:30; 38:7; 1 Sam. 2:34; 10:7).

depth/height. One could ask for the sign either in the depth (which may refer to the earth) or in heaven itself, for God has the power to reach into the farthest corners of his numberless creations to give any number of signs for his divine purposes. As it was, God indeed gave Ahaz the greatest sign in the universe, one that dealt with the Messiah, who would be called Immanuel (7:14).

7:12 test. Apparently Ahaz was afraid to ask the Lord for a sign. Perhaps he knew that Israel had often been accused of testing the Lord (Ex. 17:2; Num. 14:22; Deut. 6:16; Ps. 95:9), or he was spiritually dead and a nonbeliever, or he was afraid of the sign and what it would mean.

7:13 Hear ye now, O house of David. The sign was not for Ahaz only, for the plural ye and the phrase house of David indicate that the sign was given to all the people of the kingdom.

7:14 virgin. The term virgin describes both one who is physically untouched and one who is pure and undefiled by the world. Isaiah's wife was a virgin in the latter sense, and Mary, Jesus' mother, was a virgin in both senses. The Hebrew word 'alemah (despite some arguments to the contrary) does indeed mean "virgin." [^16]

The Book of Mormon prophets have identified Mary as "a virgin, and she was exceedingly fair and white" (1 Ne. 11:13) "a virgin, most beautiful and fair above all other virgins" (1 Ne. 11:15) "the virgin . . . the mother of the Son of God" (1 Ne. 11:18) and "a virgin, a precious and chosen vessel" (Alma 7:10).

son. The name or title son plays a prominent role in defining Jesus' divine mission and atoning sacrifice. Jesus is called "Son" (Moses 5:8), "Son Ahman" (D&C 78:20), "son of Abraham" (Matt. 1:1), "Son of David" (Matt. 9:27), "Son of God" (1 Ne. 10:17), "son of Joseph" (Luke 3:23), "Son of Man" (Moses 6:57), "son of Mary" (Mark 6:3), "Son of Righteousness" (3 Ne. 25:2), "Son of the Eternal Father" (1 Ne. 11:21), "Son of the everlasting God" (1 Ne. 11:32), "Son of the Highest" (Luke 1:32), "Son of the living God" (D&C 14:9), and "Son of the most high God" (1 Ne. 11:6).

shall call his name Immanuel. The Hebrew sentence structure makes it clear that the virgin names the child: "the virgin shall . . . call his name Immanuel." The name Immanuel, which means "God with us" or "God is with us," indicates that God's love, power, knowledge, grace, and presence are with the righteous. Also, the name indicates that God himself came down from heaven and took upon himself mortality. For these and other reasons, Immanuel is Jesus, the son of David, who is called "King Immanuel" in a modern revelation (D&C 128:22). The names Immanuel ("God is with us"), Maher-shalal-hash-baz ("to speed, spoil, hasten, plunder"), and Jesus ("salvation") are symbolic and have prophetic connotations.

7:15 butter and honey. These are the basics of a pastoral culture (7:21-22).

7:16 before the child shall know. The prophecy explains that before the child is able to make his own moral choices, or arrives at the age of accountability, which is eight years old (D&C 68:25), the kingdoms of Syria and Israel (Northern Kingdom) will be laid waste. This prophecy was fulfilled within a few years, while Maher- shalal-hash-baz was still under the age of eight, when both Syria and Israel fell to Assyria.

both her kings. The kings of Syria and the Northern Kingdom of Israel.

Assyria's Invasion of Judah (7:17-25)

After providing King Ahaz with a sign (the Immanuel prophecy), Isaiah prophesies that Assyria will invade Israel. Ahaz had been worried about the two kings (Rezin and Pekah) who were threatening to invade his land and kingdom, but, according to Isaiah, Ahaz should have been more concerned with the Assyrian army's impending invasion. Inasmuch as Ahaz had rejected the Lord and lacked faith in him (7:10-14), the Lord set the king of Assyria against Ahaz.

Isaiah prophesies that Assyria's occupation would cover the entire land (7:18- 19). Assyria's intent was to humiliate and strip the land's inhabitants of their dignity (7:20), make them poverty-stricken, and deport them from the land (7:21-22). Because of the desolating nature of warfare, the vineyards would become neglected and overrun with thorns and briers (7:23-24), and the farmlands that had once been cultivated (digged with the hoe) would also be abandoned and become a pastureland for cattle and sheep (7:25). Ahaz could have had freedom for his people, but he ignored the Lord's sign.

Isa. 7:17-25

The Lord shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy father's house, days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah; even the king of Assyria. (7:17) And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall [whistle] [^17] for the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria. (7:18) And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon all bushes. (7:19) In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is hired, [^18] by them beyond the river, by the king of Assyria, the head, and the hair of the feet: and it shall also consume the beard. (7:20) And it shall come to pass in that day, that a man shall nourish a young cow, and two sheep; (7:21) And it shall come to pass, for the abundance of milk [^19] they shall give he shall eat butter: for butter and honey shall every one eat that is left in the land. (7:22) And it shall come to pass in that day, [Every place which has a thousand vines worth a thousand pieces of silver will become thorns and briers] [^20] (7:23) With arrows and with bows shall men come thither; because all the land shall become briers and thorns. (7:24) And on all hills that shall be digged with the [hoe], [^21] [you will no longer go there for] [^22] fear of briers and thorns: but it shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of [sheep]. [^23] (7:25)

Notes and Commentary

7:17 Lord shall bring upon thee . . . the king of Assyria. Inasmuch as Ahaz and most of his people reject the Lord and turn to idolatry and other gross sins, the Lord will use the king of Assyria and his armies to punish King Ahaz, his family (upon thy father's house), and his kingdom (upon thy people). Note the active role played by God, who will bring upon [King Ahaz and his kingdom] the king of Assyria. In 10:5- 26, God says he will use the Assyrians as his staff to beat the people.

days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah. The disaster that came on the kingdom of Judah is compared to the rebellion of the ten tribes under Jeroboam's leadership (1 Kgs. 12). Israel had not had days so severe since that rebellion.

7:18 Lord shall whistle. The Lord will signal or prompt the Assyrian armies (here referred to as "bees") to come down on Judah. The Lord shall whistle to the bees is a symbol built on an actual ancient practice, for Cyrillus of Alexandria (ca. a.d. 400) wrote about beekeepers who whistled to bees to get them to return to their hives. [^24]

fly/bee. These refer to fighting soldiers (see Deut. 1:44; Ps. 118:12). These symbols are well chosen, for "the flooding of the Nile brought . . . swarms of flies. . . . The hill districts of Assyria were well known for their bees." [^25]

rivers of Egypt/land of Assyria. Assyria's domination and power would reach as far south as the rivers of Egypt, and Assyria would even rule Egypt for a brief period during the following century.

7:19 valleys/rocks, thorns/bushes. Just as the bee and the fly are able to penetrate every area of the valleys, rocks, thorns, and bushes, so too would the Assyrian soldiers penetrate every area of the kingdom of Judah.

7:20 shave with a razor. The Assyrian king and his armies represent the Lord's hired razor. The symbol of the razor refers to the fact that the Assyrians forced war prisoners to become slaves, humiliating and dishonoring them by shaving them from head to toe. Hence the fly and bee metaphors in 7:18 and the razor metaphor foretell that "no part of the land (7:18-19), no part of the person (7:20) will be free of enemy occupation." [^26]

7:21 nourish a young cow, and two sheep. This speaks of the poverty of those who remain in Judah after the Assyrian invasion. Residents who are permitted to remain in the land will be poor in comparison to the prewar years. They will no longer possess large herds of cattle or large vineyards (7:23). They will own only two sheep and a young cow, and they will find it a struggle to nourish their livestock.

7:22 abundance of milk. Ancient Israel was called a land flowing with milk and honey (Ex. 3:8; 13:5) to symbolize its fertile and productive nature, but all that remains now is butter and wild honey. Fresh milk in abundance is gone; only a milk product, butter (which can be stored longer than fresh milk), remains.

butter/honey. Those who are not deported by Assyria and thus remain in Israel will eat the very basics of a pastoral culture: butter and honey. Produce (grains, fruits, and other items) will no longer be available because of the war-torn status of the community, economic upheaval, and lack of cultivated lands.

7:23 thousand vines. A vineyard with a thousand vines is very large. The fruits and benefits of horticulture will be lost with Assyria's invasion, the richest vines will become worthless, and briers and thorns will be found in place of the vineyards.

7:24 arrows/bows. Inasmuch as vineyards (7:23) and cultivated lands (7:25) will be gone, hunters, with their bows and arrows, will roam the land to seek their prey.

land shall become briers and thorns. The phrase briers and thorns occurs three times in this section. Because of the lack of cultivation and care for pasture, the land will become full of briers and thorns.

7:25 digged with the hoe. As the vineyards will be taken over by briers and thorns, so will other cultivated land. Such desolation is symbolic of the judgments the people will receive for their pride and sin.

oxen/sheep. Farmlands that were once cultivated (digged with the hoe) have now become range for cattle and sheep.

---
Notas:
[^1] JST Isa. 8:1 and 2 Ne. 18:1 insert word of the.
[^2] Kaiser, Isa. 1-12, 178.
[^3] JST Isa. 8:4 and 2 Ne. 18:4 insert the terms behold and not and move the term before.
[^4] Kaiser, Isa. 1-12, 180.
[^5] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 90.
[^6] Watts, Isa. 1-33, 113-14.
[^7] 2 Ne. 18:10 replaces nought with naught.
[^8] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 92.
[^9] From Hebrew gesher. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 905.
[^10] 2 Ne. 18:12 omits the redundant pronoun them.
[^11] This word replaces the less familiar gin.
[^12] Wildberger, Isa. 1-12, 357.
[^13] JST Isa. 8:19 and 2 Ne. 18:19 omit that.
[^14] JST Isa. 8:19 and 2 Ne. 18:19 combine the two questions found in the KJV and add the words hear from.
[^15] JST Isa. 8:20 and 2 Ne. 18:20 add the conjunction and.
[^16] The translation is from NIV Isa. and is supported by the Hebrew Bible.
[^17] Hebrew niqisheh, from the root qashah. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 904.
[^18] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 893.
[^19] JST Isa. 9:1 and 2 Ne. 19:1 add the letter s to the word afterward.
[^20] JST Isa. 9:1 and 2 Ne. 19:1 omit the pronoun her.
[^21] JST Isa. 9:1 and 2 Ne. 19:1 add the word Red before sea.
[^22] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 92.
[^23] Hebrew tsor. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 864.
[^24] Hebrew chatim. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 367.
[^25] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 89.
[^26] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 89.
