Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 8

Likening Isa. 8 unto Ourselves

Isaiah presents three images of Jesus Christ that have special meaning for us today— water, temple, and light. First, Jesus is as essential to our spiritual salvation as water is to our physical salvation; that is to say, without water we will die physically, and without Christ we will die spiritually (8:5-10). Second, we will find peace and comfort in Jesus Christ if we permit him to be our temple (the focus of our worship), our cornerstone (the chief part of the building), and our sure foundation (where we can find sure footing) (8:11-15). Third, as we walk through mortality, which is like passing in the shadow or in darkness, we receive great hope, comfort, and joy when we accept Jesus as our "great light" (8:16-9:2).

The Immanuel Prophecy: First Fulfillment (8:1-4)

The sign provided to Ahaz was first fulfilled with the union of Isaiah and his wife and the birth of their son Maher-shalal-hash-baz (see commentary on 7:14-16). At least nine months would have passed since the conditions of the sign were given to Ahaz, for the text makes it clear that Isaiah "went unto the prophetess" after the pronouncement of the sign (8:3). Similar language found in 7:14-16 and 8:2-4 makes it clear that 8:2-4 is the first and immediate fulfillment of the Immanuel prophecy given in 7:14-16 (see Table 1, page 73). The verses recording the first fulfillment of this prophecy are written in prose rather than in the poetic parallelistic style.

Isa. 8:1-4

Moreover the [word of the] [^1] Lord said unto me, Take thee a great [tablet], [^2] and write in it with a man's pen concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz. (8:1) And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah. (8:2) And I went unto the prophetess; and she conceived, and bare a son. Then said the Lord to me, Call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz. (8:3) For [behold,] the child shall [not] [^3] have knowledge to cry, My father, and my mother, before the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away before the king of Assyria. (8:4)

Notes and Commentary

8:1 great tablet. On a large tablet, Isaiah wrote down the name by which his son would be called, "probably [to][indicat[e] that the inscription was intended for public display." [^4] This action, along with the testimony of the two witnesses, would make the prophecy and fulfillment of the sign to Ahaz public knowledge.

man's pen. This was probably a stylus or graver, used to inscribe stone, metal, or clay.

Maher-shalal-hash-baz. The son of Isaiah and the prophetess and the younger brother of Shear-jashub. Both Isaiah's sons share prophetic qualities in the book of Isaiah. Maher-shalal-hash-baz may also have been called "Immanuel" (see commentary on 7:14-16 and 8:8, 10). The prophetic nature of the name Maher-shalal-hash- baz, which means "to speed, spoil, hasten, plunder," is explained in 8:4: "For before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father, and my mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away before the king of Assyria." That is, Maher-shalal-hash-baz is a living sign of the great quickness ("speed" or "hasten") with which Assyria would plunder and spoil the Northern Kingdom of Israel (Samaria) and Syria (Damascus). The repetition of speed and hasten in the son's name emphasizes the swiftness by which the sign will be fulfilled (meaning before the baby Maher-shalal-hash-baz can utter the words father or mother).

Maher-shalal-hash-baz is a type of Jesus Christ. Both Maher-shalal-hash-baz and Christ possess prophetic names; the name Maher-shalal-hash-baz has four parts, similar to the four titles of Jesus found in 9:6. Both were named by revelation from God, and both entered the world during times of political upheaval and warfare. Maher-shalal-hash-baz prophesies the manner in which Israel would be speedily destroyed and then plundered; likewise, Jesus Christ will come down to judge the world and speedily destroy those who are wicked. Jewish tradition holds that the prophetess belonged to a royal line. If this is indeed true, then Maher-shalal-hash-baz was of royal lineage, as was Jesus Christ. (For other connections between the two, see Table 1 on page 73.)

8:2 faithful witnesses . . . Uriah the priest, and Zechariah. Uriah was a well- known figure who worked as a priest in the Jerusalem temple (2 Kgs. 16:10-16). Little is known of Zechariah, other than that he was the son of Jeberechiah and was considered to be a faithful witness. He may have been the same Zechariah who was King Ahaz's father-in-law and the grandfather of King Hezekiah. The fact that Isaiah would have two witnesses, as required by law (Deut. 17:6; 19:15), to the inscription of his son's name on a tablet indicates that he wanted the public to know that the Lord had indeed fulfilled the sign given in 7:14-16. The two witnesses could later testify that Isaiah himself had inscribed the tablet and could confirm the date of inscription.

8:3 prophetess. The prophetess, like her husband, possessed a testimony of Jesus, for "the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy" (Rev. 19:10). The title prophetess "was given to Isaiah's wife because she was literally the bearer of the Lord's word, incarnate in her son." [^5] The fulfillment of the sign given to King Ahaz from the Lord came through Isaiah's wife and the birth of her son Maher-shalal-hash- baz (7:14). She typified the virgin Mary (7:14; see also Table 1, page 73).

son. Maher-shalal-hash-baz, the son of Isaiah and the prophetess, is a type of Jesus Christ, who is the Son of God (7:14-16).

8:4 to cry, My father, and my mother. Isaiah's prophecy concerning the pending invasion of Assyria will be fulfilled within two or three years. The time element is set forth in the prophecy that Assyria will capture Damascus, Syria, Samaria, and Israel before Maher-shalal-hash-baz is able to say My father, and my mother. (Young children are able to say simple phrases such as my father or my mother near the age of two.) The prophecy was fulfilled in 734-732 b.c. when Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria, captured the Galilee region, the Jezreel Valley, and Transjordan, and plundered their riches.

riches of Damascus/spoil of Samaria. After conquering Syria and Israel, the Assyrian army seized their personal and public wealth. Tiglath-pileser III recorded in his royal chronicle that Israel "with all its inhabitants and its goods, I led to Assyria." [^6]

Rejecting Jehovah, the Waters of Shiloah (8:5-10)

Isa. 7:1-9 recounts King Ahaz's refusal to accept the sign provided by Jehovah; this section deals with the refusal of the people of Israel and Judah to accept Jehovah himself.

Isaiah describes and then contrasts two forms of waters—the soft, rolling waters of Shiloah, located near the temple mount of Jerusalem, and the waters of the Euphrates, a great river that often floods out of control. The waters of Shiloah are controlled and inviting, whereas the Euphrates is dangerous and destructive. The waters of Shiloah bring life to those who drink them; the Euphrates brings death to those who are swept up in its flood. Isaiah's images of the two waters are symbolic: the former represents Jesus, the King of Heaven, who is likened to the waters of life; the latter is the king of Assyria, who leads his great, destructive armies and "cover the earth [like a flood . . . and] destroy the inhabitants thereof" (Jer. 46:8). Inasmuch as the inhabitants of Judah had rejected Jesus, or the waters of Shiloah, the Lord set upon them the king of Assyria, or the strong and mighty waters of the river that would overflow their banks and cover the entire land with its destruction.

Isa. 8:5-10

The Lord spake also unto me again, saying, (8:5) Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's son; (8:6) Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth up upon them the waters of the river, strong and many, even the king of Assyria, and all his glory: and [it] shall come up over all [its] channels, and go over all [its] banks: (8:7) And [it] shall pass through Judah; [it] shall overflow and go over, [it] shall reach even to the neck; and the stretching out of [its] wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel. (8:8) Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces. (8:9) Take counsel together, and it shall come to [naught]; [^7] speak the word, and it shall not stand: for God is with us. (8:10)

Notes and Commentary

8:5 Lord spake also unto me. The Lord is the source of Isaiah's words.

8:6 this people. The people of Israel (1:3; 3:12; 6:9), or any people who refuse the living waters of Christ.

waters of Shiloah. This refers to Jesus Christ, who is "the fountain of all righteousness" (Ether 12:28; 8:26; 1 Ne. 2:9) and "the fountain of living waters" (Jer. 2:13; 17:13; Ps. 36:8-9). The image of waters is symbolic of Jesus because he cleanses the righteous who enter the waters of baptism; he also invites us to drink from the waters of salvation, which forever quench the thirst of those who partake.

The waters of Shiloah are located in southeast Jerusalem, possibly belonging to the same body of water as the pool of Siloam of the New Testament. In 8:6, when the people reject the soft rolling waters of Shiloah, they reject Jehovah the King. This rejection results in God's sending against them a great destructive river, representative of the king of Assyria.

Rezin and Remaliah's son. Rezin was the king of Syria, and Pekah, the son of Remaliah, was the king of Israel (7:1-9).

8:7 waters of the river. The river spoken of here is the great Euphrates that flowed through Assyria, but Isaiah uses the river as a metaphor for the "king of Assyria" (8:7) and his armies. Other prophets have similarly likened armies to great rivers and floods that "cover the earth" and "destroy the city and the inhabitants thereof" (Jer. 46:8; 47:2; Amos 8:8; Dan. 9:26), just as Noah warned his contemporaries of the worldwide flood that would destroy all creatures save those who found salvation on the ark (Gen. 6:5-17).

channels/banks. The waters of the river (the king of Assyria and his armies) will be very destructive when they flood Israel.

8:8 neck. The neck is a metaphor for the upper reaches of the land; hence, Assyria's army will destroy the width and breadth of the land.

stretching out of its wings. This phrase "could refer to the outward spread of the floodwaters, but it is more vividly seen as a change of metaphor: the Assyrian, like a huge bird of prey, overshadows the whole land, ready to pounce." [^8]

thy land, O Immanuel. The land is the promised, covenant land that belongs to the Lord (thy land). The name Immanuel (Hebrew, "God is with us") is mentioned twice in this section (8:8, 10)—once as the transliteration "Immanuel" and again as the translation "God is with us." Immanuel serves as a poetic refrain to help the reader recall the sign provided to King Ahaz (7:14-16). Immanuel, or Maher-shalal- hash-baz, is a living sign (8:18) to Judah that God (who is "with us") will fulfill his promise to bring security and hope to them as nations come upon them. More importantly, Immanuel is the name of Jesus Christ, who brings spiritual salvation to Israel. In the end, the world's nations and alliances fail because the power of Immanuel exceeds theirs.

8:9 Associate yourselves. Isaiah now addresses the invading armies and the "far countries" of the world. He warns them that if they form alliances, they eventually will be "broken in pieces."

gird yourselves . . . broken in pieces. Although the inhabitants of the world attempt to protect (gird) themselves with temporal weapons, they will be destroyed or broken in pieces. The twice-repeated phrase is probably the result of a scribal error. The repetition is not found in the Isaiah Scroll of the Dead Sea Scrolls.

8:10 Take counsel together. Despite the attempt of the world's inhabitants to make war plans and prepare for temporal salvation, their plans will be worthless ("come to naught"); their carefully designed defense "shall not stand."

Jesus Is Like a Temple to the Righteous (8:11-15)

These verses are an admonition from the Lord to Isaiah and others (second- person plural verbal forms are used here) that they should not follow those evil people who continually conspire and are obsessed with fear of war (8:11-12). Rather, Isaiah and his followers should let the Lord "be [their] fear," for he is as a temple, a cornerstone, and sure foundation for those righteous ones who have placed their trust in him.

Isa. 8:11-15

For the Lord spake thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this people, saying, (8:11) Say ye not, A [conspiracy], [^9] to all [^10] to whom this people shall say, A [conspiracy]; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid. (8:12) Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. (8:13) And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel, for a [trap] [^11] and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. (8:14) And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken. (8:15)

Notes and Commentary

8:11 with a strong hand. This expression means "with power." This phrase is "a code used to describe the basic experience of a prophet who was receiving a message; apparently Isaiah is using a formula which had long since come into general use" [^12] (see 1 Kgs. 18:46; Ezek. 3:14; 8:1).

walk in the way of this people. To travel in the paths of the wicked.

8:12 conspiracy. The conspiracy may refer to the enemies of Judah who had hoped to install a puppet ruler (the son of Tabeal) on the throne of Ahaz (7:6).

neither fear ye their fear. This refers to the fear of the damned, who carry the burden of their sins and who succumb to the world's unrighteous and unproductive influence. The righteous reverence and fear the Lord and thus find peace.

8:13 Sanctify the Lord. The literal translation from the Hebrew reads, "make him a temple, the Lord of Hosts," meaning let the Lord be your temple, your place of holiness. The same idea is contained in the phrase shall be for a sanctuary (8:14). Peter and Nephi used similar language: "But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts" (1 Pet. 3:15) and "they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the Holy One of Jacob" (2 Ne. 27:34).

let him be your fear/dread. The Israelites should not fear the Assyrian empire's temporal might and power; instead they should place their attention and fear on the Lord, who possesses everlasting might. To fear the Lord is to honor, revere, trust, and obey him.

8:14 sanctuary. Other inspired writers have identified the Lord as a sanctuary or temple (Ezek. 11:16; John 2:18-20; Rev. 21:22). In addition, Jesus Christ is both the temple's "chief corner stone" (Ps. 118:22; Eph. 2:20) and its "sure foundation" (Jacob 4:16; Hel. 5:12). The veil of the temple represents Christ's flesh (Heb. 9:3).

stone/rock. These are two synonymous symbols for the Lord. To the righteous, Jesus Christ is the elect and precious chief cornerstone (Ps. 118:22; Eph. 2:20) of the temple "upon which they might build and have safe foundation" (Jacob 4:15), but unto "them which stumble at the word," Jesus is "a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence" (1 Pet. 2:6-8; see also 1 Cor. 1:23).

both the houses of Israel. These are the Northern Kingdom of Israel and the Southern Kingdom of Judah.

trap/snare. Jehovah lays a snare for the wicked whose values are disordered. He catches them in their sins and eventually he will cast them, still entrapped, into hell.

8:15 stumble/fall/be snared. Many individuals will stumble over the "rock of offence" (Jesus) and fall to the ground. Like an animal, they will be ensnared and taken captive by the devil.

Sealing the Testimony and the Law (8:16-9:2)

This section discusses the following:

Isaiah is first instructed to "bind the testimony" and "seal the law" (8:16).

Isaiah and his family are living symbols unto the house of Israel. Their names also are prophetic and serve to instruct the house of Israel according to God's plan (8:18).

Israel wanders lost and alone in the telestial world because of her sins, which have separated her from God (8:21). She does not follow the prophetic word; instead she seeks the word of God through wizards and familiar spirits (8:19).

The world will be walking in darkness, apostasy, and the "shadow of death" when a "great light," Jesus Christ, will make an appearance (8:22; 9:2).

Isa. 8:16-9:2

Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples. (8:16) And I will wait upon the Lord, that hideth his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him. (8:17) Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of hosts, which dwelleth in mount Zion. (8:18) And when they shall say unto you: Seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep and [^13] mutter— should not a people seek unto their God for the living to [hear from] [^14] the dead? (8:19) To the law and to the testimony: [and] [^15] if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them (8:20) And they shall [roam through the land], [^16] [hard pressed] [^17] and hungry: and it shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall [make themselves angry], [^18] and curse their king and their God, and look upward. (8:21) And they shall look unto the earth; and behold trouble and darkness, dimness of anguish; and they shall be driven to darkness. (8:22) Nevertheless the dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation, when at the first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, and[afterward[s] [^19] did more grievously afflict [^20] by the way of the [Red] [^21] Sea, beyond Jordan in Galilee of the nations. (9:1) The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined. (9:2)

Notes and Commentary

8:16 Bind up the testimony/seal the law. These actions fit into a divine sequence: the Saints must first receive their endowments, then warn the world's inhabitants of God's coming judgments, which will be followed by the binding up of the testimony and the sealing of the law; finally the judgments of God will come (see D&C 88:84; 109:38, 46; 133:72). [^22] After the Lord's people have testified to and warned the nations, they will figuratively "bind," "tie up," or "shut up" [^23] their testimonies and "affix [a] seal" [^24] to the law of God (the prophetic word).

8:17 wait upon the Lord. To wait upon the Lord is to patiently and faithfully await the fulfillment of his promises. Those who wait upon the Lord will receive salvation (Prov. 20:22), physical and spiritual strength (40:31), and eventually the earth for their inheritance (Ps. 37:9, 34).

hideth his face. This idiom indicates that the Spirit of the Lord has been withdrawn (8:20-22; see also Ezek. 39:29 ) and God's blessings have been removed from the house of Jacob. On the one hand, God hides his face from those who demonstrate a lack of faith and practice evil (Deut. 32:20; Micah 3:4; Deut. 31:17-18) on the other hand, God shows his face to those who are pure in heart (Matt. 5:8; D&C 93:1).

I will look for him. The literal translation reads, "I will hope for him." With regard to our hope in Christ, Jacob wrote: "For this intent have we written these things, that they may know that we knew of Christ, and we had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his coming; and not only we ourselves had a hope of his glory, but also all the holy prophets which were before us" (Jacob 4:4).

8:18 I and the children . . . are for signs and for wonders. Isaiah and his two sons were living symbols to the house of Israel (7:3; 8:2-4). Their names are prophetic; Maher-shalal-hash-baz speaks of the disaster which would come upon the Israelite people when the Assyrians would "speedily" conquer them and then "plunder" their possessions. Shear-jashub, "a remnant shall return," refers to the restoration when "a remnant of Israel will return" to the lands of promise. The name Isaiah, "Jehovah is Salvation," prophesies of Jesus Christ and of the salvation that comes through his atonement.

Lord . . . dwelleth in mount Zion. In Jerusalem the temple stood on Mount Moriah or Mount Zion. God dwells in his earthly temples that are dedicated and set apart for sacred ordinances.

8:19 familiar spirits/wizards. These two expressions, often used together (Lev. 19:31; Deut. 18:11; 2 Kgs. 21:6), refer to those who seek truth through false means or wish to learn about the future by communicating with spirits. Such will be cut off (Lev. 20:6).

peep and mutter. Peeping (or whispering) and muttering are methods the familiar spirits and wizards use to communicate with spirits.

should not a people seek unto their God for the living to hear from the dead? Isaiah instructs us that we should seek the truth from God and not from wizards or familiar spirits.

8:20 To the law and to the testimony. Isaiah appears to be swearing a sacred oath by the testimony of God's law and the prophets (8:16, 20).

no light in them. The Spirit of the Lord was withdrawn from Israel because her people sought revelation from familiar spirits and wizards (8:19) and rejected the testimonies of the prophets (8:20).

8:21 roam through the land. Here Israel is in her scattered and forsaken condition, lost and without a home.

hard pressed and hungry. This may be a literal reference to those who need food and sustenance. It may also symbolize those in exile who suffer because the word of God has been removed (Amos 8:11-12).

8:21-22 look upward/look unto the earth. Those who are driven from their homeland and are hungry for the Lord's word will look upward and earthward for revelation and for the prophetic word, but they will not find it.

trouble/darkness/dimness of anguish. Those who lack the prophetic word and the Holy Ghost are in a state of darkness, confusion, and anguish. Dimness suggests a darkened mind or gloominess.

driven to darkness. Darkness may refer to an actual place on the earth where the gospel is not found, or, more likely, it may refer to people who have chosen darkness (evil) rather than light.

8:23 dimness . . . such as in her vexation. Other versions seem to clarify this phrase: Though in earlier times Israel suffered vexation, or trouble, in the end the dimness and anguish will give way to the light that will shine from Christ. As the New International Version says, "There will be no more gloom for those who were in distress."

9:1 the land of Zebulun/Naphtali. These two lands are significant because Jesus dwelt in Capernaum, a city that was located "in the borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim" (Matt. 4:13). Jesus was the "great light" seen by the inhabitants of this area (9:2).

afflict by the way of the Red Sea. This expression refers to events surrounding Moses and the Israelites as they fled across the Red Sea from Egyptian bondage.

9:2 walked in darkness/dwell in the land of the shadow of death. The land of the shadow of death is a land peopled by those who do not know Jesus Christ (the "great light") and his gospel; therefore, they walk in darkness.

great light/light shined. Jesus was the great light that shined upon the inhabitants of Zebulun and Naphtali during his mortal mission. Matt. 4:13-16 contains the fulfillment of the prophecy found in Isa. 9:1-2.

---
Notas:
[^1] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 99-100.
[^2] JST Isa. 19:3 and 2 Ne. 19:3 omit the term not.
[^3] JST Isa. 19:3 adds the conjunction and.
[^4] The third-person masculine singular pronoun suffix in the Hebrew his or its probably refers to nation in the previous verse. We have used the pronoun their (after NIV Isa.) to clarify this concept.
[^5] 2 Ne. 19:4 omits the phrase as in the day of Midian.
[^6] From Hebrew se'on and ra'ash. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 684, 950. See also JB and NIV Isa.
[^7] BHS critical apparatus suggests the phrase kal simelah, "every garment."
[^8] We have replaced the KJV this shall be with burning with the more accurate shall be for burning.
[^9] Most translations, other than the KJV, do not place a comma between wonderful and counsellor, thus making the two terms read as one. This practice accords with the Hebrew reading of these terms.
[^10] JST Isa. 9:7 and 2 Ne. 19:7 replace shall be with is.
[^11] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 976, 978.
[^12] In Talmage, Articles of Faith, 465-73.
[^13] Kaiser, Isa. 1-12, 215.
[^14] JST Isa. 9:8 and 2 Ne. 19:8 replace the indefinite article a with the pronoun his.
[^15] JST Isa. 9:8 and 2 Ne. 19:8 replace into with unto.
[^16] From Hebrew napalu. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 656.
[^17] 2 Ne. 19:9 makes the noun inhabitant plural.
[^18] From the Hebrew term godel. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 152.
[^19] 2 Ne. 19:14 places the term will before the phrase the Lord rather than after it.
[^20] Wildberger, Isa. 1-12, 219.
[^21] 2 Ne. 19:15 omits the phrase and honourable. The term elder replaces the KJV ancient.
[^22] JST Isa. 9:17 and 2 Ne. 19:17 add the expression of them to the sentence, showing that the young men, the fatherless, and the widows are the hypocrites and evildoers.
[^23] 2 Ne. 19:18 makes the noun forest into a plural.
[^24] Kaiser, Isa. 1-12, 220, supported by Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 5.
