Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 10

Likening Isa. 10 unto Ourselves

The ancient nation of Assyria, with its cruel and bloody leaders and well-disciplined, fierce armies, destroyed other equally evil nations. This scenario of Assyria and war anticipates the warring nations of our own day and of the future, contending for land, power, and riches. Those same evils will be present in our own day, and the thirst for blood will also exist. But as Assyria, her leaders, and her armies were soon destroyed according to God's plan, so also will the warring nations of the last days be annihilated at the Second Coming. Isaiah's language—burning of a fire, flame, devour, and consume—applies to both ancient Assyria and the future nations at Christ's coming. Meanwhile, a righteous remnant of Israel will be saved at the last day as they worship in their temples.

Assyria: Instrument in God's Hand (10:5-11)

To fulfill his divine purposes, the Lord sends Assyria's wicked king and his armies to war against Israel. The Lord is actively engaged in this process: "I will send him," he says. The Lord controls all nations and their armies. "Do I not hold the destinies of all the armies of the nations of the earth?" he asks (D&C 117:6.)

Assyria thus represents the Lord's rod of anger, which is used to beat and punish the apostate Israelites. The Lord uses agents to destroy a people who have forsaken the covenant and committed spiritual adultery by worshiping foreign deities. Note that the Lord is speaking in 10:5-7, and the king of Assyria is speaking in 10:8-11 (see also 10:13-14, in which the king of Assyria is quoted).

Isa. 10:5-11

O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is [their] [^1] indignation. (10:5) I will send him against an [apostate] [^2] nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets. (10:6) [But this is not what he intends] [^3] neither doth his heart think so; but in his heart [it is] [^4] to destroy and cut off nations not a few. (10:7) For he saith, Are not my princes altogether kings? (10:8) Is not Calno as Carchemish? is not Hamath as Arpad? is not Samaria as Damascus? (10:9) As my hand hath[found[ed] [^5] the kingdoms of the idols, and whose graven images did excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria; (10:10) Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols? (10:11)

Notes and Commentary

10:5 Assyrian. Refers to the king of Assyria as well as his nation. Assyria represents the wicked nations of the last days that will worship idols and false gods and goddesses, war against Israel, and eventually be consumed by the Lord's glory and majesty during the Second Coming.

rod/staff. Assyria is the rod and staff that will smite and chasten the people of Israel because they are an "apostate nation" (10:6). Assyria will smite Israel with the staff as a taskmaster smites a slave, and then Assyria will rule over Israel with the rod or scepter.

10:6 apostate nation/people of my wrath. Israel's inhabitants have become like their neighbors, Assyria and Egypt; they are profane, ritually unclean, impure, and unworthy to worship in God's dwelling place, the temple. They have apostatized from the truth and are the people of [God's] wrath.

to take the spoil/to take the prey. Spoil and prey refer to the prophetic name Maher-shalal-hash-baz, suggesting that Isaiah's earlier prophecy regarding his son (8:1-4) finds at least partial fulfillment in Assyria's capturing and plundering of Israel.

mire. Israel's wicked are compared to the deep mud (or mire) in streets trampled under the foot of man and beast.

10:7 this is not what he intends. Assyria's king does not know that he is being used as the Lord's instrument to punish Israel. His intent is to conquer the earth and to gain glory and riches for himself.

in his heart it is to destroy. Assyria's king intends to destroy and murder the inhabitants of many nations. It was never his purpose to fulfill the will of the Lord in punishing Israel for their many transgressions.

cut off nations not a few. Assyria's goal was to war against and conquer the world.

10:8 Are not my princes . . . kings? The proud Assyrian king believed that he was the king of kings, and that his territorial princes were so mighty that they were as great as the kings of the neighboring nations.

10:9 Calno as Carchemish . . . as Damascus. As the king of Assyria and his armies moved southward, they first destroyed Carchemish, then Calno, then Arpad, and finally conquered Samaria in 721 b.c. The newly conquered cities paid deference, taxes, and tribute to Assyria's king.

10:10 my hand hath founded. The proud king glorifies himself by proclaiming that he has founded a kingdom of people who produce and worship idols that are even superior to those found in Israel (Samaria) and Judah (Jerusalem).

10:11 so do to Jerusalem and her idols. Assyria destroyed the Northern Kingdom of Israel and prepared to destroy Judah, represented here by her capital city, Jerusalem.

God Destroys Assyria: A Type of the Destruction at the Second Coming (10:12-19)

After the Lord used Assyria to destroy Israel (10:5-11), he destroyed Assyria, who along with Babylon, Moab, Edom, and Egypt represents all the wicked and proud nations that will inhabit the earth at the time of Christ's second coming. And because all corruptible things must be destroyed, at his coming all the world's nations will be destroyed by fire. Isaiah's language is clear in this regard, using the terms kindle a burning, burning of a fire, fire, flame, burn and devour, and consume.

Isa. 10:12-19

Wherefore it shall come to pass, that when the Lord hath performed his whole work upon Mount Zion and [upon] [^6] Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks. (10:12) For he saith, By the strength of my hand [and by my wisdom I have done these things]; [^7] for I am prudent: and I have [moved the borders] [^8] of the people, and have robbed their treasures, and I have put down the inhabitants like a valiant man: (10:13) And my hand hath found as a nest the riches of the people: and as one gathereth eggs that are left, have I gathered all the earth; and there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped. (10:14) Shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith? Shall the saw magnify itself against him that [uses] [^9] it? as if the rod should shake itself against them that lift it up, or as if the staff should lift up itself, as if it were no wood! (10:15) Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of hosts, send among his fat ones leanness; and under his glory he shall kindle a burning like the burning of a fire. (10:16) And the Light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame: and [^10]shall burn and devour his thorns and his briers in one day; (10:17) And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful field, both soul and body: and they shall be as when a [sick man wastes away]. [^11] (10:18) And the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a child may write them. (10:19)

Notes and Commentary

10:12 performed his whole work. After the Lord performs his work on Mount Zion and Jerusalem, he will destroy Assyria with fire. In a latter-day context, that work may be the saving of the people of Israel at the Second Coming (Zech. 14:1- 11) and the resurrection of the righteous (D&C 133:56), after which the world will be destroyed.

Mount Zion. This name refers to the temple of Jerusalem and the mount upon which it stood.

punish the fruit. The fruit represents works, hence the intent of the Lord here may be to punish the king of Assyria because of his evil works (Jer. 21:14). Partial fulfillment of this promise of punishment came when an "angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians" and destroyed one hundred eighty-five thousand people (2 Kgs. 19:35).

stout heart/high looks. The words describe pride and haughtiness (46:12; Ps. 18:27; 76:5). The king's boastful, proud manner comes through in this statement, "With the multitude of my chariots I am come up to the height of the mountains, to the sides of Lebanon, and will cut down the tall cedar trees thereof, and the choice fir trees thereof" (2 Kgs. 19:23).

10:13 strength of my hand/by my wisdom. The king believed that it was his own power and wisdom that enabled him to conquer the world's kingdoms and nations. He failed to recognize that the Lord's "hand [is found] in all things" (D&C 59:21).

I am prudent. This phrase should read, "I have understanding."

moved the borders. As the king conquered nations and kingdoms, he removed their political borders and joined their lands with his own kingdom.

robbed their treasures. The Lord prophesied, "I will send [the king of Assyria] against an apostate nation, . . . I will give him a charge, to take the spoil" (10:6). The prophecy was fulfilled with exactness when the king robbed the people of their properties, goods, and treasures.

10:14 nest/eggs/wing/peeped. Israel is compared to a bird's nest, eggs, wings, and capacity to peep (3 Ne. 10:4-6; D&C 10:65; 29:1). The eggs in the nest represent Israel's riches (10:13). The fact that Israel was not able to move her wings or to make a peep signifies that she, like a little chick, was helpless before Assyria's ravenous armies.

10:15 axe/saw. These are tools used to cut down trees of the forest, mentioned in 10:18-19. Here the axe or saw represents Assyria in the Lord's hand. Assyria and her king are proud enough to believe that they are greater than God, who holds the tools in his hands and uses them for his divine purposes.

rod/staff. Isaiah makes it clear that the rod or staff—symbols of Assyria (10:5)— are as fragile as pieces of wood when compared to the might and power of God.

10:16 fat ones leanness. Fatness represents temporal prosperity, goodness, and earthly blessings (Gen. 45:18; Deut. 31:20; Neh. 9:25; Prov. 13:4) leanness represents a lack of temporal or spiritual prosperity and earthly blessings and is caused by wickedness and slothfulness (17:4-5; Gen. 41:2-20). Thus in the passage cited above, the Lord replaces the world's fatness with leanness.

his glory. The expressions his thorns, his briers, his forest, and his fruitful field (10:16-19) refer to the king of Assyria in all his glory.

10:17 Light of Israel/Holy One for a flame. These names for the God of Israel are appropriate in this context because it is Jehovah's light and glory that consumed ancient Assyria and will consume the wicked at his coming.

10:16-18 kindle a burning/burning of a fire/fire/flame/burn and devour/consume. Isa. 10:16-18 describes the manner in which the forests and trees (representative of people, and here specifically of ancient Assyria as well as the wicked world of the last days) will be destroyed when Jesus comes with fire and burning. The forest-fire imagery parallels the section of Isaiah (10:33-34) in which God, as the forester, cuts down the forest of Assyria with his mighty ax.

thorns/briers. Isaiah, who uses these parallel terms elsewhere (5:6; 7:23-25; 9:18; 27:4), identifies the wicked as thorns and briers, meaning thorny, prickly, and often dry plants that are not only valueless but tormenting, the cause of afflictions to both man and beast.

10:18 forest/fruitful field. Scripturally, the forest represents people (Jer. 21:14; Ezek. 20:45-47; Zech. 11:1-2), and the field symbolizes the world (1 Ne. 8:20; D&C 86:1-2). The destruction of the forest (uninhibited natural growth) and the fruitful field (ordered cultivation) expresses totality of destruction. [^12] The forest will be destroyed by the Lord's ax, saw (10:15), and fires.

soul and body. Assyria, or the modern world, will be completely consumed and destroyed.

sick man wastes away. Isaiah likens those who will be destroyed by God's burning fires to an individual whose body is decayed and wasting away.

10:19 trees . . . shall be few. Dry, dead trees (the wicked; Luke 23:31; 3 Ne. 14:17-18; D&C 135:6) will be consumed by the Lord's glory, and the green trees (the righteous; Ps. 1:3; Zech. 4:8-14; D&C 135:6) will survive, though they may be singed. The trees (righteous people) that remain will be so few that even a little child will be able to count and list them.

Remnant of Israel Shall Return (10:20-27)

Three major players are featured in this section: the God of Israel, the remnant of Israel, and the enemy of Israel (the Assyrian empire). The events of this section took place when the Assyrian empire was destroyed through God's divine acts and a remnant of the house of Israel returned to the land of promise. There are clues that these events will occur once more during our day. The remnant of Israel will be those members of the house of Israel who survive latter-day wars and destructions caused by modern-day Assyria, which "has become a code name for the world power [meaning the earth's wicked]." [^13]

The remnant of Israel will return to their lands of promise, rebuild their temples, and renew their covenant status with God. God in turn will fight their battles against Assyria with power similar to that displayed when he overcame Egypt in Moses' day. Isa. 10:20-21 indicates that the remnant includes those who repent and have faith in the Lord. "The remnant shall return" (10:21) recalls the prophetic name of Isaiah's son Shear-jashub (7:3).

Isa. 10:20-27

And it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of Israel, and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more again [lean] [^14] upon him that smote them; but shall [lean] upon the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, in truth. (10:20) The remnant shall return, [yea,] [^15] the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty God. (10:21) For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of them shall return: the [complete destruction] [^16] decreed shall overflow with righteousness. (10:22) For the Lord God of hosts shall make a [complete destruction], [^17] even determined in [^18] all the land. (10:23) Therefore thus saith the Lord God of hosts, O my people that dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian: he shall smite thee with a rod, and shall lift up his staff against thee, after the manner of Egypt. (10:24) For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their destruction. (10:25) And the Lord of hosts shall [lash them with a whip], [^19] according to the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb: and as his rod was upon the sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt. (10:26) And it shall come to pass in that day, that his burden shall be taken away from off thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed because of the [oil]. [^20] (10:27)

Notes and Commentary

10:20 that day. This is our day, or the last days (2:12).

remnant of Israel/escaped of . . . Jacob. Those who escape God's judgments (because of their righteousness) at the last days (4:2).

lean/him that smote them. The remnant of Israel will no longer lean on the rod (Assyria) that smote them (2 Kgs. 16:7), but they will lean on or trust the rod (Jehovah) that enabled them to flee safely from Egypt of old.

10:21 remnant shall return. In Hebrew, this phrase is the name Shear-jashub, Isaiah's son who was a sign unto the house of Israel (8:18). The word return (Hebrew shub) has two connected meanings: "to return" and "to repent." The remnant of Israel who survive the destructions shall return "unto the mighty God" (10:21) through repentance and shall go back to their land of promise. The Old Testament formula for an apostate people's return to God is found in 2 Chr. 30:6-9, which speaks of their return to the promised land, to God through repentance, and to true temple worship.

10:22 as the sand of the sea. This expression recalls the Abrahamic covenant (Gen. 22:17; Abr. 3:14). Although the number of the children of Israel will be exceedingly high, only a remnant of them will return.

destruction decreed. God, through his prophets, decreed destruction that has application for our day. Joseph Smith wrote, "The Saints have not too much time to save and redeem their dead, and gather together their living relatives, that they may be saved also, before the earth will be smitten, and the consumption decreed falls upon the world." [^21]

overflow with righteousness. The destruction, which will originate with the Lord (10:23), will be a just and righteous act on his part.

10:23 Lord God of hosts. This title, or Lord God of armies, is appropriate, considering the section's holy war context (1:9).

even determined in all the land. Through the mouth of his prophets, the Lord decreed a destruction upon the land's inhabitants, just as he has upon all the earth at the last day.

10:24 people . . . in Zion. The concept of Zion is always attached to a promised land, temple worship, and a covenant people who possess pure hearts (note the connection to the Abrahamic covenant in 10:22).

Assyrian/Egypt. These are two of Israel's chief enemies in biblical times. They are also symbolic of the worldly powers that will fight against Zion in the last days. Isaiah tells those who dwell in Zion to trust God and be not afraid of the Assyrian, for his power will be temporary and limited. Eventually God will destroy the Assyrian and save the remnant of Israel.

rod/staff. Assyria will smite Israel with a rod, similar to the manner in which Egypt of old forced the children of Israel to become slaves ("after the manner of Egypt"; Ex. 1:11, 14). The term staff may also be rendered scepter, representing dominion; thus Assyria will smite the Israelites with the rod and then rule over them.

10:25 indignation/anger. Israel was scattered because of her transgressions against God. But in due time ("yet a very little while"), he will remember his covenant people once more, and his indignation and anger will cease.

10:26 lash them with a whip. After Assyria serves the Lord's purposes by smiting and bruising the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, the Lord will lash the Assyrians with a whip, meaning he will punish them for their pride and wickedness.

slaughter of Midian/manner of Egypt. Just as God delivered Moses and the Israelites from Pharaoh's armies (Ex. 14:30-31), and saved Gideon and the children of Israel from the Midianites' destructive hand (Judg. 6-7), he will once again use a rod and a whip against Assyria to save members of the house of Israel (or the children of Zion).

rod . . . upon the sea. Assyria was like a taskmaster's rod; it afflicted the children of Israel (10:5). Jehovah's rod, however—the same power by which Moses divided the Red Sea and enabled Israel to flee from the armies of Egypt—will save Israel once again. The rod of Jehovah will overcome the rod of wickedness, or Assyria.

10:27 burden/yoke. Through the Lord's power, Assyria's burdens will be removed from Israel's shoulders (9:4).

oil. This may refer to the Messiah (Hebrew "anointed one"), who was anointed with olive oil and the Holy Ghost (Acts 10:38). In addition, 10:26-27 contains symbols that represent Jesus the Messiah, including rock, rod, and the removal of the yoke and burden (Matt. 11:28-29).

Assyria Marches to Jerusalem (10:28-34)

The mighty Assyrian army marches southward toward Jerusalem, destroying and sacking all towns and villages in its path. Isaiah identifies several cities whose inhabitants cry out with fear as they flee from the Assyrians: Aiath, Migron, Michmash, Geba, Ramah, Gibeah, Gallim, Laish, Anathoth, Madmenah, Gebim, and Nob. The army lays up supplies at Michmash and stops at Nob to rest. Finally the angry army halts before Jerusalem and makes a threatening gesture toward the sacred mount of Judah, the temple mount.

Many scholars believe Isaiah's prophecy was fulfilled when King Sennacherib invaded Judah in 701 b.c. (37:36-37); others believe it was King Sargon's invasion of 715 b.c. that fulfilled the prophecy. The section may also refer to a future campaign against Israel when some of the world's nations war against her. This is quite possible, because the prophecies in Isa. 11 will be fulfilled in the last days (JS-H 1:40).

Isaiah's prophecy takes a different turn in the final two verses when Jehovah, as the great forester, uses his mighty iron ax to fell Assyria's armies as they approach the gates of Zion. (Isaiah employs similar imagery elsewhere; 2:12-18; 10:18-19.) Jehovah's use of the ax to cut down the earth's nations and mighty men (both represented by the trees) allows for the shoot or sprig (meaning the Messiah) to branch out of the tree stump of Judah, which is identified in 11:1-5. Because of the work of the forester, the Assyrians are not successful in capturing Jerusalem.

Historically, Isaiah tells us that an angel (who acts for the forester) destroyed one hundred eighty-five thousand of the Assyrians who were camped at Zion's gate: "Then the angel of the Lord went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand" (37:36-37). Similar events may take place in the future.

Isa. 10:28-34

He is come to Aiath, he is passed to Migron; at Michmash he hath laid up his [supplies]: [^22] (10:28) They are gone over the passage: they have taken up their lodging at Geba; Ramah is afraid; Gibeah of Saul is fled. (10:29) Lift up thy voice, O daughter of Gallim: cause it to be heard unto Laish, O poor Anathoth. (10:30) Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of Gebim gather themselves to flee. (10:31) As yet shall he remain at Nob that day: he shall shake his hand against the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem. (10:32) Behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, shall lop the bough with terror: and the high ones of stature shall be hewn down, and the haughty shall be humbled. (10:33) And he shall cut down the thickets of the forest with iron, and Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one. (10:34)

Notes and Commentary

10:28 Aiath/Migron/Michmash. The Assyrian army captures Aiath, Migron, and Michmash on its way to Jerusalem. At Michmash, the army stores its equipment and supplies (KJV, "laid up his carriages"), perhaps so it will not be burdened as it approaches Jerusalem.

10:29 They are gone over the passage. This phrase describes the advance of the Assyrian army as it crosses over an unnamed mountain pass on its way to Jerusalem.

they have taken up their lodging at Geba. The Assyrian army temporarily halts its advance to rest at Geba.

Ramah is afraid/Gibeah . . . is fled. As the Assyrian army approaches, Jerusalem's fearful inhabitants flee. Gibeah of Saul is so named because it was the place of Saul's birth and his residence while he was king (1 Sam. 10:26; 13-15).

10:30 daughter of Gallim/poor Anathoth. Gallim and Anathoth's inhabitants raise up their voices in fear because of the impending devastation by the Assyrians. It was common for the prophets to refer to Near Eastern cities as daughter, such as daughter of Gallim ("daughter of Jerusalem," 37:22, and "daughter of Babylon," 47:1).

10:31 Madmenah is removed/inhabitants of Gebim . . . flee. Madmenah and Gebim's inhabitants also flee from imminent destruction at the hands of the Assyrian army.

10:32 shall he remain at Nob that day. The Assyrians will pause at the city of Nob, which is near Jerusalem, perhaps to rest, devise plans, and prepare for their attack against Jerusalem.

shake his hand against the mount of the daughter of Zion. Assyria might be shaking "his hand in threat against Jerusalem," [^23] directing particular attention to the temple mount and the house of the Lord, thus making a mockery of ancient Israel's chief religious symbol.

10:33 Lord of hosts. Jehovah, the mighty forester who wields a great ax, enters into the scene and prevents Assyria from destroying all his children.

lop the bough. As elsewhere in the scriptures, Assyria the nation is compared to a mighty tree (Jer. 11:16; Hosea 14:6; Rom. 11:17-24; Jacob 5). Similarly, Ezekiel wrote that "the Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, and with a shadowing shroud, and of an high stature; and his top was among the thick boughs" (Ezek. 31:3). Jehovah, the forester, chops down the tree with an ax.

high ones of stature shall be hewn down. The forester will also cut down Assyria's proud and haughty people.

10:34 cut down . . . with iron. The term iron here refers to an iron ax.

thickets of the forest. After Jehovah, the forester, chops down the mighty cedars of Lebanon and the great Assyrians, he will clean up the underbrush so that the tree of Jesse, or the tree of the Messiah (identified in the following section), can flourish.

mighty one. Jehovah.

---
Notas:
[^1] 2 Ne. 20:5 changes the pronoun mine to their.
[^2] The Hebrew term chanep means "profane, irreligious, [or] apostate." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 338.
[^3] NIV Isa. accurately translates the meaning of the Hebrew.
[^4] 2 Ne. 20:7 and JST Isa. 10:7 move the verb is from before the phrase in his heart and add it is after the term heart.
[^5] 2 Ne. 20:10 and JST Isa. 10:10 write founded in place of found.
[^6] 2 Ne. 20:12 and JST Isa. 10:12 replace the preposition on with upon.
[^7] 2 Ne. 20:13 and JST Isa. 10:13 reorder the words in the verse and replace the singular pronoun it with these things.
[^8] 2 Ne. 20:13 and JST Isa. 10:13 replace the phrase removed the bounds with moved the borders.
[^9] We have replaced the incorrect shaketh with uses.
[^10] 2 Ne. 20:17 omits the pronoun it.
[^11] The translation is of the Hebrew kimesos noses. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 651.
[^12] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 116.
[^13] Kaiser, Isa. 1-12, 244.
[^14] From the Hebrew word nishe'an. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 1043. The term also means "to support oneself."
[^15] 2 Ne. 20:21 and JST Isa. 10:21 replace even with the emphatic yea.
[^16] Hebrew kilayon. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 478.
[^17] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 478.
[^18] 2 Ne. 20:23 and JST Isa. 10:23 omit the KJV phrase the midst of.
[^19] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 118.
[^20] Hebrew shamen, meaning "oil" or "fat." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 1032.
[^21] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 330; emphasis added.
[^22] We have replaced the archaic carriages with supplies.
[^23] Young, Book of Isaiah, 1:376.
