Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 12

Likening Isa. 12 unto Ourselves

Isa. 12 is Israel's "Songs of Salvation" that we will sing in the future, perhaps at Christ's coming or during the Millennium. The first hymn has been individualized with the frequent use of the first person pronouns I and me—each of us will praise the Lord with these sacred words. The second hymn will also be sung by us ("thou inhabitant of Zion"). It is not evident where we will sing these hymns: perhaps in the temple, at the gathering at Adam-ondi-Ahman, at general conference, or in other sacred settings.

Israel's Songs of Salvation (12:1-6)

This section presents the two hymns that we will sing to the Lord in the future, both of which are introduced with similar statements: "And in that day thou shalt say" and "And in that day shall ye say." Both hymns center on the Lord; the first uses the titles Lord (twice), God, Lord Jehovah, and a number of metaphors and terms that identify the Lord as our salvation, strength, and song. The second hymn uses the titles Lord and Holy One of Israel. The two hymns also refer to those who are singing them. The first hymn is filled with first-person singular pronouns such as I (twice), me (twice), and my (four times); the second simply refers to the "inhabitant of Zion." Hence, the hymns juxtapose two essential elements: God and those who worship him.

The principal theme of the first hymn is the salvation of the members of the house of Israel: three times salvation is mentioned, twice affirming that the Lord is "my salvation" and once referring to the righteous who "draw water out of the wells of salvation." The chief theme of the second hymn pertains to the singer or worshiper who rejoices in the Lord's greatness. The hymn features a number of command verbal forms, such as praise, call upon, declare, make mention, sing, cry out, and shout, all of which recognize and honor the Lord's exalted name, his excellent works, and his greatness for dwelling in the midst of Israel.

Isa. 12:1-6

And in that day thou shalt say, O Lord, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortest me. (12:1) Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for the Lord Jehovah is my strength and my song; he also [has] [^1] become my salvation. (12:2) Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation. (12:3) And in that day shall ye say, Praise the Lord, call upon his name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name is exalted. (12:4) Sing unto the Lord; for he hath done excellent things: this is known in all the earth. (12:5) Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee. (12:6)

Notes and Commentary

12:1 in that day. This phrase, which is twice repeated in this chapter (12:1, 4), provides a link with 11:10-11. In that day refers to the events connected with our day (2:12).

thou wast angry. Similar language is found in the Doctrine and Covenants, wherein the Lord exclaims, "I . . . was angry with you [Israel] yesterday, but today mine anger is turned away" (D&C 61:20).

thou comfortest. God comforts his children with the Holy Ghost (John 15:26), but when read in the context of both of the hymns, this phrase may refer to Jesus Christ, who is called the Second Comforter. [^2]

12:2 God is my salvation. Salvation is spoken of twice in this verse for emphasis. Lectures on Faith defines salvation as follows: "Salvation consists in [gaining] the glory, authority, majesty, power and dominion which Jehovah possesses and in nothing else; and no being can possess it but himself or one like him." [^3]

Lord Jehovah is my strength. God is "the Strength of Israel" (1 Sam. 15:29; 1 Ne. 21:5; 2 Ne. 22:2), a name that sets forth the Lord's ability to save Israel both temporally and spiritually.

Lord Jehovah is . . . my song. God is the central focus of our song and music.

12:3 draw water/wells of salvation. A better translation for wells of salvation is "springs of salvation," which depicts living, flowing water. Christ represents the waters of salvation (Jer. 2:13; 17:13; Ether 8:26; 12:28). The parallel between literal water and the waters of salvation is evident—the first is essential for physical life, the second for eternal life. In part, the expression wells of salvation refers to the great privilege the righteous have to partake of the blessings connected with the First and Second Comforters (John 7:38-39; 14:16) [^4] but more fully the expression pertains to those who will receive exaltation in the celestial kingdom and will drink eternally from the wells of salvation (Rev. 21:6).

12:4 declare his doings. His doings refers to all God's works that bring salvation to mankind during the history of the world, including his restoring priesthood keys, revealing his word, and establishing Zion among his people.

his name is exalted. The names Jehovah, Jesus Christ, Son of God, and others belonging to the Lord are the highest, most honorable, and most magnificent of all names.

12:4-6 praise/call upon/declare/make mention/sing/cry out/shout. These terms are indicative of those who worship the Lord through song, prayer, or praise. We recall a modern-day revelation that promises, "The song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads" (D&C 25:12).

he hath done excellent things. The Lord has done a multitude of wondrous things that men are unable to do for themselves; most notably, Jesus Christ wrought the infinite atonement.

12:6 inhabitant of Zion. The terms cry out, shout, inhabitant, and thee are feminine forms in the Hebrew and personify Christ's bride who is ready to be received by the Holy One of Israel. Zion is depicted as the bride elsewhere (54:1-6; Rev. 21:2, 9; D&C 109:73-74), and Jehovah is portrayed as the husband (54:5). Zion's inhabitants are the pure in heart (D&C 97:21).

Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee. Christ, the Holy One of Israel, will reign over the Saints during the Millennium.

---
Notas:
[^1] JST Isa. 13:2 adds the personal pronoun my, showing that the banner belongs to the Lord.
[^2] From Hebrew nup. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 631.
[^3] 2 Ne. 23:3 adds this explanatory phrase.
[^4] JST Isa. 13:4 and 2 Ne. 23:4 change the indefinite article to the definite.
