Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 14

Likening Isa. 14 unto Ourselves

Isaiah's prophecy that we (Israel) will be gathered to our lands of promise is now being fulfilled as we become members of the Church, build temples, and accept God's covenants; the prophecy has direct application to us (14:1-3).

Much of Isa. 14 pertains to Lucifer, his evil plans for humanity, and his attempt to gain control from God. Today, as in days of old, Lucifer is persuading us to commit sins so that he may drag us down to hell.

Isa. 14:24-27 provides us comfort in the knowledge that God controls the destiny of all the nations of the earth; he controlled humanity's affairs in the past, he directs the present, and he commands the future. Knowing of his power over the nations enables us to trust him and the prophets who speak his words.

Israel Will Be Gathered, Chosen of God, and Rest from Sorrow (14:1-3)

Following a lengthy prophecy concerning Babylon's fall (13:11-22), Isaiah extends hope to us (the house of Israel) that we will be gathered to our promised lands and eventually rest from sorrow. Certainly our (Israel's) return to our covenantal lands is a prominent sign of the times. After we have gathered to our promised lands, we will eventually "exercise dominion domestically (menservants and maidservants), militarily (take . . . captives), and politically (rule over/'dominate')" (14:2). [^1] We who follow Christ and make his atonement effective in our lives will, in the end, rest from sorrow, fear, and hard bondage (14:3).

Cyrus's invitation (Ezra 1:1-4) for the Jews to return to Israel to rebuild the city and temple is but a small shadow of things to come in our own day, for we will also build temples unto the Lord.

Isa. 14:1-3

For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob , and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land; and the [foreigners] [^2] shall be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob . (14:1) And the people shall take them and bring them to their place; [yea, from far unto the ends of the earth; and they shall return to their lands of promise.] [^3] And the house of Israel shall possess them, and the land of the Lord shall be for servants and handmaids; and they shall take them captives unto whom they were captives; and they shall rule over their oppressors. (14:2) And it shall come to pass in [that] [^4] day that the Lord shall give thee rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to serve. (14:3)

Notes and Commentary

14:1 mercy on Jacob. The Lord promises mercy to members of the house of Israel, which includes the Saints of the latter days. Jehovah also used the term mercy when he brought Israel out of Egypt (Ex. 34:6; Deut. 4:31; Ps. 78:38; Joel 2:13).

choose Israel. Isaiah repeatedly declares that Jehovah has chosen the Israelites (including all who come unto Christ by covenant and obedience) to be his people (44:1-2; 49:7). Christ said to the house of Israel, "You only have I known of all the families of the earth" (Amos 3:2).

their own land. Israel and America are the lands belonging to the house of Israel (14:2 below). The possession of land recalls the Abrahamic covenant.

foreigners shall be joined with them/cleave to the house of Jacob. In ancient Israel, foreigners enjoyed a special status (Deut. 14:21, 29; 16:11). The verbs joined and cleave, which indicate more than a temporary, earthly union, may refer to the non-Israelites (45:14-25; 60) who, in the latter days, will flee to "Zion for safety" (D&C 45:68). Elsewhere Isaiah prophesies that the foreigners and their kings will join Israel or Zion and serve her (60:1-14).

14:2 people shall take them . . . to their place. The Gentiles will help members of the house of Israel return to their lands of promise (1 Ne. 22:6-8; 2 Ne. 10:9).

from far unto the ends of the earth. Inasmuch as the members of the house of Israel have been scattered throughout the centuries to every nation and country of the world (11:12), they will gather from the ends of the earth to their lands of promise.

they shall return to their lands of promise. America and the Holy Land are Israel's lands of promise and are prepared by God (1 Ne. 2:20; Ether 13:2). Each of the two promised lands is "the place for the city of Zion" (D&C 57:2), a place for the temple of the Lord (D&C 124:38), a place of refuge against the forces of the world (2 Ne. 1:3-5), and each stands as an antithesis to the place of "bondage and captivity" (Alma 36:28). Symbolically, these lands are a type and shadow of heaven, which is "a far better land of promise" (Alma 37:45). If the inhabitants of the land are wicked, they will be swept off (Ether 2:8-9), an occurrence that is well attested in history for both lands of promise.

land of the Lord. The lands of promise belong to the Lord.

take them captives unto whom they were captives. Those who oppressed members of the house of Israel will become their captives. The verse should not be taken literally; instead it likely signifies that the house of Israel will be eternal rulers in God's kingdom.

14:3 in that day. This means the day of the Lord (13:6, 9, 13) and refers to God's judgments on the nations and Jesus' second coming (2:12).

Lord shall give thee rest from thy sorrow, . . . fear, and . . . hard bondage. Temporal rest from fear and hard bondage came to the house of Israel under the leadership of King David (David received "rest round about from all his enemies," 2 Sam. 7:1) and King Solomon (1 Kgs. 8:56), both of whom were types and shadows of the King of kings, Jesus Christ, who will give the house of Israel eternal rest. The expression hard bondage recalls the time the Israelites spent in Egypt as slaves of the Egyptian taskmasters.

Fall of the King of Babylon (14:4-11)

Isa. 14 contains two parallel texts that should be closely compared and contrasted. The first text speaks of the king of Babylon (14:4-11); the second deals with Lucifer (14:12-20). The rule of the king of Babylon reminds us of Lucifer's reign, and Lucifer's wicked desires remind us of those of the Babylonian king. Although the King and Lucifer are separate individuals, they share similar characteristics—they both are evil, they have both ruled with horror and destruction, both have weakened the nations with their evil ways, and both will eventually be sent down to hell. The fall of ancient Babylon's king recalls Lucifer's fall from heaven and anticipates a future time when Lucifer will be cast down, bound in hell, and become powerless. Isa. 14:4-11 speaks of an unnamed king of Babylon who served Lucifer and became like him; 14:12-20 refers to Lucifer, the king of Babylon—worldliness and sin.

The demise of the king of Babylon is accompanied by the destruction of the wicked with their golden city Babylon—a perfect example of an evil place. It is through God's power that the king, his followers, and their city are destroyed. Although the inhabitants of the earth suffered during the king's evil reign, all God's creations sing and rejoice when their tormentor is exiled and sent to hell. Meanwhile, former kings and rulers will say to the fallen king of Babylon, "You are now as weak as we are, lacking power and pomp and worldly glory, and similar to us, the maggots and worms destroy your body" (14:11). This prophecy will have a dual fulfillment, first with the destruction of ancient Babylon, and then with the destruction of the wicked world at the second coming of Christ.

The Hebrew sheol, translated as "hell" in 14:9 and as "grave" in 14:11, refers to the world of spirits. [^5] Isa. 14:9-11 provides several insights about the world of the spirits: it is perceived (perhaps symbolically) to be a place that is physically lower than heaven or earth (14:9; 5:14); there is life after death there (14:9-10); there individuals are recognized (14:10); it is a place where kings, rulers, and others go (14:9); verbal communication exists there (14:10); it is where many of the dead become weak (14:10), perhaps because their spirits have been separated from their bodies (14:11) but also because they cannot rely on their earthly wealth and glory; and it is where mankind's pomp (14:11) and earthly glory end (5:14).

Isa. 14:4-11

[And it shall come to pass in that day,] [^6] that thou shalt take up this proverb against the king of Babylon, and say: How hath the oppressor ceased, the golden city ceased! (14:4) The Lord hath broken the staff of the wicked, the scepters of the rulers. (14:5) He who smote the people in wrath with [unceasing blows], [^7] he that ruled the nations in anger [with relentless aggression] [^8] (14:6) The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet; they break forth into singing. (14:7) Yea, the fir-trees rejoice at thee, and [also] [^9] the cedars of Lebanon, saying: Since thou art laid down no [woodsman] [^10] is come up against us. (14:8) Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming; it stirreth up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth; it hath raised up from their thrones all the kings of the nations. (14:9) All they shall speak and say unto thee: Art thou also become weak as we? Art thou become like unto us? (14:10) Thy pomp is brought down to the grave; the noise of thy viols is not heard; the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee. (14:11)

Notes and Commentary

14:4 in that day. Refers to our day, or the last days (2:12).

proverb against the king of Babylon. A proverb is "an object-lesson from which others may learn appropriate lessons." [^11] Here the king of Babylon is the object lesson from whom all of us may learn (Ezek. 16:44; Hab. 2:6).

oppressor ceased/golden city ceased. Egypt was once the oppressor of Israel, God's chosen people (Ex. 3:7; 5:2), but the oppressor mentioned here is Babylon (the world) and her king (Satan). Babylon is the golden city, "that great city that was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold and precious stones, and pearls" (Rev. 18:16; emphasis added). Babylon attempts to imitate, in its wicked and corruptible manner, the true city of God, with its streets of "pure gold as it were transparent glass" (Rev. 21:21; emphasis added). The golden city will cease to exist because God will destroy it, as prophets have revealed.

14:5 broken the staff of the wicked/scepters of the rulers. Kingship in its true and divine sense belongs to God, but very early in the history of the world, the wicked gained power from Satan, the king of hell and the prince of the world. When Jesus, the King of kings (Rev. 19:16), comes in clouds of glory at the Second Coming, he will judge those who have possessed the staff and the scepters, and he will reign with glory and truth.

14:6 He who smote the people in wrath with unceasing blows. Babylon's king was cruel and murderous; also Satan and his followers apparently do not sleep or rest, but they continuously attack and strike out at mortals with unceasing blows.

that ruled the nations in anger with relentless aggression. The king of Babylon's (as well as Satan's) very essence is anger, aggression, and the desire to rule (14:13- 14).

14:7 whole earth is at rest, and is quiet. The earth will rest and become quiet once the king of Babylon, or Satan, is cast down to hell (14:7-8). Enoch asked the Lord, "When shall the earth rest?" (Moses 7:58), to which the Lord responded, "for the space of a thousand years the earth shall rest" (Moses 7:64), referring to the Millennium, when Satan is bound and powerless.

14:7-8 fir-trees/cedars of Lebanon/rejoice at thee. The verse recalls other scriptures in which God's creations (the trees, forest, mountains, earth, and heavens) "break forth into singing" when the Lord redeems Jacob (44:23), comforts his people, and has mercy on the afflicted (49:13; D&C 128:22). The trees, representative of people (Judg. 9:15; Ezek. 31:8; Hosea 14:8; Zech. 11:2), now rejoice and sing because Satan has been cast down to hell.

no woodsman is come up against us. This implies that the king of Babylon had cut down some of the trees, or murdered the people. Thus the king was seeking to become like God, who has authority to end life. We recall also that Jehovah is the great forester identified in 10:33-34, and hence the king of Babylon attempts to imitate God's ability to cut down nations and peoples. Yet, as J. Alec Motyer observes, "With exact justice the arrogant woodsman [the king of Babylon] has 'had the chop!'" [^12] Satan, similarly, attempts to make people suffer the second death.

14:9 Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming. Those in hell know that the king of Babylon will imminently join them.

it stirreth up the dead for thee. The New International Version reading here is instructive; it says that hell "rouses the spirits of the departed to greet you—all those who were leaders in the world, it makes them rise from their thrones."

chief ones of the earth/kings of the nations. These will marvel that the mighty king of Babylon has been cut down and become like them (14:10).

14:10 Art thou also become weak as we? During mortality the king of Babylon ruled with glory and power and possessed great wealth and importance. After death, while in the spirit prison, other spirits asked him, "Have you now become like us, without glory and wealth? Have you now become weak like us?"

14:11 Thy pomp is brought down to the grave. The king's glory and worldly pomp no longer exist once his body is placed in the grave.

worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee. Although the king of Babylon may have enjoyed luxury and wealth during mortality, his dead body, like that of all the deceased, will lie in the dust, and worms will eat his flesh (Job 21:26). Spread or cover suggests a bed, since the king, who sat on his throne in temporal glory, now sleeps in a cold bed in hell; he leaves his pomp on earth, and his body becomes like that of all sinful people who preceded him.

Fall of Lucifer (14:12-23)

Lucifer's statement (14:13-14) about his goals demonstrates his extreme self- centeredness. He begins all five lines with the personal pronoun I, which shows that he is interested in his own goals and in glorifying himself. Lucifer had a fivefold plan: He wanted to enter heaven (without following God's laws), to be greater than other souls, to become part of the assembly of gods, to be exalted above other authorities and powers, and to become like God himself (14:13-14). In contrast, God's Saints are taught to lose themselves in the service of others (Matt. 16:25; Luke 9:24) not by looking after self but by seeking out the widows, the poor, the fatherless, and those with spiritual and temporal needs.

Isaiah's treatment of the archdevil and enemy of all humanity, Lucifer, sets forth terms and phrases that on one hand demonstrate Lucifer's attempt to imitate God's exalted state, and on the other present Lucifer's true degradation. Note the language connected with Lucifer's attempts at exaltation: ascend, heaven, exalt, above, stars, mount, and north (14:13); and ascend, above, heights, clouds, and Most High (14:14). Contrast that with the language that deals with Lucifer's actual lowliness: fallen, cut down, to the ground (14:12); brought down to hell, pit (14:15); and cast out of thy grave, go down, pit, and trodden under (14:19).

The section has two applications: Lucifer's fall from heaven during the premortal existence, and the time when Lucifer will be cast down to hell, after the Millennium. In the end, Babylon will be completely destroyed because it housed Lucifer and his followers (14:21-23).

Isa. 14:12-23

How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! Art thou cut down to the ground, which did weaken the nations! (14:12) For thou hast said in thy heart: I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God; I will sit also upon the [mountain of the assembly of the gods] [^13] in the [farthest] [^14] north; (14:13) I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the Most High. (14:14) Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the [depth] of the pit. (14:15) They that see thee shall [stare] [^15] at thee, and [shall] consider thee, [and shall say:] [^16] Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms? (14:16) [And] made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof, [and] [^17] opened not the house of his prisoners? (14:17) All the kings of the nations, [yea], [^18] all of them, lie in glory, every one of them in his own house. (14:18) But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch, and [the remnant] [^19] of those that are slain, thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a carcase trodden under feet. (14:19) Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, and slain thy people: the seed of evildoers shall never be renowned. (14:20) Prepare slaughter for his children for the [iniquities] [^20] of their fathers, that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor fill the face of the world with cities. (14:21) For I will rise up against them, saith the Lord of Hosts, and cut off from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew, saith the Lord. (14:22) I will also make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of water; and I will sweep it with the [broom] [^21] of destruction, saith the Lord of Hosts. (14:23)

Notes and Commentary

14:12 fallen from heaven/cut down to the ground. The first phrase implies that Lucifer was a star that lost its heavenly prominence by falling (Rev. 8:10; 9:1; 2 Ne. 2:17). The second phrase suggests that Lucifer was a mighty tree that was cut down by God the forester (10:33-34). Both the star and the tree commonly symbolize an individual, and both show how Lucifer was once mighty.

Lucifer. "And was called Perdition, for the heavens wept over him—he was Lucifer, a son of the morning" (D&C 76:26).

The name Lucifer (Hebrew helel) means "shining one." [^22] If the name is given different vowels (helal), it signifies the crescent of the moon, having a possible meaning that Lucifer had less light (symbolically) than the full moon, or Lucifer's light waned as does the light of the moon during its cycle. Further, Lucifer's light was far less than the light of Jesus Christ, whose light is the sun (Ps. 84:11; D&C 88:7-9). Isaiah may also be using a play on words, for Lucifer's name (helel) sounds like a word Isaiah uses in 13:6 where he commands those of Babylon to "Howl!" (Hebrew helili).

son of the morning. In Hebrew this means "son of the dawning light." D&C 76:26 recalls Isaiah's words: "And was called Perdition, for the heavens wept over him—he was Lucifer, a son of the morning." The title son of the morning recalls the phrase morning stars (Job 38:7; D&C 128:23) and refers to eminent persons from the premortal existence. Christ, we recall, is the "bright and morning star" (Rev. 22:16) and the "morning star" (Rev. 2:28), the most eminent of all stars.

which did weaken the nations. Satan's work among the nations has brought dishonor, corruption, perversion, anarchy, immorality, exploitation, war, greed, and a myriad of other evils to every nation and people since the beginning: "And the children of men were numerous upon all the face of the land. And in those days Satan had great dominion among men, and raged in their hearts; and from thenceforth came wars and bloodshed; and a man's hand was against his own brother, in administering death" (Moses 6:15).

14:13 thou hast said in thy heart. Lucifer was (and is) a self-centered individual who secretly makes his own plans without seeking God's assistance.

I will ascend into heaven. Although Lucifer was an eminent figure in the premortal world (14:12), he did not enjoy the status of God, who lived in heaven. Lucifer also said to God, "Give me thine honor, which is my power," which resulted in "a third part of the hosts of heaven[turn[ing] away from [Christ] because of their agency" (D&C 29:36).

I will exalt my throne above the stars of God. Lucifer sins and errs because of his desires. First, he believes that he is able to exalt himself. Yet, the scriptures inform us that no one can become exalted without Jesus Christ and his atonement; Jesus is the way to heaven (John 14:6). Second, Lucifer speaks concerning his throne. Yet no one can possess a heavenly throne without overcoming the world and receiving God's permission and blessing. "To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne" (Rev. 3:21).

The stars of God refers to righteous people who belong to God (Job 38:7; D&C 128:23; Gen. 37:9). Satan wants to possess a throne that is higher than those of God's other children.

I will sit also upon the mountain of the assembly of the gods in the farthest north. The mountain of the assembly of the gods refers to the general assembly of the exalted where decisions have been made or are being made concerning the creation of the worlds and other eternal events. Lucifer desires to become part of the assembly, which would give him equal power and authority with the gods. The expression farthest north (Ps. 48:2) is an allusion to heaven, meaning a place far away from the habitations of humanity.

14:14 I will ascend above the heights of the clouds. Lucifer wanted to dwell in heaven, which is above the clouds, but no soul is able to ascend into heaven without following the proper prescriptions set forth by God, including being baptized, receiving the Holy Ghost, and attaining a godly character. Lucifer, therefore, will never enter heaven. The irony here is that Lucifer received the opposite of his desire— instead of ascending into heaven, he fell, or was "cut down to the ground" (14:12).

I will be like the Most High. The title Most High indicates a vertical hierarchy: God is higher than all; he is the Most High. Lucifer desired to be like the Most High, but he has been cast down to hell (14:9, 11, 12, 15).

14:15 Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the depth of the pit. Similar language is used in 14:19 (Ps. 28:1; 38:18; 143:7), which says that Lucifer will be cast "to the stones of the pit." The pit, which is another term for hell, expresses hell's conditions; it is dark, narrow, restrictive, and extremely uncomfortable for its inhabitants. Satan sought a high position in heaven (14:13-14); in response to Satan's machinations, God, whose justice is exact and faultless, sent him to the place farthest from heaven.

14:16 They that see thee shall stare at thee. Hell's inhabitants will be amazed that Lucifer, who shook kingdoms with his evil intent, has been brought down to the depths.

Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms? On seeing Lucifer in hell, the inquiry will come, Is this the man who caused such great disturbances upon the earth ("made the earth to tremble, . . . destroyed the cities"; 14:16-17), and now he is like "an abominable branch," like "a carcase" that others trample on (14:19)? By calling him man, Isaiah emphasizes here that Lucifer is by no means a god.

14:17 made the world as a wilderness. The Lord's creative effort made the world into a place that was called "good" (Gen. 1:10-31), but Lucifer's work had an opposite effect, for he made the world as a wilderness.

destroyed the cities. Lucifer is the destroyer; he destroys both cities and souls.

opened not the house of his prisoners. The New International Version reads that Lucifer "would not let his captives go home," which is a possible reference to the fact that Lucifer does not want his spiritual captives, or those bound by sin, to be released. Lucifer's goal, of course, stands in direct opposition to Jesus Christ's righteous and perfect desire, which is to release from sin all those who come unto him.

14:18 kings of the nations . . . lie in glory. The kings who rule over the telestial earth are buried in magnificent tombs decorated with marble. The once powerful tyrant (king of Babylon or Lucifer) is not treated with honor but is cast away with great disgrace.

14:19 cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch. The grave of Nebuchadnezzar, Babylon's king, has never been discovered, and Lucifer will never have a grave or a monument because he never received a body. The imagery of cast out of the grave stands opposite Jesus and his tomb (53:9), where Jesus arose from the dead and possessed "life in himself" (John 5:26) he used his own power to arise and exit the tomb. Lucifer, the abominable branch, can be contrasted to the useful "Branch" that will "grow out of" the roots of Jesse (11:1; D&C 113:1-2). John D. Watts, an Isaiah scholar, summarizes this section of Isaiah by writing of Nebuchadnezzar: "The body has not been buried, but abandoned like garbage (v. 19). He shares the fate of the dead among the poorest people: like the aborted fetus, like the clothes of one stabbed in a brawl, one killed in a fall, one trampled by a mob or on a battle-field, he is simply dumped in a pit and left to the birds and animals." [^23]

the remnant of those that are slain. Isaiah's imagery here likens Lucifer to the corpse of one who was killed by the sword, the sword wounds visible on the body. According to the law of Moses, any individual who touches the corpse (representative here of Lucifer) becomes ritually unclean and impure (Num. 19:11). Those who remain unclean, having forsaken Christ and his atoning sacrifice, cannot enter the celestial temple, or heaven (Alma 11:37).

that go down to the stones of the pit. See commentary on 14:15.

as a carcase trodden under feet. Lucifer is likened to a carcass that has not received a proper burial; instead it has been left on the ground to be trampled by man or animals. This analogy is more meaningful when considered in light of Joseph Smith's words: "The place where a man is buried is sacred; . . . one of the greatest curses the ancient prophets could put on any man, was that he should go without a burial." [^24]

14:20 Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial. See commentary on 14:19. Lucifer, because of his destructive and murderous acts, will not join the "kings of the nations" (14:18) who receive monumental tombs. Lucifer, of course, never received a body and therefore will never be buried.

thou hast destroyed thy land. Lucifer's code has always been war and destruction against both humanity and nature.

slain thy people. Lucifer uses men as instruments by tempting them to murder their fellow beings; Lucifer also leads people "away unto destruction" (Matt. 10:28; Alma 36:14). In a sense, he slays their souls so they will suffer spiritual death.

the seed of evildoers shall never be renowned. Lucifer, or the king of Babylon, and others like them will not be honored or acclaimed in the eternities.

14:21 Prepare slaughter for his children for the iniquities of their fathers. The children of evildoers will perish because they heeded their wicked fathers' sayings.

that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor fill the face of the world with cities. The righteous will possess the lands of promise (14:1-2) and build cities of Zion for the pure in heart. The wicked, however, will not be blessed to inherit such cities of Zion.

14:22 I will rise up against them. The Lord will destroy all things connected to Babylon.

Lord of Hosts. See commentary on 1:9.

cut off from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew. The term cut off is the same as excommunication (Ex. 12:15, 19). Hence, those in Babylon who are cut off will be excommunicated from God and his saints, and they will not have any part of God's covenants. The reference to son and nephew here indicates that the line of inheritance will be cut off to make room for the new King Messiah to reign.

saith the Lord. Jehovah is the origin and authority of the revelation.

14:23 I will also make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of water. Babylon's destruction will be so complete that bittern (variously translated as owl, hedgehog, and waterfowl) will inhabit it, and "there will be no regular irrigation or cultivation of the soil, and the place will become a swamp." [^25]

I will sweep it with the broom of destruction. Just as one sweeps his or her house to eliminate dust and dirt, so will God sweep Babylon of her foul matter so that none remains.

God Is in Control of All Nations (14:24-27)

The Lord's plans, designs, and purposes will come to pass according to his desires. This fact is emphasized here twice—first in the words of the Lord: "Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, so shall it stand" (14:24), and again in Isaiah's explanation of the Lord's power to carry out his plans: "For the Lord of hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul it? and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?" (14:27). God has always been in control of humanity's affairs; he is in charge of the present, and he holds the future in his hands. The Assyrians, for instance, were in God's control. They served his purposes by smiting the wayward Israelites, but then God in turn destroyed the Assyrians.

Isa. 14:24-27

The Lord of Hosts hath sworn, saying: Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, so shall it stand—(14:24) That I will bring the Assyrian in my land, and upon my mountains tread him under foot; then shall his yoke depart from off them, and his burden depart from off their shoulders. (14:25) This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth; and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all nations. (14:26) For the Lord of Hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul? And his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back? (14:27)

Notes and Commentary

14:24 Lord of Hosts hath sworn, saying. The Lord makes a promise to his children that his word will be fulfilled. Elsewhere the Lord has said, "Though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled" (D&C 1:38). See commentary on 45:23.

Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass. Unlike the plans or goals of the Assyrian king (10:5-11), the Syrian king (7:5-7), or others (29:8, 15; 30:1), the Lord's purposes are certain and will be fulfilled exactly as he plans them.

14:25 I will bring the Assyrian in my land. The fulfillment of this prophecy is chronicled in Isa. 36 when the Assyrians enter Palestine.

upon my mountains tread him under foot. God's mountains are the Judean mountains in Palestine, the hill country that extends north and south some thirty-five miles and is approximately fifteen miles wide. After the Assyrians have fulfilled the Lord's purposes, he will trample on them as if they were dust.

then shall his yoke depart from off them. This phrase recalls 10:27, wherein the Lord promises the Israelites that the Assyrian "yoke shall be destroyed." The Assyrian burden was removed from Israel a few years after the prophecy was given. Symbolically, the yoke of Assyria (the world) is removed from covenant Israel as they accept Jesus Christ and forsake their sins.

14:26 purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth. This is the Lord's decision and it will certainly come to pass.

hand that is stretched out upon all nations. Assyria wanted to conquer all nations (10:14), but the Lord's purposes are greater. He is in control of all nations and has power over all the earth.

14:27 the Lord of Hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul. When God devises a divine plan, no being has the power to obstruct or hinder.

Judgment against the Philistines (14:28-32)

This revelation given to Isaiah is yet another prophecy directed to one of the world's kingdoms. It shows that the Lord's prophets do not serve the house of Israel alone. The Philistines are warned against rejoicing over the temporary defeat of the Assyrian forces because Assyria eventually regroups, wars against Philistia, and destroys her. Meanwhile, the Lord has established Zion, and all who wish to become a part of her will find rest and peace.

Isa. 14:28-32

In the year that king Ahaz died was this burden. (14:28) Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of him that smote thee is broken; for out of the serpent's root shall come forth a cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent. (14:29) And the first-born of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie down in safety; and I will kill thy root with famine, and [I] [^26] shall slay thy remnant. (14:30) Howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou, whole Palestina, art dissolved; for there shall come from the north a smoke, and none shall be alone in his appointed times. (14:31) What shall then answer the messengers of the nations? That the Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it. (14:32)

Notes and Commentary

14:28 In the year that king Ahaz died. Isaiah dated an earlier vision by the death of King Uzziah (6:1). The date of Ahaz's death was probably between 740 and 714 b.c.

burden. This is a prophecy of desolation and destruction on a wicked nation.

14:29 Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of him that smote thee is broken. Palestine, or Philistia, which consists of five kingdoms—Gaza, Ekron, Gath, Ashdod, and Ashkalon—is warned not to celebrate Assyria's (the "serpent's") lost power, because the Assyrians will regain their strength (the serpent's seed will produce a cockatrice, another poisonous serpent) and once again smite the Philistines.

his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent. Isaiah again uses imagery to describe how the poisonous snake (Assyria) will produce offspring that will war against the Philistines. The serpent is called fiery probably because of its terrible burning venom; it is called flying probably because of the speed with which it strikes (30:6; Num. 21:6).

14:30 first-born of the poor shall feed. Those who are humble and who suffer (the poor and needy) will join Zion, which was founded by Jehovah (14:32). The New International Version suggests that the first-born of the poor are the poorest of the poor.

I will kill thy root with famine. God will create a famine in Philistia, or Palestine, that will destroy its remaining inhabitants after the wars with Assyria have ended. The root may refer to the Philistines who are yet producing children, those who are about to bring forth another generation.

14:31 Howl, O gate/cry, O city. The inhabitants of all Philistine cities will wail and moan once the Assyrians begin their destructive advances.

come from the north a smoke. Smoke represents the burning cities the Assyrians destroyed by fire as they advanced southward toward Philistia.

none shall be alone in his appointed times. The Jerusalem Bible reads "there are no deserters in those battalions," which means that all enlisted men who belong to the Assyrian army are mighty warriors; there are no cowards or deserters among them.

14:32 What shall then answer the messengers of the nations? When envoys from various nations ask how they may be saved from Assyria's destructive forces, they will find comfort in knowing that "the Lord hath founded Zion" (2 Ne. 24:32).

Lord hath founded Zion. The Lord himself has established a place for the pure in heart to dwell. Indeed he is the very foundation of it; he is our "safe foundation" and our "sure foundation" (Jacob 4:15, 17; Hel. 5:12).

poor of his people shall trust in it. The poor will find both temporal and spiritual salvation in Zion.

---
Notas:
[^1] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 142.
[^2] The KJV reads strangers. The Hebrew reads nilevah, and "foreigners" is a better translation.
[^3] This lengthy addition is from JST Isa. 14:2 and 2 Ne. 24:2.
[^4] This addition is from JST Isa. 14:3 and 2 Ne. 24:3.
[^5] History of the Church, 5:425.
[^6] This addition is from JST Isa. 14:4 and 2 Ne. 24:4.
[^7] The translation is from Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 143.
[^8] From NIV Isa.
[^9] JST Isa. 14:8 and 2 Ne. 24:8.
[^10] KJV has the archaic feller.
[^11] New Bible Dictionary, s.v. "proverb."
[^12] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 143.
[^13] Keil and Delitzsch, Commentary, 7:1:312, reads "assembly of gods." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 417, has "assembly (of the gods)," and Watts, Isa. 1-33, 207, reads "the mountain where the gods assemble."
[^14] Watts, Isa. 1-33, 206. Sides of the north is an archaic way of saying farthest.
[^15] Stare is Motyer's reading, Prophecy of Isaiah, 145.
[^16] The changes in this line are from JST Isa. 14:16 and 2 Ne. 24:16.
[^17] JST Isa. 14:17 and 2 Ne. 24:17 replace the KJV that with and.
[^18] JST Isa. 14:18 and 2 Ne. 24:18 replace the KJV even with yea.
[^19] JST Isa. 14:19 and 2 Ne. 24:19 read the remnant rather than the KJV as the raiment.
[^20] 2 Ne. 24:21 reads the plural iniquities rather than iniquity.
[^21] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 370.
[^22] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 237.
[^23] Watts, Isa. 1-33, 211.
[^24] History of the Church, 5:361.
[^25] Kissane, Book of Isaiah, 1:174.
[^26] DSS Isa. Scroll restores the correct pronoun (I instead of he) to the Hebrew Bible.
