Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 15

Likening Isa. 15 unto Ourselves

Moab's inhabitants were enemies of Israel and constantly warred against them (Num. 22-25; Judg. 3:12-30). As such, they serve as a type and a shadow of the wicked today who are Zion's enemies. Also, as ancient Moab was "laid waste" and her inhabitants were "brought to silence," so will the wicked of our day be destroyed at the Lord's coming.

A Prophecy of Judgment against Moab (15:1-9)

Moab, which was named after the firstborn son of Lot's eldest daughter (Gen. 19:37), was the nation that bordered the Dead Sea on the east. The prophet warns the Moabites that they will be destroyed, despite the fact that they are prosperous in trading and commerce. The listing of sixteen cities and places in this section, which are located in both the northern and southern regions of Moab, indicates that all of Moab will be affected by the devastation.

Moabites will mourn and lament their destruction. They will mourn by weeping, howling, shaving their heads, cutting off their beards (15:2), girding with sackcloth, howling on housetops and in the streets (15:3), and crying out to the point that the voice is heard from distant places ("even unto Jahaz"); even "soldiers of Moab shall cry out" (15:4).

Isa. 15:1-9

The burden of Moab. Because in the night Ar of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence; because in the night Kir of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence; (15:1) He is gone up to Bajith, and to Dibon, the high places, to weep: Moab shall howl over Nebo, and over Medeba: on all their heads shall be baldness, and every beard cut off. (15:2) In their streets they shall gird themselves with sackcloth: on the tops of their houses, and in their streets, every one shall howl, weeping abundantly. (15:3) And Heshbon shall cry, and Elealeh: their voice shall be heard even unto Jahaz: therefore the armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out; his life shall be grievous unto him. (15:4) My heart shall cry out for Moab; his fugitives shall flee unto Zoar, an heifer of three years old: for by the mounting up of Luhith with weeping shall they go it up; for in the way of Horonaim they shall raise up a cry of destruction. (15:5) For the waters of Nimrim shall be desolate: for the hay is withered away, the grass faileth, there is no green thing. (15:6) Therefore the abundance they have gotten, and that which they have laid up, shall they carry away to the brook of the willows. (15:7) For the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab; the howling thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto Beer-elim. (15:8) For the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood: for I will bring more upon Dimon, lions upon him that escapeth of Moab, and upon the remnant of the land. (15:9)

Notes and Commentary

15:1 burden of Moab. This refers to a prophecy of destruction upon a wicked people.

in the night Ar of Moab/Kir of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence. Ar and Kir are two cities of Moab that will be destroyed. The phrase in the night may mean that Moab's cities will be destroyed with such great force and speed, it will be as if the destruction took place without warning in a single night. The expression brought to silence indicates that the devastation was so complete that no inhabitants remained in the cities, meaning no conversations among adults, no children playing in the streets, and no bustling noise in the marketplaces.

15:2 He is gone up to Bajith, and to Dibon, the high places, to weep. The inhabitants of Moab go to their temples (Hebrew Byth, "temple") and high places to mourn and lament because of the destruction.

Moab shall howl over Nebo, and over Medeba. The nation will also mourn for the destruction of Nebo and Medeba, two of Moab's notable cities.

on all their heads shall be baldness/every beard cut off. It was customary for males to demonstrate their sorrow by shaving their heads and beards (22:12; Micah 1:16). The once proud inhabitants of Moab are now reduced to humility and shame.

15:3 In their streets/on the tops of their houses. In the ancient Middle East, extreme mourning was done in public places so that all could see.

they shall gird themselves with sackcloth. Mourning (2 Sam. 3:31) was often accompanied by rending the garments, weeping, fasting, praying, and sitting in ashes and wearing sackcloth.

every one shall howl. Every citizen has been affected by the destruction, and perhaps all have lost a loved one in the destruction.

weeping abundantly. This expression shows the deep anguish the people felt.

Heshbon shall cry, and Elealeh/Jahaz. These are cities in Moab's north region. The phrase even unto Jahaz indicates that the people who dwell in even the farthest regions of the land, the border cities of Moab, will lament because of the destruction.

15:4 the armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out. Even the hardened men of war will feel sorrow and will cry out.

his life shall be grievous unto him. The life of each armed soldier will be painful and distressful because of the devastation of his homeland.

15:5 My heart shall cry out for Moab. The pronoun my refers either to God or to Isaiah; both are experiencing great emotional pain because of the destruction of Moab's inhabitants.

his fugitives shall flee unto Zoar. Zoar is located near the southern end of the Dead Sea; the fugitives are fleeing south, away from the heat of the battle.

heifer of three years old. A heifer of three years old is "in her strength," or full of vigor. Zoar was strong but soon would be destroyed when Sennacherib, king of Assyria, invaded.

for by the mounting up of Luhith with weeping. As the fugitives flee from the battles and destruction toward Luhith, a Moabite city in the south near Zoar, they will weep.

for in the way of Horonaim they shall raise up a cry of destruction. The inhabitants of Horonaim, a Moabite city near Zoar, will wail for the loss of their homeland.

15:6 waters of Nimrim shall be desolate. This site in southern Moab will suffer because of the national disaster. Perhaps drought will be added to the other troubles.

for the hay is withered away/grass faileth. Cultivated lands, pastures, and green plants wither because of the lack of water in Nimrim and the lack of care by local farmers.

15:7 shall they carry away to the brook of the willows. Refugees grab their personal belongings and treasures as they flee from the invading army. Brook of the willows may be Wadi Zered, which is located in the southern end of Moab (Num. 21:12; Deut. 2:13).

15:8 the howling thereof unto Eglaim/Beer-elim. The devastation is nationwide, with the howling of the country's residents echoing as far away as Eglaim and Beer- elim, cities on the northern and southern borders of Moab.

15:9 For the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood. So great will be the bloodbath in Dimon that its waters will run with the blood of the slain.

for I will bring more upon Dimon. The destruction is not yet over.

lions upon him that escapeth of Moab. Armies, like lions, will pursue the refugees and those who attempt to flee from the carnage, with the intent of destroying them. This prophecy may also have a literal fulfillment, with lions sent upon the land as a further judgment by the Lord.
