Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 16

Likening Isa. 16 unto Ourselves

The desolation of historical Moab (chapter 15) anticipates the destruction of the modern nations that work evil and worship false gods; the mourning and lamentation of Moab's inhabitants after her destruction (16:6-14) foretells the anguish that will be experienced by earth's inhabitants during and after the latter-day wars; and Moab's refugees who sought protection in Judah (16:1-5) parallel those in the last days who will flee unto Zion from the warring nations (45:68-69).

Moab Seeks Refuge in Judah (16:1-5)

After the destruction of historical Moab, which is a type of all nations that will be destroyed for their wickedness, many Moabite refugees seek refuge in Judah (16:1- 5); they wander around the fords of Arnon like a nestling who was cast out of her nest (16:2). Possibly following royal protocol, the refugees send a lamb to pay tribute to the king of Judah (16:1); they seek advice and protection from Judah: "Advise us what to do" (JB 16:2), and "protect and hide us from our enemies" (JB 16:3-4).

Ultimately, this section is a prophecy of Jesus Christ. "Once the oppression is over, and the destroyer is no more" (JB 16:4), the throne and kingdom of David will be set up once again (16:5). Jesus Christ is the king who will sit upon the throne in his temple ("tabernacle of David"), which recalls the throne in Solomon's temple and the Tabernacle of Moses.

Isa. 16:1-5

Send ye the lamb to the ruler of the land from Sela to the wilderness, unto the mount of the daughter of Zion. (16:1) For it shall be, that, as a wandering bird cast out of the nest, so the daughters of Moab shall be at the fords of Arnon. (16:2) Take counsel, execute judgment; make thy shadow as the night in the midst of the noonday; hide the outcasts; bewray not him that wandereth. (16:3) Let mine outcasts [of Moab] [^1] dwell with thee; be thou a covert to them from the face of the spoiler for the extortioner is at an end, the spoiler ceaseth, the oppressors are consumed out of the land. (16:4) And in mercy shall the throne be established: and he shall sit upon it in truth in the tabernacle of David, judging, and seeking judgment, and hasting righteousness. (16:5)

Notes and Commentary

16:1 lamb to the ruler. As a tribute, and following the formalities of the period, the Moabite refugees sent a lamb to the ruler in Judah. This recalls 2 Kgs. 3:4, which describes Mesha, king of Moab, giving a tribute to the king of Judah of one hundred thousand lambs and one hundred thousand rams with their wool.

Sela. Sela may refer to cliffs and caves where the refugees of Moab fled for safety; to Petra, the capital of Edom; or to an unidentified site in Moab.

mount of the daughter of Zion. This is a possible reference to the temple mount in Jerusalem, which is called the daughter of Zion.

16:2 wandering bird cast out of the nest. The Moabites (or "daughters of Moab") who survive the destruction (chapter 15) wander through the land like a nestling who has lost its nest.

fords of Arnon. Many Moabites gather at the fords of Arnon, perhaps because there is water there to take care of their needs. Arnon, now called Wadi el-Mujib, is Moab's chief river. It flows into the Dead Sea.

16:3 Take counsel, execute judgment. The Jerusalem Bible reads "advise us what to do, decide for us." The Moabites (likened to nestlings without a nest in 16:2) request that the ruler of Judah provide them political refuge. They seek protection under his wings ("make thy shadow"), as a chick is sheltered from the noonday sun ("midst of the noonday") by the hen.

16:4 mine outcasts [of Moab] dwell with thee. The appeal of the Moabites continues.

extortioner is at an end/spoiler ceaseth/oppressors are consumed. Isa. 16:4-5 is a messianic prophecy. The newly restored kingdom of David removes oppression and destruction; the Messiah sits on the throne (16:5), a symbol of kingship.

16:5 mercy/truth/judging, and seeking judgment, and hasting righteousness. These qualities belong to Jesus the Messiah, who will reign from his throne.

tabernacle of David. The tabernacle refers to the temples of heaven, Jerusalem, and New Jerusalem. The Messiah, like David of old, will rule over the united tribes of Israel (Ezek. 37:21-28).

Lament for Moab (16:6-14)

In Isa. 15 the prophet gives a prophecy of Moab's destruction followed by a description of her refugees' flight for safety (16:1-5). In 16:6-11 Isaiah's prophecy is in the form of a lamentation, bewailing Moab's destruction. The lamentative terms of the section include howl (used twice), mourn (16:7), bewail with weeping, water with tears (16:9); we find no gladness or joy, no singing or joyful shouting, and especially none of the rejoicing that would occur at harvest time (16:10), so that even the heart (KJV, "bowels") and soul (KJV, "inward parts") mourn for Moab's destruction (16:11).

Interwoven into the prophecy are images of Moab's grape industry, including the terms vine, wine, vineyards, plants, and harvest. Isaiah's prophecy of the destruction of Moab and her agricultural industry should be taken literally, but it appears that Isaiah also uses the grapes and plants to refer to her inhabitants.

The prayers of Moab's inhabitants (16:12-13) to their gods will not stop the decreed destruction, which will occur within three years (16:14) from the time the prophecy is uttered. Isa. 16:6 explains that Moab is destroyed because of her pride, haughtiness, lies, and evil works.

Isa. 16:6-14

We have heard of the pride of Moab; of his haughtiness and his pride, [for] [^2] he is very proud; and his wrath, his lies, [and all his evil works]. [^3] (16:6) Therefore shall Moab howl for Moab, every one shall howl: for the foundations of Kir-hareseth shall ye mourn; surely they are stricken. (16:7) For the fields of Heshbon languish, and the vine of Sibmah: the lords of the heathen have broken down the principal plants thereof, they are come even unto Jazer, they wandered through the wilderness: her branches are stretched out, they are gone over the sea. (16:8) Therefore I will bewail with the weeping of Jazer the vine of Sibmah: I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon, and Elealeh: for the shouting for thy summer fruits and for thy harvest is fallen. (16:9) And gladness is taken away, and joy out of the plentiful field; and in the vineyards there shall be no singing, neither shall there be shouting: the treaders shall tread out no wine in their presses; I have made their vintage shouting to cease. (16:10) Wherefore my bowels shall sound like an harp for Moab, and mine inward parts for Kir-haresh. (16:11) And it shall come to pass, when it is seen that Moab is weary on the high place, that he shall come to his sanctuary to pray; but he shall not prevail. (16:12) This is the word that the Lord hath spoken concerning Moab since that time. (16:13) But now the Lord hath spoken, saying, Within three years, as the years of an hireling, and the glory of Moab shall [cease to command respect], [^4] with all that great multitude; and the remnant shall be very small and feeble. (16:14)

Notes and Commentary

16:6 pride of Moab. Isaiah gives several reasons for Moab's destruction by God—pride (mentioned three times), haughtiness, wrath, lies, and evil works. Our own world, following Moab as a type, has the same sins.

16:7 Moab howl for Moab. Moab's inhabitants will lament and howl because of the destruction of their homeland.

foundations of Kir-hareseth shall ye mourn. Kir-hareseth is the modern Kerak, located seventeen miles south of the fords of Arnon (16:2) and some eleven miles east of the Dead Sea. Kir-hareseth's economy was founded on its wine industry. Verses 7-10 contain references to this famous industry that existed in ancient Moab. They include fields of Heshbon, vine of Sibmah, principal plants, branches, vine of Sibmah, summer fruits, harvest, plentiful field, vineyards, wine, and vintage. Moab's inhabitants will mourn because its economic mainstay, in which it placed so much trust, will be lost.

Some translators read "raisin cakes of Kir-hareseth" rather than "foundations of Kir-hareseth." Such a reading fits well into the context of this section of Isaiah, for raisin cakes, used in apostate religious practices (Hosea 3:1), were made of dried and compressed grapes (2 Sam. 6:19; 1 Chr. 16:3).

16:8-11 Heshbon, Sibmah, Jazer, Elealeh, and Kir-haresh. These are principal Moabite cities connected with the wine industry and are mentioned here to indicate the industry's breadth. Isaiah also recounts that "her branches are stretched out, they are gone over the sea," which indicates that Moab's wine export business was regionally and perhaps even internationally known.

16:9 I will bewail/weeping/tears. This may be the mourning of the Moabites over their lost grape industry or, more importantly, over the Moabites who are slain in the destruction. Or it may refer to the mourning of the Lord or his prophet that the people had to be destroyed.

16:10 gladness/joy is taken away. The lamentation continues, and the happiness shown in the gladness, joy, singing, and shouting normally connected with harvest, blessings, and peaceful conditions is gone.

in the vineyards there shall be no singing, neither . . . shouting. The customary singing and joyful shouting that accompany the grape treaders are gone; lamenting replaces them.

treaders shall tread out no wine in their presses. Workers will cease their laboring and the normal economy will be disrupted.

I have made their vintage shouting to cease. The joy that attends the bounteous harvest is replaced with mourning, because of the judgments of the Lord.

16:11 mine inward parts/my bowels shall sound like an harp for Moab. The pronouns my and mine may refer to the Lord or to Isaiah, who groans and mourns because of Moab's destruction, or to individual inhabitants of Moab who mourn the loss of their homeland.

16:12 he shall come to his sanctuary. Worshipers shall seek comfort from their idols at their temples, but the Lord's word will be fulfilled; Moab's devastation will be complete.

16:13 Lord hath spoken. Jehovah is the source of this prophecy.

16:14 But now the Lord hath spoken. A new revelation from Jehovah concerning Moab.

Within three years. The destruction of Moab will be complete within three years.

all that great multitude. Despite the number of its inhabitants, Moab will be destroyed.

remnant shall be very small and feeble. Few will remain in Moab, perhaps chiefly the elderly and the sick or injured.

---
Notas:
[^1] The reading is according to the NRSV.
[^2] JST Isa. 16:6 adds the preposition for and reorders the phrase he is very proud in the verse.
[^3] JST Isa. 16:6 adds this phrase and omits the KJV phrase but his lies shall not be so.
[^4] We prefer the reading of the JB over the archaic KJV reading of contemned.
