Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 17

Likening Isa. 17 unto Ourselves

The prophecy of Isaiah in this chapter may be likened unto our own generation. The idolatrous practices of the ancient countries of Syria and Israel resulted in their downfall and destruction (17:1-11). People and nations in the last days who put their trust in idols, such as riches, power, false security, or illicit sex, will similarly be destroyed.

A Prophecy of Judgment against Damascus and Israel (17:1-11)

Damascus and other Syrian cities will be destroyed and depopulated (17:1-3), and Israel will experience similar judgments (17:4-5). Isaiah compares Israel's destruction and depopulation to an individual who was healthy but has become emaciated by disease. Similarly, those who remain after Israel's destruction will be as sparse as the remaining stalks of wheat after the reaping or as the olives after the olive trees have been stripped (17:4-6).

Isa. 17:7-8 seems to be parenthetical; this passage promises that some will turn from idolatry and focus their eyes on the Holy One of Israel.

Isa. 17:9-11 is a continuation of the judgments against Syria and Israel (recorded in 17:1-6) because of their idolatries. Isaiah continues his comparison of idolatrous Israel to a man who planted his vineyard with inferior plants, and, though he cultivated and cared for the vines, his harvest was poor. The man's disappointment was great; "the harvest shall be a heap in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow" (17:11). The effect of God's judgments on Syria and Israel will bring about Israel's return to God when his people no longer trust in their self-created idols (17:7-8).

Isa. 17:1-11

The burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus is taken away from being a city, and it shall be a ruinous heap. (17:1) The cities of Aroer are forsaken: they shall be for flocks, which shall lie down, and none shall make them afraid. (17:2) The fortress also shall cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus, and the remnant of Syria: they shall be as the glory of the children of Israel, saith the Lord of hosts. (17:3) And in that day it shall come to pass, that the glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall wax lean. (17:4) And it shall be as when the harvestman gathereth the corn, and reapeth the ears with his arm; and it shall be as he that gathereth ears in the valley of Rephaim. (17:5) Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it, as the shaking of an olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough, four or five in the outmost fruitful branches thereof, saith the Lord God of Israel. (17:6) At that day shall a man look to his Maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the Holy One of Israel. (17:7) And he shall not look to the altars, the work of his hands, neither shall respect that which his fingers have made, either the groves, or the images. (17:8) In that day shall his strong cities be [like the deserted places of the Hivites and the Amorites, which they deserted] [^1] because of the children of Israel: and there shall be desolation. (17:9) Because thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation, and hast not been mindful of the rock of thy strength, therefore shalt thou plant pleasant plants, and shalt set it with strange slips: (17:10) In the day shalt thou make thy plant to grow, and in the morning shalt thou make thy seed to flourish: but the harvest shall be a heap in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow. (17:11)

Notes and Commentary

17:1 burden of Damascus. A prophecy of judgment against Damascus, capital of Syria and other Syrian cities (17:2).

Damascus . . . shall be a ruinous heap. Damascus will be destroyed and become a heap of rubble.

17:2 cities of Aroer are forsaken: they shall be for flocks. Other Syrian cities, along with Damascus, will be destroyed and abandoned. Their destruction will be so complete that flocks of sheep will pasture where they once stood.

17:3 fortress also shall cease from Ephraim. With the fall of Damascus, Ephraim (Israel's Northern Kingdom) would lose her powerful ally and hence its protection (meaning "fortress"). Ephraim was destroyed in 721 b.c.

the kingdom [shall cease] from Damascus. With the fall of Syria's capital city and other municipal centers, the kingdom ceased to exist.

the remnant of Syria . . . shall be as the glory of the children of Israel. Those who remain in Syria after it becomes a heap of ruins will have little glory, similar to the "thin" glory Israel will have after it becomes desolate (17:4).

saith the Lord of hosts. Jehovah is the source of this prophecy.

17:4 glory of Jacob shall be made thin. The nation of Israel (Jacob) is likened to a man whose body has become weak and thin. Similar to Syria in its destruction ("in that day it shall come to pass"), Israel, in all its glory and prosperity, will become as a shadow—thin and afflicted. Unlike Syria, however, which would be afflicted both body and soul (annihilated from the earth), Israel's spirit would be left intact, eventually enabling a remnant to return to God with full strength.

17:5 harvestman gathereth the corn . . . in the valley of Rephaim. The valley of Rephaim (2 Sam. 5:18), southwest of Jerusalem, was a fertile agricultural area. Isaiah compares the harvest and subsequent emptiness of the valley to Israel's destruction and the few inhabitants that will remain. As the corn is harvested and removed from Rephaim, so will Israel's inhabitants be removed from the land; only a few will remain.

17:6 Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it. In ancient Israel, the landless poor were permitted to glean any grains and produce that remained after the harvest (Deut. 24:19-22; Ruth 2:2-23). The olives (KJV reads "grapes") that the gleaners could not reach with their hands were knocked from the upper branches with a stick, or they were shaken from the tree (24:13; Deut. 24:20). Isaiah continues the comparison between the valley of Rephaim's harvest and Israel's destruction by likening her few remaining inhabitants to the four or five olives that remain in the tree's uppermost bough (2 Kgs. 24:14; 25:12).

17:7 At that day shall a man look to his Maker. After the troubles, disasters, and depopulation of the land, at least some of those who remain will repent of their sins and return to God, looking to him with new "respect."

Maker. Isaiah contrasts man and Maker; man is weak, frail, and dependent compared to the Maker, who is the Creator, Omnipotent, and Lord of all. Verse 8 continues the contrast when Isaiah reproves mankind for vainly creating idols with his own tools ("the work of his hands") rather than relying upon God (the Maker), who created him.

17:8 he shall not look to the altars . . . or the images. Altars, groves, and images refer to the Canaanite religion and its temples (Ex. 34:13). The groves were poles or trees or stone pillars erected near the Canaanite temple's altar in honor of Ashera, a Canaanite female deity, and Baal, a Canaanite male deity. Some of the Israelites who survive the prophesied calamities will turn from their idols and return to God.

17:9 In that day shall his strong cities be like. Israel's cities will be like the cities of the Hivites and Amorites after Israel conquered them (Deut. 7:1)—empty and desolate.

17:10 forgotten the God of thy salvation. Israel had forgotten God, who was both their temporal and their spiritual salvation.

plant pleasant plants . . . strange slips. Israel was indulging in the false worship of fertility gods or goddesses (17:11; Jer. 2:21).

17:11 in the morning shalt thou make thy seed to flourish. The Israelites are eager and quick (in the day and in the morning) to plant their plants to the fertility gods, but at the time of harvest, the plants will be useless, becoming heaps of rotten produce. The plants and sprigs that Israel plants represent none other than Israel herself in her apostate condition.

harvest shall be a heap in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow. Israel should be a choice vine that relies upon Jesus Christ for life and power (John 15) its fruits should be plump and nourishing. Instead, Israel has become a wild, inferior, and unfruitful vine. The harvest of rotten produce, therefore, will be cast into a great heap. This is why God should be the planter and the keeper of the vineyard (Jacob 5- 6): if the people of Israel had permitted God to become the focus of their lives, they would have produced good fruits (3 Ne. 14:17-18).

Portrayal of the Downfall of the Nations That Oppress Israel (17:12-14)

The reason for the woe in 17:12 is not given explicitly, but 17:14 suggests that the oracle is directed toward all nations or peoples who rob or plunder members of the house of Israel (represented by the pronoun us, which is used twice). Three key phrases point out the disaster that awaits the multitudes who "spoil us" and "rob us": They are "God shall rebuke them," "they shall flee far off," and "they shall be chased" (17:13).

Isa. 17:12-14

Woe to the multitude of many people, which make a noise like the noise of the seas; and to the rushing of nations, that make a rushing like the rushing of mighty waters! (17:12) The nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters: but God shall rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like a rolling thing before the whirlwind. (17:13) And behold at eveningtide trouble; and before the morning he is not. This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that rob us. (17:14)

Notes and Commentary

17:12 Woe to the multitude of many people. This refers to the world, or all nations (for example, ancient Assyria, Egypt, and Syria) who do not seek God.

make a noise like the noise of the seas/mighty waters. Great multitudes and nations are often compared to waters (see 8:7; Jer. 47:2; Rev. 17:1, 15).

17:13 God shall rebuke them. God will chasten the worldly nations and cause them to scatter and flee as the useless chaff is scattered by the four winds during harvest. Chaff is worthless and easily removed from the precious kernels of grain.

they shall flee. Worldly nations will flee from God's wrath and terrible rebuke.

chaff . . . before the wind/rolling thing before the whirlwind. God will carry off and scatter the nations to the four corners of the world as easily as a tumbleweed is carried off by the whirlwind, or as effortlessly as the wind blows the chaff through the air.

17:14 at eveningtide trouble . . . before the morning he is not. God's judgment will come swiftly (before the morning) upon the wicked.

the portion of them that spoil us . . . that rob us. The eventual lot of those who plunder and harm members of the house of Israel is destruction.

---
Notas:
[^1] Signs of the Times, 54-55.
