Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 18

Likening Isa. 18 unto Ourselves

In this chapter Isaiah is speaking directly to us. He prophesies of the gospel ensign that has been raised at the beginning of this dispensation, to which people from many nations are gathering. Isaiah also speaks of our missionaries who are sent forth to proclaim the gospel to the nations of the earth.

The Lord's Messengers Take the Gospel to the World (18:1-7)

President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "This chapter is clearly a reference to the sending forth of the missionaries to the nations of the earth to gather again this people who are scattered and peeled. The ensign has been lifted upon the mountains, and the work of gathering has been going on for over one hundred years. No one understands this chapter, but the Latter-day Saints, and we can see how it is being fulfilled." [^1]

Isa. 18:1-7

Woe to the land shadowing with wings, which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia: (18:1). That sendeth ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels of bulrushes upon the waters, saying, Go, ye swift messengers, to a nation scattered and peeled, to a people terrible from their beginning hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden down, whose land the rivers have spoiled! (18:2) All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth, see ye, when he lifteth up an ensign on the mountains; and when he bloweth a trumpet, hear ye. (18:3) For so the Lord said unto me, I will take my rest, and I will consider in my dwelling place like a clear heat upon herbs, and like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest. (18:4) For afore the harvest, when the bud is perfect, and the sour grape is ripening in the flower, he shall both cut off the sprigs with pruning hooks, and take away and cut down the branches. (18:5) They shall be left together unto the fowls of the mountains, and to the beasts of the earth: and the fowls shall summer upon them, and all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them. (18:6) In that time shall the present be brought unto the Lord of hosts of a people scattered and peeled, and from a people terrible from their beginning hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden under foot, whose land the rivers have spoiled, to the place of the name of the Lord of hosts, the mount Zion. (18:7)

Notes and Commentary

18:1 Woe to the land shadowing with wings, which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia. This expression refers to America, which is "in the shape of wings." [^2] Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "America . . . is the land 'shadowing with wings' spoken of by Isaiah that today is sending ambassadors by the sea to a nation scattered and peeled." [^3] Hyrum Smith spoke of the gathering of Israel to America by saying that "the gathering will be from the nations to North and South America, which is the land of Zion. North and South America, are the symbols of the wings." [^4]

Apparently the woe does not belong in the introduction to 18:1. "The chapter shows clearly that no woe was intended, but rather a greeting. . . . A correct translation would be, 'Hail to the land in the shape of wings.'" [^5]

18:2 That sendeth ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels. The ambassadors and "swift messengers" (D&C 124:26) are our "elders of Israel," our "messengers of the kingdom," [^6] or the Lord's servants who are working to establish Zion in the last days. They travel swiftly in a variety of vehicles, represented here with the phrase vessels of bulrushes, which means "vessels of speed," according to Joseph Fielding Smith. [^7]

a nation scattered and peeled, to a people terrible from their beginning hitherto. President Joseph Fielding Smith asked, "Do you know of any land like that? Terrible in the beginning and later meted out and scattered, peeled and a curse upon the land? That land is Palestine." [^8]

18:3 All ye inhabitants of the world. The focus of the prophecy turns to all the inhabitants of the earth.

see ye . . . hear ye. The inhabitants of the earth are commanded to see God's ensign and hear the blowing of the trumpet; they should hearken to the gospel message as declared by the Lord's messengers.

when he lifteth up an ensign on the mountains. The ensign (a flag or banner) will be raised upon a high mountain for all of Israel's outcasts to see and be prompted to gather around it. The ensign represents the gospel of Jesus Christ (D&C 45:9; 105:39) and the light that accompanies it (D&C 115:4-5). [^9] The ensign, regularly mentioned in Isaiah (5:26; 11:10-12; 18:3; 30:17; 31:9; 49:22), was raised "here in America, and the Lord calls upon all the world to take notice when this ensign is lifted upon the mountains." [^10]

when he bloweth a trumpet. The trumpet, with the ensign mentioned above, beckons the world's inhabitants to gather to Zion and its temples (27:13; Matt. 24:31). Every missionary of our dispensation is instructed that "at all times, and in all places, he shall open his mouth and declare my gospel as with the voice of a trump" (D&C 24:12) so the earth's inhabitants will hear the gospel's message. Thus the Lord's trumpet is the voice of his missionaries.

18:4 For so the Lord said unto me. The Lord spoke to Isaiah.

I will take my rest, and I will consider in my dwelling place. God's place of rest and his dwelling place is his heavenly temple (celestial kingdom). God is considering events pertaining to the earth's inhabitants, and at the right moment he will carry out his designs.

like a clear heat upon herbs, and like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest. Victor Ludlow writes: "Verse 4 explains that, as the gospel goes forth, the Lord will calmly remain in his dwelling place like a 'clear heat' or a 'dewy mist' during the harvest season. . . . Like the delicate balance of warmth and moisture needed to fully ripen the grapes, God attends to the harvest of souls by providing the proper light (truth) and water (cleansing powers) to ensure the full development of each person." [^11]

18:5 For afore the harvest. Before the sweet, ripe grapes are plucked from the vine.

he shall both cut off the sprigs with pruning hooks. Just before the grapes are ripe for plucking, the Great Pruner (the Lord) will take his pruning hook and prune the vine of its unwanted sprigs and branches, here representing unrighteous people or wicked nations.

18:6 They shall be left together unto the fowls of the mountains. After the Lord has destroyed the wicked (or permitted their destruction), so many human corpses will be scattered on the face of the land that fowls and beasts will feed on the carnage: "And it shall come to pass that the beasts of the forest and the fowls of the air shall devour them up" (D&C 29:20; see also Deut. 28:26; Ps. 79:2; Jer. 7:33; 16:4; Ezek. 32:4).

fowls shall summer upon them, and all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them. There will be so many bodies that the vultures and beasts will feast for one year (see Ezek. 39:12, which states that it will take seven months to bury the bodies of Gog).

18:7 In that time. This is the time of the events identified in the previous six verses.

shall the present be brought unto the Lord of hosts. These are the gifts of homage that Israel will bring to the Lord after her restoration. The gifts may be no less than the state of purity and righteousness of the Saints who have made the Atonement effective in their lives.

a people scattered and peeled . . . whose land the rivers have spoiled. The words in 18:2 are repeated here for emphasis but with the added phrase to the place of the name of the Lord of hosts, the mount Zion, a reference to the temple.

---
Notas:
[^1] Signs of the Times, 54-55.
[^2] Smith, Signs of the Times, 51.
[^3] Conference Report, 14; see also McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 94-95.
[^4] History of the Church, 6:322.
[^5] Smith, Signs of the Times, 51.
[^6] McConkie, New Witness for the Articles of Faith, 536.
[^7] Smith, Signs of the Times, 51.
[^8] Signs of the Times, 52.
[^9] See also Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 38.
[^10] Smith, Signs of the Times, 54.
[^11] Ludlow, Isaiah, 208.
