Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 19

Likening Isa. 19 unto Ourselves

This entire prophecy pertains to Egypt and its people, as indicated by the frequent reference to Egypt (seventeen times), Egyptian(s) (six times), and land of Egypt (three times). The time frame for the prophecy, at least with regard to 19:16-25, is the last days, as indicated by the expression in that day (19:16, 18, 19, 21, 23). Thus those of us who are permitted to live in the final decades before the coming of the Savior may witness the events of this chapter. Egypt as referred to herein may be the literal nation in Africa, or may symbolize one or more unidentified latter-day nations.

A Prophecy Concerning Egypt's Devastation and Ultimate Return to the Lord (19:1-25)

The prophecy, which appears to have a latter-day application, consists of two parts. The first part consists of the judgments against Egypt's people, leaders, and deities (19:1-18). Egypt will experience internal confusion, perhaps civil war, and eventually the rule of an external tyrant (19:1-4). Egypt will also encounter economic upheaval when the Nile and irrigation ditches dry up, negatively affecting the farmers and the fishing, flax, and weaving industries. Egypt's inhabitants will suffer (19:5- 10).

The second part of this prophecy (19:19-25) deals with the Egyptians' turning to the Lord, with evidence that the gospel will exist among them. The prophecy speaks of prayer ("they shall cry unto the Lord," 19:20; and "he shall be intreated of them," 19:22); a Savior and deliverance (19:20); and a people that "shall know the Lord" (19:21). In addition, spiritual healing will come through God's power (this aspect of the prophecy is emphasized when it is twice repeated, 19:22); repentance and conversion ("they shall return even to the Lord," 19:22); oneness among the nations (19:23-24); blessings unto the people (19:25); and a temple of the Lord ("shall there be an altar," 19:19); sacrifices and vows (19:21).

The two parts of the prophecy may be summarized in two words, smite and heal, both occurring twice in 19:22. The first section, the smiting of Egypt, refers to the turmoil and confusion that Egypt experiences by not knowing God (19:1-18); the second section deals with the healing that will occur when Egypt's people turn to God (19:19-25). Notice how Isaiah compares the two parts: civil war and internal confusion (19:2) are replaced with one language (19:18); the idols and false gods (19:3) are replaced with the Lord and Savior (19:20); the fierce and evil king (19:4) is replaced with the Lord who heals Egypt (19:22); and the drying up of the river (19:5) is replaced with the highway and the Lord's blessing (19:22-23).

Isaiah teaches that it is God who has governed and will continue to govern Egypt's affairs—as he does with all nations. This truth is emphasized by including the term Lord (Jehovah) ten times, Lord of Hosts (Jehovah of Hosts) seven times, and Lord (Adonai), saviour, and great one once. Specific phrases that identify God as the chief moving force behind certain events that have or will take place in Egypt include: "let them know what the Lord of hosts hath purposed upon Egypt" (19:12), "the Lord hath mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof" (19:14), "because of the counsel of the Lord of hosts, which he hath determined against it" (19:17), "the Lord . . . shall send them a saviour, and a great one, and he shall deliver them" (19:20), "Lord shall smite Egypt: he shall smite and heal it" (19:22).

This chapter may be interpreted on at least two different levels. It is possible that Isaiah saw these events occurring in the literal latter-day Egypt. But it may be that these things refer to another nation (or many nations) that will repent and turn to God after suffering great judgments and punishments for their sins.

Isa. 19:1-25

The burden of Egypt. Behold, the Lord rideth upon a swift cloud, and shall come into Egypt: and the idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it. (19:1) And I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians: and they shall fight every one against his brother, and every one against his neighbour; city against city, and kingdom against kingdom. (19:2) And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof; and I will destroy the counsel thereof: and they shall seek to the idols, and to the charmers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and to the wizards. (19:3) And the Egyptians will I give over into the hand of a cruel lord; and a fierce king shall rule over them, saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts. (19:4) And the waters shall fail from the sea, and the river shall be wasted and dried up. (19:5) And they shall turn the rivers far away; and the brooks of defence shall be emptied and dried up: the reeds and flags shall wither. (19:6) The paper reeds by the brooks, by the mouth of the brooks, and every thing sown by the brooks, shall wither, be driven away, and be no more. (19:7) The fishers also shall mourn, and all they that cast angle into the brooks shall lament, and they that spread nets upon the waters shall languish. (19:8) Moreover they that work in fine flax, and they that weave networks, shall be confounded. (19:9) And they shall be broken in the purposes thereof, all that make sluices and ponds for fish. (19:10) Surely the princes of Zoan are fools, the counsel of the wise counselors of Pharaoh is become brutish: how say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings ? (19:11) Where are they? where are thy wise men? and let them tell thee now, and let them know what the Lord of hosts hath purposed upon Egypt. (19:12) The princes of Zoan are become fools, the princes of Noph are deceived; they have also seduced Egypt, even they that are the stay of the tribes thereof. (19:13) The Lord hath mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof: and they have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit. (19:14) Neither shall there be any work for Egypt, which the head or tail, branch or rush, may do. (19:15) In that day shall Egypt be like unto women: and it shall be afraid and fear because of the shaking of the hand of the Lord of hosts, which he shaketh over it. (19:16) And the land of Judah shall be a terror unto Egypt, every one that maketh mention thereof shall be afraid in himself, because of the counsel of the Lord of hosts, which he hath determined against it. (19:17) In that day shall five cities in the land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and swear to the Lord of hosts; one shall be called, The city of the Sun. [^1] (19:18) In that day shall there be an altar to the Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar at the border thereof to the Lord. (19:19) And it shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the Lord of hosts in the land of Egypt: for they shall cry unto the Lord because of the oppressors, and he shall send them a saviour, and a great one, and he shall deliver them. (19:20) And the Lord shall be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and shall do sacrifice and oblation; yea, they shall vow a vow unto the Lord, and perform it. (19:21) And the Lord shall smite Egypt: he shall smite and heal it: and they shall return even to the Lord, and he shall be intreated of them, and shall heal them. (19:22) In that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria, and the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians. (19:23) In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the land: (19:24) Whom the Lord of hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance. (19:25)

Notes and Commentary

19:1 burden of Egypt. This statement is a prophecy of judgment against Egypt.

the Lord rideth upon a swift cloud. Jehovah has the power to move through the heavens at his will and pleasure (2 Sam. 22:11). He also rides upon his cherub (Ps. 18:10) he "maketh the clouds his chariot" (Ps. 104:3). The cloud represents the Lord's glory (D&C 84:5).

shall come into Egypt. The Lord will visit Egypt with destruction, as outlined in the following verses.

idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence. This expression indicates that Jehovah is more powerful than the creations of man.

heart of Egypt shall melt. The Egyptians shall fear because of the Lord's devastating works (13:7; Josh. 2:11; Ezek. 21:7).

19:2 I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians. This statement speaks of a fractured society that is involved in civil war or perhaps even broken families. Isaiah carefully orders his words; he begins with the basic unit of society (family) and progresses in size from neighborhood to city and finally to kingdom. Such an approach may indicate that the demise of any society begins with the demise of the family.

19:3 spirit of Egypt shall fail. The Egyptians will be demoralized because of the civil wars and broken families identified in 19:2.

I will destroy the counsel thereof. The Lord will destroy the plans and designs of various Egyptian entities, perhaps including government offices and economic and religious groups.

they shall seek to the idols/charmers/familiar spirits/wizards. A confused and godless society turns to false deities, wizards, and false prophets. Members of such a society, feeling helpless and desperate, grasp for help, often from the wrong sources. Charmers are those who pretend to understand their gods' desires, them that have familiar spirits are those who pretend to communicate with spirits of the departed, and wizards are male witches.

19:4 fierce king shall rule over them. An evil dictator will rule Egypt for a period of time. The fulfillment of this prophecy "may have been the 'Ethiopian' Pharaoh Piankhi (715), the conquests of Sargon II (cf. 20:1ff.) or Sennacherib, or the invasion and conquest of Egypt by Esarhaddon (680), Ashurbanipal (668), or the Persian Artaxerxes III Ochus (343)." [^2] Its fulfillment might also come in the future.

Lord of hosts. See commentary on 1:9.

19:5 river shall be wasted and dried up. Egypt's economic structure was connected to the great Nile River. Isaiah may be speaking symbolically here and in the following five verses, referring to the economic collapse Egypt will suffer, or the prophecy might refer to an actual drought that will cause economic disintegration in Egypt.

19:6 they shall turn the rivers far away. This passage includes Egypt's various waterways and rivers. The phrase they shall turn the rivers far away may refer to the Aswan Dam built during the 1960s and the waterways connected to it. [^3]

19:7 every thing sown by the brooks, shall wither. Vegetation shall cease.

19:8 fishers also shall mourn. Isa. 19:8-9 speaks of three of Egypt's industries: fishing (casting the net and casting the hook), flax growing, and weaving. The demise of these three industries points to national economic disaster.

19:9 they that work in fine flax . . . shall be confounded. See commentary on 19:8.

19:10 they shall be broken in the purposes thereof. The Jerusalem Bible reads: "The weavers will be dismayed and all the workmen dejected." Workers at all levels will experience anxiety and economic distress.

19:11 princes of Zoan are fools/counsel of the wise counselors of Pharaoh is become brutish. Zoan (Tanis), in the northern delta, was Egypt's capital from approximately 1100 to 660 b.c. and the location from which Moses sent forth the plagues of Egypt. The administrative qualities of the government officials (princes), legislative/ judicial leaders (counselors), and other public servants had degenerated to the point that their leadership was no more than foolishness (brutish), which brought Egypt to disaster.

how say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise/the son of ancient kings. "The wisdom of Egypt, which was renowned among the ancients . . . , was the hereditary possession of the priestly caste, and from the same class were descended the kings. Pharaoh's counsellors could therefore boast that they were descended from wise men and from the ancient kings." [^4] Neither their heritage nor their boasting could prevent Egypt's wise men from becoming fools.

19:12 where are thy wise men? This rhetorical question is followed by a statement that the Lord is in charge of Egypt and has full knowledge of his plan concerning it.

19:13 princes of Zoan are become fools. Officers and leaders of Zoan (19:11) and Noph (or Memphis, once Egypt's capital during the Old Kingdom), have lost their ability to lead. They act more like fools than true leaders, perhaps due to self- deception.

they have also seduced Egypt. The thoughtless leaders and governors of Egypt's provinces lead the citizens astray with their wickedness and deceptions.

19:14 The Lord hath mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof: and they have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof. This verse offers two reasons why Egypt's once wise government leaders and royalty have lost their status and become fools: Jehovah has "poured into them a spirit of dizziness" (NIV), so much that Isaiah likens Egypt's inhabitants to "a drunken man [who] staggereth in his vomit"; and the corrupt leaders have caused the people of the land to work evil in all they do.

19:15 Neither shall there be any work for Egypt, which the head or tail, branch or rush, may do. The head (Egypt's leaders, identified above) and tail (the followers) will be unable to be productive in either the quality or the quantity of their work.

19:16 In that day. This expression is found six times in this section (19:16, 18, 19, 21, 23, 24). The time frame for the prophecy belongs to an unknown era in the history of Egypt or to the last days and Jesus' second coming (2:12)—or perhaps to both ancient and future times.

Egypt be like unto women: and it shall be afraid and fear. Isaiah's imagery presents a clear picture as he compares the fears of the Egyptians to a woman who demonstrates concern for her children during impending danger.

the shaking of the hand of the Lord of hosts. Once again (19:14) Isaiah confirms that Jehovah is a moving cause behind some of Egypt's actions when He shakes his hand over it. The shaking of Jehovah's hand refers to his power (see 5:25; 9:12).

19:17 land of Judah shall be a terror unto Egypt, every one that maketh mention thereof shall be afraid in himself. Those who hear mention of Judah in Egypt are fearful because of the plans Judah's God has against Egypt. It may be also that the Egyptians are fearful of Judah because of Jehovah's powerful demonstration in days of old when he battled against Ramses, an Egyptian Pharaoh, and sent plagues of various kinds upon the Egyptians. In this prophecy Jehovah again makes plans against Egypt ("the counsel of the Lord . . . which he hath determined against" Egypt), causing its inhabitants to fear.

19:18 In that day shall five cities in the land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and swear to the Lord of hosts. The language of Canaan is Hebrew, as John N. Oswalt notes: "Egypt's turn to God will be so complete that some cities will go so far as to adopt even the language of Judah." [^5] A portion of Egypt (represented by "five cities") will "swear" or make sacred covenants with the Lord of Hosts.

The city of the Sun. One of the five cities may have been called the City of the Sun, perhaps meaning that the city belongs to Jesus Christ, who is the Sun (Ps. 84:11; Mal. 4:2).

19:19 an altar to the Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt. The altar is representative of a temple that will be built and dedicated to Jehovah in the land of Egypt.

a pillar at the border thereof to the Lord. A sign or a monument dedicated to the Lord.

19:20 it shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the Lord. The pillar will serve as both a sign and witness of the Lord throughout Egypt.

they shall cry unto the Lord . . . he shall send them a saviour . . . he shall deliver them. The words cry unto the Lord, oppressors, and he shall deliver them recall the period of the judges when Israel, oppressed by her enemies, cried unto the Lord and was sent deliverers (Judg. 3:9, 15; 6:7; 10:10). Now it is Egypt that will cry unto the Lord and receive a saviour who will deliver them.

19:21 Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day. The Egyptians will have true knowledge concerning Jehovah.

shall do sacrifice and oblation; yea, they shall vow a vow unto the Lord. Sacrifices, oblations, and vows pertain to temple worship and also to Sabbath worship (D&C 59:9-12). That the Egyptians will make sacrifices to Jehovah indicates the presence of a temple dedicated to Jehovah in Egypt.

19:22 Lord shall smite Egypt . . . and heal it. "The Lord's blows will be for healing, not destruction (Hosea 6:1). And Egypt may know his healing at any point, just as Israel may." [^6]

they shall return even to the Lord. To return (Hebrew shub) is to repent. The phrase indicates that many Egyptians will repent of their sins and worship Jehovah.

he shall be intreated of them. Egyptians will pray to Jehovah.

Lord . . . shall heal them. This statement indicates that Jehovah will heal the Egyptians of their spiritual diseases and sicknesses.

19:23 a highway out of Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt. Christ's gospel brings peace to formerly warring nations. The highway is the way of holiness on which the righteous tread as they return to God (11:16).

19:24 shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria. Israel, Egypt, and Assyria will share the gospel's blessings equally; one will not be favored over the others.

even a blessing in the midst of the land. The presence of members of the house of Israel will be a blessing to all the earth's inhabitants.

---
Notas:
[^1] DSS Isa. Scroll corrects City of Destruction to City of the Sun.
[^2] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 165.
[^3] Ludlow, Isaiah, 214-16.
[^4] Kissane, Book of Isaiah, 1:217.
[^5] Book of Isaiah, 377.
[^6] Oswalt, Book of Isaiah, 380.
