Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 20

Likening Isa. 20 unto Ourselves

The chapter has a dual meaning for us. First, it shows that Isaiah was a prophet not to Judah alone but to all the known world, in that Isaiah warned Egypt and Ethiopia of impending doom. Likewise, the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the prophet for the entire world. Second, the prophecy served to warn Judah not to place her trust in Egypt and Ethiopia, nor to make them her allies. Similarly, as individuals and as members of the Church, we should never place our trust in armed forces or powerful countries. Our trust should be in Jesus Christ.

Conquest of Ethiopia and Egypt: Isaiah's Dramatization (20:1-6)

Isaiah dramatizes this prophecy, which pertains to three major countries: Egypt (identified four times in the section), Ethiopia, and Assyria (each mentioned three times). The Lord instructs the prophet three times to remove his sackcloth and sandals and walk "naked and barefoot," which he does for three years. Isaiah's symbolic and prophetic actions (explained in 20:3-4) are a "sign and wonder" to Egypt and Ethiopia. Note the comparative language: "Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot . . . so shall" (20:3-4) the Egyptians and Ethiopians walk naked and barefoot as slaves to the Assyrian conquerors. Isaiah's dramatization prophesies that Assyria will capture and enslave the Egyptians and Ethiopians.

This section is written in prose rather than in the poetic parallelistic style.

Isa. 20:1-6

In the year that Tartan came unto Ashdod, (when Sargon the king of Assyria sent him) and fought against Ashdod, and took it; (20:1) At the same time spake the Lord by Isaiah the son of Amoz, saying, Go and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and put off thy shoe from thy foot. And he did so, walking naked and barefoot. (20:2) And the Lord said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot three years for a sign and wonder upon Egypt and upon Ethiopia; (20:3) So shall the king of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and the Ethiopians captives, young and old, naked and barefoot, even with their buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt. (20:4) And they shall be afraid and ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation, and of Egypt their glory. (20:5) And the inhabitant of this isle shall say in that day, Behold, such is our expectation, whither we flee for help to be delivered from the king of Assyria: and how shall we escape? (20:6)

Notes and Commentary

20:1 In the year. In 711 b.c. Tartan came to Ashdod, a Philistine port city.

Tartan. Cupbearer and servant of King Sargon and later chief captain of King Sennacherib (2 Kgs. 18:17).

Sargon. Sargon II was an Assyrian king who ruled from 722-705 b.c.

20:2 spake the Lord by Isaiah. The Lord is the source of Isaiah's prophecy.

loose the sackcloth. Often made of goats' hair, the sackcloth worn by Isaiah may have been similar to Elijah's hairy clothing (2 Kgs. 1:8) or to John the Baptist's camel-hair garment (Matt. 3:4). Symbolically, sackcloth represented repentance, mourning, or humility (Ps. 35:13; Matt. 11:21). That Isaiah had to be told to remove his sackcloth perhaps indicates that he was not permitted to mourn the forthcoming disaster that would befall Ethiopia and Egypt.

he did so. This was not a parable; it was an actual prophecy that was acted out by the prophet in view of his contemporaries, including perhaps his family, friends, and neighbors.

naked and barefoot. This phrase, mentioned three times in the section, emphasizes the Lord's command to Isaiah to remove his clothing. It is probable that Isaiah removed only his upper garment, which would have made only the upper portion of his body bare. [^1]

The Assyrians forced their captives to march naked and barefoot to humiliate them, and the naked and barefoot Isaiah prophesied of the time when Egypt and Ethiopia, as Assyria's captives, would be forced to walk naked.

In a spiritual sense, naked and barefoot represents the way we stand without the Atonement, "uncovered" before the Lord, for the Hebrew term for atonement (kapar) signifies a covering. [^2]

20:3 Lord said. After Isaiah dramatized the prophecy, the Lord spoke again and explained its meaning.

sign and wonder. This word pair often expresses a great sign from God (Deut. 28:46; 3 Ne. 2:1; Hel. 14:6). Here, Isaiah's action symbolizes the great sign from God that prophesied the captivity of Egypt and Ethiopia.

Ethiopia. Ethiopia is located below Egypt and is part of the kingdom of Nubia that was settled by the descendants of Cush (Gen. 10:6).

20:4 So shall the king of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners. The symbolism of Isaiah's dramatization is explained here. Just as Isaiah walked naked and barefoot, so will the Egyptians and Ethiopians walk naked and barefoot while prisoners of war.

20:5 they shall be . . . ashamed. People who looked to Ethiopia and Egypt for power and glory, who imagined that these countries' chariots and weapons would save them, will be ashamed for trusting these worldly nations.

20:6 inhabitant of this isle. This phrase refers to the Philistines.

how shall we escape. If the powerful nations of Egypt and Ethiopia, with their military might, have been overthrown, how can we, the inhabitants of Philistia, escape bondage?

---
Notas:
[^1] This translation from Oswalt, Book of Isaiah, replaces the unclear translation in the KJV.
[^2] The KJV reading of "a lion" is corrupt, as indicated by the Masoretic text. DSS Isa. Scroll preserves the reading ra'ah, "one who sees" or "watchman"; compare Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 175.
