Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 21

Likening Isa. 21 unto Ourselves

This prophecy speaks not only of Babylon (and Duman and Arabia) of old but also of modern Babylon, which is the world (Rev. 14:8; 18:2; D&C 1:16). Ancient Babylon was destroyed as quickly as a whirlwind passes through the desert, and so will modern Babylon be devastated. "And again, verily I say unto you, the coming of the Lord draweth nigh, and it overtaketh the world as a thief in the night." For us, the command is, "gird up your loins, that you may be the children of light, and that day shall not overtake you as a thief" (D&C 106:4-5).

A Prophecy of Judgment against Babylon (21:1-10)

Disaster upon Babylon will be as quick and destructive as the whirlwinds that sweep over the Negev, and the destruction will advance from the direction of a "terrible land" (21:1), identified in 21:2 as the nations of Elam and Media. The vision is so clear to Isaiah that he hears the military leader shout the command to the Elamite and Mede armies to attack Babylon: "Go up [attack], O Elam, besiege, O Media" (21:2). As Elam and Media prepare to attack, the people of Babylon feast and celebrate, vainly relying on their watchmen to warn them of impending danger (21:5).

Isaiah finds the vision in this section painful and disturbing. He calls it a "grievous vision" (21:2); he is physically pained—his "loins [are] filled with pain"—and experiences sharp pangs likened to a woman in labor; he is "bowed down," and his "heart panted" after hearing and seeing things in the vision. He also experiences emotional pain and a loss of sleep (21:3-4). The pain probably came from the horror of the scene that he witnessed.

Isa. 21:1-10

The burden of the desert of the sea. As whirlwinds in the south pass through; so it cometh from the desert, from [the] terrible land. (21:1) A grievous vision is declared unto me; the treacherous dealer dealeth treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth. Go up, O Elam: besiege, O Media; all the sighing thereof have I made to cease. (21:2) Therefore are my loins filled with pain: pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of a woman that travaileth: I was bowed down at the hearing of it; I was dismayed at the seeing of it. (21:3) My heart panted, fearfulness affrighted me: the night of my pleasure hath he turned into fear unto me. (21:4) Prepare the table, watch in the watchtower, eat, drink: arise, ye princes, and anoint the shield. (21:5) For thus hath the Lord said unto me, Go, set a watchman, let him declare what he seeth. (21:6) And he saw [chariotry, horsemen in pairs, riders on donkeys, riders on camels]; [^1] and he hearkened diligently with much heed: (21:7) And [the watchman] [^2] cried, My lord, I stand continually upon the watchtower in the daytime, and I am set in my ward whole nights: (21:8) And, behold, here cometh a chariot of men, with a couple of horsemen. And he answered and said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen; and all the graven images of her gods he hath broken unto the ground. (21:9) O my threshing, and the corn of my floor: that which I have heard of the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, have I declared unto you. (21:10)

Notes and Commentary

21:1 burden. A prophecy of judgment against Babylon, meaning both the ancient kingdom and, symbolically, the latter-day world of wickedness.

desert of the sea. This image refers to Babylon. That city sat on a hot and dusty plain in the Euphrates valley, but anciently, before flood-control dams were built, the whole plain was flooded each spring during the high-water runoff of the Euphrates. Thus, Babylon sat both in a desert and on a sea. [^3]

whirlwinds in the south. Destruction will come upon Babylon with a speed and force comparable to the whirlwinds that arise in the desert area known as the Negev.

terrible land. Isaiah calls Elam and Media the terrible land because of the extremely cruel nature of their leaders and armies. Isa. 13:17-18 describes the Medes as people who love warfare for the sake of warring and killing, rather than for the rich booty it brings.

21:2 grievous vision is declared unto me. The vision was painful, perhaps because it revealed explicit scenes of bloodshed and horror that will come with Babylon's destruction. Certainly the statement reveals Isaiah's great compassion for his people.

treacherous dealer dealeth treacherously/spoiler spoileth. This phrase sums up the vision's contents. Babylon is destroyed and plundered by destructive forces— warring nations who love to murder and cause havoc.

Go up, O Elam: besiege, O Media. Elam (the western portion of ancient Persia) was famous for its archers (Jer. 25:25; 49:34). "Media was the ancient name for NW Iran, southwest of the Caspian Sea and north of the Zagros Mountains." [^4] Under King Cyrus's leadership, Elam and Media captured Babylon in 538 b.c.

Isaiah may have envisioned some of the actual bloodshed and warfare connected to this historical event, but he presents here a simple war cry uttered by a military leader (or perhaps by one of the warriors): "Go up, O Elam; besiege, O Media." Jeremiah received a portion of this same vision (Jer. 51:11, 28).

21:3 my loins filled with pain. The vision brought Isaiah physical distress. He experienced pangs that resembled the sharp pains a woman experiences during labor.

21:4 night of my pleasure hath he turned into fear unto me. The phrase may mean that the vision came and disturbed the prophet in the night, or Isaiah looked forward to the night when he could sleep and gain relief from the pain of the vision, but even then he found no relief. Job experienced similar struggles (Job 6:4).

21:5 watch in the watchtower, eat, drink: arise, ye princes, and anoint the shield. Babylon's leaders and revelers feast and celebrate while the watchman looks for invaders. Trusting in their own man-made security and defense (watchtower), the people of Babylon (the worldly) prepare a banquet ("prepare the table") and then eat and drink, unaware of their imminent destruction. The phrase anoint the shield speaks of warriors who prepare for war, because shields were oiled to make them slick so that arrows would be diverted.

21:6 the Lord said unto me. The Lord told Isaiah to "Go, set a watchman."

Go, set a watchman. The watchman may be Isaiah himself (21:11), all the true prophets of all ages (Jer. 6:17; Ezek. 3:17), or all of God's true witnesses who warn their neighbors and cities of approaching invaders or impending danger; "And in that day all who are found upon the watch-tower, or in other words, all mine Israel, shall be saved" (D&C 101:12).

21:7 he saw chariotry, horsemen in pairs, riders on donkeys, riders on camels. The watchman sees the army that will soon destroy Babylon.

21:8 I stand continually upon the watchtower. The watchman is diligent in keeping watch.

21:9 here cometh a chariot of men, with a couple of horsemen. Now the watchman sees the army that has destroyed Babylon and he hears the declaration, "Babylon is fallen."

Babylon is fallen. The prophecy does not actually identify Babylon by name until now. The phrase Babylon is fallen is an expression that was also revealed to John (Rev. 14:8; 18:2) and Joseph Smith (D&C 1:16).

graven images of her gods he hath broken. Conquerors often made their captives' humiliation complete and their new kingdom secure by destroying the deities of the conquered people. They did this to show that their deities and kingdom were greater and more powerful than those of the fallen empire. When Jehovah destroys the kingdoms of the world (Babylon) at his second coming and before his millennial reign, he will destroy the people's images and gods.

21:10 that which I have heard . . . have I declared unto you. Isaiah declared this vision to his audience after he received it.

A Prophecy of Judgment against Dumah (21:11-12)

The prophecy is a dialogue between Isaiah and an unnamed man of Seir. It goes as follows:

Man of Seir: "Watchman, how much of the night remains? Watchman, how much of the night remains?"

Isaiah, the watchman: "The morning is coming, but then the night will come again. If you wish to inquire again, return to your home and come again to me later."

In the greater context of Isaiah's prophecies of judgment against the nations, the prophecy appears to be about a man who, weary from living in the apostate world (Seir = Edom = world), asks Isaiah, "Watchman, how much of the night [sin, darkness, apostasy] remains? Watchman, how much of the night remains?" Isaiah responds with, "The morning [truth, light, the gospel] is coming, but the night [sin, darkness, apostasy] will return once more. If you wish to inquire again, return to your home and come again to me." Those who read Isaiah must remember that the prophecy is concerned with Dumah, although there may be a number of appropriate applications.

Isa. 21:11-12

The burden of Dumah. He calleth to me out of Seir, Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night? (21:11) The watchman said, The morning cometh, and also the night: if ye will inquire, inquire ye: return, come. (21:12)

Notes and Commentary

21:11 burden. See commentary on 21:1.

Dumah. Dumah was the son of Ishmael (Gen. 25:13-14; 1 Chr. 1:29-30) and founder of an Arab community. These descendants gave their name to Dumah, capital of a district known as Jawf, about halfway across northern Arabia between Palestine and southern Babylonia. [^5] A second possible application for Dumah may indicate the silence that follows destruction, for the Hebrew word means "silence."

He calleth to me out of Seir. One of Seir's inhabitants called to Isaiah, "Watchman, what of the night?" Seir refers to Edom's land and people and is a symbol of worldliness (D&C 1:36).

Watchman, what of the night? This phrase is repeated for emphasis. An individual asks of the watchman (Isaiah), "What remains of the night [apostasy and darkness] before the morning light [truth, gospel] arises?" Isaiah responds with, "In the morning you will receive light followed by further darkness [night]." Isaiah is the watchman in this context, but compare with 21:6.

21:12 if ye will inquire. Isaiah encourages inquiries pertaining to spiritual things.

return, come. Isaiah says, "Go home and return to me and inquire again at a later time."

A Prophecy of Judgment against Arabia (21:13-17)

This section contains a single prophecy directed to three groups: the Dedanite caravans, Tema's inhabitants, and Kedar's nomads. Isaiah prophesies that within a year many of Kedar's people will be destroyed (21:16-17). Refugees will flee the swords and bows of the conquering nation and escape the "grievousness of war" (21:15); Isaiah calls upon the inhabitants of Dedanim and Tema to provide water and food (21:13-14) for these fugitives from Kedar (21:15-16). No mention is made of who it is that will war against the nomads of Kedar.

Isa. 21:13-17

The burden upon Arabia. In the forest in Arabia shall ye lodge, O ye travelling companies of Dedanim. (21:13) The inhabitants of the land of Tema brought water to him that was thirsty, they prevented with their bread him that fled. (21:14) For they fled from the swords, from the drawn sword, and from the bent bow, and from the grievousness of war. (21:15) For thus hath the Lord said unto me, Within a year, according to the years of an hireling, and all the glory of Kedar shall fail: (21:16) And the residue of the number of archers, the mighty men of the children of Kedar, shall be diminished: for the Lord God of Israel hath spoken it. (21:17)

Notes and Commentary

21:13 burden upon Arabia. This expression refers to a judgment against Arabia.

forest in Arabia shall ye lodge. The Dedanite caravans (traveling companies) are camping in the Arabian forest. Dedan, which was named after a son of Cush (Gen. 10:7), was a "city and people of Northwest Arabia famous for its role in the caravan trade." [^6]

21:14 inhabitants of the land of Tema. Tema, which was named after one of the sons of Ishmael (Gen. 25:15), was an oasis and an important caravan stop. It was located on an ancient trade route on the Arabian peninsula some two hundred fifty miles southeast of Aqaba.

brought water to him that was thirsty. Tema's inhabitants supplied Kedar's refugees with water and food.

21:15 fled from the swords/drawn sword/bent bow. The battle was raging when the refugees fled, as indicated by the phrases drawn sword and bent bow, weapons in use at that time. This verse provides the reason why the people fled: it was to escape the bloodshed and horrors of war.

21:16 Lord said unto me. The Lord is the source of Isaiah's prophecy.

Within a year. The time frame of Isaiah's prophecy is explicit: Kedar will fall within a year.

glory of Kedar shall fail. Kedar's prosperity will come to an end because of the war.

Kedar. A son of Ishmael and grandson of Abraham (Gen. 25:13; 1 Chr. 1:29), whose descendants lived in tents in the Syro-Arabian desert and raised goats, sheep, and camels (60:7).

21:17 mighty men of the children of Kedar shall be diminished. Only a few of Kedar's warriors will survive the destruction.

Lord God of Israel hath spoken it. God is the source of Isaiah's words.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 56.
[^2] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 186.
[^3] That this prophecy is messianic is indicated in the Times and Seasons 5 (1844): 748.
[^4] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 742.
[^5] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 376.
[^6] Times and Seasons 5 (1844): 748.
