Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 22

Likening Isa. 22 unto Ourselves

Isaiah's prophecy to Jerusalem (22:1-14) applies to all communities in all time periods: When war is imminent, do not rely on your weapons inventory and your fortified walls for salvation; rather, trust in the Lord and his ability to protect and save.

Isaiah's prophecy of Shebna and Eliakim (22:15-25) speaks of two types of people found in our own society. Shebna is the proud, wicked person who looks after his own welfare before seeking the good of others. Eliakim is the priestly minister whose concern is others, such as the widow and the fatherless. In the end, Shebna does not obtain a monumental grave but dies in shame; Eliakim takes his rightful place in his Father's kingdom and receives glory.

A Prophecy of Judgment against the Valley of Vision (Jerusalem) (22:1-14)

The people of Jerusalem are the subject of this section, as can be seen by Isaiah's use of feminine pronouns (apparent in the Hebrew only) to modify Jerusalem. Other expressions indicate that Jerusalem is the focus, including city, which is repeated three times (22:2, 9); in 22:10, Jerusalem is explicitly identified. Jerusalem mourns the loss of her inhabitants. She was once full of joy and activities, but now her children are gone, taken captive and moved to distant lands (22:1-3). Therefore, she weeps bitterly and refuses to be comforted by the Lord (22:4).

For Jerusalem, this is a "day of trouble, and of treading down" and of "breaking down the walls" (22:5), referring to her impending destruction by invading armies. Elam and Kir are the enemies prepared to battle against Jerusalem; they will fill the nearby valleys with chariots and horsemen and even approach the city's gates (22:6-7). Jerusalem had prepared for this possibly lengthy war by building up a weapons inventory, fortifying the walls, and preparing the water supply (22:8-11). It is unfortunate, however, that Jerusalem relied for security on her weapons and preparations for war rather than on her Maker, the God of Israel, who created her long ago (22:11). All along, God desired that Jerusalem repent ("weeping," "mourning," "girding with sackcloth"; 22:12), but instead she chose riotous living, indulgences, feasting, and drunkenness (22:13-14). Therefore, Jerusalem will die in her sins (22:14).

Isa. 22:1-14

The burden of the valley of vision. What aileth thee now, that thou art wholly gone up to the housetops? (22:1) Thou that art full of stirs, a tumultuous city, a joyous city: thy slain men are not slain with the sword, nor dead in battle. (22:2) All thy rulers are fled together, they are bound by the archers: all that are found in thee are bound together, which have fled from far. (22:3) Therefore said I, Look away from me; I will weep bitterly, labour not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people. (22:4) For it is a day of trouble, and of treading down, and of perplexity by the Lord God of hosts in the valley of vision, breaking down the walls, and of crying to the mountains. (22:5) And Elam bare the quiver with chariots of men and horsemen, and Kir uncovered the shield. (22:6) And it shall come to pass, that thy choicest valleys shall be full of chariots, and the horsemen shall set themselves in array at the gate. (22:7) And he discovered the covering of Judah, and thou didst look in that day to the armour of the house of the forest. (22:8) Ye have seen also the breaches of the city of David, that they are many: and ye gathered together the waters of the lower pool. (22:9) And ye have numbered the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses have ye broken down to fortify the wall. (22:10) Ye made also a ditch between the two walls for the water of the old pool: but ye have not looked unto the Maker thereof, neither had respect unto him that fashioned it long ago. (22:11) And in that day did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth: (22:12) And behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine: let us eat and drink; for to morrow we shall die. (22:13) And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of hosts, Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die, saith the Lord God of hosts. (22:14)

Notes and Commentary

22:1 burden of the valley of vision. This prophecy is of judgment that will come against Jerusalem, the city where Isaiah and many of the prophets received divine visions.

What aileth thee now. What is wrong with you that you are climbing to the housetops?

thou art wholly gone up to the housetops. Jerusalem climbed upon the rooftop to mourn (a custom in ancient Israel; 15:3; Jer. 48:38) the loss of her children, who had been carried away into captivity.

22:2 Thou that art full of stirs, a tumultuous city, a joyous city. Jerusalem, normally a city full of joy, now mourns the loss of her children.

thy slain men are not slain with the sword. Jerusalem's dead did not perish in a battle, but in captivity.

22:3 rulers are fled together, they are bound by the archers. While the enemy was approaching Jerusalem, her leaders fled the city in cowardice and fear. Nevertheless, they were captured and bound by the archers and sent into captivity. After the captives were taken into exile, "none remained, save the poorest sort of the people of the land" (2 Kgs. 24:14).

22:4 Therefore said I, Look away from me; I will weep bitterly. The personal pronoun I now replaces you and your, which are used in the first three verses to refer to Jerusalem. I refers to Isaiah, who weeps bitterly and demonstrates great emotion as he witnesses this vision of destruction (21:3-4).

daughter of my people. Daughter is another name for Jerusalem (Lam. 1:6-8; 2:8; Zech. 9:9; 2 Ne. 8:25), and my people often refers to Jerusalem and Judah's inhabitants.

22:5 For it is a day of trouble, and of treading down. The language here refers to the pending destruction of Jerusalem and parallels the language used when prophets speak of the Second Coming. Joel, for instance, called it "a day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick darkness" (Joel 2:2).

by the Lord God of hosts. The Lord permitted the destruction of Jerusalem and Judah.

the valley of vision. See commentary on 22:1.

breaking down the walls. The high walls that surround Jerusalem and are designed to defend her will be broken and destroyed by those who attack the city.

22:6 Elam bare the quiver with chariots of men and horsemen. In this passage, Elam's famed archers (Jer. 49:34-39) pull their arrows from their quivers and set them in their bows, ready to battle against Jerusalem. Earlier, Isaiah heard the war cry of an army captain commanding Elam to go to battle against Babylon (21:2).

Kir uncovered the shield. Kir was a Mesopotamian city situated east of the Tigris River on the main highway that ran from Elam to Babylon. A leather covering protected a warrior's shield when it was not in use, and the phrase uncovered the shield indicates that Kir's warriors held their shields in readiness; it parallels the anticipation of Elam's soldiers who had their arrows removed from the quivers, ready for an impending battle.

22:7 thy choicest valleys shall be full of chariots. The enemy has surrounded Jerusalem, fully armored, ready for the battle. The army is composed of chariots that serve as war vehicles and horsemen who have "set themselves in array at the[gate[s]" of Jerusalem. The valleys mentioned here may be those immediately next to Jerusalem—Kidron, Hinnom, and Tyropoeon—or other valleys in the region.

22:8 he discovered the covering of Judah. Jerusalem and Judah's defense was not adequate, and the invaders removed Jerusalem's fortifications.

armour of the house of the forest. This phrase refers to a building constructed under Solomon's direction on the temple mount, which formed part of Solomon's palace complex. The structure was called house of the forest because it was constructed of cedar columns and beams, and it housed armor and other items (1 Kgs. 7:2-5; 10:17). Isaiah's inspired words show irony in the situation: the Jews prepared for the coming war by trusting in their armories, including the house of the forest, but they ignored the most significant building on the very same mount: Solomon's temple—the only place from which both temporal and spiritual salvation could have come.

22:9 Ye have seen also the breaches of the city of David. The Jews prepared for the war by repairing weaknesses in Jerusalem's walls.

gathered together the waters of the lower pool. The pool refers to Hezekiah's Tunnel, an engineering marvel that was created to permit Jerusalem's inhabitants to safely obtain outside water through the city's walls during a siege. Isaiah selects his terms well; Judah relied on the waters that originated from the ground (Hezekiah's Tunnel) but rejected Jehovah, the "waters of Shiloah that go softly" (8:6) and the "fountain of living waters" (Jer. 2:13; 17:13; Isa. 33:21).

22:10 numbered the houses of Jerusalem. The Jerusalemites took a census to determine how many men of fighting age were available to defend the city.

houses have ye broken down to fortify the wall. Jerusalem's inhabitants prepared for the battle by destroying a number of their own homes so they could obtain building materials such as cut stones to repair and reinforce the wall's strength (22:9).

22:11 Ye made also a ditch. Jerusalem's inhabitants created a channel to move water from outside the city to the inside so water could be obtained during a siege (22:9).

but ye have not looked unto the Maker thereof. This clause is a pivotal point. The people of Judah prepared for the battle by adding to their weapons supply, repairing the city's walls, and so on (22:8-10), but they had not looked to nor had respect for Jehovah, the God of Israel. Judah should have been fasting, praying, worshiping in the temple, and seeking God's word through the mouths of the prophets. Note the terminology Isaiah uses as he explains Judah's reliance on worldly might instead of heavenly powers: during this period of impending battle, Jerusalem's inhabitants did look at their armories (22:8), and they have seen that their water supply was in order (22:9), but they have not looked unto Jehovah, their Maker (22:11).

Maker. According to Isaiah's imagery, Jehovah was the Maker (D&C 30:2; Hosea 8:14) of Jerusalem, the great Architect who "fashioned it long ago." Again Isaiah's words are instructive and show contrasts between those who attempted to build Jerusalem through repairs, fortifications, and water channels (22:8-11), and God, who was the city's original builder (22:11).

22:12 in that day did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping. Weeping, mourning, baldness, and sackcloth symbolize repentance and sorrow. Jehovah wanted the people to repent with their hearts, but instead they chose revelry (22:13).

22:13 let us eat and drink; for to morrow we shall die. The Jerusalemites failed to turn to Jehovah at this critical time. Their attitude was to seek pleasure and eat and drink; for tomorrow we die (see also 2 Ne. 28:8; 1 Cor. 15:32), which is the attitude held by those who do not believe in God or in a postmortal existence. [^1]

22:14 revealed in mine ears by the Lord of hosts. Isaiah witnesses that the Lord revealed the prophecy found in Isa. 22:1-14.

Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die. The New International Version reads, "'Til your dying day this sin will not be atoned for." In very strong language Isaiah testifies that Judah has gone beyond the point of repentance and will not receive forgiveness in this life for her sins. His revelation closes with the affirmation that it is the Lord who has spoken, "saith the Lord God of hosts."

Judgment upon Shebna and Blessings upon Eliakim (22:15-25)

This prophecy rests on the heads of two historical characters, Shebna and Eliakim, who were Isaiah's contemporaries and likely acquainted with him. The section consists of two parts. First, Isa. 22:15-19 sets forth certain details pertaining to Shebna, an important and influential government official or treasurer (22:15; 37:2) who served in the court of Hezekiah, king of Judah. Shebna, a proud man of wealth, is rebuked by the Lord through Isaiah for his haughtiness and attempt to build for himself a monumental tomb. Therefore, Isaiah prophesies that a judgment will fall upon his head (22:17-19): Shebna will lose his important position in the kingdom of Judah; he will be violently captured and carried into captivity; his glory will become shame, and he will die in exile.

Shebna symbolizes all wicked people of his day and ours. He is an example of what many individuals have become: "He was, therefore, individually what the nation was collectively: wedded to present satisfactions and self-confident in the face of the future." [^2]

Second, Isa. 22:20-25 pertains to the righteousness and blessing of Eliakim, who was a priest and official in Hezekiah's house (36:3; 37:2). This section is of great import to the reader because Eliakim's life and ministry parallels Jesus Christ's. [^3] Eliakim serves as a type of Jesus in several ways: as Eliakim replaced an evil ruler of Judah (Shebna), so Christ will replace all of the temporal rulers of Judah and Israel when he takes his rightful place as King of kings; Eliakim's name is prophetic ("may God raise") and points to Christ's power to lift us from both sin and death as a priest, Eliakim points to Jesus' role as the priest (Heb. 7:17) and similar to Eliakim's ministry "over the house" of Hezekiah, king of Judah, Christ possesses eternal power over the house of Judah or Israel.

Other prophetic elements of this section about Eliakim point to Jesus' divine mission: Eliakim's call (22:20); his participation in a vesting rite (22:21); his reception of the government (22:21; 9:6-7); his fatherhood (22:21); and his reception of the "key of the house of David" (22:22). All refer to Jesus Christ's divine call and election, his investiture, coronation, and enthronement in the temple setting, his reception of God's true government, his divine and everlasting fatherhood (9:6), and his possession of great priesthood authority (keys). Further, the concept that "they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father's house" (22:24) may refer to an enthronement ceremony; the "nail" (22:23, 25) speaks of Jesus' crucifixion, the "throne" refers to his kingship (22:23), and the subject of offspring (22:24) may refer to his spiritual children.

Isa. 22:15-25

Thus saith the Lord God of hosts, Go, get thee unto this treasurer, even unto Shebna, which is over the house, and say, (22:15) What hast thou here? and whom hast thou here, that thou hast hewed thee out a sepulchre here, as he that heweth him out a sepulchre on high, and that graveth an habitation for himself in a rock? (22:16) Behold, the Lord will [certainly grab you] [^4] and [hurl you away, O mighty man] [^5] (22:17) He will surely violently turn and toss thee like a ball into a large country: there shalt thou die, and there the chariots of thy glory shall be the shame of thy lord's house. (22:18) And I will drive thee from thy station, and from thy state shall he pull thee down. (22:19) And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will call my servant Eliakim the son of Hilkiah: (22:20) And I will clothe him with thy robe, and strengthen him with thy girdle, and I will commit thy government into his hand: and he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah. (22:21) And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; so he shall open, and none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none shall open. (22:22) And I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place; and he shall be for a glorious throne to his father's house. (22:23) And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father's house, the offspring and the issue, all vessels of small quantity, from the vessels of cups, even to all the vessels of flagons. (22:24) In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, shall the nail that is fastened in the sure place be removed, and be cut down, and fall; and the burden that was upon it shall be cut off: for the Lord hath spoken it. (22:25)

Notes and Commentary

22:15 Thus saith the Lord. The Lord is the source of Isaiah's prophecy.

treasurer, even . . . Shebna. Shebna held the prominent position of a royal treasurer (perhaps over the temple treasury) in the kingdom of Judah.

22:16 What hast thou here/whom hast thou here. Isaiah asks Shebna, "Who do you think you are, that you make a great sepulchre for yourself, that you are trying to exalt yourself?"

thou hast hewed thee out a sepulchre. Shebna tries to imitate God and God's glory with permanence (sepulchre) and self-exaltation (on high). The location of Shebna's sepulchre is unknown, although some scholars place it with other tombs carved in rock in the valley of Kidron, east of Jerusalem.

22:17 the Lord will . . . [hurl you away]. Shebna will be hurled away, or taken into captivity, by the Lord's power.

22:18 He will surely violently turn and toss thee like a ball into a large country. This is a continuation of the prophecy concerning eventual exile that is formulated in Isa. 22:17: Shebna/Judah, like a ball, will be violently kicked and bounced about on their way to exile.

there shalt thou die. Shebna and many of Judah's inhabitants will die while in captivity. How, then, did Shebna end up in his tomb (22:16), if he died in exile? Either his body was returned from his exiled land to Jerusalem for burial, or, more likely, Shebna was a symbol of all wicked people.

the chariots of thy glory. Chariots represent the self-reliance, self-might, and glory of the wicked as they look to war and weaponry for temporal salvation. Meanwhile, the righteous view God as both their temporal and spiritual salvation; he is their refuge and place of safety.

22:19 I will drive thee from thy station. Because of Shebna's pride and attempt at self-exaltation, he is removed from his important station (treasurer) in the kingdom.

from thy state shall he pull thee down. Shebna will be pulled down from his position of honor in Hezekiah's courts.

22:20 it shall come to pass in that day. Refers to the day when Shebna is destroyed. This statement indicates a transition from a prophecy about Shebna to one about Eliakim.

I will call my servant Eliakim. Eliakim, the priest, receives a call and replaces Shebna as the servant. Now he typifies Jesus Christ, who is also called "servant" (42:1; Matt. 12:18) and who serves Heavenly Father (Ps. 40:8; John 8:29).

22:21 I will clothe him with thy robe/girdle. Eliakim (or Christ) receives the garments of priesthood authority, kingship, and righteousness. The robe and girdle refer to the temple's sacred vestments (see commentary on 9:6).

I will commit thy government into his hand. This pertains to Eliakim, but it is also a messianic statement about Jesus, who received "the throne of David," a "kingdom," and "the government . . . upon his shoulder" (9:6-7). Hand represents power or authority.

he shall be a father. Jesus is the spiritual father (9:6).

22:22 the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder. The key, which represents authority and power (Matt. 16:19; Rev. 3:7), opens the door to the heavenly temple.

he shall open, and none shall shut/he shall shut, and none shall open. Only Christ has the power to open and close the door of the heavenly temple. The words in this phrase are repeated in Rev. 3:7.

22:23 I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place. This image pertains to Christ's crucifixion. "'The nail fastened in a sure place,' remains a mystery to the world, and will, but the wise understand." [^6]

he shall be for a glorious throne to his father's house. The throne represents kingship; Christ will sit upon his Father's throne (Rev. 3) and rule and reign with great glory.

22:24 they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father's house. The prophet may be presenting a word play; inasmuch as Christ hung on the cross to atone for the sins of mankind, even so will God "hang upon him all the glory" of his Father's kingdom. The phrase hang upon him all the glory may represent the robe of righteousness that will hang on Christ's shoulder, or the key of the house of David that will (symbolically) hang around his neck. One recalls similar expressions from Isaiah, such as "and the government shall be upon his shoulder" (9:6; 22:21-22) and the "key . . . will I lay upon his shoulder" (22:22).

offspring and the issue. This phrase pertains to Jesus Christ. [^7] Those who become part of Christ's spiritual family through his atonement will be his offspring. See 22:21 above, concerning Christ as the Father.

vessels of small quantity/cups/flagons. The varying sizes of vessels may be metaphors for members of Christ's spiritual family. A flagon is a large vessel, often with a handle and a lid.

22:25 In that day. This refers to the last days and Christ's second coming.

saith the Lord of hosts. The Lord is the source of Isaiah's prophecy.

nail that is fastened in the sure place be removed, and be cut down, and fall. "If any man believes that the 25th verse is true translation and explanation of the 'nail,' he is welcome to his opinion; he knows nothing of the key of David, and little about the keys of the kingdom." [^8] This is a reference to the crucifixion and the Atonement. One possible meaning: the nail prints will remain in Christ's body even after the resurrection, until every person has witnessed them, acknowledged that he is the Savior, and accepted judgment. All persons will be judged in proportion to their acceptance of him and his tokens. This passage, then, may refer to the completion of Jesus Christ's divine work and the judgments against the wicked, when justice has been eternally served.

Lord hath spoken it. The Lord is the source of Isaiah's prophecy.

---
Notas:
[^1] NIV Isa. 23:1.
[^2] The word mart can be better rendered as marketplace or fair.
[^3] All bracketed changes are from NIV Isa. 23:5.
[^4] The word traffickers can be better rendered as traders.
[^5] The KJV stain comes from Hebrew chalal meaning to "pollute, defile, [or] profane." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 320.
[^6] DSS Isa. Scroll 23:10 reads 'abediy, to "work," rendered here as "cultivate"; see Watts, Isa. 1-33, 303.
[^7] NIV Isa. 23:10 reads along the Nile, replacing the KJV a river.
[^8] JST Isa. 23:10 adds in thee.
