Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 23

Likening Isa. 23 unto Ourselves

Tyre was a famous Phoenician city noted for her commercial enterprises, great wealth, and materialism. Tyre was so well-known that she was called a "market place of nations" (23:3), and her traders and merchants were so celebrated that they were equated with the princes and the "honorable of the earth" (23:8).

The Lord spoke against Tyre (and her inhabitants), decrying her pride by calling her a harlot. He also warned her inhabitants to repent, lest she become a desolate city. Tyre's inhabitants did not listen to the prophet and were thus destroyed.

Tyre may be like many of the large cities in our world today, whose inhabitants' primary interest is obtaining material wealth. Such cities—if their inhabitants are proud, if they glory in wickedness, and if they sell themselves to the ways of the world— will be destroyed when the Lord returns to the earth with great glory, just as Tyre was destroyed so long ago. Tyre, then, serves as a warning to us of the pitfalls of pride and materialism and the resultant destruction.

The Song of the Destruction of Tyre and Sidon (23:1-14)

Isa. 23 is the last of nine prophetic warnings against the heathen nations surrounding Israel. Isaiah began this series of pronouncements in chapter 13 with a prophecy against Babylon; he concludes it in this chapter with a prophecy against Tyre. These two cities symbolize worldliness—Tyre was the center of commerce and a leading sea power; Babylon was the center of politics and a leading land power. Both were condemned for pride (13:11; 23:9) and referred to as harlots (23:15-17; D&C 86:3). The prophecy against Babylon attacks worldliness; the prophecy against Tyre strikes at materialism. Both are types of the world in our day.

Isaiah prophesies that the merchants of Tyre will learn of the destruction of their homeland and mourn (23:1). He uses colorful descriptions of Tyre's glory—it is like a "market place of nations" (23:3), a "joyous city" (23:7), a "crowning city," full of "princes" and the "honorable of the earth" (23:8). As a contrast, Isaiah describes the destruction of Tyre—a defiled woman (23:9), who is weak (23:10), shamed (without children; 23:4), and a ruin (23:13). The Lord is responsible for planning Tyre's devastation (23:9), using Assyria's armies to accomplish his plan (23:13). The destruction of Tyre is a type of the destruction of the wicked—and their wealth—at the time of the Lord's return.

Isa. 23:1-14

The burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; for it is laid waste, so that there is no house, no [harbor]: [^1] from the land of Chittim it is revealed to them. (23:1) Be still, ye inhabitants of the isle; thou whom the merchants of Zidon, that pass over the sea, have replenished. (23:2) And by great waters the seed of Sihor, the harvest of the river, is her revenue; and she is a [market place] [^2] of nations. (23:3) Be thou ashamed, O Zidon: for the sea hath spoken, even the strength of the sea, saying, I travail not, nor bring forth children, neither do I nourish up young men, nor bring up virgins. (23:4) [When] the report [comes to] Egypt, [they will be] sorely pained at the report [from] Tyre. (23:5) [^3] Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, ye inhabitants of the isle. (23:6) Is this your joyous city, whose antiquity is of ancient days? her own feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn. (23:7) Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre, the crowning city, whose merchants are princes, whose [traders] [^4] are the honorable of the earth? (23:8) The Lord of hosts hath purposed it, to [defile] [^5] the pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the honorable of the earth. (23:9) [Cultivate] [^6] thy land as [along the Nile], [^7] O daughter of Tarshish: there is no more strength [in thee]. [^8] (23:10) He stretched out his hand over the sea, he shook the kingdoms: the Lord hath given a commandment against [Phoenicia], [^9] to destroy the strong holds thereof. (23:11) And he said, Thou shalt no more rejoice, O thou oppressed virgin, daughter of Zidon: arise, pass over to Chittim; there also shalt thou have no rest. (23:12) Behold the land of the Chaldeans; this people [did not exist], [^10] till the Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness: they set up the towers thereof, they raised up the palaces thereof, he brought it to a ruin. (23:13) Howl, ye ships of Tarshish: for your [fortress] [^11] is laid waste. (23:14)

Notes and Commentary

23:1-2 burden. See commentary on 13:1.

Tyre/Zidon (Sidon). Tyre and Sidon, Phoenicia's chief cities, are a symbol for the whole land of Phoenicia; like Babylon, they symbolize the world that will be judged by God (D&C 1:16).

Howl. The ships of Tarshish are commanded to cry out in anguish (howl) over the many deaths and mourn the loss of their city, Tyre.

ships of Tarshish. The location of Tarshish is unknown. The ships of Tarshish symbolize Tyre's people, and especially the merchants who, because of their wealth and prestige, represent the world's pride and arrogance (see commentary on Isa. 2:16).

it is laid waste. Tyre will soon be destroyed.

Chittim (Kittim). Early name for Cyprus, an island colonized and controlled by Tyre. Since Tyre will be laid waste, so that there will be no house or harbor for people or ships to rest in, Chittim is an ideal location for Tyre's refugees, who will bring news of the destruction to Tyre's merchants who are traveling away from home.

23:2 Be still, ye inhabitants of the isle. Be still (Hebrew damam) carries two meanings associated with stillness, "motionless" and "silent." [^12] Isle specifically refers to the island of Tyre. In contrast to howl in 23:1, the Lord commands the inhabitants of Tyre to be still. The once bustling city of Tyre will be silenced by the destruction of her houses, port, and inhabitants.

merchants . . . replenished. Sidon's merchants carried corn, dyed cloth, grain, wine, metal, horses, wood, and oil as they voyaged on the seas. Tyre and Cyprus were supported (replenished) by Sidon's trading (see commentary on 2:6).

23:3 seed of Sihor/harvest of the river. Seed and harvest refer to the grain produced near Sihor (Josh. 13:3) and the Nile River and shipped by the Phoenicians over great waters to other nations, thereby providing Phoenicia with revenue.

market place of nations. During Isaiah's time, Tyre and Sidon were the Mediterranean's most powerful commercial cities; the Mediterranean nations all traded with Phoenicia.

23:4 ashamed. According to Israelite tradition, shame fell on the woman who was barren or violated, or who lost all her children through death. Tyre and Sidon, portrayed as women, will be humbled and shamed. Tyre, referred to as the "strength of the sea," will be virtually depopulated, her people killed, enslaved, or made refugees, and therefore unable to raise up a new generation of young men and virgins to populate the island.

strength of the sea. This phrase, which speaks of Tyre, can be translated as "stronghold" or "fortress of the sea." [^13]

I travail not, nor bring forth children, neither do I nourish up. Tyre, presented as a barren or vanquished woman, speaks of the shame she will feel when she becomes childless through the loss of sons and daughters in battle. It will be as if Tyre had never been populated and the sea had never been a major shipping lane.

young men/virgins. The lack of young men and virgins implies the loss of honor and life, symbolizing Tyre's destruction and the enslavement of her inhabitants. So will it be with the wicked in the last days.

23:5 Egypt . . . will be sorely pained at the report. Egypt's inhabitants, who rely heavily on trade with Tyre, will be hurt by Tyre's destruction.

23:6 Pass ye over to Tarshish. Those who survive or escape the destruction of Tyre are instructed to flee to Tarshish, which had once brought them great profit.

howl, ye inhabitants. Tyre's inhabitants will mourn the loss of Tyre as they flee to Tarshish (23:1).

23:7 joyous city, whose antiquity is of ancient days. Tyre took pride and joy in her prosperity and antiquity, and Isaiah mocks her inhabitants with a question that essentially asks, "Where is your joyous, bustling city now?" (22:2; 32:13).

her own feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn. After the destruction of their city, Tyre's refugees will migrate to distant places.

23:8-9 Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre. Isaiah answers his own question: The Lord, who made this plan against Tyre, hath taken this counsel. The Hebrew word ya'ats, [^14] translated as both "counsel" (23:8) and "purposed" (23:9), speaks both of the plans made and of the determination to follow through. Elsewhere in Isaiah the Lord plans the destruction of Babylon (14:24, 27) and Egypt (19:12).

23:8 crowning city. This description represents Tyre's splendor and glory—her pride. Despite her worldly greatness, the Lord of Hosts is about to bring her low (see Isa. 23:1).

merchants are princes/traders are the honorable of the earth. Tyre's merchants are so well-respected and famous, it is as if they were princes, or sons of kings. The honorable of the earth can be understood as those who receive the honors of men rather than those of God (see commentary on 47:15; see also 3:3-4). The scriptures make it clear that the honors of men are worthless in eternity because only those honors conferred by God will persist (Alma 60:36).

23:9 defile the pride/bring into contempt. The Lord determines to bring down the proud of Tyre, causing her glory to cease; instead, she will be defiled. This same fate will fall upon the proud in the last days (see commentary on 2:12-17; Lev. 26:19; Prov. 16:18).

23:10 Cultivate thy land as along the Nile. Because Tyre's inhabitants have lost their domination of the trading market and been pressed into servitude by a foreign nation, they must resort to cultivating their land, as was the practice along the Nile River in Egypt. [^15] The occupation of merchant was preferred to farming—but the people of Tyre will be forced back to the land.

daughter of Tarshish. Tyre is essentially dependent on Tarshish ships for her strength and livelihood (see commentary on 23:1).

23:11 stretched out his hand. This foresees the time when the Lord stretches forth his hand in punishment (see commentary on Isa. 5:25).

he shook the kingdoms. In an action as simple as stretching out his hand, God destroys nations and kingdoms.

commandment against Phoenicia. God commands Assyria (23:13) to destroy Phoenicia's strongholds.

23:12 Thou shalt no more rejoice. Because of her destruction, Sidon cannot rejoice.

oppressed virgin. Sidon is portrayed as a woman, as is customary for cities referred to by Isaiah.

daughter of Zidon (Sidon). It was customary for Isaiah to call cities daughter (23:10; 37:22; 47:1).

arise, pass over to Chittim. Sidon's refugees are told to flee to Chittim, or Cyprus (compare 23:6).

there also shalt thou have no rest. In Cyprus, the refugees from Sidon will experience troubles, perhaps warfare, as they did in Sidon.

23:13 this people did not exist. The Chaldeans were Semitic nomads who came to be known as Babylonians. They inhabited the wilderness areas of the Fertile Crescent where Babylon was built. They had little significance (did not exist) among the earth's nations until the Assyrians came and built cities and fortifications ("founded it") in their land, thus making the city of Babylon powerful.

set up the towers. The Assyrian army set up siege towers as they surrounded Tyre.

they stripped its palaces. The Assyrians stripped Sidon's palaces of their ornaments, wealth, and leaders; they even pulled down Tyre's walls.

he brought it to a ruin. The subject here is the Lord, who brought about Tyre's harsh and swift ruin through Assyria (25:2).

23:14 Howl, ye ships of Tarshish: for your fortress is laid waste. Isaiah reiterates the command to the Tarshish ships to howl (23:1). Again, this prophecy symbolizes the great destruction of the proud and the wicked at the end of the world; they will have ample cause to howl and mourn.

Tyre and Sidon Restored for the Purposes of the Lord (23:15-18)

Contrasting the message of doom of the previous section, the Lord now reveals a message of restoration: After seventy years, Tyre will begin to rebuild her trading industry (23:16-17) and will sing "the song of the harlot" (23:15).

Isa. 23:15-18

And it shall come to pass in that day, that Tyre shall be forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one king: after the end of seventy years, [it shall be unto Tyre as the song of the harlot]. [^16] (23:15) Take an harp, go about the city, thou harlot that hast been forgotten; make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou mayest be remembered. (23:16) And it shall come to pass after the end of seventy years, that the Lord will visit Tyre, and she shall turn to her hire, and shall commit fornication with all the kingdoms of the world upon the face of the earth. (23:17) And her merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the Lord: it shall not be [hoarded] [^17] nor laid up; for her merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently, and for [choice] [^18] clothing. (23:18)

Notes and Commentary

23:15 forgotten seventy years/days of one king. The decline of the Assyrian empire permitted Tyre to regain commercial domination (23:17) approximately seventy years after her destruction (see commentary on Isa. 23:1). The days of one king are said to be seventy years.

as the song of the harlot. This may be a street song heard in seaport towns, directed to a forgotten harlot who tries to revitalize her image and former occupation. The harlot is encouraged to take up her harp and sing "about the city" to gain attention. Isaiah uses this song to refer to Tyre and her profitable trade, which could be compared to prostitution because Tyre sought to satisfy the carnal desires of men by selling them all manner of wares.

23:16 go about the city/sing many songs, that thou mayest be remembered. The forgotten harlot (Tyre) must go about her city (the world's marketplaces) to solicit men's attention (Prov. 7:10-19) with alluring cries (songs) in the hope of somehow regaining her former status among the nations.

23:17 the Lord will visit Tyre. Tyre was previously visited in judgment by the Lord (23:9, 11), but after the completion of the seventy-year sentence, the Lord will again visit Tyre, this time to restore her to her former status. But she will again find success in trading with the world's nations and return to her harlotry.

Tyre . . . shall commit fornication. This perhaps speaks of the immoral practices, greed, or idolatry that Tyre will sell to the world's kingdoms.

kingdoms of the world. Tyre's influence will again extend throughout the known world.

23:18 her hire shall be holiness to the Lord. This may refer to an ancient custom by which the wealth of a city designated for destruction was consecrated to the Lord (Josh. 6:17, 19; Micah 4:13). Or perhaps the time of which Isaiah speaks is yet to come, and Tyre is a symbol of the wealthy nations of the world who, in the last days, will bring gifts, money, and honor to the Lord and his people (60:5-7; Ps. 45:12; Hag. 2:8).

it shall not be hoarded. Tyre possessed treasuries, and her inhabitants "heaped up silver as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the streets" (Zech. 9:3). Isaiah prophesies that Tyre will not hoard her treasures, but "her merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the Lord" (23:18).

---
Notas:
[^1] Bracketed words in this verse come from the Hebrew root nasha', meaning "to lend." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 674.
[^2] From Hebrew baqaq, meaning to "empty [or] lay waste." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 132, replacing the KJV utterly emptied.
[^3] The word plundered is from Hebrew bazaz, meaning to "spoil [or] plunder." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 102, replacing the KJV utterly spoiled.
[^4] From Hebrew nabal, meaning to "sink or drop down, languish, wither and fall, fade" (as in devastated). Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 615, replacing the KJV fadeth away.
[^5] From the Hebrew 'amal meaning to "be weak . . . [or] feeble, languish." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 51.
[^6] See note 4.
[^7] The Hebrew 'asham, "to offend, be guilty," in this form can be translated as to be held guilty or to bear punishment. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 79.
[^8] See note 5. Perhaps a better translation here would be droops.
[^9] From Hebrew tupiym meaning "timbrel" or "tambourine." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 1074, replacing the KJV tabrets.
[^10] From Hebrew galah, meaning "uncover [or] remove; [to] become clear." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 162, replacing the KJV gone.
[^11] Desolation remains is a clearer rendering than the KJV left desolation.
[^12] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 510, renders this phrase as crushed to ruins, replacing the KJV smitten with destruction.
[^13] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 337-38.
[^14] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 349.
[^15] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 79.
[^16] New Witness for the Articles of Faith, 645.
[^17] NIV Isa. 24:13.
[^18] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 943, replacing the KJV sing.
