Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 24

Likening Isa. 24 unto Ourselves

When any of us transgress the laws of God, "seek not the Lord," do not "establish his righteousness," or walk in our "own way" (D&C 1:16), we join to a greater or lesser degree the earth's inhabitants who "have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, [and] broken the everlasting covenant" (24:5). We should instead strive to obey the laws of God, seek the Lord, establish his righteousness, and walk in his way. If we do so, we will "glorify . . . the Lord in the region of light, even the name of the Lord God of Israel in the isles of the sea" (24:15).

The World Changes the Ordinance and Breaks the Covenant (24:1-12)

Isaiah teaches us of the great apostasy, when earth's inhabitants made three major errors: they "transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, [and broke] the everlasting covenant" (24:5). Because of this great apostasy from God's truth and his plan of happiness, God has wasted, turned upside down, emptied, and utterly spoiled the earth. Furthermore, the earth mourns, fades away, languishes, is defiled, and a curse devours it (24:1-6); because of the apostasy, God has scattered and burned the earth's inhabitants so that the few who remain do not experience happiness—"all joy is darkened" (24:11).

Although this prophecy of Isaiah speaks of many apostasies that have occurred during the history of the earth, it speaks especially of the period preceding the restoration of the gospel—an apostasy that continues to this day among most of the world's people. In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord quoted Isa. 24:5: "For they have strayed from mine ordinances, and have broken mine everlasting covenant." The Lord then explained, "They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god." Because of these things, and "knowing the calamity which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth," the Lord "called upon . . . Joseph Smith, Jun., and spake unto him from heaven, and gave him commandments" (D&C 1:15-17). The calamity to which the Lord refers comprises the second half of this section. The great cause of the destruction preceding the Second Coming is the wickedness that grows from apostasy.

Isa. 24:1-12

Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof. (24:1) And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; as with the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender, so with the borrower; as with the [creditor], so with the [debtor]. [^1] (24:2) The land shall be [completely laid waste], [^2] and [completely plundered]: [^3] for the Lord hath spoken this word. (24:3) The earth mourneth and [withereth] [^4] away, the world languisheth [^5] and [withereth] [^6] away, the haughty people of the earth do languish. (24:4) The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. (24:5) Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are [held guilty]: [^7] therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left; (24:6) The new wine mourneth, the vine languisheth, [^8] all the merryhearted do sigh. (24:7) The mirth of [timbrel] [^9] ceaseth, the noise of them that rejoice endeth, the joy of the harp ceaseth. (24:8) They shall not drink wine with a song; strong drink shall be bitter to them that drink it. (24:9) The city of confusion is broken down: every house is shut up, that no man may come in. (24:10) There is a crying for wine in the streets; all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is [removed]. [^10] (24:11) In the city, desolation [remains], [^11] and the gate is [crushed to ruins]. [^12] (24:12)

Notes and Commentary

24:1 Lord maketh the earth empty. This refers to the destruction of the earth's inhabitants at the Second Coming. A modern revelation uses similar language: "For a desolating scourge shall go forth among the inhabitants of the earth, and shall continue to be poured out from time to time, if they repent not, until the earth is empty, and the inhabitants thereof are consumed away and utterly destroyed by the brightness of my coming" (D&C 5:19).

maketh it waste. The judgments that precede the second coming of Christ will turn the earth into a wasteland (Rev. 8:7-12).

turneth it upside down. Similar imagery was used in the Lord's declaration, "I will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it, and turning it upside down" (2 Kgs. 21:13). The Lord will cleanse the earth of the wicked as one turns a bowl upside down and empties, or pours out, the filth.

scattereth abroad the inhabitants. The Lord scatters the world's inhabitants (Gen. 11:8-9) as punishment for wickedness (Ps. 92:9).

24:2 as with the people, so with the priest; as with the servant, so with his master. Isaiah lists twelve groups (people, priests, servants, masters, and others) who represent all levels of society. The inhabitants of the land will be scattered, regardless of their status or position.

24:3 completely laid waste. The term completely emphasizes the totality of destruction and shows that the devastation promised in verse 1 will be complete.

the Lord hath spoken this word. Isaiah speaks by the authority of Jehovah.

24:4 earth mourneth and withereth away. The repetition of withereth, in conjunction with languisheth, emphasizes the earth's depleted and droughtlike condi- tion. With her strength gone, the earth is no longer able to bring forth fruit as she once had, a curse that has been associated with sin since the world's beginning (Gen. 3:17- 19). This in turn affects all who dwell on the earth—human beings, animals, and vegetables (24:7; 40:7-8; Hosea 4:3; JST Isa. 64:6). The earth mourns and withers both from judgment and from apostasy.

the haughty people of the earth do languish. In the last days, the proud will languish, or droop, under the weight of their sins (10:33; 13:11; Prov. 16:18).

24:5 earth also is defiled under the inhabitants. To defile (Hebrew chanap) means "to pollute, profane or make godless." [^13] Earth's inhabitants have polluted her by transgressing laws, changing ordinances, and breaking the everlasting covenant.

transgressed the laws. People have disregarded the revealed word of God by transgressing the laws given to them by the prophets. Law (Hebrew torah), used here in a rare plural form (Gen. 26:5; Ex. 16:28; Ps. 105:45), indicates that all God's laws have been transgressed; this by itself is enough to bring a curse upon the people (Dan. 9:10-11).

changed the ordinance. Ordinance (Hebrew choq) [^14] comes from the root word chaqaq, which means "to carve or engrave." God's ordinances were essentially carved in stone and were not meant to be changed; rather, they were to be engraved on the hearts of the children of God. When the ordinances such as baptism (JST Gen. 17:3-6; Moro. 8:14, 16) are changed, their power to save is lost.

broken the everlasting covenant. The everlasting covenant is the gospel with its covenants and ordinances. Because the ordinances had been perverted or lost, the Lord revealed for the last time through the Prophet Joseph Smith the everlasting covenant for the earth, "lest all of the earth be smitten with a curse" (D&C 1:12-16, 22; D&C 29:8-10).

24:6 curse devoured the earth. The Lord pronounces blessings for faithfulness (Mosiah 2:41) and cursings for rebellion (Deut. 28:15-68). War, slavery, pestilence, plague, disease, famine, poverty, and death are all curses sent from God for not keeping the commandments (Deut. 27-30). All these curses will be poured out on the earth in the last days (D&C 112:23-24).

they that dwell therein are held guilty. The term guilty (Hebrew 'asham) [^15] refers to the guilt that requires restitution and cleansing ordinances before it can be removed. Those who continue to be held guilty (i.e., do not repent) must bear the punishment of their sins.

the inhabitants of the earth are burned. When the Lord comes to cleanse his vineyard, the earth's wicked inhabitants will be burned because they have strayed from the ordinances and broken the everlasting covenant (9:18; Mal. 4:1-3; 3 Ne. 25:1-3; JS 1:37). It was because of this pending calamity that the Lord gave the Prophet Joseph Smith the necessary saving principles and ordinances to prepare the righteous remnant who will remain after the destruction of the wicked (24:5).

few men left. So few will remain after the destruction of the wicked that a child will be able to number them (10:19), individuals will be accounted more precious than fine gold (13:12), and "many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant" (5:9; 6:11-12). Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "In the coming day when the vineyard of the Lord is burned, some few will abide the day, but the masses of men will be destroyed. Only those who are quickened, as were Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in the furnace of Nebuchadnezzar, shall be able to abide the day of burning." [^16]

24:7 new wine mourneth/vine languisheth. These statements may speak of the drought that occurs when the physical earth reacts to wickedness and destruction (24:4-5).

the merryhearted do sigh. The merryhearted sigh, or groan, because of the destruction and wickedness that precede the Second Coming.

24:8 mirth/noise/joy. Isa. 24:7-11 draws a strong correlation between the sounds of gaiety and the free abundance of wine. The party lifestyle of the world, which so often depends on alcohol, will cease to exist; instead of the sounds of laughter, groans of discontent will prevail. The dependency on artificial stimulants for happiness indicates the pitiful state of the earth's inhabitants.

timbrel/harp. Instruments that accompany the sounds of merriment and revelry have also stopped their joyous sounds. Babylon is to be thrown down, "and the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all" (Rev. 18:22). Apparently, earth's inhabitants can no longer find joy or entertainment in their music.

24:9 They shall not drink wine with a song/strong drink shall be bitter. Isaiah emphasizes the mourning and sighing that will exist. There may also be a spiritual meaning here: The wicked will partake not of wine and strong drink but of the cup of the Lord's wrath when they experience his judgments.

24:10 city of confusion is broken down. This reference is not to a particular city but to all cities that are full of confusion and chaos because of inequality and destruction.

every house is shut up. The wicked will shut their doors out of fear of the coming judgments, while the righteous will close their doors in obedience to this counsel: "Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation pass over" (26:20).

24:11 There is a crying for wine in the streets. This may be literal, or it may speak of the loss of joy during this time.

joy is darkened/mirth is removed. In the time of judgment the people will no longer find enjoyment or mirth in their sinful ways. Worldly joy will be replaced with despair.

24:12 In the city, remains desolation/gate is crushed to ruins. This image refers to the "city of confusion" (24:10), whose streets are empty, whose houses are shut, whose defenses are gone, and whose social interaction has vanished (1:7; 5:9).

A Righteous Remnant Rejoices (24:13-16a)

In the midst of the apostasy and destruction described in the section above, the Lord will gather us (i.e., those who are members of the Church) from among the wicked, as one seeks the few remaining olives on the trees after the harvest. We are the remnant that is being gathered from the nations. According to Isaiah, we are["lift[ing our] voice,"["cry[ing] aloud for the majesty of the Lord," sharing the gospel message from Zion ("the region of light"), and glorifying his name throughout the entire world.

Isa. 24:13-16a

When thus it shall be in the midst of the land among the people, there shall be as [when an olive tree is beaten, or as when gleanings are left over after the grape harvest] [^17] is done. (24:13) They shall lift up their voice, they shall [cry aloud] [^18] for the majesty of the Lord, they shall [cry shrilly] [^19] from the sea. (24:14) Wherefore glorify ye the Lord in the [region of light], [^20] even the name of the Lord God of Israel in the isles of the sea. (24:15) From the uttermost part of the earth have we heard songs, even ['Glory to the righteous one']. [^21] (24:16a)

Notes and Commentary

24:13 When thus it shall be in the midst of the land. Isaiah establishes the time reference for the next three verses. The prophecies contained in them will take place during or after the destruction identified in Isa. 23 and 24:1-15.

when an olive tree is beaten. A few olives always remain on the olive trees after the completion of the harvest, especially on the upper branches, and a stick is usually used to beat these olives from the branches. These remaining olives represent the righteous who will remain after the destruction of the wicked, represented by the harvesting of an olive tree. On many occasions the prophets compare the harvest to the destruction of the wicked (Matt. 13:39; D&C 86:4-7).

gleanings are left over after the grape harvest. Only a few individuals will remain after the harvest or destruction of the world.

24:14 They shall lift up their voice/cry shrilly. The righteous who remain will lift up their voice—a phrase often associated with prayer (Gen. 21:16) and song (42:11). When the Lord comes, all "who remain, even from the least unto the greatest . . . shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, and shall see eye to eye, and shall lift up their voice, and with the voice together sing this new song" (D&C 84:98). The words to the song are found in D&C 84:99-102.

they shall cry aloud. This pertains to the preaching of the gospel. Joseph Smith counseled the elders of the Church: "Oh, ye elders of Israel, hearken to my voice; and when you are sent into the world to preach, tell those things you are sent to tell; preach and cry aloud, 'Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand; repent and believe the Gospel.'" [^22]

they shall cry . . . from the sea. The Lord's servants cry across the sea to all other nations, inviting them to become part of the gospel.

24:15 region of light. The gathered remnant, or the Saints, glorify the Lord in the region of light, or the place where the Spirit of God is abundant.

24:16a From the uttermost part. The songs that glorify and honor the Lord will be heard from the ends of the earth (24:14), for he is the righteous one (53:11).

Glory to the righteous one. These appear to be some of the actual words of one of the songs that will be sung by the righteous remnant.

Earth Reacts to Her Inhabitants' Iniquities (24:16b-23)

Here Isaiah's soul mourns for the wicked: "I waste away, I waste away, woe unto me!" He then continues the theme introduced in Isa. 24:1-12 concerning human relationships and the earth's reaction to her inhabitants' transgressions. While the righteous remnant will "glorify . . . the Lord in the region of light, even the name of the Lord God of Israel in the isles of the sea" (24:15), the transgressors will find that "fear, and the pit, and the snare, are upon" them (24:17).

Isaiah 24:16b-23

But I said, [I waste away, I waste away], [^23] woe unto me! the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously; yea, [with treachery have the treacherous dealers dealt very treacherously.] [^24] (24:16b) Fear, and the pit, and the snare, are upon thee, O inhabitant of the earth. (24:17) And it shall come to pass, that he who fleeth from the noise of the fear, shall fall into the pit; and he that cometh up out of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for the windows from on high are open, and the foundations of the earth do shake. (24:18) The earth is utterly broken down, the earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved exceedingly. (24:19) The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage; and the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it; and it shall fall, and not rise again. (24:20) And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones that are on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth. (24:21) And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days shall they be visited. (24:22) Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously. (24:23)

Notes and Commentary

24:16b I waste away, woe unto me. Isaiah expresses the pain and sorrow he feels over the sins and destruction of earth's inhabitants (21:3-4; 22:4). His exclamation Woe is me was uttered earlier when, in God's presence, he was conscious of his own sins (6:5). He now feels the pain of others' condemnation as deeply as he felt his own.

treacherous dealers. Isaiah's heartfelt sorrow is caused by the world's wickedness. The wicked have been treacherous in their hearts and have dealt treacherously with the innocent (21:2; 33:1). They have preyed on the weak, have sworn falsely both to their neighbors and to God (48:1), and have broken the everlasting covenant (24:5).

24:17 the pit, and the snare, are upon thee. Just as an animal flees from the hunter only to be caught in a pit or a snare, so do the wicked flee destruction. When the judgment comes, they will try to escape it, but they will be caught in the snare of their own wickedness (Alma 30:60).

24:18-20 who fleeth from the noise of the fear. Those who work iniquity fear the Lord's judgments and attempt to hide in the rocks and dust; they "fear . . . the Lord, and . . . the glory of his majesty" (2:19). This is in striking contrast to the command given to the Saints to "fear not, for the kingdom is yours" (D&C 38:15).

fall into the pit. While trying to flee the judgments of the Lord, the wicked will "fall into the pit," which is a reference to hell.

windows from on high are open. The Lord will open the windows of heaven and send forth blessings (Mal. 3:10) or judgments (Gen. 7:11-12). For instance, at the time of Noah the windows of heaven were opened, and floods burst forth from both the heavens and the foundations of the earth to cleanse the earth of her wicked.

foundations of the earth do shake. Joseph Smith stated that the "earth groans under the weight of its iniquity" (D&C 123:7) Isaiah taught that "the earth mourneth" (33:9); and Moses recorded that when "Enoch heard the earth mourn, he wept, and cried unto the Lord, saying: O Lord, wilt thou not have compassion upon the earth?" (Moses 7:49). Here in Isa. 24:18-20, Isaiah makes seven statements to portray the earth's reaction to the transgressions of humanity that are "heavy upon it": "the foundations of the earth do shake," "the earth is utterly broken down," "the earth is clean dissolved," "the earth is moved exceedingly," "the earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard," the earth "shall be removed like a cottage," and the earth "shall fall, and not rise again." These expressions may refer to great earthquakes that will occur in the last days when God's judgments come upon a wicked world (see D&C 43:25; 88:89). They may particularly refer to the last great earthquake that will occur at the time of the coming of the Lord (see Rev. 16:18-20).

Isaiah's expression is very poetic. He portrays the earth staggering about like a man whose sense of balance has been affected by strong drink; he also compares the movement of the earth to a cottage—a frail, temporary structure that shakes during a strong wind.

24:21 host of the high ones/kings of the earth. The proud and mighty of the world will be subject to God's judgments and punishments.

24:22 gathered together, as prisoners. The high ones and kings will be gathered together in spirit prison after their earthly probation ends. There they will wait, with full remembrance of their sins and without the knowledge necessary to free themselves from those sins until they are visited by the Lord's messengers, who can teach them the principles needed for their salvation.

pit/prison. These terms refer to spirit prison (14:15, 19; Rev. 19:19-20:3

shall they be visited. Isaiah assures us that the dead who have been gathered together as prisoners in a pit will be visited after many days. Just as Christ's ministers visited those in spirit prison to "proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound" (61:1; John 5:25), and to "bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house" (42:7), so too will "we find that God will deal with all the human family equally, and . . . those characters referred to by Isaiah [will] have their time of visitation and deliverance; after having been many days in prison." [^25] Elder Orson Pratt taught that they will have the opportunity to be redeemed from their prison through the preaching of the gospel in the spirit world and through the performance of vicarious ordinances in mortality. [^26]

24:23 the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed. In comparison with the glory and brilliance that will surround the Lord when he["reign[s] in mount Zion," the light of the sun and the moon will pale and be confounded and ashamed. It will be the glory of the Lord that will light the city of Zion (60:19; Rev. 21:23).

The Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem. "Two separate Jerusalems, the old and the new, will serve as headquarters of the millennial kingdom of God from which Jesus will rule. Old Jerusalem will be built up by Judah. The New Jerusalem, also to be known as Zion (D&C 45:66-67), will be built up in Jackson County, Missouri, by Ephraim." [^27] Temples will be located at the centers of these two capital cities.

before his ancients gloriously. The New International Version reads "The Lord Almighty will reign on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, and before its elders, gloriously."

---
Notas:
[^1] Sam eat min means literally "constitute from," thus "transform."
[^2] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 274, replacing the KJV branch.
[^3] Hailey, Commentary on Isaiah, 206.
[^4] From Hebrew nabal, meaning to "sink or drop down, languish, wither and fall, fade" (as in devastated). Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 615, replacing the KJV fadeth away.
[^5] From the Hebrew 'amal meaning to "be weak . . . [or] feeble, languish." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 51.
[^6] See note 4.
[^7] The Hebrew 'asham, "to offend, be guilty," in this form can be translated as to be held guilty or to bear punishment. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 79.
[^8] See note 5. Perhaps a better translation here would be droops.
[^9] From Hebrew tupiym meaning "timbrel" or "tambourine." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 1074, replacing the KJV tabrets.
[^10] From Hebrew galah, meaning "uncover [or] remove; [to] become clear." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 162, replacing the KJV gone.
[^11] Desolation remains is a clearer rendering than the KJV left desolation.
[^12] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 510, renders this phrase as crushed to ruins, replacing the KJV smitten with destruction.
[^13] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 337-38.
[^14] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 349.
[^15] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 79.
[^16] New Witness for the Articles of Faith, 645.
[^17] NIV Isa. 24:13.
[^18] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 943, replacing the KJV sing.
[^19] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 843, replacing the KJV cry aloud.
[^20] From Hebrew 'uriym, meaning "region of light" or the "East." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 22, replacing the KJV fires.
[^21] NIV Isa. 24:16.
[^22] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 292.
[^23] From NIV Isa. 24:16, replacing the KJV My leanness, my leanness.
[^24] See Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 93, replacing the KJV the treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously.
[^25] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 219.
[^26] Journal of Discourses, 7:87 (28 August 1859).
[^27] Ogden, "Jerusalem," 723.
