Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 25

Likening Isa. 25 unto Ourselves

Latter-day Saints love to worship the Lord through singing hymns, and we do so on many occasions, such as at sacrament meetings, general conference, and baptisms. Isaiah, some seven hundred years before Christ, provided the words of a hymn (25:1- 5) that the righteous will sing after Jesus Christ destroys wickedness and corruption from off the face of the earth at his second coming. The words of the hymn should give us hope for the future as well as build our faith in him.

The second part of this chapter introduces us to a great sacred feast that will be prepared by the Lord (25:6-12). This feast is the supper of the Lord, or the Bridegroom, which will be attended by all the righteous.

A Hymn of Praise: Triumph over the Wicked (25:1-5)

Those who survive the judgments and the destructions upon the earth, as set forth in Isa. 24, will praise the Lord, perhaps in prayer or song. Isaiah preserves the words of a hymn of praise in these verses. The hymn includes words that bring us great comfort: Jehovah is our "strength" and our "refuge from the storm"; he is our "shadow from the heat." He is always there when we need him, whether for spiritual protection or physical safety.

Isa. 25:1-5

O Lord, thou art my God; I will exalt thee, I will praise thy name; for thou hast done wonderful things; thy counsels of old are faithfulness and truth. (25:1) For thou hast made [^1] of a city an heap; of a defenced city a ruin: a palace of strangers to be no city; it shall never be built. (25:2) Therefore shall the strong people glorify thee, the city of the terrible nations shall fear thee. (25:3) For thou hast been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall. (25:4) Thou shalt bring down the noise of strangers, as the heat in a dry place; even the heat with the shadow of a cloud: the [song] [^2] of the terrible ones shall be brought low. (25:5)

Notes and Commentary

25:1 O Lord, thou art my God. After addressing the Lord (O Lord), the one who utters this prayer bears testimony that Jehovah is God, a personal God.

I will exalt thee, I will praise thy name. Isaiah explains why we will praise God's name: He has "done wonderful things," and his "counsels of old are faithfulness and truth."

thou hast done wonderful things. The word wonderful (Hebrew pele') means something of an extraordinary nature. Jehovah has done extraordinary things for us, including abolishing death and wickedness and promising eternal life for the faithful. We recall that Jesus is called "Wonderful Counsellor" in 9:6. The Psalmist praised the Lord: "Thou art the God that doest wonders: thou hast declared thy strength among the people. Thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph" (Ps. 77:14-15).

counsels of old. Counsels (Hebrew ya'ats) speaks both of the plans that were made and of the determination to follow through with the plans (23:8-9). The words of old hark back to the premortal existence, when great ones made plans for the earth and her inhabitants.

25:2 thou hast made of a city an heap. City here refers to all cities wherein wickedness reigns. It is found in the singular form, perhaps recalling the ancient city of Babylon, which represents worldliness (D&C 1:16). Here Isaiah tells us that God will make a city into a heap of stones and rubble, and a fortified city into a ruin. This is one of the reasons why we will praise God's name.

25:3 strong people glorify thee. This refers to the Lord's righteous people (Job 17:9), both the house of Israel (Gen. 25:23) and the Gentiles who serve the Lord. In the last days, they will glorify (praise) the name of the Lord because of his mighty work of cleansing the earth of the wicked and redeeming the righteous.

city of the terrible nations shall fear thee. The New International Version reads "cities of ruthless nations will revere you." This may speak of the people who will remain after the destruction at Christ's coming and then become converted and worship the Lord (Ps. 86:9; Zech. 14:16).

25:4 thou hast been a strength to the poor. The Hebrew word for strength may be translated as "stronghold" (23:4), aptly describing how "God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble" (Ps. 46:1). The poor and needy described here are not simply financially bereft; they include the poor in spirit and the meek who are willing to submit to God's will and who will inherit the earth and the kingdom of heaven (3 Ne. 12:5; D&C 56:18-19). The Lord's strength makes these poor and needy into "strong people," standing in contrast to the strength of the rich and their "strong city" (Prov. 10:15), which will be brought down by the Lord (25:5).

thou hast been . . . a refuge from the storm. Jehovah is our refuge from the storm, our protection from both physical and spiritual danger. He is also our "sanctuary" (8:14) and our "tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the heat, and for a place of refuge" (4:6).

a shadow from the heat. The Lord protects us from the blast, or judgments, against the wicked.

blast of the terrible ones . . . storm. The blast may refer to the Lord's judgments upon the wicked, or terrible ones; it may also refer to the battle that will be waged between Israel and the nations of the world, when the nations of the world will come close to overtaking Jerusalem. Their fury will pound against the walls of the city until the Lord comes to defend his people.

25:5 Thou shalt bring down the noise of strangers/song of the terrible ones. The Lord at his second coming will silence the strangers (foreigners, or those not of the covenant) and the terrible ones; their clamorous atmosphere and noise of battle will be brought low and no longer exist.

heat in a dry place . . . shadow of a cloud. The New International Version reads, "You [Lord] silence the uproar of foreigners; as heat is reduced by the shadow of a cloud."

The Lord Prepares a Feast for the Righteous (25:6-12)

Jehovah plays a very active role in the events of the earth, including those that will occur during these last days and at his second coming, as set forth in this section. He will make a feast for all people (although only the meek and humble of the earth will attend), "destroy . . . the veil that is spread over all nations," he will "swallow up death in victory," "wipe away tears from off all faces," and take away the "rebuke of his people."

After we have partaken of the Lord's feast, and after he has wiped away our tears, we will worship him with these words (25:9):

Lo, this is our God; we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is the Lord; we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.

Note that with these words we will twice testify "this is our God/Lord," twice affirm "we have waited for him," and twice speak of his salvation ("save us"/"salvation").

Isa. 25:6-12

And in this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined. (25:6) And he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all people, and the veil that is spread over all nations. (25:7) He will swallow up death in victory; and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the earth: for the Lord hath spoken it. (25:8) And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God; we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is the Lord; we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation. (25:9) For in this mountain shall the hand of the Lord rest, (25:10a) And Moab shall be trodden down under him, even as straw is trodden down for the dunghill. (25:10b) And he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim: and he shall bring down their pride together with the spoils of their hands. (25:11) And the fortress of the high fort of thy walls shall he bring down, lay low, and bring to the ground, even to the dust. (25:12)

Notes and Commentary

25:6 this mountain. This phrase refers to Isa. 24:23 and also to "Mount Zion," or the New Jerusalem (D&C 84:2). Thus the great feast identified in this section will take place in the New Jerusalem.

feast of fat things, a feast of wines. By teaching the gospel to the earth's inhabitants, our missionaries invite people to come to this feast, also called "the supper of the Lord" (D&C 58:11), the "supper of the house of the Lord" (D&C 58:9), and the "marriage supper of the Lamb" (Rev. 19:9). "All nations" are invited—"first, the rich and the learned, the wise and the noble"—but when these reject the invitation to the feast, the Lord's representatives will invite the poor and the humble. Only those who have received the ordinances of the temple and who are truly the humble followers of Christ will be able to partake of the feast. This feast will take place at or near the time of the Second Coming (D&C 58:9-11; Rev. 19:7-8; Matt. 22:2-14; Luke 14:16-24).

fat things full of marrow. The feast, like the sacramental emblems, reminds us of Christ's atonement, for fat things and wines recall sacrificial offerings (Lev. 3:3-16) these things also imply abundance and bounty. The phrase wines on the lees well refined speaks of "wine that remains upon its settlings until it is well matured. It is then poured off and strained to provide the best wine possible," [^3] since only the very best will be served at the Lord's feast.

25:7 he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering. This covering, or veil, that is "cast over all people" or "all nations" may speak of the dark veil of ignorance or unbelief (Alma 19:6; 2 Cor. 3:14-16; Ether 4:15) that covers the hearts and minds of all people. The Lord has promised, "The day soon cometh that ye shall see me, and know that I am; for the veil of darkness shall soon be rent, and he that is not purified shall not abide the day" (D&C 38:8; 2 Ne. 30:16-18).

25:8 He will swallow up death in victory. Christ victoriously overcame death at his resurrection and made it possible for us also to swallow up death in victory. Paul quoted this passage: "So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. . . . Thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ" (1 Cor. 15:54-57; see also Hel. 14:14-18).

Lord God will wipe away tears. Tears come from the pain and sorrow associated with mortality, affliction, pain, death, and personal sin. When he dwells with us after his coming, Jesus Christ, who is well acquainted with grief (53:3), will remove the pains of our mortality (Rev. 7:17; 21:4; D&C 101:29).

for the Lord hath spoken it. God is the source of this revelation, and it will therefore surely come to pass.

25:9 in that day. The time frame for this chapter is the same as for chapters 24- 25: the time of the Lord's second coming (24:21).

we have waited for him. When the Lord wipes away our tears from our faces, we will rejoice.

save us/rejoice in his salvation. Save is the verb counterpart of the noun salvation; Savior is one of the titles of Jesus Christ. Jesus saves us from death ("he will swallow up death in victory") and from sin ("God will wipe away tears from off all faces").

25:10 in this mountain. See commentary on 25:6.

hand of the Lord rest. The hand of the Lord, which previously was stretched out against his people, now rests.

Moab shall be trodden down. Moab symbolizes the wicked, proud, and arrogant (16:6; Jer. 48:27-32), who will be completely destroyed (15 and 16). In contrast to the Lord's hand, which rests with his people, his feet will tread on Moab as easily as one treads upon the straw mixed with the dung on the dunghill. Isaiah's imagery expresses the great degradation of the world (Moab), which is as corrupt and polluted as filthy dung.

25:11 he shall spread forth his hands. In divine judgment the Lord will spread forth his hands and destroy Moab, or the wicked. With the same ease of a swimmer who puts forth his arms to pass through water, the Lord's judgments will pass through the midst of Moab until she has been brought down.

25:11-12 he shall bring down their pride. The pride of the wicked will be brought down (Prov. 16:18), along with the spoil of their hands, which speaks of things gained by their treacherous deeds. To emphasize their complete destruction, Isaiah uses repetitive language: "bring down" (twice), "lay low," "bring down to the ground," and "to the dust."

---
Notas:
[^1] From the Hebrew cheyl, meaning "rampart [or] fortress." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 298, replacing the KJV bulwarks.
[^2] DSS Isa. Scroll 26:2 reads your gates as opposed to the KJV the gates.
[^3] From the Hebrew samak, meaning to "lean, lay, rest, [or] support." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 701, replacing the KJV is stayed.
