Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 26

Likening Isa. 26 unto Ourselves

Isaiah, through revelation, composed a song for us to sing in "the land of Judah." The words of the song are about the city of Jerusalem, described as a "strong city" that is protected by God himself. Unlike the cities of the biblical world, Zion will not have regular walls that surround and protect it, because God himself will be her protection (26:1-6).

Isa. 26:7-18 is a prayer about the way the Lord sends judgments upon the wicked. The prayer is perhaps uttered by Israel, our ancestors, or ourselves in the near future. The Lord responds to this prayer in Isa. 26:19-21, promising the righteous that they will be safe during the destruction of the wicked and gives a promise of the resurrection. These words bring us great comfort in a world with so many negative occurrences and influences in our lives and in our communities.

A Song about a "Strong City" and the "Lofty City" (26:1-6)

This song, which will be sung by "the righteous nation which keepeth the truth" at the time of the Second Coming, is about a "strong city" and the "lofty city." The strong city is Zion, or Jerusalem. She has gates that only the righteous may enter. Her strength does not come from walls and bulwarks made of mortar and stone but from God's salvation. His power and everlasting strength will protect the city's inhabitants, who will enjoy perfect peace.

By contrast, Jehovah will bring down those who dwell in the lofty city, where the wicked and proud are found. In fact, Jehovah will bring down this city "even to the dust," and the feet of the poor and the needy will "tread it down."

Isa. 26:1-6

In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah; We have a strong city; salvation will God appoint for walls and [ramparts]. [^1] (26:1) Open ye [your gates], [^2] that the righteous nation which keepeth the truth may enter in. (26:2) Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind [rests] [^3] on thee: because he trusteth in thee. (26:3) Trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength: (26:4) For he bringeth down them that dwell on high; the lofty city, he layeth it low; he layeth it low, even to the ground; he bringeth it even to the dust. (26:5) The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy. (26:6)

Notes and Commentary

26:1 In that day. The time frame for chapter 26 is the same as for chapters 24 and 25: the day of the Lord, or the time of the Lord's second coming (2:12; 24:21).

song. Isaiah provides the actual words of the song here. The song will probably be sung by the Jews, as indicated by the phrase in the land of Judah.

the land of Judah. This expression refers to the land of the Jews.

We have a strong city. The strong city is Jerusalem, although the New Jerusalem has also been appointed as a strong city, or a refuge (D&C 124:36). The Lord has promised both these cities: "For I, saith the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her" (Zech. 2:5). In contrast, the cities of the world will be destroyed (25:2, 10-12).

salvation . . . for walls and ramparts. Salvation is one of the names of Jehovah. No ordinary walls, towers, or ramparts (Ps. 91:9; Jer. 17:5) will guard Zion: rather the Lord and the power of his atonement will defend his Zion communities (Ps. 125:2; Zech. 2:9).

26:2 Open ye your gates. The righteous will sing out to God, asking for entrance to the holy city: "Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will go into them, [and] I will praise the Lord: This gate of the Lord, into which the righteous shall enter" (13:2; Ps. 118:19-20).

righteous nation which keepeth the truth. These are the Lord's covenant people. The truths they keep are the laws and covenants of God, and their obedience will give them the right to enter the gates (33:14-16; 35:8-10).

26:3 perfect peace. The literal reading is peace, peace. Those of the strong city will have perfect peace if their mind rests on Jehovah and if they trust in him. Isaiah calls the Lord the Prince of Peace (9:6).

whose mind [rests] on thee. In our day the Lord has said, "Look unto me in every thought" (D&C 6:36). Those whose thoughts are upon the Lord continually are blessed with perfect peace.

26:4 Trust ye in the Lord for ever. Those singing here are not calling for a single act of faith, but faith that lasts an eternity.

everlasting strength. The Hebrew word for strength has the same root as the word for rock. Isaiah reminds us that the Lord is our sure foundation (17:10; 28:16; Hel. 5:12)—our eternal rock.

26:5 he bringeth down them that dwell on high. These are the proud and haughty who will be laid low (24:4).

the lofty city. This refers to Babylon, the city of worldliness. See also Isaiah's reference to the "crowning city" (23:8) and the "city of confusion" (24:10).

he bringeth it even to the dust. Isaiah emphasizes the humbling of the wicked with the phrases he bringeth down, he layeth it low (twice), even to the ground, he bringeth it to the dust. Also, the feet of the poor and needy will tread upon the lofty city. The words dust and ground recall the mortal nature of the proud, who were created from the dust.

26:6 the feet of the poor. "For the dwellers on high to be trampled under foot is indeed humiliation. The humiliation is seen to be even greater when we read that the feet that do the trampling are those of the ones who themselves had been oppressed. They are the needy and poor, who formerly had suffered from those who dwelt in the high city. Isaiah's figure shows the complete defeat of the enemies of God's kingdom and the full exaltation of those who in the eyes of the world were regarded as insignificant and poor, and who had suffered at the hands of unjust oppressors." [^4]

poor/needy. These words may be taken literally; or they may speak of them who can rely only on the Lord for strength (25:4).

A Prayer about the Lord's Judgments (26:7-18)

In this prayer Israel addresses God as "O Lord," "Lord," or "O Lord our God" seven times. The prayer is uttered by more than one person, as indicated by the frequent use of the plural we, although 26:9 twice uses the singular I. The theme of the prayer is the justice of the Lord, for the term judgments appears often; it is found in such expressions as "the way of thy judgments" and "thy judgments are in the earth." Other expressions are less explicit: "thy hand is lifted up" and "thy chastening was upon them."

The Lord's justice works two ways: the wicked suffer shame ("they shall see, and be ashamed") and destruction ("fire . . . shall devour them") as the result of the judgments, while the righteous experience peace ("Lord, thou wilt ordain peace for us"), an increase of Zion's numbers, and an expansion of Zion's borders (26:15).

When will this prayer be uttered? This prayer or one like it has been offered by the righteous since the beginning of the world, for it sets forth their desires for God's judgments. The prayer should also represent our desires.

Isa. 26:7-18

The way of the just is uprightness: thou, most upright, dost [make level] [^5] the path of the just. (26:7) Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee; the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. (26:8) With my soul have I desired thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee early: for when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness. (26:9) Let favor be [shown] [^6] to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness: in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the Lord. (26:10) Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at the people; yea, the fire of thine enemies shall devour them. (26:11) Lord, thou wilt ordain peace for us: for thou also hast wrought all our works in us. (26:12) O Lord our God, other lords beside thee have had dominion over us: but by thee only will we make mention of thy name. (26:13) They are dead, they shall not live; they are deceased, they shall not rise: therefore hast thou visited and destroyed them, and made all their memory to perish. (26:14) Thou hast increased the nation, O Lord, thou hast increased the nation: thou art glorified: thou hast [extended all the boundaries of the land]. [^7] (26:15) Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them. (26:16) Like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time of her delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in her pangs; so have we been in thy sight, O Lord. (26:17) We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were brought forth wind; we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth; neither have the inhabitants of the world fallen. (26:18)

Notes and Commentary

26:7 way of the just/path of the just. The way or path leads back to the presence of God; it represents life's journey taken by the just. The path is the straight and narrow path; Jesus is the way back to our Father's presence (John 14:6).

most upright, dost make level. Jesus Christ is the most upright, or the most righteous of all, who makes level the path of the just. To make level in the physical sense is to clear the path of bumps, boulders, and large holes so that the traveler can journey thereon. In the spiritual sense, Jesus Christ, through his atonement, provides a clear path for all who will make their way back to the Father (Ps. 25:8; 2 Ne. 31:16).

26:8 way of thy judgments . . . waited for thee. The righteous remain faithful to their covenants and wait patiently until God manifests his judgment (33:2).

desire of our soul is to thy name. The deepest desire of the righteous is to bear the name of the Lord and gain the salvation that comes only through that name (2 Ne. 31:13, 21).

26:9 With my soul have I desired thee in the night; yea, with my spirit. Both the body and the spirit yearn for the Lord and his presence continually; night and early express this thought.

when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants . . . learn righteousness. When the judgments of the Lord "are withheld and men seem to prosper, they tend to forget God. On the other hand, when times of adversity come and the judgments of God are felt, at that time men do learn God's righteousness." [^8]

26:10 Let favor be shown to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness. Although God sends blessings or judgments to give the wicked man opportunity to repent, he will not learn righteousness. Rather, Isaiah says he will deal unjustly in the land of uprightness.

land of uprightness . . . unjustly. Even in a land where others obey God's laws, the wicked will still do wickedly.

not behold the majesty of the Lord. The wicked will not behold the Lord's majesty, but will be destroyed by the fire of his second coming (24:6).

26:11 Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see. Transgressors do not perceive God's power in the judgments that are sent to the earth in every generation; they "confess not his hand in all things" (D&C 59:21).

but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at the people. The Jerusalem Bible has a much different reading: "Let them see your jealous love for this people and be ashamed, let the fire prepared for your enemies consume them." The shame that the wicked will experience pertains to the loss of the glory or honor that they would have received as God's worthy children. The fire mentioned here is an actual fire that will consume the wicked.

26:12 Lord, thou wilt ordain peace for us. Jehovah has established peace for us—a blessing that arises from a covenant relationship with him and membership in a strong city (26:3).

wrought all our works. The New International Version reads, "all that we have accomplished you have done for us."

26:13 O Lord our God, other lords beside thee have had dominion over us. "Two views are held regarding the term other lords. One is that they were foreign rulers who, at various times beginning with the period of the judges, had held sway over Israel. . . . The second view is that the prophet is referring to the idol-gods which the people had served repeatedly throughout their history (cf. Isa. 2:8; Kgs. 18:4-6;] Amos 5:25-26)." [^9]

by thee only will we make mention of thy name. We have a responsibility to bear record of the name of the Lord to the world, and the Spirit and power accompany his name only.

26:14 They are dead, they shall not live . . . hast thou visited and destroyed them. The foreign lords or false gods who once ruled the people of Israel no longer live; the Lord has visited them with destruction (23:17). He has "made all their memory to perish." Indeed, how many of us can name any of the gods of the Amorites, Hittites, or Moabites?

26:15 Thou hast increased the nation. The phrase is repeated twice for emphasis. In contrast to the destruction of wicked nations, the Lord's nation has been increased. The Lord, by means of scattering Israel and bringing the gospel to the Gentiles, has brought about an increase of his people.

thou art glorified. The fulfillment of the Abrahamic covenant brings glory to the Lord.

thou hast extended all the boundaries. This image speaks of the growth of Zion and her stakes in our day. Isaiah presents a full discussion of these things in Isa. 54:1-3, where he instructs us to enlarge our tent and stretch forth our habitations; we will do this to accommodate our numbers because there will be so many members of Israel who will "break forth on the right hand and on the left" and even make "the desolate cities to be inhabited."

26:16 in trouble have they visited thee. This idea is more clearly expressed in D&C 101:8: "In the day of their peace they esteemed lightly my counsel; but, in the day of their trouble, of necessity they feel after me."

thy chastening was upon them. This message is also for us, who are part of Zion: "I, the Lord, will contend with Zion . . . and chasten her until she overcomes and is clean before me" (D&C 90:36) also "My people must needs be chastened until they learn obedience" (D&C 105:6).

26:17-18 Like as a woman with child. Israel is like a pregnant woman who has carried her child for nine months and then suffers the great pains that are associated with delivering a child. She does not, however, bring forth a child but rather brings forth "wind," perhaps symbolizing her destruction.

Israel was responsible for bringing forth the fruit that the Lord intended, such as the gospel with its saving ordinances. She (Israel) did not provide that deliverance or life to the world (Isaiah says, "We have not wrought any deliverance in the earth"), neither have the inhabitants of the world "fallen from the womb" (Hebrew napal) [^10] or become born of God. Instead, Israel brought forth nothing but wind, and the pain associated with her delivery (such as God's chastisements, exile, etc.) was for naught.

The Lord Responds to Israel's Prayer and Promises the Resurrection (26:19-21)

Israel offered a prayer to the Lord in the previous section, contemplating different aspects of God's judgments upon the wicked (26:7-18). Here the Lord responds to that prayer with a promise of the resurrection and of safety from devastation.

Isaiah presents clear prophetic statements about the resurrection of Jehovah and humanity. The words "Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise" are straightforward, so as not to be misunderstood. Jehovah has arisen from the dead, along with many of the Saints, in partial fulfillment of Isaiah's words, for many have witnessed his resurrection, including the Nephites at the temple in Bountiful (3 Ne. 11). Others have witnessed the resurrection of the Saints (Matt. 27:52-53) other resurrections are yet to come.

Isaiah provides information vital to us for surviving God's judgments upon the earth: "Enter into [our] chambers . . . until the indignation pass over" (26:20).

Isa. 26:19-21

Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of [the morning], [^11] and the earth shall cast out the dead. (26:19) Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors [behind] [^12] thee: hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation [pass over]. [^13] (26:20) For, behold, the Lord cometh out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain. (26:21)

Notes and Commentary

26:19 Thy dead men shall live. This is a promise of the resurrection.

together with my dead body shall they arise. The dead body referred to is that of Jesus Christ. This prophecy was fulfilled at Jesus' resurrection. Matthew recorded that after Jesus arose from the dead, "the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose" (Matt. 27:52-53).

Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust. The call is made for those who are dead to awake from the sleep of death and sing praises to the Lord who made the resurrection possible. Joseph Smith also prophesied, "And the graves of the saints shall be opened; and they shall come forth and stand on the right hand of the Lamb, when he shall stand upon Mount Zion, and upon the holy city, the New Jerusalem; and they shall sing the song of the Lamb, day and night forever and ever" (D&C 133:56; D&C 128:22).

for thy dew is as the dew of the morning. The literal reading of the phrase dew of the morning is "dew of lights." Isaiah compares resurrected bodies to the dew of the morning because of dew's association with life. "Dew is a very important element in Palestine's ecosystem. During the long dry months it is the only moisture the vegetation receives. It became a symbol for life. Light is also an important symbol of life and well-being." [^14] Interestingly, dew is also associated with the manna given to the Israelites to save their lives during the exodus (Ex. 16:13-15; Num. 11:9).

earth shall cast out the dead. This is another reference to the resurrection.

26:20 Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers. The Lord invites us to enter our chambers while he destroys the wicked ("until the indignation pass over"). Chambers may refer to our homes and inner chambers, where we offer our prayers to our Father (Matt. 6:6) it may refer to the Lord's temples, where the righteous seek refuge from the world, or chambers may refer to the Lord himself, who is our "refuge from the storm" (25:4).

shut thy doors behind thee. Contrasting the open gates of verse two, before the appearance of the Lord, Isaiah counsels the Lord's people to shut their doors. The shut doors recall the Passover, when the people of Israel remained within their homes while the angel destroyed Egypt's firstborn (Ex. 12:21-27) they also recall Noah's family, shut in the ark until the destructive floods had passed (Gen. 7:1, 16).

indignation. God's great judgment, which will cleanse or purify the earth.

26:21 Lord cometh out of his place. The Lord will come forth from his heavenly temple to cleanse the world of sin.

earth also shall disclose her blood. The blood of the innocent, speaking figuratively, has long called out from the earth for vengeance (Gen. 4:10; Job 16:18; Ezek. 24:7-8).

---
Notas:
[^1] From Hebrew qashah, meaning to be "hard, severe [or] . . . fierce." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 904, replacing the KJV sore.
[^2] From the Hebrew barach, meaning to "go through [or] flee." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 137, replacing the KJV piercing.
[^3] The preposition 'al in Hebrew can be translated as "to, for, in regard to, about."
[^4] From the Hebrew chemed, meaning "desire, delight." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 326; cf. Amos 5:10. This replaces the KJV red wine.
[^5] From Hebrew natsar, meaning to "watch, guard." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 665, replacing the KJV keep.
[^6] NIV Isa. 27:6 replacing the KJV he shall cause them that come of Jacob to.
[^7] This reading from NIV Isa. better reflects the reading of the Hebrew Bible.
[^8] We have replaced the archaic KJV shew.
[^9] The river here is the Euphrates.
[^10] McConkie and Parry, Guide to Scriptural Symbols, 107.
[^11] History of the Church, 5:423.
[^12] NIV Isa. 26:20, replacing the KJV about.
[^13] Hebrew 'abar, meaning to "pass over, through, by, pass on." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 716.
[^14] Watts, Isa. 1-33, 342.
