Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 27

Likening Isa. 27 unto Ourselves

The marvelous prophecies of this chapter are being fulfilled in our dispensation by elders and sisters who are serving full-time missions and by the Saints who are letting their light shine before their neighbors and friends. We are teaching individuals the gospel, and one by one they are coming unto Christ. We are "the weak things of the earth,"["thrash[ing] the nations by the power of the Spirit" (D&C 133:59). We are also witnessing the fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecy concerning temple work (27:13).

Israel Will Be Gathered in the Last Days (27:1-13)

This entire chapter deals directly with us as members of the Church; it shows the great love and care that the Lord has for us and outlines the many blessings that can be ours:

With his great sword, the Lord punishes Satan (27:1);

He provides us (the vineyard) with water every moment (27:3);

He watches over us (the vineyard) night and day (27:3);

He protects us from our enemies (briers and thorns) (27:4);

He provides us with peace (27:5);

Because of him, we will "fill the face of the world with fruit" (27:6); and

He will thresh the nations and gather us from the world one by one (27:12).

The words in this chapter imply a covenantal relationship. In return for the many blessings bestowed on us by the Lord, we will share the gospel in all the world (27:6, 12) and worship him at his holy temple (27:13).

Isa. 27:1-13

In that day the Lord with his [hard] [^1] and great and strong sword shall punish leviathan the [fleeing] [^2] serpent, even leviathan that crooked serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea. (27:1) In that day sing ye [about], [^3] A vineyard of [delight]. [^4] (27:2) I the Lord do keep it; I will water it every moment: lest any hurt it, I will [guard] [^5] it night and day. (27:3) Fury is not in me: who would set the briers and thorns against me in battle? I would go through them, I would burn them together. (27:4) Or let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me; and he shall make peace with me. (27:5) [In days to come Jacob will] [^6] take root: Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit. (27:6) Hath he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? or is he slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him? (27:7) [By warfare and exile you contend with him], [^7] he stayeth his rough wind in the day of the east wind. (27:8) By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged; and this is all the fruit to take away his sin; when he maketh all the stones of the altar as chalkstones that are beaten in sunder, the groves and images shall not stand up. (27:9) Yet the defenced city shall be desolate, and the habitation forsaken, and left like a wilderness: there shall the calf feed, and there shall he lie down, and consume the branches thereof. (27:10) When the boughs thereof are withered, they shall be broken off: the women come, and set them on fire: for it is a people of no understanding: therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will [show] [^8] them no favor. (27:11) And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall beat off from the channel of the river [^9] unto the stream of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel. (27:12) And it shall come to pass in that day, that the great trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which were ready to perish in the land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and shall worship the Lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem. (27:13)

Notes and Commentary

27:1 In that day. In the day of the Lord, meaning the time of the Lord's second coming (see 2:12).

great and strong sword. At his second coming, Jesus Christ will use his sword to wage war against Satan (see commentary on 34:5).

leviathan/fleeing serpent/crooked serpent/dragon. These terms refer to Satan. The meaning of leviathan is uncertain. Elsewhere Satan is identified as "serpent" and "dragon" (51:9; 2 Ne. 2:18)—terms that describe his nature. Fleeing may also be understood as swift, while crooked suggests deception or treachery. Both are valid descriptions of the adversary, who must be conquered in order for the Lord's vineyard to be safe and for Zion to be fully established. The Lord will accomplish this at the beginning of his millennial reign (Rev. 20:1-2).

sea. The "destroyer rideth upon the face" of the waters (D&C 61:19).

27:2 sing ye. Verses 2-6 recall the song of the vineyard introduced in Isa. 5. The song in chapter 5 addresses the vineyard's destruction; these verses here speak of the vineyard's redemption.

vineyard of delight. The house of Israel, meaning the covenant people of the Lord. In contrast to the wild grapes of Isa. 5:2, 4 the languishing vineyards of Isa. 24:9-11, and Israel will become a vineyard of delight. For this reason the Lord will take great care of it by keeping and watering it every moment and guarding it night and day.

27:3 I the Lord do keep it. The Lord himself is the caretaker and the guardian of the vineyard. This is a contrast to Isa. 5:5, in which he no longer protects Israel because of her nonproductivity, or wickedness.

I will water it every moment. For the meaning of water here, see Isa. 8:6. The expression every moment indicates that the Lord will give divine attention to the vineyard.

lest any hurt it. The Lord will not permit his enemies to destroy the vineyard.

I will guard it night and day. A destroyer continually waits to attack, so Jehovah will watch over his vineyard constantly. Similarly, "He that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord is thy keeper: the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand. The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night. The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy soul" (Ps. 121:4-7; Isa. 25:4-5).

27:4 Fury is not in me. The wrath of the Lord, which once hung over the unrighteous of his covenant people, has been lifted, and now he seeks to defend his vineyard (contrast Isa. 5:5-7, 25).

briers/thorns. The enemies of the Lord's people. As briers and thorns hamper the growth of the vineyard, so Israel's enemies attempt to halt the growth of the Lord's vineyard (7:23-25). Briers and thorns were previously allowed to grow in the vineyard (5:6; 32:13), but now they are removed.

I would burn them. The Lord at his coming will act against the wicked, overcoming all who oppose him by destroying them with fire (10:17; 26:11); this destruction will be as simple as burning the briers and thorns in a vineyard.

27:5 let him take hold of my strength. This statement is made concerning the briers and thorns in the vineyard, or the enemies of the kingdom, indicating that membership in the vineyard is granted to any who will turn to the Lord. We can take hold of God's strength by making covenants.

he may make peace with me. The blessing and reward of a covenant relationship with God is peace.

27:6 Jacob/Israel. The covenant people of the Lord (Ether 13:10-11).

Jacob will take root. The vineyard (Jacob) will take root, or will become firmly established, in the promised land; after the vineyard matures (blossoms and buds), it will fill "the world with fruit," which may speak of literal offspring (2 Ne. 3:4; Gen. 30:2) or possibly righteous deeds (Jer. 17:7-8; see also commentary on 35:1).

27:7 Hath he smitten him. The verse is difficult without the grammatical subjects and objects, so we supply them here in brackets: "Hath he [God] smitten him [Israel], as he [God] smote those [Israel's oppressors] that smote him [Israel]? or is he [Israel] slain according to the slaughter of them [Israel's oppressors] that are slain by him [God]?" The two rhetorical questions show that even in Israel's gross wickedness, the Lord did not completely destroy Israel as he did her oppressors (Assyria and Babylon). Rather, the Lord has scattered Israel as a chastisement to bring about a repentant people.

27:8 By warfare and exile you contend with him. The Lord punishes Israel by sending armies to war against her and by sending her into exile.

he stayeth his rough wind in the day of the east wind. The east wind is God's destructive wind, symbolizing his judgments.

27:9 By this . . . shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged. "Warfare" and "exile"— God's chastisements upon Israel—will purge Israel from her iniquity: "I, the Lord, will contend with Zion . . . and chasten her until she overcomes and is clean before me" (D&C 90:36).

this is all the fruit to take away his sin. The fruit (result) of the purging of Israel, which will remove the blemish of sin, is the destruction of all forms of false worship.

he maketh all the stones of the altar as chalkstones. Chalkstone, a soft stone that crumbles easily and quickly dissolves in rain, symbolizes the complete destruction of the altars of idolatry. When Israel's inhabitants destroy all forms of idolatry and false worship from their land and hearts, as if making all the stones of the altars into chalkstone, then will their iniquity be purged.

the groves. See commentary on 1:29; 17:8.

27:10 the defenced city shall be desolate. Before the nation of Israel obtains redemption, her great, walled cities will be destroyed and the people carried away captive. This will leave both city and house empty and open to any wandering animal (6:11-12).

wilderness. "Diametrically opposite to the promised land, the Garden of Eden, and Zion stands the wilderness or desert (Isa. 51:3; Joel 2:3; Isa. 35:6-7). Scriptural expressions set forth the desolate state of the wilderness—it is a 'land of darkness' (Jer. 2:31), a 'parched ground,' a 'thirsty land,' and a 'habitation of dragons' (Isa. 35:6-7). Further, 'the wilderness' is a 'land of deserts and of pits, . . . a land of drought, and of the shadow of death, . . . a land that no man passed through, and where no man dwelt' (Jer. 2:6). Divine curses and judgments transform rich lands and fruitful territories into deserts, due to the wickedness and abominations of the people which inhabit such areas (Joel 3:19; Jer. 17:5-6; 50:12)." [^10]

there shall the calf feed. With the inhabitants of the cities gone, cattle will roam the land, eating what they can find and sleeping wherever they wish (5:5; 7:25). In the process they will strip bare the branches of the vineyards and the trees, so that there will be nothing of value left, except withered wood for fire (27:11).

27:11 women come, and set them on fire. Withered wood will be all that remains of value once the homes and cities are destroyed; women will seek for wood, using it as fuel for cooking and warmth. There is a spiritual meaning here: After the destruction of idolatry (27:9) and the desolation of cities and homes (27:10) in the last days, all that will remain will be the burning, representing the burning at the Second Coming.

people of no understanding. This same accusation is made in 1:3. The people of the Lord do not understand who their God is or their covenantal relationship with him. Therefore, the Lord "that made them will not have mercy on them."

27:12 that day. Isaiah now prophesies of the last days.

the Lord shall beat off from the channel of the river unto the stream of Egypt. The New International Version reads, "The Lord will thresh from the flowing Euphrates to the Wadi of Egypt." We, the house of Israel, are God's threshing (21:10). Jehovah himself will take an active role in the gathering of Israel in the last days; he will thresh the entire world (from the Euphrates to the Nile, because these were the original boundaries of the realm of David; see Gen. 15:18; 1 Kgs. 4:21; 8:65), seeking the precious kernels of wheat (see the parable of the farmer in 28:23-29). As representatives of the Lord, we are assisting in the gathering of Israel through missionary work and through being a light upon a hill (Matt. 5:14-16). We are "the weak things of the world, those who are unlearned and despised"—those whom God has called upon "to thrash the nations by the power of [his] Spirit" (D&C 35:13).

ye shall be gathered one by one. Ye refers to the children of Israel. In our day the elders of Israel are commanded to assist in the gathering of Israel: "And ye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect" (D&C 29:7). Members of the house of Israel do not usually join the Church in large groups; instead, they gather one by one as they hearken to the truth.

27:13 the great trumpet shall be blown. The Lord calls upon the nations to gather to the gospel "by the mouth of [his] servants, and by the ministering of angels, and by [his] own voice . . . and by the great sound of a trump" (D&C 43:25; Matt. 24:31; D&C 49:23).

they shall come which were ready to perish in the land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the land of Egypt. The scattered children of Israel, at the point of perishing spiritually, will hearken to the trumpet and gather to the gospel banner. Assyria and Egypt, two of Israel's former enemies, serve here as symbols of wickedness.

shall worship the Lord in the holy mount. The holy mount refers to the temples of the Lord. "The object of gathering the Jews, or the people of God in any age of the world . . . was to build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of His house." [^11]

---
Notas:
[^1] From the Hebrew word bikurah, meaning "first ripe fig, early fig." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 114, replacing the KJV hasty fruit.
[^2] Kiy may also be read indeed, which replaces the KJV for. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 471-72.
[^3] See "Cleansing the Inner Vessel," 6-7.
[^4] McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 76.
[^5] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 348; emphasis omitted.
[^6] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 18; cf. D&C 45:31.
[^7] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 17.
[^8] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 252.
[^9] Watts, Isa. 1-33, 375-76.
[^10] Keil and Delitzsch, Commentary, 7:2:14-17.
[^11] Watts, Isa. 1-33, 376.
