Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 30

Likening Isa. 30 unto Ourselves

Many of us who dwell in Zion repeat the transgressions of some of our ancient Israelite ancestors: We reject our living prophets, or we accept only a portion of their counsel; we forget to pray to our Father, or we pray insincerely or irregularly; we trust in our arms and armies for protection rather than in our God, as our ancestors trusted anciently in Egypt's horses, chariots, and armies; and we despise God's word, or find the gospel too hard to accept (30:1-17).

Others of us who dwell in Zion experience the great fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecies: The Lord hears and answers our prayers, the Holy Ghost provides us with constant guidance, and we enjoy the bounties of the land (30:18-26).

Judah Rejects Her Prophets and Walks with Egypt (30:1-17)

Isaiah addresses the issue of trusting in man rather than in God. Judah's leaders sought an alliance with Egypt against Assyria, contrary to the counsel of the Lord (30:1-2). Now Isaiah promises that their reliance on Egypt will be unfruitful and will cause their downfall (30:3). Because of Judah's wickedness and her rebellion against God, her destruction will come "suddenly at an instant" (30:13). Her sins are many: she does not take counsel from the Lord (30:1); she does not pray to the Lord (30:2); she trusts Egypt and its horses rather than the Lord (30:2, 16); she carries her riches there (30:6); she rejects her prophets and seers and desires them to prophesy "smooth things" and lies (30:10); and she despises God's word (30:12). Note the Lord's command to Isaiah to record this prophecy in a book so that future generations, including our own, will learn that Judah was "a rebellious people" (30:8-9).

Isa. 30:1-17

Woe to the rebellious children, saith the Lord, that take counsel, but not of me; and that poured out a libation, [^1] but not of my spirit, that they may add sin to sin: (30:1) That walk to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my mouth; to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egypt! (30:2) Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt your confusion. (30:3) For his princes were at Zoan, and his ambassadors came to Hanes. (30:4) They were all ashamed of a people that could not profit them, nor be an help nor profit, but a shame, and also a reproach. (30:5) The burden of the beasts of the south: into the land of trouble and anguish, from whence come the young and old lion, the viper and fiery flying serpent, they will carry their riches upon the shoulders of young asses, and their treasures upon the bunches of camels, to a people that shall not profit them. (30:6) For the Egyptians shall help in vain, and to no purpose: therefore have I cried concerning this, Their strength is to sit still. (30:7) Now go, write it before them in a table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever: (30:8) That this is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will not hear the law of the Lord: (30:9) Which say to the seers, See not; and to the prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits: (30:10) Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us. (30:11) Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel, Because ye despise this word, and trust in oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon: (30:12) Therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking cometh suddenly at an instant. (30:13) And he shall break it as the breaking of the potters' vessel that is broken in pieces; he shall not spare: so that there shall not be found in the bursting of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit. (30:14) For thus saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel; In returning and rest shall ye be saved; in quietness and in confidence shall be your strength: and ye would not. (30:15) But ye said, No; for we will flee upon horses; therefore shall ye flee: and, We will ride upon the swift; therefore shall they that pursue you be swift. (30:16) One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one; at the rebuke of five shall ye flee: till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain, and as an ensign on an hill. (30:17)

Notes and Commentary

30:1 Woe. This message of judgment against Judah (5:8) is also against "the rebellious children" in all ages.

rebellious children. This describes the inhabitants of Judah and the rebellious children in all ages (1:2).

take counsel, but not of me. Judah ignored the word of the Lord received through the prophets and sought counsel from such foreign nations as Egypt, as well as from false gods. In our day, many do the same, listening to guidance and counsel from many sources, while rejecting the true prophets and the Holy Spirit of God.

poured out a libation, but not of my spirit. Judah made offerings to false gods and offerings that were not directed or approved by the Lord.

add sin to sin. Judah refused to follow the counsel of the Lord concerning her relationship with Assyria, which brought Judah under Assyrian vassalage. Judah's people then sought to free themselves from the shadow of Assyria by forming an alliance with Egypt, again ignoring the Lord's counsel, thus adding "sin to sin" (Jer. 2:18). Likewise, we add sin to sin by first rejecting the voice of the Lord and then walking in our own way contrary to his.

30:2-3 walk . . . down into Egypt. Instead of walking on the Lord's paths, the leaders chose to follow a path of rebellion leading to Egypt, where Israel was once in bondage. We ourselves walk down into bondage in Egypt symbolically when we walk the path of sin.

have not asked at my mouth. Judah's wicked leaders were not praying to the Lord or seeking the Lord's counsel through his prophets.

strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh. Jerusalem's leaders sought to strengthen themselves by establishing an alliance with Egypt, ruled by Pharaoh Psamtik I, who seemed to offer strength and protection. The consequence of Judah's alliance with Egypt was the eventual enslavement and deportation of the people by the Assyrians, to their shame and confusion. It is always a sin to trust in the arm of flesh rather than the power of God.

trust in the shadow of Egypt. Judah trusted in Egypt's military might and political strength. Isaiah's reference to shadow of Egypt indicates that the might and strength of Egypt are as a mere shadow—fleeting, dark, and insubstantial—when compared to the power of God.

30:4 For his princes were at Zoan, and his ambassadors came to Hanes. Zoan (also known as Tanis) and Hanes were cities in Egypt where the princes and ambassadors of Egypt met with Judah's representatives to discuss a possible alliance.

30:5 They were all ashamed. Judah's ambassadors were ashamed of their alliance with Egypt, for it did not profit them—Egypt was not strong enough to stand against Assyria.

30:6 burden of the beasts of the south. A burden is a prophecy of doom or judgment against a people. This prophecy, strangely enough, is pronounced on the beasts, the camels and asses belonging to Judah's leaders, who are using them to transport their gifts and bribes to Egypt. Ironically, the children of Israel once escaped bondage through the Negev (south) carrying Egypt's treasures with them (Ex. 11:2), but now they return with the treasures of Jerusalem to purchase an alliance, another form of bondage. The beasts may represent Judah's leaders.

young and old lion/viper/fiery flying serpent. These same creatures plagued the Israelites as they escaped Egypt's pharaoh and armies (Num. 21:4-6; Deut. 8:15; see the discussion of fiery flying serpent in commentary on 14:29).

they will carry their riches upon . . . young asses. Judah's leaders will carry gifts to Egypt, a people that shall not profit them. Similarly, we sometimes devote our time, energy, or resources (our riches) to purposes or causes that are contrary to God's will. In the end, all such activities will not profit us.

30:7 Egyptians shall help in vain. The Egyptians' help will not profit Judah (30:5). Whenever we seek help from the world, apart from God, it will be in vain.

Their strength is to sit still. Isaiah has cried out to Judah that she should sit still, for her strength lies not in taking action against Assyria but rather in trusting the Lord.

30:8 write . . . in a table/note it in a book. The Lord commands Isaiah to record this testimony against Judah as a witness to future generations (for the time to come for ever and ever) that Judah is a rebellious people, that is, children who will not hear the law of the Lord.

30:9 this is a rebellious people. Isaiah lists in a book the iniquities of the people of Judah—they are rebellious, lying children, who will not hear the law of the Lord. They refuse to hearken to their prophets and seers but tell them to "See not; . . . Prophesy not . . . , speak . . . smooth things, . . . get . . . out of the way, . . . cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us" (30:10-11).

30:10 Prophesy not unto us right things/speak . . . smooth things/prophesy deceits. "If a prophet come among you and declareth unto you the word of the Lord, which testifieth of your sins and iniquities, ye are angry with him, and cast him out. . . . But behold, if a man shall come among you and shall say: Do this, and there is no iniquity; do that and ye shall not suffer; . . . do whatsoever your heart desireth— . . . because he speaketh flattering words unto you, and he saith that all is well, then ye will not find fault with him" (Hel. 13:26-28).

30:11 Get you out of the way. See commentary on 26:7.

cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us. Inasmuch as "the guilty taketh the truth to be hard, for it cutteth them to the very center" (1 Ne. 16:2), they do not want religion and they do not want God in their lives.

30:12 despise this word. The phrase this word refers to Isaiah's revelation concerning the futility of an alliance with Egypt, a prophecy Judah refused to heed.

trust in oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon. The Jerusalem Bible reads, "you . . . prefer to trust in wile and guile and rely on these." Judah chose to trust in the might of the pharaoh of Egypt, a man of wile and guile, rather than in the Lord.

30:13 breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall. Isaiah compares Judah's iniquity to a large crack in the outside wall that protects Jerusalem. The crack expands, weakening the wall until it suddenly crumbles. Similarly, Judah's inhabitants have been weakened through sin; their iniquity increases like the crack in the wall until the nation is destroyed because its enemies are able to enter through the breach. This excellent description illustrates the effect of sin on all of us. Even a little sin, not repented of, can be like a crack in a wall, which can grow larger and larger until it leads to our spiritual destruction.

30:14 he shall break it as the breaking of the potters' vessel. Isaiah likens the fall of Judah to a shattered clay vessel that can no longer serve its original purpose. Not a single shard (a fragment of the shattered vessel) is large enough to serve as a scoop "to take fire from the hearth" or "to take water" from a pool of water. Similarly, Judah's inhabitants are not suitable to serve as God's holy people.

30:15 In returning and rest shall ye be saved. The New International Version reads, "In repentance and rest is your salvation." The people of Judah would have found salvation from God and deliverance from Assyria through repentance, but they said "No!" (30:16).

30:16 for we will flee upon horses. In direct opposition to the will of the Lord (Deut. 17:16), Judah's leaders placed their confidence in Egypt's horses and chariots (31:1), believing they would be able to flee from the Assyrian armies. The Lord, however, warns Judah that these plans will not work, for her pursuers will be swift (Amos 2:14-15; Deut. 28:49).

30:17 One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one. The Jerusalem Bible reads, "A thousand will flee at the threat of one." The Lord had earlier promised Israel that five of them would chase one hundred enemies and that one hundred of them would put ten thousand to flight (Lev. 26:8) because the Lord would be with them. But that promise was no longer in effect, and now Judah would be put to flight because she abandoned God.

till ye be left as a beacon . . . and as an ensign. Where there had once been a multitude living in a city, only a small remnant would be left. Although only a few of Judah's population would remain, they will still act as an ensign and beacon, or light to the world.

Zion Is Restored in Jerusalem (30:18-26)

Wonderful blessings await the Lord's people who will "dwell in Zion at Jerusalem" (30:19): They will no longer weep; Jehovah promises to answer their prayers; they will be blessed to see their "Teacher," he who taught them the law and the gospel; the Holy Ghost will give them guidance; they will renounce all their false gods; and they will receive the bounties of the land.

Isa. 30:18-26

And therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious unto you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you: for the Lord is a God of judgment: blessed are all they that wait for him. (30:18) For the people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem: thou shalt weep no more: he will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry; when he shall hear it, he will answer thee. (30:19) And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers: (30:20) And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left. (30:21) Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy molten images of gold: thou shalt cast them away as a menstruous cloth; thou shalt say unto it, Get thee hence. (30:22) Then shall he give the rain of thy seed, that thou shalt sow the ground withal; and bread of the increase of the earth, and it shall be fat and plenteous: in that day shall thy cattle feed in large pastures. (30:23) The oxen likewise and the young asses that ear the ground shall eat clean provender, which hath been winnowed with the shovel and with the fan. (30:24) And there shall be upon every high mountain, and upon every high hill, rivers and streams of waters in the day of the great slaughter, when the towers fall. (30:25) Moreover the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that the Lord bindeth up the breach of his people, and healeth the stroke of their wound. (30:26)

Notes and Commentary

30:18 therefore will the Lord wait. The Hebrew reading of this verse indicates that the Lord is waiting to be gracious and show mercy on Israel, but his blessings must wait until justice has been served.

therefore will he be exalted. This phrase should more properly read "therefore will he rise."

blessed are all they that wait for him. Note the reciprocal relationship shown in the double usage of the verb wait in this verse: The Lord waits (longs) to be gracious to the righteous, and those who wait, or long, for the Lord, will be blessed.

30:19 weep no more. Once the Jews have been restored to their homeland and the Lord comes to reign, he will wipe away their tears. The same promise was made in 25:7-8 to those in New Jerusalem.

he will be very gracious unto thee. The Lord will pour forth the blessings of the Atonement and the bountiful gifts of his Spirit on all who dwell in Zion.

at the voice of thy cry. When Israel cries to the Lord in prayer, the Lord will answer her prayers.

30:20 bread of adversity/water of affliction. Though our trials be as common as our daily bread and water, yet the Lord promises us that "all things wherewith you have been afflicted shall work together for your good, and to my name's glory" (D&C 98:3; 122:7).

thine eyes shall see thy teachers. The phrase thy teachers should read the singular, thy teacher, because it refers to the Lord, who was Israel's great teacher and eternal lawgiver. When this prophecy is fulfilled, the Lord will not "be removed into a corner"; he will no longer need to withdraw himself from his people because they will no longer be idolatrous or rebellious. Rather, their eyes shall see their teacher when he comes in glory to Israel as a whole and to her people individually.

30:21 thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way. The Lord guides his people with a quiet, unseen voice, the voice of the Holy Ghost. He prevents them from straying to the right hand or to the left.

30:22 Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven images. Rather than idols and graven images defiling individual members of Israel, as had happened many times throughout history, Israel will now cast away her idols as one throws away a menstruous cloth. According to the law of Moses, a menstruous cloth defiled anyone who touched it, making him or her ritually unclean (Lev. 15:19-30) similarly anyone who touched an idol was religiously unclean. Israel will tell her idols, Get thee hence.

30:23 rain/increase of the earth. Wickedness is often associated with drought and the earth's infertility (24:4; Deut. 11:17), whereas righteousness brings blessings and plenty. With Israel's full dedication to the Lord comes the promise of beneficial rains, fertile ground, and the Lord's bounty in all areas (fat and plenteous and large

pastures). The blessing of rain and bread promised here contrasts with the water of affliction and the bread of adversity given to Israel's rebellious people (30:20).

30:24 oxen likewise and the young asses that ear the ground. These animals were used to ear the ground, or to plow the fields and work the soil. These, like the cattle mentioned in verse 23, will be well fed and blessed because of the righteousness of Israel.

30:25 there shall be upon every high mountain, and upon every high hill, rivers and streams. The rain promised in 30:23 will lead to an abundance of water on every hill and mountain (41:18). The implication is that we, the house of Israel, will receive great spiritual blessings, an abundance of the "living waters" of Christ.

the day of the great slaughter/towers fall. The blessings mentioned in 30:23-25 will come to the Lord's people at the same time that a great slaughter assails the wicked, when battles and warfare destroy fortifications and towers fall. This slaughter may refer to God's judgments on the wicked in the last days, perhaps in the form of nations fighting amongst themselves.

30:26 light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun. This passage may be understood in several ways: The magnification of the sun "sevenfold, as the light of seven days" may be symbolic of the seventh thousand-year period of the earth, the Millennium, when Christ and his much greater light will be on the earth. In 24:23, these same heavenly bodies symbolically participated in a great event associated with Jehovah, so the moon and the sun are linked to the time when the Lord "bindeth up the breach of his people, and healeth the stroke of their wound." Moreover, the moon and sun's increase in brightness may indicate the increase in the light of Christ, Holy Ghost, and gifts of the Spirit that will be present among the people after their wounds are healed. Heavenly spheres have often been mentioned in prophecies in a literal manner; perhaps this prophecy will have a literal fulfillment.

Lord bindeth up the breach. The Lord will remove the "breach in the wall" caused by Israel's wickedness (30:13). This primary function of the atonement of Jesus Christ makes us "at one" with God.

Lord . . . healeth the stroke of their wound. Through the power of the Atonement, Jehovah, the great physician, heals Israel's spiritual wounds.

The Lord Burns the Wicked at His Second Coming (30:27-33)

Isaiah describes the destruction of Assyria, meaning the wicked and their wickedness, to take place at Jesus Christ's second coming. He speaks of burning, devouring fire, flame of a devouring fire, scattering, tempest, hailstones, and brimstone. Isaiah assures those who dwell in Zion (the pure in heart who become one with their fellows) that they will be protected during these events and promises that they will sing songs to the Lord, worship at his temple, and experience a gladness of heart.

Isa. 30:27-33

Behold, the name of the Lord cometh from far, burning with his anger, and the burden thereof is heavy: his lips are full of indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire: (30:27) And his breath, as an overflowing stream, shall reach to the midst of the neck, to sift the nations with the sieve of vanity: and there shall be a bridle in the jaws of the people, causing them to err. (30:28) Ye shall have a song, as in the night when a holy solemnity is kept; and gladness of heart, as when one goeth with a pipe to come into the mountain of the Lord, to the mighty One of Israel. (30:29) And the Lord shall cause his glorious voice to be heard, and shall [show] [^2] the lighting down of his arm, with the indignation of his anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire, with scattering, and tempest, and hailstones. (30:30) For through the voice of the Lord shall the Assyrian be beaten down, which smote with a rod. (30:31) And in every place where the grounded staff shall pass, which the Lord shall lay upon him, it shall be with tabrets and harps: and in battles of shaking will he fight with it. (30:32) For Tophet is ordained of old; yea, for the king it is prepared; he hath made it deep and large: the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it. (30:33)

Notes and Commentary

30:27 name of the Lord cometh from far. The Lord will come from the distant heavens to cleanse the earth of the wicked.

burning with his anger/his lips are full of indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire. These descriptive phrases speak of the destruction that will occur when the Lord comes to punish the wicked. The Hebrew word translated here as "anger" may also be translated "nose." Thus Isaiah describes God's countenance with the four terms nose, lips, tongue, and breath, connecting each with his anger and power to destroy.

30:28 midst of the neck. See commentary on 8:8, in which the same language is used in a similar context.

sift the nations with the sieve of vanity. In the last days the Lord will sift the nations, removing the tares from the wheat with the sieve of vanity or "the sieve of destruction." [^3] Compare Amos 9:9, in which God uses the same "sieve" to "sift the house of Israel, . . . yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth."

bridle in the jaws of the people. As a beast of burden is held in its path by the bridle it wears, so will the wicked be restrained, unable to escape God's judgments.

30:29 Ye shall have a song . . . and gladness of heart. Perhaps for our benefit, so that we will not become depressed or unduly anxious as we read about the destructions that will befall transgressors, Isaiah interjects here a parenthetical statement. During the judgments of the last days, the Lord's people will focus on praising him with song, and they will experience gladness of heart. Our gladness will be similar to that experienced when a "holy solemnity is kept," perhaps a reference to a sacred temple occasion such as a festival or a solemn assembly. Our gladness will be similar to the joyous ancient processions to the house (mountain) of the Lord when one would approach the mighty One of Israel accompanied by the music of an instrument such as a flute (2 Sam. 6:5-6).

mighty One of Israel. This is a name for Jehovah.

30:30 voice to be heard. The Lord's voice will be heard as he destroys the wicked. "And he shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem, and his voice shall be heard among all people" (D&C 133:21-22).

lighting down of his arm. The New International Version reads, "his arm coming down." When the Lord's arm comes down (that is, in judgment), "the flame of a devouring fire, with scattering, and tempest, and hailstones" will destroy the wicked. The Lord revealed to Joseph Smith, "But before the arm of the Lord shall fall, an angel shall sound his trump, and the saints that have slept shall come forth to meet me in the cloud. . . . Then shall the arm of the Lord fall upon the nations . . . and the nations of the earth shall mourn. . . . And calamity shall cover the mocker, and the scorner shall be consumed; and they that have watched for iniquity shall be hewn down and cast into the fire" (D&C 45:45-50).

30:31 For through the voice of the Lord shall the Assyrian be beaten down. When the Lord speaks, the Assyrians (those who are wicked) will be destroyed. Concerning Assyria's rod, see commentary on 10:24.

30:32 staff . . . which the Lord shall lay upon him. The New International Version presents this verse quite differently: "Every stroke the Lord lays on them with his punishing rod will be to the music of tambourines and harps, as he fights them in battle with the blows of his arm." The Lord's arm was spoken of in verse 30; his staff replaces Assyria's rod mentioned in 30:31.

tabrets and harps. Apparently, as the Lord battles the wicked, the righteous continue their joyous praise of the Lord with tambourines and harps; in verse 29 they approach the temple with pipes (or flutes). This continuing music contrasts sharply with the cessation of joy, when the wicked no longer play the tabrets and harps (24:8).

30:33 Tophet is ordained of old. This phrase may also be read "Tophet was prepared of old." Tophet is an area south of Jerusalem where humans were sacrificed to Molech, a fire god. Molech's worshipers dug a large, deep pit, filled it with wood, ignited the fire, and then sacrificed humans there. Unfortunately, Molech was worshiped by apostate Israelites at various times (LDS Bible Dictionary, "Molech"). Now, however, justice is served because the Lord symbolically uses the deep pit and the wood to burn the wicked at his second coming, and "the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it."

---
Notas:
[^1] The KJV holpen is an older form of helped.
[^2] We have replaced the archaic KJV shew with show.
[^3] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 996.
