Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 31

Likening Isa. 31 unto Ourselves

Isaiah's message to ancient Judah is the same one we have received from our modern prophets: "Man should not . . . trust in the arm of flesh" (D&C 1:19). Judah's trusting in Egypt's horses, chariots, and armies for deliverance and temporal salvation is no different from our trusting in tanks, warplanes, or personal weapons—or money and temporal security. We can and should learn from history's lessons. If we trust in the Lord's power to protect us, both spiritually and physically, he will "defend" us, "deliver" us, and "preserve" us (31:5).

Divine Protection for Zion and Jerusalem (31:1-9)

Isa. 31 may be divided into two parts. Part one, 31:1-3, prophesies woe unto all who rely on the arm of flesh rather than on God. Specifically, Judah had relied on Egypt's military powers for deliverance rather than trusting in God, but the woe applies to us if we rely on our armies, weapons of war, or other means of temporal deliverance, or security, rather than on our God.

Part two, 31:4-9, speaks mainly to us today. If we, who are part of Zion, will cast away our wickedness as one casts away false gods, then the Lord will defend Zion. He will be like a mighty lion, "roaring on his prey" (31:4), or like a bird, flying protectively over her nestlings to preserve them; he will use his mighty sword to protect Zion.

Isa. 31:1-9

Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help; and stay on horses, and trust in chariots, because they are many; and in horsemen, because they are very strong; but they look not unto the Holy One of Israel, neither seek the Lord! (31:1) Yet he also is wise, and will bring evil, and will not call back his words: but will arise against the house of the evildoers, and against the help of them that work iniquity. (31:2) Now the Egyptians are men, and not God; and their horses flesh, and not spirit. When the Lord shall stretch out his hand, both he that helpeth shall fall, and he that is [helped] [^1] shall fall down, and they all shall fail together. (31:3) For thus hath the Lord spoken unto me, Like as the lion and the young lion roaring on his prey, when a multitude of shepherds is called forth against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them: so shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight for mount Zion, and for the hill thereof. (31:4) As birds flying, so will the Lord of hosts defend Jerusalem; defending also he will deliver it; and passing over he will preserve it. (31:5) Turn ye unto him from whom the children of Israel have deeply revolted. (31:6) For in that day every man shall cast away his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which your own hands have made unto you for a sin. (31:7) Then shall the Assyrian fall with the sword, not of a mighty man; and the sword, not of a mean man, shall devour him: but he shall flee from the sword, and his young men shall be discomfited. (31:8) And he shall pass over to his strong hold for fear, and his princes shall be afraid of the ensign, saith the Lord, whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem. (31:9)

Notes and Commentary

31:1 Woe. This represents the severe anguish and distress pronounced upon Judah, or Israel, who has her trust in Egypt.

trust in chariots. Judah put her trust in Egypt's army with its great number of horses and chariots rather than looking to the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, for divine protection. Egypt symbolizes the world and her manmade weapons of war, including tanks, bombs, artillery, and soldiers—in which we too often put our trust.

Holy One of Israel. See commentary on 1:4.

31:2 he . . . is wise. The Lord, who knows all things, gave wise counsel to Judah in 30:1-17.

bring evil/not call back his words. Because of Judah's wickedness and rebellion, the Lord has commissioned Assyria and Babylon to bring evil (or misfortune) to Jerusalem. God will not call back his words—"What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled" (D&C 1:38).

house of the evildoers/help of them. The house of the evildoers is the house, or tribe, of Judah—or any group who choose not to follow the Lord's will; the phrase help of them refers to Egypt, who was the help of Judah. Isaiah includes Egypt in his prophecy of destruction.

31:3 Egyptians are men, and not God; and their horses flesh, and not spirit. Isaiah points out the simple truth that Egypt and her horses cannot compare to God's power. Judah should trust in the strength of her God rather than in Egypt's military might.

Lord shall stretch out his hand. The Lord stretches forth his hand to punish (see commentary on 5:25).

both he that helpeth shall fall, and he that is helped. Reiterating the prophecy in 31:2, Isaiah says that both Judah and Egypt will be punished.

31:4 Like as the lion and the young lion roaring on his prey. As mentioned in the introduction to this section, verses 4 through 9 change the subject of verses 1 through 3. Like the self-assured lion who defends his prey, unafraid of the shouts and clamor of the shepherds, the Lord will not be deterred ("abase himself") from his objective.

fight for mount Zion. The Lord will fight on behalf of Zion with the strength of a lion. Zion is called Mount Zion to underscore the central importance of Zion and the temple thereof (temples are represented by mountains).

for the hill thereof. The Lord will also fight in behalf of Zion's temple, here identified as the hill.

31:5 As birds flying, so will the Lord of hosts defend Jerusalem. The Lord, like a mother bird that hovers over her chicks to protect them from predators, will do three things for Zion—defend, deliver, and preserve—but only after his people have cast away their idols (31:7; 30:22). The words passing over remind us of the Lord's Passover, when he preserved Israel by passing over them while destroying the firstborn of Egypt (Ex. 12:11-13).

31:6 Turn ye unto him. Isaiah pleads with the people of Judah (the Southern Kingdom) to learn from the folly of the people of Israel (the Northern Kingdom), who had "deeply revolted" from the ways of the Lord. He urges them to end their rebellion and turn back to the Lord. Turn in Hebrew also means "repent."

31:7 every man shall cast away his idols. Isaiah prophesies once again that one day the people of Israel will cease their worship of false gods (see commentary on 30:22).

31:8 Assyrian fall with the sword. The Lord promises that if his people will cast away their idols, he will destroy Assyria. The sword here belongs to the Lord (see commentary on 27:1; 34:5).

mighty man/mean man. Neither the mighty man nor the mean (ordinary) man will cause Assyria's fall. Rather the Lord of Hosts will accomplish it, as he did during Hezekiah's reign (37:36), and Assyria's young (strong) men will lose their power (be discomfited). This prophecy also applies to the day of the Lord's second coming, when he will destroy Assyria (the world of sin) and establish Zion.

31:9 he shall pass over to his strong hold for fear. The Assyrians (the wicked) will flee to their own fortresses because of their fear of the Lord and his power to destroy.

princes shall be afraid of the ensign. Even the mighty leaders of Assyria, or the world, will flee before the ensign, or Zion's banner. This ensign identifies the Lord's army, the inhabitants of Zion. A modern revelation confirms that "the glory of the Lord" shall be in Zion, and "the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it. . . . And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand" (D&C 45:67-70).

whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem. Zion and Jerusalem are the centers of the Lord's reign during the Millennium (24:23). The phrases fire is in Zion and furnace in Jerusalem find a counterpart in 33:14, where it is written that the righteous will dwell with the devouring fire and everlasting burnings, which are references to Christ. The two phrases in this verse also seem to parallel D&C 45:66-67, which speaks of the "glory of the Lord" and the "terror of the Lord" that will be in Zion, protecting the righteous from the wicked.

---
Notas:
[^1] From the Hebrew nadiyb, meaning "inclined, generous, noble." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 622.
