Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 32

Likening Isa. 32 unto Ourselves

Isa. 32 contains prophecies concerning the last days and the millennial reign of Jesus Christ, which we or our posterity will be privileged to witness. When the Lord becomes our ruler, he will remove evil people from our society, including those who use obscene language, are hypocritical, and attempt to destroy the faith of others.

Already we see the Spirit of the Lord being poured out upon us, the result being a great increase in the fruits and produce of the earth. More important, we may experience greater personal peace and righteousness because of our acceptance of Jesus Christ and his commandments and because of the gifts and powers of the Holy Ghost.

The Results of the Reign of Jesus, Our King (32:1-8)

After the destruction of the wicked, described by Isaiah in previous chapters, Jesus Christ will reign on the earth in righteousness. As king he will protect his people, both physically and spiritually, from their enemies and will bring relief from the tempests and droughts that have caused suffering. During his rule and establishment of justice people will no longer speak obscenity, "work iniquity," "practice hypocrisy," or destroy the faith of others.

Isa. 32:1-8

Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment. (32:1) And a man shall be as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land. (32:2) And the eyes of them that see shall not be dim, and the ears of them that hear shall hearken. (32:3) The heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly. (32:4) The vile person shall be no more called [noble], [^1] nor the churl said to be bountiful. (32:5) For the vile person will speak villainy, and his heart will work iniquity, to practice hypocrisy, and to utter error against the Lord, to make empty the soul of the hungry, and he will cause the drink of the thirsty to fail. (32:6) The instruments also of the churl are evil: he deviseth wicked devices to destroy the poor with lying words , even when the needy speaketh right. (32:7) But the [noble] [^2] deviseth [noble] things; and by [noble] things shall he stand. (32:8)

Notes and Commentary

32:1 king shall reign in righteousness. Jesus Christ, the king, shall reign in righteousness during the Millennium (see 11:4). Jeremiah prophesied similarly to Isaiah, naming the king "the Lord our Righteousness" (Jer. 23:6).

princes shall rule in judgment. The princes who serve under the king are those who receive exaltation and become part of the family of Christ. These will rule in judgment, or judge righteously.

32:2 a man shall be as an hiding place from the wind. Man refers to the king mentioned above, or Jesus Christ. Isaiah provides four metaphors to indicate the Lord's eternal preservation of the Saints: hiding place (or shelter), covert, rivers of water, and shadow of a great rock; these correspond with wind, tempest, dry place, and weary land, words that cause us to recall this telestial existence with all of its tribulation and hardships.

32:3 eyes of them that see shall not be dim. Those who choose to see and hear the truth will be blessed with continuing clear spiritual sight and understanding.

32:4 heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge. The rash are those who proceed with haste, without understanding. The Lord will open their hearts to knowledge.

tongue of the stammerers. Those who formerly had difficulty communicating will now be able to speak the truth plainly.

32:5 vile person shall be no more called noble. When the Lord reigns in truth and righteousness on the earth, vile persons will no longer be viewed as noble or generous but will be recognized for what they are.

nor the churl said to be bountiful. The LDS Bible footnote reads "miser" for churl, which makes sense with the term bountiful in the same context. Also, the Jerusalem Bible reads, "nor the villain be styled honorable."

32:6 vile person. Isaiah defines the vile person mentioned in 32:5. He or she [peak[s] villainy (obscenity), [ork[s] iniquity, practices hypocrisy, and [tter[s] error against the Lord. These actions deprive others' souls of spiritual things, making them hungry and thirsty. In other words, the vile person destroys the faith of others.

32:7 churl . . . deviseth wicked devices. Isaiah defines the churl spoken of in 32:5. He is one who devises wicked plans to further his power and prosperity. Frequently his victims are the poor and needy, whom he [estroy[s] . . . with lying words. For a man such as this to be called bountiful (32:5) requires a warped morality and an eye blind to truth.

32:8 noble. Standing opposite the vile person and the churl are the noble, those who make honorable plans and possess integrity.

Destruction for the Wicked, Peace for the Righteous (32:9-20)

The troubles and sorrows allotted to Israel, or Judah (32:9-14), will continue until the restoration of the gospel in the last days, when the Lord pours out his Spirit on his people. At this time the Lord will remove the curse from the earth (D&C 61:17), so that wildernesses and deserts will become fruitful fields, or bounteous sources of food. Also accompanying the outpouring of the Spirit will be increased spirituality among the inhabitants of Zion—Isaiah specifically mentions righteousness and peace.

We should be comforted by Isaiah's prophecy that as the crops and homes of the wicked are being flattened, Zion's inhabitants will dwell securely in peace.

Isa. 32:9-20

Rise up, ye women that are at ease; hear my voice, ye careless daughters; give ear unto my speech. (32:9) Many days and years shall ye be troubled, ye careless women: for the vintage shall fail, the gathering shall not come. (32:10) Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be troubled, ye careless ones: strip you, and make you bare, and gird sackcloth upon your loins. (32:11) [Beat upon your breasts] [^3] for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine. (32:12) Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and briers; yea, upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city: (32:13) Because the palaces shall be forsaken; the multitude of the city shall be left [desolate]; [^4] the forts and towers shall be for dens for ever, a joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks; (32:14) Until the spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a forest. (32:15) Then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness remain in the fruitful field. (32:16) And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever. (32:17) And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places; (32:18) When it shall hail, coming down on the forest; and the city shall be low in a low place. (32:19) Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters, that send forth thither the feet of the ox and the ass. (32:20)

Notes and Commentary

32:9 women that are at ease/careless daughters. The women who continue in their daily activities without concern for the calamity about to befall them represent the inhabitants of the Israelite or Judean cities, male and female, who are at ease and ignore the prophets' warnings of impending doom (compare commentary on 3:16).

hear my voice/give ear unto my speech. This is a summons to listen carefully to the words of the prophet.

32:10 Many days and years. This idiom means a long time.

the vintage shall fail/the gathering shall not come. Israel's crops will fail.

32:11 Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be troubled. Isaiah commands the women that are at ease to fear the coming destruction.

strip you, and make you bare. These phrases represent enslavement and captivity (see 20:2-3). By the use of symbols Isaiah warns Israel of what the future holds for them.

gird sackcloth upon your loins. Sackcloth represents the mourning typically associated with death, disaster, or heartfelt repentance. Isaiah prophesies that after Israel is carried away captive, she will mourn the loss of freedom, family, friends, home, and temple.

32:12 Beat upon your breasts. This action is also an expression of mourning (Nahum 2:7).

pleasant fields/fruitful vine. The fields and vineyards that once produced an abundance of grain and fruit will become barren, symbolic of the spiritual state of the people themselves.

32:13 land of my people. This term is a synonym for Israel, the land of God's covenant people.

thorns and briers. This phrase refers to the curse that comes upon the earth because of wickedness (Moses 4:23-24). Thorns and briers also represent Israel's enemies (see commentary on 27:4).

houses of joy/joyous city. Everyone, from the individual (house) to the community (city), is caught up in this sense of "all is well." They are unable to believe that their cities will fall, but the Lord has decreed that Israel's enemies will overrun her.

32:14 palaces shall be forsaken. The rich are not exempt from the calamity; even the palaces will be forsaken. All of Jerusalem's inhabitants will flee, and the once- crowded city will be abandoned. The fortifications will become dwelling places for animals.

32:15 Until the spirit be poured upon us from on high. The word until is significant here—the "women that are at ease" (32:9, 14) will experience calamity and mourn over the loss of their freedom and their land until the spirit of the Lord is poured out upon them. The Spirit was previously rejected by Israel (see 31:3).

This phrase also applies to the Restoration (Joel 2:28-29; JS 1:41). During the last days, the Lord will prune his vineyard one last time, "that I may bring to pass my strange act, that I may pour out my Spirit upon all flesh" (D&C 95:4). This phrase reminds us that the Lord had formerly poured out upon the people "the spirit of deep sleep" in 29:10 (see commentary on 29:10).

wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a forest. The desolation and scattering of the people will continue until the Lord's Spirit is poured out and the people (forest) are restored to spiritual fruitfulness. This phrase recalls 29:17, which reads Lebanon instead of wilderness: "Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest." This verse pertains to the Restoration, after the coming forth of the Book of Mormon (see commentary on 29:29; 35:1).

32:16 judgment shall dwell in the wilderness. "Judgment" may read "justice" here (see footnotes in LDS edition of the Bible to Deut. 32:4; Job 19:7; Ps. 33:5; 37:28; Isa. 1:17, 21, 27). When the Lord pours out his Spirit on the earth, justice and righteousness will be an integral part of Zion—even in areas that formerly were dry and unfruitful—because the people belong to the Messiah (see 11:2-4; 32:1).

32:17 work of righteousness shall be peace. Isaiah explains that the results of righteousness are peace, quietness, and assurance (confidence); these three will abound in Zion.

32:18 my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation. Zion is a place of "peaceful dwelling places," "secure homes," and "undisturbed places of rest" (NIV). This verse reminds us of a modern revelation in which Zion is called "a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God" (D&C 45:66). Elder Orson Pratt applied 32:17-19 to the Saints when they sought in the Rocky Mountains relief from persecution. [^5]

32:19-20 When it shall hail. . . . Blessed are ye. The New International Version reads, "Though hail flattens the forest and the city is leveled completely, how blessed you will be, sowing your seed by every stream, and letting your cattle and donkeys range free." Hail, one of the Lord's judgments upon the wicked in the last days (D&C 29:16-17), here represents all his judgments. The "forest" and the "city" refer to the "proud and the wicked" (footnote b to 32:19). See commentary on 32:15. These verses mean that although the homes and crops of the wicked are destroyed, Zion will enjoy peace and security, planting crops in an almost carefree manner and letting cattle graze without fear.

---
Notas:
[^1] These four words translated in the KJV as spoil come from the Hebrew root shadad, meaning "to deal violently with, despoil, devastate, ruin." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 994.
[^2] Most versions read our instead of their.
[^3] From Hebrew hamon, meaning "sound, murmur, roar, crowd, abundance," especially "sound made by a crowd of people, murmur, roar." This word may also be translated as "rumbling from earthquakes, thunder or chariots." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 242.
[^4] NIV Isa. 33:6.
[^5] From Hebrew re'adah, "trembling" a noun paralleling fear, the subject of the verb seized. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 944.
