Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 33

Likening Isa. 33 unto Ourselves

The Lord is the constant support of the righteous—we pray "be thou [our] arm every morning" (33:2). But the wicked have no such promise, and they will be destroyed by burning at the last day. In contrast to the fire of destruction, Isaiah sets forth six statements that describe the fire of holiness. If we are holy, we will not burn at Christ's coming but will dwell with him in "everlasting burnings."

A Woe Oracle against Sennacherib (33:1)

The destroyer to whom Isaiah refers in this woe oracle is often identified as Sennacherib, the king of Assyria who attacked Jerusalem in 701 b.c. These prophecies also apply to transgressors of any age who "destroy" and "deal treacherously." The Lord destroyed Sennacherib and his armies and will continue to destroy all others who follow Sennacherib's pattern of evil.

Isa. 33:1

Woe to thee that [destroy], and thou wast not [destroyed]; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee! when thou shalt cease [destroying], thou shalt be [destroyed]; [^1] and when thou shalt make an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee. (33:1)

Notes and Commentary

33:1 Woe. This word invokes severe anguish and distress upon those who destroy and deal treacherously with others.

destroy/dealest treacherously. A woe pronounced upon those who destroy and who deal evil unto others. The phrases apply historically to the Assyrian king Sennacherib, who had offered to spare the lives of the inhabitants of Jerusalem if they agreed to pay him tribute (2 Kgs. 18:13-16). At great cost they paid him tribute, but he treacherously continued his attack against them, seeking to destroy them. These phrases also apply to the wicked of any age who deal treacherously with others.

when thou shalt cease destroying, thou shalt be destroyed. Isaiah's prophecy was fulfilled. The Lord destroyed 185,000 men in a single night, and the king abandoned his camp and fled to Nineveh, where he was murdered by his sons (see commentary on 37:38).

The Righteous Praise the Lord in Prayer (33:2-6)

This wonderful prayer or hymn presents an example of how we may praise and worship the Lord. It appears to be the prayer of those who dwell in Zion, or at least those who desire and anticipate the building of Zion. It sets forth the attributes of God, including his graciousness, strength, salvation, exaltation, justice, and righteousness.

Isa. 33:2-6

O Lord, be gracious unto us; we have waited for thee: be thou [our] [^2] arm every morning, our salvation also in the time of trouble. (33:2) At the noise of the [tumult] [^3] the people fled; at the lifting up of thyself the nations were scattered. (33:3)

And your spoil shall be gathered like the gathering of the caterpillar:

as the running to and fro of locusts shall he run upon them. (33:4) The Lord is exalted; for he dwelleth on high: he hath filled Zion with judgment and righteousness. (33:5) [He will be the sure foundation for your times, a rich store of salvation and wisdom and knowledge] [^4] the fear of the Lord is his treasure. (33:6)

Notes and Commentary

33:2 O Lord. This expression indicates that the words that follow are a prayer or a hymn.

be gracious unto us. The text could also read, "Show favor to us."

we have waited for thee. The Hebrew reads, "we hope for you."

be thou our arm every morning. We seek the Lord's protective care every morning. We seek protection from our enemies, from danger, and from evil.

our salvation . . . in the time of trouble. We ask the Lord to deliver us from trouble.

33:3 noise of the tumult. The New International Version reads, "At the thunder of your voice the peoples flee." The Lord's voice brings judgment, causing the wicked to flee (30:30).

lifting up of thyself. When the Lord rises to defend his people, the nations scatter.

33:4 your spoil shall be gathered like the gathering of the caterpillar. Spoil generally refers to goods taken from an enemy during war. In this context it may refer to spiritual benefits (peace, joy, love) the righteous receive as they partake of the Lord's victory over sin and death.

33:5 Lord is exalted. Jehovah possesses eternal life and has "all power" (D&C 132:20). The phrase he dwelleth on high speaks of heaven.

he hath filled Zion with judgment and righteousness. Elsewhere Isaiah taught that "Zion shall be redeemed with judgment [justice] and her converts with righteousness" (1:27). The Psalmist wrote, "Righteousness and judgment [justice] are the habitation of [God's] throne" (Ps. 97:2).

33:6 He will be the sure foundation. Jesus is "the great, and the last, and the only sure foundation" (Jacob 4:16) upon which we can build. He is our "safe foundation" (Jacob 4:15; see Isa. 28:16).

rich store of salvation and wisdom and knowledge. Isaiah creates a metaphor— Jehovah is a treasury or storehouse of riches to the righteous. The riches include salvation, wisdom, and knowledge.

fear of the Lord is his treasure. Worshipful reverence of God (Ps. 5:7) is a treasure to the righteous because it results in wisdom, knowledge, and salvation.

The Wicked Are Burned at Christ's Second Coming (33:7-14)

During these last days we are witnessing many of the events set forth in Isaiah's prophecy. We see individuals who lack integrity, and break covenants and agreements with others. We notice that people have little regard for others (33:8). In families as well as among cities and nations there is a great lack of love. For these and a host of other reasons, the Lord is going to come forth and for the last time burn all evil from the face of the earth.

Isaiah's language is most descriptive—he compares transgressors to women who become pregnant, but not with precious children; rather they "conceive chaff," and "bring forth stubble" (33:11). Such people will be burned as though they were thorns and briers in intensely hot fires (33:12). Those who secretly sin and are hypocrites should fear these things (33:14).

Isa. 33:7-14

Behold, their valiant ones shall cry without: the ambassadors of peace shall weep bitterly. (33:7) The highways lie waste, the wayfaring man ceaseth: he hath broken the covenant, he hath despised the cities, he regardeth no man. (33:8) The earth mourneth and languisheth: Lebanon is ashamed and hewn down: Sharon is like a wilderness; and Bashan and Carmel shake off their fruits. (33:9) Now will I rise, saith the Lord; now will I be exalted; now will I lift up myself. (33:10) Ye shall conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth stubble: your breath, as fire, shall devour you. (33:11) And the people shall be as the burnings of lime: as thorns cut up shall they be burned in the fire. (33:12) Hear, ye that are far off, what I have done; and, ye that are near, acknowledge my might. (33:13) The sinners in Zion are afraid; [trembling] [^5] hath [seized] [^6] the hypocrites. (33:14)

Notes and Commentary

33:7 valiant ones shall cry/ambassadors of peace shall weep. All will weep when the world is destroyed, including warriors (valiant ones) and peacemakers (ambassadors of peace).

33:8 highways lie waste, the wayfaring man ceaseth. These phrases speak of a time when battles and wars rage in the land, when civilians avoid the highways for fear of their safety, or perhaps the highways have been destroyed by armies and their artillery. All business and travel between cities ceases because no one dares to venture forth.

he hath broken the covenant, he hath despised the cities, he regardeth no man. Some scholars believe that cities should read "witnesses" here, meaning prophets or missionaries. The pronoun he in these three phrases is impersonal, and can read "they" or "people," as in "people have broken covenants," etc. The Jerusalem Bible reads, "Treaties are broken, witnesses despised, there is respect for no one." The intent is to portray the general lack of integrity and love that will exist in the last days, toward both God and man.

33:9 earth mourneth and languisheth. The earth mourns and languishes as a reaction to the wickedness of her peoples. To languish is to become weak or feeble. This language is also used by Isaiah in 24:4.

Lebanon is ashamed and hewn down. Isaiah uses symbolic language to express the destruction of fruitful fields and productive forests (32:15), symbolizing the proud and the wealthy, who will be ashamed and hewn down at the last day. It is apparent from 10:33-34 that Jehovah is the forester who hews down Lebanon (2:12-13).

33:10 Now will I rise, saith the Lord. The Lord uses three parallel phrases: Now will I rise, Now will I be exalted, now will I lift up myself. In the last days, the Lord will come into view, or show himself, to enact his decrees of justice, coming in his glory to purge the world of the wicked, thereby exalting himself in righteousness.

33:11 Ye shall conceive chaff. You (plural, referring to the wicked) will conceive (become pregnant with) chaff, or useless husks of grain. This harsh statement to the wicked tells them that their lives and plans will founder and are in vain.

ye shall bring forth stubble. Your pregnancy has come to completion, and you (plural, referring to the wicked) will now bring forth stubble, rather than useful grains of wheat. In other words, the lives and evil designs of the wicked will be worthy only to be burned, as chaff and stubble are burned. This passage clearly refers to the judgment and great burning of the wicked that will occur at the Second Coming.

your breath, as fire, shall devour you. The Jerusalem Bible reads, "my breath shall devour you like fire." This reading accords with Isaiah's earlier images of the Lord burning the wicked (see 30:27-28).

33:12 people shall be as the burnings of lime. This may refer to the intense heat that is necessary to extract the lime from bones (Amos 2:1). Thus it would symbolize the complete destruction of the wicked at the Lord's coming.

as thorns cut up shall they be burned in the fire. Thorns and weeds are burned to prevent them from overcoming useful plants. When they are cut down and placed in a pile, the fire becomes fiercer and hotter, and they burn more easily. Such will be the burning of the wicked at Christ's second coming: Sinners will burn as easily as thorns are consumed in a fire.

33:14 sinners in Zion are afraid. Members of Zion will be aware of the destruction that the rising up of the Lord brings to the wicked, and Zion's sinners will be equally aware and afraid of the Lord's coming because of their own sins. The knowledge of their hypocrisy will cause them to fear and tremble.

Righteous Dwell in Everlasting Burnings (33:14-17)

One common link between the previous section and this one is fire—the wicked will be destroyed by fire at Jesus' second coming, while the righteous will come to dwell in the "everlasting burnings" of the celestial world. The section begins with two parallel rhetorical questions asking who can dwell with God in his fire (33:14); these are followed by a response to the questions, detailing the attributes of one who is able to dwell with God (33:15), which in turn is succeeded by a description of the blessings of those who will be privileged to dwell with God (33:16-17). This passage has the same structure as two psalms that give the requirements for entrance into the temple (Ps. 15, 24), both of which have two rhetorical questions, a response to the questions, and a description of the blessings. The psalms, however, deal with the earthly temple, in contrast to this section of Isaiah, which asks, "Who is worthy to enter God's temple in heaven, or the celestial kingdom?"

Isa. 33:14-17

Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? (33:14) He that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly; he that despiseth the gain of oppressions, that shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, that stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, and shutteth his eyes from seeing evil; (33:15) He shall dwell on high: his place of defence shall be the [stronghold] [^7] of rocks: bread shall be given him; his waters shall be sure. (33:16) Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty: they shall behold the land that is very far off. (33:17)

Notes and Commentary

33:14 Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire/everlasting burnings. Joseph Smith taught that "God dwells in everlasting burnings," [^8] and "flesh and blood cannot go there, for all corruption is devoured by the fire." [^9]

Isaiah's two rhetorical questions ask who will be able to abide the devouring fire of the Lord's glory. He answers these questions in 33:15.

33:15 He that walketh righteously— Isaiah sets forth six statements to describe the qualities of one who will inherit and endure the glories of the celestial kingdom:

he that walketh righteously—one who moves forward in the Lord's paths of righteousness and obedience.

speaketh uprightly—one who speaks the truth, does not bear false witness against another, or use profanity, and so forth.

he that despiseth the gain of oppressions—one who refuses to gain power or wealth, or other things by oppressing another. Footnote b to 33:15 in the LDS edition of the Bible says, "profit by extortion."

shaketh his hands from holding of bribes—one who refuses to bribe or to be bribed, on any level of society, in any situation.

stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood—according to the Jerusalem Bible, one who "shuts suggestions of murder [or violence] out of his ears."

shutteth his eyes from seeing evil—one who does not participate in or condone evil actions or works.

33:16-17 He shall dwell on high. Isaiah sets forth six statements to describe the blessings of those who will inherit the celestial kingdom:

he shall dwell on high—he or she will dwell in heaven, which is "on high."

his place of defence shall be the stronghold of rocks—as a rock stronghold provides protection from earthly enemies, God will eternally defend and protect the righteous.

bread shall be given him—this phrase reminds us of the sacrament. Christ is the Bread of Life (John 6:48) and the source of eternal life for those who inherit the celestial kingdom.

his waters shall be sure—this phrase also reminds us of the sacrament. Christ will give the waters of eternal life to exalted souls, for he is the "fountain of living waters" (Jer. 17:13).

thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty—exalted souls will be privileged to behold God in all of his glory.

they shall behold the land that is very far off—exalted souls will be privileged and blessed to see (and dwell in) God's celestial kingdom, the land that is very far off.

The Restoration of Zion (33:18-24)

When the Lord comes in his glory, his people will see with their own eyes their righteous King, Lawgiver, Judge, and Savior in all his glory (33:17, 22; 32:1). Zion's stakes will be perfected, and the Lord's temples will never again be threatened by destruction (33:20). The people of the Lord will no longer be threatened by foreign invasion (33:18-19), and the inhabitants of Zion will be healed physically and spiritually by the Lord's healing power (33:24).

Isa. 33:18-24

Thine heart shall meditate terror. Where is the scribe? where is the receiver? where is he that counted the towers? (33:18) Thou shalt not see a fierce people, a people of a deeper speech than thou canst perceive; of a stammering tongue, that thou canst not understand. (33:19) Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken. (33:20) But there the glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad rivers and streams; wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall gallant ship pass thereby. (33:21) For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our king; he will save us. (33:22) Thy tacklings are loosed; they could not well strengthen their mast, they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great spoil divided; the lame take the prey. (33:23) And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity. (33:24)

Notes and Commentary

33:18 Thine heart shall meditate terror. The Jerusalem Bible reads, "Your heart will look back on its fears." When the Lord reigns in Zion, we will look back on mortality and recall our fears of evil, enemies, and death.

Where is the scribe/receiver/he that counted the towers. The New International Version reads, "Where is the chief officer? Where is the one who took the revenue? Where is the officer in charge of the towers?" As we recall our mortal fears, we will remember many uncomfortable aspects of mortality, represented by these three rhetorical questions.

33:19 Thou shalt not see a fierce people. We will no longer be threatened by fierce foreign enemies, because the Lord will be our defender (33:16).

33:20 Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities. Zion will be a city of solemnities, or, perhaps, solemn assemblies.

Jerusalem a quiet habitation. Jerusalem, a city that has witnessed many wars and much bloodshed, will be a peaceful city (see 32:17) when the Lord reigns as "our king" (33:22).

a tabernacle . . . shall not be taken down. This refers to the tabernacle of Moses, a portable temple that was a large tent with stakes and cords. The stakes were sticks or posts driven into the ground; cords or ropes connected the tabernacle to the stakes. Both the stakes and cords supported the tabernacle.

The entire verse speaks about latter-day Zion and informs us that the temples of the Lord will be surrounded and upheld by the stakes of Zion, which are gathering places of the Lord's people. As the stakes and cords of a tent serve to uphold it during a storm, so the stakes of Zion are "for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth" (D&C 115:6). The phrase "a tabernacle . . . shall not be taken down" contrasts with Moses' portable tabernacle that had to be repeatedly put up and "taken down"—Jerusalem at the Second Coming will be a permanent, everlasting place.

33:21 Lord will be unto us a place of broad rivers/streams. Rivers and streams are metaphors for the Lord, who provides us with the "waters of life" (see commentary on 8:6). Notice the abundance of water—broad rivers and streams—available to those who wish to partake.

wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall gallant ship pass. In ancient times large warships transported armies. These galleys were often powered by slaves, and on return trips to the homeland the galleys were often loaded with spoils and captives. Isaiah states that such ships will not pass over the broad rivers and streams, indicating that the Lord will protect those who have access to him. The New International Version translates gallant ship as mighty ship.

33:22 the Lord is our judge. In this verse Isaiah explains why Zion will be such a marvelous place to live. "The Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our king; he will save us." Surely no one can conceive of a better justice of the peace, lawmaker, ruler, and protector than the Lord himself.

33:23 tacklings/mast/sail. Isaiah returns to the subject of warships, spoken of in 33:21, and emphasizes that the once-feared ships will no longer be able to function because the masts are not secure and their tackle hangs loose. This condition symbolizes the way in which the wicked will lose their power in the final judgments.

then is the prey of a great spoil divided; the lame take the prey. Because the armies of the wicked are completely destroyed by the Lord, even the lame will gather and divide the spoils left behind by their enemies (33:4; 26:5-6).

33:24 the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick. The physical bodies of those who remain in Zion after the destruction of the wicked will be changed and thereafter never experience sickness.

shall be forgiven their iniquity. The truly celestial inhabitants of Zion, those who have yielded their hearts to God, will have repented and will be cleansed and forgiven of their sins.

---
Notas:
[^1] From Hebrew qetsep, meaning "wrath" or sore anger. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 893.
[^2] From Hebrew re'emiym, referring to a "wild ox" or "unicorns, and (oftener) rhinoceros." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 910.
[^3] From Hebrew 'abiyriym, meaning "strong" or "mighty"; 'byr "the Strong, old name for God (poet)." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 7.
[^4] From Hebrew tohu, meaning "formlessness, confusion, unreality, emptiness, . . . nothingness, waste." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 1062.
[^5] From Hebrew 'abeney, meaning "stones." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 6.
[^6] From Hebrew taniym. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 1072.
[^7] From Hebrew chatsiyr, meaning "enclosure [or] courtyard." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 346.
[^8] JST Isa. 34:16.
[^9] From Hebrew n'drh, from the root 'dr, meaning to "be lacking." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 727.
