Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 34

Likening Isa. 34 unto Ourselves

Isa. 34 applies directly to our time, the last days, because the prophecies in that chapter will occur when the Lord comes in his glory to the earth. Some of our generation may witness the slaughter of the wicked, as described in 34:1-8, or we may see the burning of the earth, as set forth in 34:9-15; 34:16-17 alludes to the blessings of eternal marriage.

A Day of Wrath upon Edom (the World) (34:1-8)

Isaiah prophesies to all the peoples of the earth, as signaled by his use of the words nations, people, the earth, and the world in 34:1. His message is plain: the Lord is angry with the nations of the earth and their armies; therefore, he is going to destroy them at his second coming. Isaiah's words regarding the destruction are vivid and descriptive— utterly destroyed, slaughter, slain, carcases, blood, filled with blood, sacrifice, and soaked with blood. In addition, Isaiah's terminology recalls animal sacrifice at the Lord's temple: slaughter, blood, fat, blood of lambs and goats, and fat of the kidneys of rams. The Lord is going to destroy the nations as if they were sacrificial animals.

Isaiah's symbolism is clear to us: those who accept the Savior's atoning sacrifice will be delivered from destruction, but those who reject his atonement will be slaughtered, as were the sacrificial animals of his temple. During all this slaughter, Jehovah will "uphold Zion's cause" (NIV 34:8) and protect his Saints.

Isa. 34:1-8

Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people: let the earth hear, and all that is therein; the world, and all things that come forth of it. (34:1) For the [wrath] [^1] of the Lord is upon all nations, and his fury upon all their armies: he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter. (34:2) Their slain also shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up out of their carcases, and the mountains shall be melted with their blood. (34:3) And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll: and all their host shall fall down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from the fig tree. (34:4) For my sword shall be bathed in heaven: behold, it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment. (34:5) The sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is made fat with fatness, and with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams: For the Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea. (34:6) And the [wild oxen] [^2] shall come down with them, and the bullocks with the [mighty ones]; [^3] and their land shall be soaked with blood, and their dust made fat with fatness. (34:7) For it is the day of the Lord's vengeance, and the year of recompenses for the controversy of Zion. (34:8)

Notes and Commentary

34:1 nations/people. The voice of warning is to all nations, people, the entire earth, and the world, which encompasses all societies, peoples, and governments.

34:2 wrath/fury. The Lord's wrath and fury will be expressed in the last days by the destruction of the wicked (13:13).

the slaughter. The Lord will destroy the nations as if they were animals led to slaughter.

34:3-4 Their slain. Isaiah depicts the scene of destruction and death: The carcasses of the slain will stink, and "the mountains will be soaked with their blood" (NIV).

mountains shall be melted with their blood. This passage may be translated as "the mountains shall be soaked with their blood," referring to the slain and the carcasses spoken of earlier in the verse.

And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved. This event will occur at the Second Coming and speaks of the passing away of "the heavens and the earth" (3 Ne. 26:3).

rolled together as a scroll. A scroll is rolled up before it is put away. This phrase is difficult to understand but seems to refer to the events connected with the passing away of the heavens and the earth, which will occur at Christ's second coming: "Behold, will ye believe in the day of your visitation—behold, when the Lord shall come, yea, even that great day when the earth shall be rolled together as a scroll, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, yea, in that great day when ye shall be brought to stand before the Lamb of God—then will ye say that there is not God?" (Morm. 9:2).

their host shall fall down . . . as a falling fig from the fig tree. A modern-day revelation explains, "For not many days hence and the earth shall tremble and reel to and fro as a drunken man; and the sun shall hide his face, and shall refuse to give light; and the moon shall be bathed in blood; and the stars shall become exceedingly angry, and shall cast themselves down as a fig that falleth from off a fig-tree" (D&C 88:87). As shriveled fruit or dry leaves fall from the tree, so shall the stars (Mark 13:25; D&C 45:42; Rev. 8:10) fall from the heavens (D&C 88:87; Rev. 6:13-14; 8:10).

34:5 sword. Symbolically, the Lord's sword exacts judgment and destruction on Earth's inhabitants (see commentary on 27:1).

bathed in heaven. Jehovah's sword is prepared to destroy the wicked.

it shall come down upon Idumea. The Lord's sword will come down upon Idumea, or Edom, which also refers to the wicked world (D&C 1:36).

people of my curse. The wicked.

to judgment. Part of the Lord's judgment upon the wicked is their destruction.

34:6 sword of the Lord is filled with blood. The destruction of the wicked is so great that the sword of the Lord is covered with blood.

blood/fatness/kidneys. In the Mosaic law of sacrifice, the blood and fat of a sacrificed animal are reserved for the Lord (Lev. 3:15-17). By using these three words in the context of the slaughter of the wicked, Isaiah emphasizes the Lord's right to exact the penalty for iniquity. It is noteworthy that blood and kidneys, with other internal organs, regulate the life of humans and beasts. The Lord's slaughter will be complete, claiming the very life force of the wicked.

lambs, goats, rams. These sacrificial animals were used for sin and trespass offerings to symbolically cleanse the repentant offerer from both willful and inadvertent sins. In this context, it may suggest that the wicked will have to die for their own sins because they would not partake of the blessings of the sacrifice of Christ.

sacrifice/slaughter. These are parallel terms. Those who did not accept Jesus' atoning sacrifice will be slaughtered as are the sacrificial animals in the temple (Jer. 46:10; Rev. 19:17-18).

Bozrah/Idumea. Bozrah (perhaps modern Busra) is the capital of Edom, here called Idumea. Both Bozrah and Idumea represent the world (D&C 1:36) and will be destroyed by the Lord (Ezek. 25:14).

34:7 wild oxen/bullocks. Known for their great strength, oxen and bullocks represent mighty people that will be destroyed.

mighty ones. This term may refer to the politically and socially important people of the world.

soaked with blood. The destruction will be so great that the land will be soaked with the blood of the wicked.

34:8 day of the Lord's vengeance/year of recompenses. The day of vengeance, which falls upon the wicked (D&C 97:26), is also referred to as the day of the Lord (2:12). The implication is that the Lord's vengeance will be brief (day) in comparison to the time of recompense (year) The year of recompenses is the same as the year of my redeemed identified in 63:4 (see commentary there; see also D&C 133:51-52).

controversy of Zion. The New International Version reads "to uphold Zion's cause." At the same time the Lord destroys the wicked, he will support Zion's cause.

Edom (the World) to Be Burned (34:9-15)

Isaiah continues his prophecy concerning the destruction of Edom, or the world (34:1-8). Isaiah's portrayal of the "burning pitch" that fills the land of Edom and the billowing smoke that arises "for ever" is reminiscent of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by fire and brimstone. It presents a picture of terror for the wicked, who will be consumed by the great power of Christ's glory at his second coming.

Isa. 34:9-15

And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become burning pitch. (34:9) It shall not be quenched night nor day; the smoke thereof shall go up for ever: from generation to generation it shall lie waste; none shall pass through it for ever and ever. (34:10) But the cormorant and the bittern shall possess it; the owl also and the raven shall dwell in it: and he shall stretch out upon it the line of [desolation], [^4] and the [plummet] [^5] of emptiness. (34:11) They shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom, but none shall be there, and all her princes shall be nothing. (34:12) And thorns shall come up in her palaces, nettles and brambles in the fortresses thereof: and it shall be an habitation of [jackals], [^6] and an [enclosure] [^7] for owls. (34:13) The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild beasts of the island, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; the screech owl also shall rest there, and find for herself a place of rest. (34:14) There shall the great owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather under her shadow: there shall the vultures also be gathered, every one with her mate. (34:15)

Notes and Commentary

34:9 pitch/brimstone/burning pitch. The world, like Sodom and Gomorrah, will be destroyed because of great wickedness (Gen. 19:1-29; also D&C 29:21). Destruction will be the result of pitch and brimstone, flammable materials that will cover the land.

34:10 smoke thereof shall go up for ever. The phrases it shall not be quenched night nor day and smoke . . . shall go up forever remind one of hell.

generation to generation/lie waste. When Christ comes to destroy the world (Edom) at his second coming, the effects of this destruction will last "for ever and ever," for the world will be renewed and become a paradisiacal sphere during the Millennium. "None shall pass through it for ever and ever" for the same reason—that state of the earth will no longer exist.

34:11 cormorant/bittern/owl/raven. These (and the others listed) are unclean creatures that inhabit lands made desolate by God (13:21-22; Jer. 50:39). (Some translate cormorant as "desert owl" and bittern as "screech owl.") These creatures inhabited ancient Edom after its destruction. They and their desolate dwelling places symbolize telestial domains. Their existence in Edom reveals the completeness of its ruin and desolation. Similarly, at the Second Coming, the world (Edom) will be destroyed, and all corruptible things will be consumed.

line/plummet. The land is being surveyed and assigned to destruction (28:17).

desolation/emptiness. Edom will become "desolation" and "emptiness," two terms which described the earth before God organized the elements (these two terms are used in Gen. 1:2 in the Hebrew).

34:12 nobles, princes. The nobles and princes of Edom (the world) will never again exercise power or order government. They will not exist. The government will be in the Lord's hands.

34:13-14 thorns, brambles. Edom's mansions become wasteland.

jackals/owls/wild beasts/satyr/screech owl. The satyr is probably a wild goat. See commentary on 34:11.

34:15 There shall the great owl make her nest. This verse emphasizes both the extent of the desolation (owls and vultures will gather where man once lived) and its length (owls and vultures will live there long enough to make nests, lay and hatch eggs, and care for their young).

Those Whose Names Are Written in the Book of the Lord Receive the Land (34:16-17)

The land of the wicked has been made desolate and assigned to chaos by means of the Lord's "line" and "plummet." The Lord will also use these devices to assign the glorified earth to the righteous, whose names are recorded in the book of the Lord (34:17; see also D&C 103:7). These will have an eternal inheritance with the Lord (34:16); thus, they will always remain with their spouses and have an eternal increase (34:16; see also D&C 132:30-31). There are a number of parallel word choices between this and previous sections, especially between 34:10-11 and 34:17.

Isa. 34:16-17

Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read [the names written therein]: [^8] no one of these shall fail, none shall [lack] [^9] [their] mate: for my mouth it hath commanded, and [my] [^10]spirit it hath gathered them. (34:16) And [I have] cast the lot for them, and [I have] divided it unto them by line: they shall possess it for ever, from generation to generation [they shall] [^11] dwell therein. (34:17)

Notes and Commentary

34:16 book of the Lord. During the day of the Lord, those whose names are found in the book of the Lord will be delivered from the "time of trouble" (Dan. 12:1), and they will inherit the celestial city (Rev. 21:22-27). This book of the Lord may be the "book of life" identified more than a dozen times in the scriptures (Dan. 12:1; Rev. 3:5; 20:12; D&C 76:68; 128:7).

none shall lack their mate. Those whose names are written in the book will have their spouses through eternity. This is a rare Old Testament reference to eternal marriage. Note the parallel in 34:15, in which Isaiah states that creatures would have their mates after the destruction of Edom—meaning, they would propagate their species at least for a few generations. Here, Isaiah promises that after the destruction of the world, those whose names are written in the book of the Lord will also have their mates.

my spirit . . . gathered them. This passage speaks of the role of the Holy Ghost in gathering individuals to the gospel of Jesus Christ.

34:17 cast the lot. Those in the Lamb's book are chosen as the Lord's servants.

divided . . . by line. By a godly decree the land once known as Edom is surveyed and apportioned to those whose names are in the Lord's book (Rev. 21:27). The earth, once a telestial world inhabited by telestial beings, will become a celestial kingdom, inhabited by celestial beings.

for ever/generation to generation. The righteous will inhabit the earth eternally.

---
Notas:
[^1] Hebrew taniym. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 1072.
[^2] All bracketed changes in v. 8 are found in JST Isa. 35:8.
[^3] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 699-700.
[^4] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 95, 370.
[^5] From Hebrew 'abeney, meaning "stones." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 6.
[^6] From Hebrew taniym. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 1072.
[^7] From Hebrew chatsiyr, meaning "enclosure [or] courtyard." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 346.
[^8] JST Isa. 34:16.
[^9] From Hebrew n'drh, from the root 'dr, meaning to "be lacking." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 727.
[^10] All bracketed changes in this verse are from JST Isa. 34:16.
[^11] All bracketed changes in this verse are from JST Isa. 34:17.
