Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 35

Likening Isa. 35 unto Ourselves

Chapter 35 presents a glorious picture of Zion in the latter-days. Those of us who attain to Zion will "be glad," "rejoice," and "rejoice even with joy and singing"; there will be "songs and everlasting joy upon" our heads. We will "obtain joy and gladness," and "sorrow and sighing" shall "flee away" from us. Most important, as we are obedient and worthy, we will "see the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God."

Latter-day Israel Rejoices and Blossoms as a Rose (35:1-10)

With the restoration of the gospel, the righteous of latter-day Israel, which includes the Lamanites, is no longer comparable to a wilderness or desert but is like the garden of God, or Eden (see commentary on 27:10; see also D&C 33:5). Zion["blossom[s] abundantly" (35:2), thanks to the abundance of "waters," "streams," and "springs of water" (35:6-7)—all of which refer symbolically to Jesus Christ and the great life-giving blessings associated with him and his gospel.

Modern revelation adds light to this chapter of Isaiah: "But before the great day of the Lord shall come, Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose. Zion shall flourish upon the hills and rejoice upon the mountains" (D&C 49:24-25). The revelation places Jacob in the "wilderness," a term also used in Isa. 35, and we learn that Jacob and Zion shall "flourish" and the Lamanites shall "blossom." The words flourish and blossom suggest that Jacob, Zion, and the Lamanites are like plants or flowers.

D&C 49 presents a host of teachings about what Zion will be like in the last days:

It will be a place of rejoicing, joy, gladness, singing, and glory (D&C 49:1-2, 10)

Inhabitants of Zion will "see the glory of the Lord" (D&C 49:2)

Inhabitants of Zion will strengthen one another spiritually (D&C 49:3-4)

God will open the eyes of the blind and the ears of the deaf (D&C 49:5)

The waters of life will flow abundantly (D&C 49:6-7)

The "way of holiness" will be in Zion (D&C 49:8)

The "way of holiness" will be off limits to the "unclean" and enemies of Zion (D&C 49:8-9)

The "way of holiness" will be for the "redeemed" and "ransomed of the Lord" (D&C 49:9-10)

Those who "come to Zion" will experience "everlasting joy," and "sorrow and sighing shall flee away" (D&C 49:10).

We also read some, but not all, of Isaiah's statements literally, seeing in our time the deserts of both Utah and Israel responding to the Lord's blessing the land. The great irrigation systems and man-made water systems enable places that were once wastelands to become farming communities; hence, the desert and the wilderness are blossoming as a rose.

Isa. 35:1-10

The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them; and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose. (35:1) It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing: the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon, they shall see the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God. (35:2) Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees. (35:3) Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompence; he will come and save you. (35:4) Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. (35:5) Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert. (35:6) And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs of water: in the [resort of jackals], [^1] where each lay, shall be grass with reeds and rushes. (35:7) And [a] highway shall be there; [for] a way [shall be cast up] and it shall be called The way of holiness; [T]he unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall be [cast up] for those [who are clean, and] the wayfaring men, though [they are accounted] [^2] fools, shall not err therein. (35:8) No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon, it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk there: (35:9) And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. (35:10)

Notes and Commentary

35:1 desert shall . . . blossom as the rose. Isaiah equates the desert to Israel, an important point to understanding this chapter; here he prophesies that the desert shall blossom, just as earlier he had prophesied that Israel shall blossom (see commentary on 27:6, 10). For Isaiah's prophetic world, the words desert and wilderness relate not only to a barren and desolate land but to a people or nation (1:30) who lack the living waters of Jesus Christ. When Isaiah prophesies that the desert shall blossom as the rose, he refers to the restoration of the gospel: "Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit" (27:6), "Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness" (D&C 49:24), and the full blessings of the temple shall again be made available.

After the death of Jesus and his apostles, the Church was driven "into the wilderness" (D&C 86:3), but with the restoration of the gospel we have witnessed "the coming forth of [the Lord's] church out of the wilderness" (D&C 5:14). We, the house of Israel, are no longer a desert but are flourishing and filling "the face of the world with fruit" (27:6). We drink deeply of the waters of Christ (58:11).

35:2 It shall blossom abundantly. The house of Israel will not simply blossom but will blossom abundantly.

joy and singing. We will rejoice for the founding of Zion and for the Lord's glory (51:3).

glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon. Isaiah likens us, latter-day Israel, to the lush forests of Lebanon, the fertile fields of Carmel, and the beauty and flowers of Sharon (2:13; 33:9; 60:13).

they shall see the glory of the Lord. As we witness the flourishing of the Church in the last days, we will see the hand of God. With the restoration of the priesthood and its ordinances, the privilege of the obedient and worthy to behold God is now on the earth.

35:3 weak hands/feeble knees. In the last days we are commanded to "succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees" (D&C 81:5) so that all will remain faithful until the Lord's coming.

35:4 Be strong, fear not. All of us are commanded to strengthen the weak by saying, "Be strong, fear not" and remind them that God will come and save us.

vengeance/recompence. Christ will exact vengeance on the wicked for their iniquities (Morm. 3:15) and recompense those who are part of his kingdom (see commentary on 34:8).

35:5 eyes of the blind shall be opened. This statement has a literal, physical application (D&C 84:69-70), but it also refers to those who are spiritually blind, deaf, and dumb, who will be made whole through their conversion to the restored gospel.

35:6-7 waters/streams/pool/springs of water. This image has a dual application: desolate wastelands become gardens in the last days; through the power of Christ, "Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit" (27:6) and "Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness" (D&C 49:24). The waters point to Christ and his salvation. Earlier Isaiah wrote that the "Lord will be unto us a place of broad rivers and streams" (33:21).

35:7 grass with reeds and rushes. Reeds and rushes require ample water and cannot grow in the harsh wilderness. These plants also represent righteous individuals who partake of the waters of life.

35:8 highway. This word may also be read "exalted path" [^3] (or "way that is high"—highway). This highway, called "the way of holiness" (11:16; 35:8), is our path to God. It brings us out of bondage and into the promised land. It leads us through the gates of baptism and to the temple, or the presence of God (Jer. 31:21; see also Isa. 51:10-11). That the way is a "way of holiness" for the "redeemed" but not for the "unclean" emphasizes the connection with temples and temple ordinances.

unclean shall not pass over. Those who have chosen not to avail themselves of the Lord's atonement and enter into covenants with him will not pass over the way of holiness.

wayfaring men. The traveler on this particular highway is the searcher for truth. The sincere disciple of truth eventually finds the path of the Lord, and, though many account such to be a fool for his conversion to the gospel of the Lord, he will not err by walking this highway. [^4]

35:9 lion/ravenous beast. These creatures represent the Lord's enemies, who desire to harm those on the highway of holiness, but they will not succeed.

redeemed. Those who have taken upon them the name of the Lord and his covenants and applied the Atonement in their lives are thus redeemed and ransomed by the Lord.

35:10 ransomed of the Lord shall return. Those who accept the restored gospel and its covenants are the ransomed of the Lord. These people will return (return in Hebrew also means "repent") from centuries of scattering and exile in various lands and will "come to Zion" (D&C 45:71).

with songs . . . upon their heads. Our pioneer ancestors literally sang as they traveled, but this passage also refers to our worship services today. Sacred songs have always been part of true worship among the Saints.

they shall obtain joy. Joy accompanies sacred music, obedience, and temple attendance.

---
Notas:
[^1] Bracketed changes are from JST Isa. 36:5.
[^2] All bracketed changes in v. 8 are found in JST Isa. 35:8.
[^3] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 699-700.
[^4] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 95, 370.
