Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 36

Likening Isa. 36 unto Ourselves

King Hezekiah set a wonderful example for us to follow. When faced with tremendous challenges, including the approach of the Assyrian armies, he turned to the Lord in prayer and sought counsel from the Lord's prophet; then he trusted the Lord to deliver him and his people. So should we do when we are faced with trials, challenges, and threats to our lives. The Lord stands ready to help us—but we must ask him and be obedient to his will if we hope to receive his blessing.

The Invasion of Sennacherib (36:1-21)

While Hezekiah is king over Judah, Sennacherib, the king of Assyria, and his armies capture most of the fortified cities of Judah (36:1). Then Sennacherib sends his armies, led by Rabshakeh, to Jerusalem (36:2) to demand gifts and to inform Judah of the terms of surrender, which include the deportation of the people of Jerusalem (36:8, 16-17). Rabshakeh emphasizes that the inhabitants of Jerusalem should not rely on Egypt (36:4-6) or their God (36:7, 10, 15, 18-20) for deliverance.

Hezekiah, in exchange for what he hopes will be Sennacherib's mercy and consequent departure from Judea in peace, pays Sennacherib three hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold (2 Kgs. 18:14-16). Sennacherib, however, treacherously sends his armies to destroy Jerusalem.

Isa. 36:1-21

Now it came to pass in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, that Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the defenced cities of Judah, and took them. (36:1) And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem unto king Hezekiah with a great army. And he stood by the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field. (36:2) Then came forth unto him Eliakim, Hilkiah's son, which was over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, Asaph's son, the recorder. (36:3) And Rabshakeh said unto them, Say ye now to Hezekiah, Thus saith the great king, the king of Assyria, What confidence is this wherein thou trustest? (36:4) I say, [thy] words are but vain [when thou sayest,] [^1] I have counsel and strength for war: now on whom dost thou trust, that thou rebellest against me? (36:5) Lo, thou trustest in the staff of this broken reed, on Egypt; whereon if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it: so is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all that trust in him. (36:6) But if thou say to me, We trust in the Lord our God: is it not he, whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar? (36:7) Now therefore give pledges, I pray thee, to my master the king of Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them. (36:8) How then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of my master's servants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen? (36:9) And am I now come up without the Lord against this land to destroy it? the Lord said unto me, Go up against this land, and destroy it. (36:10) Then said Eliakim and Shebna and Joah unto Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray thee, unto thy servants in the Syrian language; for we understand it: and speak not to us in the Jews' language, in the ears of the people that are on the wall. (36:11) But Rabshakeh said, Hath my master sent me to thy master and to thee to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the men that sit upon the wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink their own piss with you? (36:12) Then Rabshakeh stood, and cried with a loud voice in the Jews' language, and said, Hear ye the words of the great king, the king of Assyria. (36:13) Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall not be able to deliver you. (36:14) Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the Lord, saying, The Lord will surely deliver us: this city shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria. (36:15) Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus saith the king of Assyria, Make an agreement with me by a present, and come out to me: and eat ye every one of his vine, and every one of his fig tree, and drink ye every one the waters of his own cistern; (36:16) Until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards. (36:17) Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying, The Lord will deliver us. Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria? (36:18) Where are the gods of Hamath and Arphad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim? and have they delivered Samaria out of my hand? (36:19) Who are they among all the gods of these lands, that have delivered their land out of my hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand? (36:20) But they held their peace, and answered him not a word: for the king's commandment was, saying, Answer him not. (36:21)

Notes and Commentary

36:1 fourteenth year of king Hezekiah. Approximately 701 b.c.

Sennacherib. King of Assyria (704-681 b.c.).

36:2 Rabshakeh. A trusted officer of Sennacherib's army, he was sent from Lachish with his own large army to deal with Hezekiah.

Lachish. This fortified city guarded the highway to Jerusalem from the south.

upper pool/highway. The upper pool is the Spring of Gihon; adjoining the pool was a highway that ran through a valley called the Fuller's Field.

36:3 Eliakim/Shebna/Joah. Hezekiah sends three of his high officials to meet Rabshakeh.

36:4 wherein thou trustest. Rabshakeh asks from what source Hezekiah has received the confidence to raise a rebellion against Assyria when Egypt was unable to support him.

36:5 thy words are but vain. The field commander mocks Hezekiah's plans to wage war against Assyria (30:2-7; 31:1-3).

36:6 staff of this broken reed. Rabshakeh compares Hezekiah's placing his trust in Egypt to a man who trusts in a reed for support as he walks; when the reed snaps, it is driven into his hand (Ezek. 29:6).

36:7 trust in the Lord. Rabshakeh attacks Judah's trust in God by attacking Hezekiah's recently established religious policies.

high places/altars Hezekiah hath taken away. In an attempt to stop the worship of false gods, Hezekiah has Judah's high places and altars destroyed (2 Kgs. 18:1-7). Rabshakeh attempts to undermine the trust people have in Hezekiah's relationship with the Lord by implying that Hezekiah has angered the Lord by destroying the high places.

36:8 pledges. Rabshakeh asks Jerusalem to pledge her services and devotion to Assyria.

two thousand horses. Rabshakeh implies that the army of Judah is of no consequence—he promises horses if Hezekiah can muster enough men to use them.

36:10 the Lord said unto me, Go up against this land. Rabshakeh claims that Jehovah commissioned Assyria to destroy Jerusalem (Isa. 30; 31).

36:11 Speak . . . in the Syrian language. Hezekiah's officials desire Rabshakeh to speak Syriac (or Aramaic), the common tongue of the Assyrians, so that the onlooking Jews cannot understand the negotiations. Rabshakeh, however, wishing to intimidate the onlookers, chooses to address Hezekiah's envoys in Hebrew.

36:12 eat their own dung. Rabshakeh plays on the people's fears by creating a picture of famine and destitution caused by Assyria's seizure of the land; the only thing available for consumption would be human refuse.

36:13 Rabshakeh . . . cried with a loud voice. Rabshakeh not only refuses to speak Syriac (36:11) but shouts his words to the people on the walls.

36:14 he shall not . . . deliver you. Rabshakeh attempts to create fear by boasting that neither Hezekiah nor his God could deliver Jerusalem from the mighty Assyrian power.

36:16 Make an agreement . . . by a present. Rabshakeh asks for the people to pay tribute in exchange for their freedom.

36:17 take you away to a land. It was Assyrian practice to deport captured peoples from their homelands, a tactic that was part of a larger strategy of humiliation.

corn/wine/bread/vineyards. To soften the blow of deportation, Rabshakeh promises that the inhabitants of Judah will be sent to lands of produce and plenty.

36:19 Hamath/Arphad/Sepharvaim/Samaria. These cities were conquered by Sennacherib during his military campaigns before he reached Jerusalem. Rabshakeh notes that the gods of these cities (which of course were false gods) could not defend their inhabitants from Assyrian conquest.

36:20 Who . . . among all the gods of these lands. Rabshakeh asks, "What makes you think that the Lord will deliver you, when other gods have failed their worshippers?" This blasphemy brought the Lord's wrath on the Assyrians (37:29-38).

36:21 answered him not. Hezekiah has ordered his officials to listen to Rabshakeh but not to respond.

---
Notas:
[^1] DSS Isa. Scroll 37; see Watts, Isa. 34-66, 32.
