Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 38

Likening Isa. 38 unto Ourselves

Hezekiah sets a righteous example for us in the latter days. Sick nigh unto death, he "prayed unto the Lord" (38:2); after he is healed, he writes a psalm praising and giving thanks to the Lord for the blessings of healing and deliverance from sin (38:17). Like Hezekiah, we should praise God in prayer after we are healed from sickness and disease, both spiritual and physical; and we, like this great king, should teach our children of God's truth (38:19).

The Sickness of King Hezekiah (38:1-8)

This section contains a fulfillment of yet another prophecy given by Isaiah that occurs during the time of the Assyrian threat in Palestine. Hezekiah, who is sick and near to death during Sennacherib's campaign, is promised fifteen more years of life (38:5) because of his faith and for the sake of the covenant that the Lord made with David.

Isa. 38:1-8

In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came unto him, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Set thine house in order: for thou shalt die, and not live. (38:1) Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto the Lord, (38:2) And said, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept sore. (38:3) Then [^1] came the word of the Lord to Isaiah, saying, (38:4) Go, and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the Lord, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, [^2] I will add unto thy days fifteen years. (38:5) And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria: and I will defend this city. [^3] (38:6) And this shall be a sign unto thee from the Lord, that the Lord will do this thing that he hath spoken; (38:7) Behold I will bring again the shadow of the degrees, which is gone down in the sun dial of Ahaz, ten degrees backward. So the sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone down. (38:8)

Notes and Commentary

38:1 In those days. During the Assyrian siege.

sick unto death. Hezekiah's life-threatening illness apparently included boils (38:21). Although they are not fatal by themselves, they may be symptoms of a greater ailment.

Set thine house in order. Isaiah counsels Hezekiah to arrange for the royal succession, for his death seemed imminent. This issue is of significant concern for Hezekiah, because at this time he has no male heir to whom he could pass the kingship.

38:2 turned his face toward the wall, and prayed. Hezekiah's illness made him ritually unclean, preventing him from entering the temple, so he turned his face toward the temple wall to pray. Before his illness, Hezekiah prayed in the temple (37:14-15).

38:3 I have walked before thee. Hezekiah reaffirms that he has been faithful to the Lord.

38:5 David thy father. The reference to King David reassures Hezekiah that the royal line will continue (37:35).

heard thy prayer. The Lord answers Hezekiah's prayer by extending his life fifteen years, leaving him sufficient time to prepare a son for kingship. Manasseh was born approximately two years after these events and ascended the throne at age twelve or thirteen when Hezekiah died.

38:7 a sign. The Lord's sign to Hezekiah, assuring him that his life will be extended, contradicts the ordinary course of nature. The Lord causes the sun's shadow to move "ten degrees backward" (38:8), indicating that time had been added to the day (Hel. 12:14). This was a sign for Hezekiah, who has time added to his life.

King Hezekiah's Psalm (38:9-22)

After Hezekiah, who is sick and near unto death (38:1-8), learns that the Lord will postpone his death, he writes a psalm portraying his humility, meekness, and reliance upon the Lord (38:9-20).

Isa. 38:9-22

The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah, when he had been sick, and was recovered of his sickness: (38:9) I said in the [midst] [^4] of my days, I shall go to the gates of the grave: I am deprived of the residue of my years. (38:10) I said, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord, in the land of the living: I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world. (38:11) Mine age is departed, and is removed from me as a shepherd's tent: I have cut off like a weaver my life: he will cut me off with pining sickness: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me. (38:12) I reckoned till morning, that, as a lion, so will he break all my bones: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me. (38:13) Like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a dove: mine eyes fail with looking upward: O Lord, I am oppressed; undertake for me. (38:14) What shall I say? he hath both spoken unto me, and himself hath [healed me]. I shall go softly all my years, [that I may not walk] [^5] in the bitterness of my soul. (38:15) [Oh] Lord, [thou who art the life of my spirit, in whom I live]; so wilt thou recover me, and make me to live; [and in all these things I will praise thee]. [^6] (38:16) Behold, [I had great bitterness instead of peace,] but thou hast in love to my soul [saved me] [^7] from the pit of corruption, for thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back. (38:17) For the grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee: they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth. (38:18) The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day: the father to the children shall make known thy truth. (38:19) The Lord was ready to save me: therefore we will sing my songs to the stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house of the Lord. (38:20) For Isaiah had said, Let them take a lump of figs, and lay it for a plaister upon the boil, and he shall recover. (38:21) Hezekiah also had said, What is the sign that I shall go up to the house of the Lord? (38:22)

Notes and Commentary

38:9 The writing of Hezekiah. After Hezekiah recovers from his illness, he records his feelings and appreciation for the Lord.

38:10 midst of my days . . . gates of the grave. Even though Hezekiah is in the middle of his life, he stands at the threshold of death, about to enter the grave.

38:11 I shall not see the Lord/I shall behold man no more. Hezekiah mourns lost opportunities for worship and association with other people because his life is about to end.

38:12 Mine age. Hezekiah's future, his time of old age, is taken from him.

as a shepherd's tent/like a weaver. Hezekiah's life ends as easily as a shepherd dismantles his tent or as quickly as a weaver cuts and gathers the finished fabric from the loom.

day even to night. In a single day, Hezekiah's anticipation of a long life changes to an anticipation of death.

38:13 lion . . . break all my bones. Hezekiah anticipates complete destruction, such as that carried out by a beast that overcomes and devours its prey (Jer. 50:17).

38:14 Like a crane or a swallow/dove. Hezekiah's pleadings with the Lord are at times loud, as a crane's cry, at other times as soft as a swallow's chirp, and on occasion mournful, as a dove's cooing.

mine eyes fail. Hezekiah pleads so long that his eyes become weak from looking heavenward, symbolizing his great efforts in petitioning the Lord for his life.

I am oppressed. Hezekiah, feeling the pressure a debtor feels from a creditor (Matt. 18:28-30), asks the Lord to take the responsibility for the debt ("undertake for me"), that is, to free him from immediate death.

38:15 What shall I say? The climax of the psalm is the point at which Hezekiah learns that his life has been extended: He is more or less speechless (What shall I say?).

go softly. Hezekiah commits himself to walk humbly (softly) in the Lord's paths.

38:16 life of my spirit. Hezekiah testifies that the Lord is the sustaining force of life (cf. D&C 10:70; 50:27; 88:11).

38:17 bitterness instead of peace. Hezekiah had felt anguish of soul at the prospect of death, but with his healing, he now feels clean and wholly at peace.

pit of corruption. Hell.

cast all my sins behind thy back. Being healed by the Lord is often associated with being forgiven of sins (Matt. 9:6; James 5:15).

38:18 grave cannot praise thee. The opportunity of praising and celebrating the Lord's name in his presence is not given to those who are consigned to the pit (hell); they have no hope of basking in the truth and light of the Lord (D&C 76:81-87; 121:19).

38:19 the living. The living, those who are spiritually alive and have avoided the fate of those consigned to the pit (38:18), praise the Lord.

father to the children. It is the obligation of parents to teach their children God's truths (D&C 68:25).

38:20 we will sing . . . all the days of our life. Hezekiah determines to sing praises to the Lord in the temple all the days of his life.

38:21 lump of figs . . . boil. Isaiah tells Hezekiah to apply to his boils a paste made of figs. Hezekiah obeys, and "he recovered" (2 Kgs. 20:7).

38:22 go up to the house of the Lord. After an illness that had kept one from entering the temple was cured, it was customary to wash and go before the priests to be pronounced clean.

---
Notas:
[^1] Bracketed changes are from JST Isa. 39:2.
[^2] We have replaced the archaic KJV shewed.
[^3] 2 Kgs. 20:6 and DSS Isa. Scroll add for mine own sake and for my servant David's sake (cf. 37:35).
[^4] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 198.
[^5] Bracketed changes are from JST Isa. 38:15.
[^6] Bracketed changes are from JST Isa. 38:16.
[^7] Bracketed changes are from JST Isa. 38:17.
