Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 40

Likening Isa. 40 unto Ourselves

Many of us apply the words "prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a highway for our God" exclusively to John the Baptist. Yet, a revelation to Joseph Smith reveals that these words apply to all of us as full-time or member missionaries of the Church. The revelation reads, in part, "Yea, open your mouths and they shall be filled, saying: Repent, repent, and prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight" (D&C 33:10). After the word has gone forth, the Lord will come "with a strong hand" (40:10). Those who are righteous will receive him, and "he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom" (40:11).

The Lord's Message of Comfort to Jerusalem (40:1-8)

On the heels of a message of national disaster (39:5-7) come words of comfort and forgiveness to Jerusalem's inhabitants. Although the national disaster took place centuries before Jesus' birth and ministry, the prophecy of comfort to Jerusalem will not find fulfillment until the last days and the second coming of Christ. At that time the iniquity of Jerusalem will be pardoned, and "the glory of the Lord shall be revealed" (40:5).

This section contains a commandment for all of us as members of the Church: "Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a highway for our God" (40:3).

Isa. 40:1-8

Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God. (40:1) Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath received of the Lord's hand double for all her sins. (40:2) The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a highway for our God. (40:3) Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain: (40:4) And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. (40:5) The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field: (40:6) The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: because the spirit of the Lord bloweth upon it: surely the people is grass. (40:7) The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God shall stand for ever. (40:8)

Notes and Commentary

40:1 comfort ye my people. These opening words are meant to comfort the people of Jerusalem. (Of course, in a broader sense, my people refers to all of the Lord's covenant people.) Comfort ye is repeated for emphasis, because Jerusalem's warfare will soon be over. Elder Orson Hyde was told by the Spirit, "Go ye forth . . . and declare these words unto Judah, and say, . . . 'assemble yourselves, and let us go into the defensed cities. . . . Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished—that her iniquity is pardoned, for she hath received of the Lord's hand doubly for all her sins.'" [^1]

40:2 Jerusalem. This word refers both to the city as well as its inhabitants, that is, the Jews (and, again, in a broader sense, all the covenant people of the Lord).

warfare is accomplished/iniquity is pardoned. Warfare (Hebrew tseba'ah) should be translated as "hard service." [^2] This possibly refers to the hardships, persecution, and burdens that the Jewish nation had to endure as a result of their sins against God. This term of service will be completed near the time in which "the voice . . . crieth in the wilderness," when "every valley shall be exalted," and "the glory of the Lord shall be revealed" (40:3-5).

double for all her sins. The word double recalls the law of Moses, which required double payment as restitution for theft (Ex. 22:4, 7) or breach of trust (Ex. 22:9). It indicates that the full measure of debt has been paid for the nation's sins (Jer. 16:18).

40:3 voice . . . crieth in the wilderness. This passage has several fulfillments:

John the Baptist, during his mortal ministry (JST John 1:6-24; Mark 1:1-8; Luke 1:76-79) and also his appearance to Joseph Smith to restore the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, thus commencing the preparation for the Lord's coming (D&C 13).

Joseph Smith, who "laid the foundation for the kingdom of God . . . that the world might be prepared for the coming of the Lord." [^3]

Priesthood leaders and missionaries, who are told to cry repentance and "prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight" (D&C 33:10).

Angelic messengers, who helped restore the gospel (D&C 128:20) to prepare a righteous people for the Lord's coming.

The Lord's Spirit, which "is as the voice of one crying in the wilderness—in the wilderness, because you cannot see him" (D&C 88:66).

Prepare ye the way of the Lord. This statement is a commission to prepare for the coming of the Lord by crying repentance and gathering a people sufficiently prepared by covenant and ordinance to receive him (Mal. 3:1; JST Luke 3:4-10; D&C 84:28).

make straight in the desert a highway for our God. This phrase means "prepare the way of the Lord," or prepare for the Second Coming by making the Saints' path back to God's presence level or smooth (that is, remove all obstacles out of the way so that others can be obedient to the laws and ordinances of the gospel). [^4] The modern equivalent to Isaiah's phrase make straight in the desert a highway for our God is "make his paths straight" (D&C 33:10; 65:1; 45:2). The desert symbolizes the world of sin. The highway here is "the way of holiness" (19:19-25; 35:8).

40:4 valley . . . exalted/mountain . . . made low. This passage may refer to the great earthquake that will accompany the Lord's return (Rev. 16:18-20). Symbolically, it suggests that the humble will be exalted and the proud brought low (see also D&C 49:23; 109:74; 133:22).

crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain. These statements are similar in meaning to "make straight in the desert a highway" (40:3). Crooked also means "deceitful" or "sly," so the phrase could read, the "deceitful shall be made upright."

40:5 the glory of the Lord . . . revealed. This passage refers to the coming of the Lord in his glory (see commentary on 24:23).

all flesh shall see it together. When the Lord comes in his glory, all the world will see him (D&C 88:95-98; 101:23).

40:6 The voice said, Cry. The voice of the Lord, his Spirit, or perhaps an angel commands Isaiah to cry, to which he asks, "What shall I cry?" Isaiah is commanded to cry out, "All flesh is grass, . . . surely the people is grass."

All flesh is grass. Grass and flowers swiftly dry up and wither away when the hot desert winds blow on them. The Spirit of the Lord blows, in the form of judgments, upon men and causes them to wither away and die like grass (Ps. 102:11). The glory of man is temporary, like that of the flower (James 1:10; 1 Pet. 1:24; D&C 124:7).

40:8 word of our God shall stand for ever. In contrast to mankind's transitory nature, the word of God—his judgments and decrees—stands forever.

The Lord Comes like a Shepherd (40:9-11)

Isaiah calls out to Zion and Jerusalem to prepare for the coming of their Lord in strength and judgment to rule on the earth and reward her inhabitants according to their works. He will be a shepherd who will care for, protect, and lead his followers.

Isa. 40:9-11

O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God! (40:9) Behold, the Lord God will come with strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him. (40:10) He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young. [^5] (40:11)

Notes and Commentary

40:9 Zion . . . get thee up into the high mountain. Before Zion's people take the gospel (good tidings) to the world, they are commanded to go up to the high mountain, or God's temple. Isaiah's words apply to us: We are "sent forth . . . to teach the children of men the things which I have put into your hands by the power of my Spirit; and ye are to be taught from on high. Sanctify yourselves and ye shall be endowed with power" (D&C 43:15-16; 110:9).

good tidings. This is the restored gospel, which is to be preached to the entire world.

Jerusalem . . . lift up thy voice. The Lord will come in glory to Jerusalem to reign on the earth (24:23). The good news of the Lord's reign will then go forth from Jerusalem to the cities of Judah, or to all of the lands where the children of Judah dwell, to call them to come and "Behold your God!" In a broader sense, Jerusalem stands as a symbol for the covenant people of God.

40:10 God will come with strong hand/arm. Hand and arm represent power. The same arm that has been stretched out in judgment now establishes the Lord's reign.

his reward is with him. Judgment accompanies Jesus at his coming, whereby everyone will be rewarded for his works (Rev. 22:12).

40:11 flock/lambs. This is a metaphor for the followers of Christ.

like a shepherd. Christ is the shepherd who protects, feeds, and provides water for his flock (Ps. 23; 28:9; Jer. 23:3) he gathers the lambs and carries them "in his bosom," or the fold of the shepherd's robe, a symbol of intimate, loving care.

Who Is Like unto the Lord? (40:12-25)

Isaiah contrasts the greatness of the Lord with the nothingness of mankind. The Lord has power to create the heavens (40:12), possesses all knowledge, wisdom, and understanding, and no man can instruct him (40:14); he is greater than all his creations and has no equal (40:20). When contrasted with God, the nations of the earth are as insignificant as a single drop of water in a bucket, a few particles of dust (40:15-17), or small grasshoppers. Even the great princes and judges of the earth are nothing (40:23) compared to God, who has power to add to his creations as easily as a person opens the curtains in his home (40:22). Isaiah uses ten rhetorical questions as a teaching tool in this section; five of them begin with the words who or whom.

Isa. 40:12-25

Who hath measured the waters [of the sea] [^6] in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance? (40:12) Who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his counselor hath taught him? (40:13) With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and [showed] [^7] to him the way of understanding? (40:14) Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing. (40:15) And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt offering. (40:16) All nations before him are as nothing; and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity. (40:17) To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto him? (40:18) The workman melteth a graven image, and the goldsmith spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver chains. (40:19) He that is so impoverished that he hath no oblation chooseth a tree that will not rot; he seeketh unto him a cunning workman to prepare a graven image, that shall not be moved. (40:20) Have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been told you from the beginning? have ye not understood from the foundations of the earth? (40:21) It is he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in: (40:22) That bringeth the princes to nothing; he maketh the judges of the earth as vanity. (40:23) Yea, they shall not be planted; yea, they shall not be sown: yea, their stock shall not take root in the earth: and he shall also blow upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlwind shall take them away as stubble. (40:24) To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equal? saith the Holy One. (40:25)

Notes and Commentary

40:12 measured the waters . . . in the hollow of his hand. God created Earth's great oceans as easily as a man cups his hand and fills it with water. He created "heaven with the span" as easily as a man measures a household object with a ruler. All of creation, formed by him with exactness (measured), is held in the hollow of his hand, meaning he is aware of and protective of all.

comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure. This phrase emphasizes that the Lord knows everything from the largest of his creations to the smallest (Mosiah 4:9).

40:13 Who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord. No one is able to teach or counsel God, who controls and comprehends all things (see commentary on 55:9; Rom. 11:33-34; Alma 26:35).

40:14 taught . . . judgment/knowledge/understanding. No one needed to instruct the Lord in matters of judgment, knowledge, or discernment (11:2-5).

40:15 nations are as a drop of a bucket. The great nations of the world are insignificant when compared to the vast and marvelous creations of the Lord and his immense power and knowledge (Hel. 12:7-8). To Joseph Smith the Lord said, "Have I not made the earth? Do I not hold the destinies of all the armies of the nations of the earth?" (D&C 117:6).

40:16 Lebanon is not sufficient to burn. Lebanon, known for its immense forests (2:13; 60:13), could not provide enough wood or animals to support a sacrifice worthy of God.

40:17 nations before him are as nothing. Though the nations of the earth consider themselves to be world powers, they are nothing compared to the Lord.

40:18 To whom then will ye liken God? Since God is much more powerful than man can comprehend, how can he try to create a likeness of him or worship anyone or anything else?

40:19 workman melteth a graven image. Though God is too magnificent for any to understand fully, many foolishly seek to make representations of him by fashioning images and idols overlaid and decorated with precious metal (44:10-17).

40:20 impoverished . . . chooseth a tree that will not rot. Those who could not afford ostentatious displays of worship sought cheaper methods (wood) by which to display their gods for worship. They carefully selected wood that would not rot, for a rotting or decaying god would have seemed powerless to help itself or its worshipers.

graven image, that shall not be moved. Once an idol was created, it was nailed or anchored to keep it from tipping over (41:7). Ironically, the anchoring of the idol emphasizes its powerlessness (Judg. 6:25-31). The Lord, however, could never be restrained.

40:21 Have ye not known? The four rhetorical questions of this verse indicate that humanity has been taught the truth about God from the beginning of the world, but because of wickedness, they have not heard it (6:9-10).

40:22 sitteth upon the circle of the earth. This statement emphasizes the magnitude of the Lord (40:12-15), whose greatness is such that the earth is as a footstool to him (66:1).

inhabitants . . . as grasshoppers. The people of the earth are great in number and have devastated the land, yet compared to God, they are small and insignificant.

stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain/tent. The Lord created the heavens as easily as we open or close the curtains in our home.

40:23 judges of the earth as vanity. The earth's powerful and wise inhabitants are weak fools compared to God, the Omnipotent (Job 12:21).

40:24 they shall not be planted. The powerful people of the earth, here likened to plants, will not have a place or thrive in the Lord's kingdom because of their rebellion and wickedness (40:6-8). They will be destroyed as quickly as a whirlwind carries away the stumps of grain (stubble) that are left after the harvest.

40:25 To whom . . . shall I be equal. This statement is a reminder that man-made things are powerless and only God can accomplish these events.

The Lord Sustains His People with His Power (40:26-31)

The Lord is the Creator of all that the eye can see and the orchestrator of every movement in the heavens. Nothing slips by him unseen, and nothing that his Spirit sustains ever fails; therefore, Isaiah promises that those who trust and rely on him will be replenished by his sustaining strength.

Isa. 40:26-31

Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these things, that bringeth out their host by number: he calleth them all by names by the greatness of his might, for that he is strong in power; not one faileth. (40:26) Why sayest thou, O Jacob , and speakest, O Israel, My way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my God? (40:27) Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary? there is no searching of his understanding. (40:28) He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he increaseth strength. (40:29) Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall: (40:30) But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint. (40:31)

Notes and Commentary

40:26 Lift up your eyes on high. Isaiah summons the Lord's people to look at the heavens as an example of the Lord's might. He who created all the stars and heavenly bodies directs all of their movements and knows each by name (Ps. 147:4) not one ceases to act according to God's direction ("not one faileth").

40:27 Jacob/Israel. The recipient of this revelation is identified. Jacob and Israel are symbolic names for the Lord's people in any age, from the days of Jacob to the present.

My way is hid from the Lord. Some of us may have an incorrect belief that the Lord is not aware of all our actions or that he will disregard unforgiven sin in the Day of Judgment.

40:28 Hast thou not known? The prophets have taught of God and his ways since the beginning (40:21).

the Creator . . . fainteth not. The Lord does not tire or sleep.

no searching of his understanding. So great is the Lord's wisdom that it is impossible for mankind to comprehend his knowledge (Rom. 11:33).

40:29 He giveth power to the faint. God has given all of us the breath of life, and he "is preserving [us] from day to day, by lending [us] breath, . . . and even supporting [us] from one moment to another" (Mosiah 2:21). Without his power we would be nothing; we would not exist. Even the "youths" and "young men," those who are in the prime of life, "shall utterly fall" without God's power upholding them (40:30).

40:31 they that wait upon the Lord. Those who seek righteousness will be upheld by God's power (D&C 24:12).

run, and not be weary. Those who wait upon the Lord will receive the spiritual blessing of magnification. This promise certainly pertains to the physical body (D&C 89:20), and it also anticipates the immortal body.

---
Notas:
[^1] Hymns, no. 85.
[^2] We have replaced the archaic KJV shew.
[^3] Literally "from nothing." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 34.
[^4] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 100.
[^5] We have replaced the archaic KJV sheweth.
[^6] JST Isa. 41:28.
[^7] We have replaced the archaic KJV shewed.
