Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 41

Likening Isa. 41 unto Ourselves

Isaiah addresses a number of issues that concern us as members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. We need to be reminded often that we are the Lord's "chosen" people so that we will order our lives accordingly. We need to know, at a young age, that God will direct each one of us through life; he will hold our right hand and assure each of us, "Fear not; I will help thee" (41:13). And if we are ever thirsty, physically or spiritually, our small, empty cups will never suffice, for God desires to give us a great river full of water to fill our needs.

Israel Is the Lord's Servant (41:1-20)

Isaiah's prophetic promises to Israel are wonderful, and they have application to us, of whom the Lord has said, "ye are the children of Israel" (D&C 103:17). Isaiah tells us that, as part of Israel,

We are God's servants (41:8-9);

We are his chosen people (41:8-9);

God has called us from the chief men of the earth (41:9);

We are to fear not, for God will strengthen, help, and uphold us (41:10);

Those who are against us will be ashamed and confounded and will perish (41:11);

They who war against us will be "as nothing, and as a thing of nought" (41:12);

While holding our right hand, God will say, "Fear not; I will help thee" (41:13);

God will mold us into powerful, unique instruments, enabling us to perform our work (41:15-16);

When our poor and needy (speaking of all of us) seek water, God will provide more than enough for us. He says, "I will open rivers . . . and fountains . . . and . . . springs of water" (41:18). Such are the great promises unto us, who are of the house of Israel.

Isa. 41:1-20

Keep silence before me, O islands; and let the people renew their strength: let them come near; then let them speak: let us come near together to judgment. (41:1) Who raised up the righteous man from the east, called him to his foot, gave the nations before him, and made him rule over kings? he gave them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow. (41:2) He pursued them, and passed safely; even by the way that he had not gone with his feet. (41:3) Who hath wrought and done it, calling the generations from the beginning? I the Lord, the first, and with the last; I am he. (41:4) The isles saw it, and feared; the ends of the earth were afraid, drew near, and came. (41:5) They helped every one his neighbor; and every one said to his brother, Be of good courage. (41:6) So the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth with the hammer him that smote the anvil, saying, It is ready for the sodering: and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved. (41:7) But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend. (41:8) Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away. (41:9) Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness. (41:10) Behold, all they that were incensed against thee shall be ashamed and confounded: they shall be as nothing; and they that strive with thee shall perish. (41:11) Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, even them that contended with thee: they that war against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of nought. (41:12) For I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee, Fear not; I will help thee. (41:13) Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help thee, saith the Lord, and thy redeemer, the Holy One of Israel. (41:14) Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt make the hills as chaff. (41:15) Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt rejoice in the Lord, and shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel. (41:16) When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue faileth for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them. (41:17) I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys: I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water. (41:18) I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittah tree, and the myrtle, and the oil tree; I will set in the desert the fir tree, and the pine, and the box tree together: (41:19) That they may see, and know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of the Lord hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it. (41:20)

Notes and Commentary

41:1 Keep silence before me, O islands. This command is issued to all the nations of the earth. To keep silence is perhaps to acknowledge the Lord's supremacy.

let the people renew their strength. The promise of renewed strength was made previously to those who rely on the Lord (40:31); the Lord now extends a call to all the peoples of the earth to find renewal in him.

let us come near together to judgment. The Lord invites the people of the earth to come, speak, and gather at the "place of judgment" (NIV). This gathering is held so the Lord can tell the nations about the "righteous man from the east" and about God's righteous acts (41:2-5). After telling the nations, they "feared" and "drew near, and came" (41:5). The "speaking" may be the nations' defense of their actions before the judgment.

41:2 righteous man from the east. Jesus Christ, who is righteous, will come from the east at his second coming and will rule over kings and nations. This passage also refers to Cyrus, the king who conquered much of the world and ruled over kings (44:24-45:5).

called him to his foot. This idiom means "called him to serve."

rule over kings. This phrase refers to both Jesus and Cyrus.

dust to his sword/stubble to his bow. A sword passes through dust easily, as does an arrow shot through airborne (driven) stubble. These metaphors indicate the ease with which both Jesus (at his coming in glory) and Cyrus will conquer the nations.

41:3 He pursued them, and passed safely. The Lord provides the means for Cyrus to pass safely, perhaps referring to his personal safety while leading his armies.

had not gone with his feet. This phrase may indicate the use of horses for travel by Cyrus.

41:4 Who hath . . . done it. The Lord paves the way for Cyrus's rise to power.

calling the generations from the beginning. The Lord has controlled the forces of history from the beginning of time.

the first/last. These titles describe Christ's eternal nature and role as the "author and finisher of our faith" (Heb. 12:2; Rev. 1:8-11).

I am he. Jesus Christ's self-affirmation and testimony.

41:5 isles saw it, and feared. The nations of the known world (see commentary on 41:1) see the coming destruction of Cyrus's armies and fear what will happen to them. At the Second Coming, the nations will possess great fear at the appearance of Jesus Christ.

41:6 They helped every one his neighbor. The fearful nations attempt to comfort each other, and then they turn to their gods to find comfort and to incur their favor.

41:7 carpenter/goldsmith. These craftsmen are those who fashion false gods. As the nations perceive the oncoming destruction, they seek to please their gods by making elaborate representations of them (see commentary on 40:19-20).

fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved. The people may have nailed down or soldered their images to keep them from tipping over.

41:8 Israel/Jacob/seed of Abraham. The Lord, who has been speaking to the nations, now addresses his covenant people.

I have chosen. The people of Israel were chosen to serve the Lord (Deut. 7:6; 26:18) and make his name known to all the world (66:19; 1 Kgs. 8:43).

my friend. Abraham was called "Friend of God" (James 2:23) because of his faith and obedience.

41:9 taken from the ends of the earth . . . from the chief men. Israel was chosen from among all the earth, a nation of simple people selected from among the great and powerful of the world.

I have . . . not cast thee away. However greatly Israel may deserve to be cast away by the Lord as if they were impure metal, the Lord promises not to take such an action. Rather he will send them through a refiner's fire to purify them until they learn to obey him.

41:10 I am with thee. The Lord makes five statements directly to us, Israel, to quiet our fear and dismay: I am with thee, I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, I will help thee, I will uphold thee. This verse is echoed in the comforting Latter-day Saint hymn "How Firm a Foundation." [^1]

right hand of my righteousness. The Lord upholds us with his right hand, his covenant hand.

41:11 they that strive with thee shall perish. The Lord gives us a wonderful promise that those who contend with us, the house of Israel, will be ashamed and confounded, will be as nothing, will perish, and will be as a thing of nought (41:12). Though Israel will look around for her enemies, they will not be found ("Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them"; 41:12), for they will have been destroyed.

41:13 I . . . will hold thy right hand. The right hand is the covenant hand. This phrase reminds us of the covenant relationship we have with the Lord, as his "servant" and "chosen" (41:8-9). It suggests that the Lord will hold up our hand, meaning he will sustain us as we seek in righteousness to keep our covenants. It also suggests that the Lord will hold our hand as an expression of comfort and support (42:6).

41:14 thou worm Jacob. As our enemies will be as "nothing" before us (41:11- 12), so are we as nothing before the Lord. Yet, despite our mortal and spiritual weakness, the Lord will support and sustain us; he will protect and defend us. Twice he states, "I will help thee" and twice he commands, "Fear not" (41:13-14).

redeemer. The Lord, Jesus Christ. A redeemer had a legal meaning in ancient Israel: he was responsible to take a helpless relative's obligations on his own shoulders (Lev. 25:25; Num. 5:8), to avenge a murder (Num. 35:12; Deut. 19:6), to care for a dead relative's widow (Ruth 3-4), or to purchase one's release from debtor's prison. Such is the relationship of the Lord with us (Gen. 48:16): he will care for our needs, avenge us, and release us from bondage, especially the bondage of our sins.

Holy One of Israel. See commentary on 1:4.

41:15 I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument. To help us, the house of Israel, fulfill our mission, the Lord will make us into a new threshing instrument. Most threshing instruments work best on level ground, but this special threshing tool, because it is created by the Lord, is capable of threshing hills and mountains, a seemingly impossible task. That means that we, the house of Israel, are capable of performing impossible works through the power of God, who created us. Part of our goal, through harvesting the white fields (D&C 4), is to seek out the honest in heart. Eventually the gathering will separate the righteous from the wicked, just as wheat is separated from the tares.

41:16 Thou shalt fan them. This statement refers to the separation of the chaff from the kernels after the threshing is complete. The chaff represents the wicked.

whirlwind shall scatter them. The Lord's judgments will destroy the wicked as a whirlwind carries away and scatters chaff.

thou shalt rejoice in the Lord. We will rejoice in the Lord for his work among us.

41:17 poor/needy. All of us are poor and need the waters of life that only the Lord can provide. When we seek water, God provides an abundance. He says, "I will open rivers . . . fountains . . . and . . . springs of water" for you (41:18).

41:18 rivers/fountains/pool/springs. Christ is the living waters that will satisfy our thirst. In the last days there will be an outpouring of this living water to our spirits as well as an increase of water in the wilderness (35:1, 7; see also D&C 117:7; 133:29).

dry land. Nations or peoples that lack the gospel or Church members who lack the Spirit.

41:19 plant in the wilderness the cedar. Isaiah's list of seven trees represents righteous people (Ps. 1:1-3). As indicated in 41:20, these "trees" see, know, consider, and understand together. Seven is a symbolic number that denotes wholeness or completion. These trees represent the variety of individuals that will drink deeply from the living water of 41:18. Note the Lord's interest in the trees and his active role with them: I will plant and I will set the trees in the wilderness.

41:20 hand of the Lord hath done this. This statement summarizes Isaiah's point: the Lord knows the outcome of everything in history, and it is he who gives us power to partake of his blessings.

Graven Images Are Confusion (41:21-29)

The Lord challenges the false gods and graven images that the people have created for themselves to prophesy and foretell the future. He asks the false gods to relate a few historical facts, and he invites them to perform any kind of act—a good act or even an evil act. The Lord issues these challenges so that the people who created these graven images may see if their images are indeed gods, possessing powers and life within themselves. The false gods, of course, are unable to respond, because they are nothing more than "wind and confusion." Whoever makes a graven image is an "abomination" and "vanity."

Isa. 41:21-29

Produce your cause, saith the Lord; bring forth your strong reasons, saith the King of Jacob . (41:21) Let them bring them forth, and [show] [^2] us what shall happen: let them [show] the former things, what they be, that we may consider them, and know the latter end of them; or declare us things for to come. (41:22) [Show] the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods: yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold it together. (41:23) Behold, ye are of nothing, [^3] and your work of nought: an abomination is he that chooseth you. (41:24) I have raised up one from the north, and he shall come: from the rising of the sun shall he call upon my name: and he shall [tread] [^4] upon princes as upon mortar, and as the potter treadeth clay. (41:25) Who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know? and beforetime, that we may say, He is righteous? yea, there is none that [showeth], [^5] yea, there is none that declareth, yea, there is none that heareth your words . (41:26) The first shall say to Zion, Behold, behold them: and I will give to Jerusalem one that bringeth good tidings. (41:27) For I beheld, and there was no man; even among [men], [^6] and there was no counselor, that, when I asked of them, could answer a word. (41:28) Behold, they are all vanity; their works are nothing: their molten images are wind and confusion. (41:29)

Notes and Commentary

41:21 Produce your cause/bring forth your strong reasons. The Lord challenges the false gods to bring forth their case and arguments (D&C 71:8) to attempt to prove they are more powerful than he.

41:22 Let them . . . show us what shall happen. For emphasis, Isaiah twice rephrases this statement as declare us things for to come and show the things that are to come hereafter (41:23). The Lord challenges the false gods to prophesy, to tell what will happen in the future, an act that only God can do, often through his prophets.

let them show the former things. The false gods are not even able to tell things that have already happened, because they are not living. Even men are able to relate historical facts.

41:23 do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed. When the Lord's challenge to the pagan gods to disclose the future is met only by silence, he challenges them to do good, or do evil or anything at all, so that the people may know that ye are gods.

41:24 ye are nothing/your work of nought. Inasmuch as silence meets the Lord's challenge, the natural conclusion is that these gods are incapable of answering. These gods are not gods; they are nothing, and the works attributed to them are nothing but falsehoods.

abomination. Those who worship idols are an abomination (2 Ne. 9:37).

41:25 raised up one. The Lord will raise up a conqueror (see commentary on 41:2) from the north, speaking of Cyrus. Though Cyrus was from the east (see commentary on 41:2), he would conquer from the north.

shall he call upon my name. At the beginning of his reign, Cyrus claimed to believe in all Middle Eastern gods, but once the prophecies of Isaiah were brought to his attention, he turned to Jehovah at least to a degree (see commentary on 45:5).

upon princes as upon mortar. Cyrus "tramples on rulers as if they were mud, like a potter trampling clay" (GNB). Cyrus' enemies will provide no obstacles for him (41:2-3).

41:26 Who hath declared from the beginning. The Lord asks those who worship the false gods, "Which god has been able to prophesy?" Then he answers his own question with "there is no false god that is able to give you visions [showeth], to speak to you [declareth], or who can answer your prayers [heareth your words ]."

He is righteous. The gods are challenged to prove they are worthy of worship by foretelling events by which the people can establish the gods' existence.

41:27 The first shall say. The Lord is the first.

behold them. "Look at the false gods that cannot speak or act; I am going to send a God who can bring good tidings."

one that bringeth good tidings. Jesus Christ brought good tidings, or the gospel, to Jerusalem.

41:28 there was no man . . . could answer a word. No one could be found who could speak the mind of these gods.

41:29 they are all vanity. The Lord concludes by condemning those who worship false gods as vain and the false gods themselves as wind and confusion.

---
Notas:
[^1] Keil and Delitzsch, Commentary, 7:174.
[^2] Keil and Delitzsch, 7:2:175.
[^3] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 322.
[^4] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 219.
[^5] DSS Isa. Scroll inserts truly before long time.
[^6] JST Isa. 42:19-20. The "blind" and "deaf" here are clearly not "he that is perfect" or "the Lord's servant" (as the KJV implies) but rather the same people spoken of in v. 18.
