Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 42

Likening Isa. 42 unto Ourselves

Isaiah had a great understanding of the Savior and his mission. He knew that Jesus' mission would include serving the house of Israel, the Gentiles, those in spirit prison, and those who are spiritually and physically weak; he knew that Christ would not fail his mission (42:1-9). Isaiah also understood that Jesus is a mighty God, who will personally destroy all wickedness from off the face of the earth (42:10-17). As members of the Lord's church, we can understand these truths and receive a testimony of them. Knowledge of Jesus Christ and his gospel is not reserved for the prophets alone; it is also available to all who will seek.

A Prophecy of Jesus Christ's Mission and Ministry (42:1-9)

The heading of chapter 42 in the LDS edition of the Bible reads, "Isaiah speaks Messianically." Biblical scholars C. F. Keil and F. Delitzsch write that this section speaks of the "future Christ." [^1] Jesus is God's "servant," who will serve the physically and the spiritually weak (42:3); he will not fail in his mission, nor will he become discouraged (42:4). His mission is to serve Israel, the Gentiles, and the dead who are in spirit prison (42:1, 4, 7; 49:9); indeed, he will be "a light of the Gentiles" (42:6).

Isa. 42:1-9

Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. (42:1) He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street. (42:2) A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench: he shall bring forth judgment unto truth. (42:3) He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth: and the isles shall wait for his law. (42:4) Thus saith God the Lord, he that created the heavens, and stretched them out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which cometh out of it; he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein: (42:5) I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles; (42:6) To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house. (42:7) I am the Lord: that is my name: and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images. (42:8) Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I declare: before they spring forth I tell you of them. (42:9)

Notes and Commentary

42:1 my servant/mine elect. The prophecy finds fulfillment in Jesus Christ (Matt. 12:17-21). God the Father calls Jesus my servant, mine elect (chosen), and says, my soul delighteth in him; also, the statement "I have put my spirit upon him" was fulfilled, in part, at Jesus' baptism (Matt. 3:16-17) the phrase in Isaiah, he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles, another reference to Jesus, indicates that he will deal justly with the Gentiles by providing a way for them to enter into a covenant relationship with God.

42:2 He shall not cry . . . nor cause his voice to be heard in the street. Biblical commentators Keil and Delitzsch write concerning this phrase: "Although [the Lord] is certain of His divine call, and brings to the nations the highest and best, His manner of appearing is nevertheless quiet, gentle, and humble; the very opposite of those lying teachers, who endeavored to exalt themselves by noisy demonstrations. He does not seek His own, and therefore denies Himself; He brings what commends itself, and therefore requires no forced trumpeting." [^2]

42:3 A bruised reed shall he not break . . . smoking flax shall he not quench. A reed is a marsh plant with tall, hollow stems. A bruised reed is one that is cracked, and therefore is weak. Symbolically, a bruised reed may be a mortal with physical weaknesses or bodily afflictions. A smoking flax is a wick made from flax for an oil lamp, whose flame wavers, about to go out. This may signify someone who is spiritually weak, whose light flickers and does not burn brightly. Jesus healed and cared for the physically infirm (bruised reed), and he taught and guided the spiritually weak (smoking flax). A reed requires much water for it to grow properly; a flax or wick burns brightly when it has sufficient oil. Symbolically, Jesus Christ (as the waters of life) provides water to the reed, and (as the Anointed One) provides oil to the wick.

judgment unto truth. The New International Version reads: "In faithfulness he will bring forth justice." The passage is difficult in this context, but it may refer to the Day of Judgment (see Matt. 12:20), when the Lord will be victorious and establish truth in his kingdom on the earth (D&C 52:11).

42:4 He shall not fail nor be discouraged. Jesus Christ will not fail his mission, nor will he become discouraged, but he will set judgment in the earth.

wait for his law. The New International Version provides a better reading: "In his law the islands will put their hope." This means that some people in the farthest reaches of the earth will believe in Jesus and hearken to his laws and commandments.

42:5 created the heavens . . . spread forth the earth. Jesus Christ, who would serve among mortals (42:1-4), is the same who created the heavens and the earth, and all things which cometh out of the earth (see also D&C 104:14). The Jerusalem Bible indicates that it was the heavens, not the earth, that were spread: "he who created the heavens and spread them out, who gave shape to the earth and what comes from it."

breath/spirit. The crowning achievement of creation is mankind, given the breath of life from the Lord. The Lord continues to support and give life to all creation by the power of his Spirit (D&C 88:5-13).

42:6 called thee in righteousness. The verse makes five statements about Jesus Christ's mission: he was called . . . in righteousness, God will guide Jesus (hold [his] hand), God will protect him (keep [him]), Jesus will be a covenant of the people ("i.e., the means through whom people will come into a covenant relation with the Lord" [^3]), and he will be a light of the Gentiles (see also 49:8-9; D&C 45:9). This prophecy has some interesting parallels with that found in 49:1-10; see commentary there.

42:7 blind eyes. This phrase represents those unable to see or comprehend spiritual truths (6:9-10). During his mortal ministry, Christ opened the eyes of those who were physically and spiritually blind (Matt. 11:5; Ps. 146:8).

bring out the prisoners. The prisoners are those who dwell in spirit prison (1 Pet. 3:19-20; D&C 76:73-74). Christ opened the way for the prisoners to be taught and provided them with the opportunity to be freed from prison. Joseph Smith said, "It is very evident from this that He [Jesus] not only went to preach to them [those in the spirit world], but to deliver, or bring them out of the prison house." [^4]

42:8 I am the Lord. The Lord bears testimony that he exists, that he is God.

my glory will I not give to another. No one else (whether Satan, or mortals, or idols) deserves the glory due the Lord, because no other has accomplished such a marvelous plan or work for his people nor has any other offered such a sacrifice as Christ has.

neither my praise to graven images. The Lord acknowledges the existence of idols but he does not praise them or work through them.

42:9 former things are come to pass, and new things do I declare. All former prophecies given through the Lord's servants came to pass in their own time (1 Ne. 20:3), and all other prophecies will yet be fulfilled in the future: before they spring forth I tell you of them.

A Hymn to Jehovah the Redeemer (42:10-17)

Isa. 42:10-12 is a command for all the earth's inhabitants and creatures to praise the Lord with a new song. The phrases "end of the earth," "the sea," "the isles," "the wilderness," "the cities," "the villages," "the rock," "the mountains," and "the islands" indicate that the earth's inhabitants are universally invited to sing praises to the Lord. Isa. 42:13-17 describes God as a mighty warrior who will destroy the wicked, especially those who pronounce to their graven images that "ye are our gods." Note the active role God plays in their destruction, for the personal pronoun I, referring to the Lord, is found eleven times. Isa. 42:16 is an interjection about the spiritually blind. We, the house of Israel, are the blind (JST 42:19-23) whom God leads down paths, and out of darkness into the light.

Isa. 42:10-17

Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the isles, and the inhabitants thereof. (42:10) Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their voice, the villages that Kedar doth inhabit: let the inhabitants of the rock sing, let them shout from the top of the mountains. (42:11) Let them give glory unto the Lord, and declare his praise in the islands. (42:12) The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy like a man of war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail against his enemies. (42:13) I have long time [^5] [held] my peace; I have been still, and refrained myself: now will I cry like a travailing woman; I will destroy and devour at once. (42:14) I will make waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their herbs; and I will make the rivers islands, and I will dry up the pools. (42:15) And I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not; I will lead them in paths that they have not known: I will make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight. These things will I do unto them, and not forsake them. (42:16) They shall be turned back, they shall be greatly ashamed, that trust in graven images, that say to the molten images, Ye are our gods. (42:17)

Notes and Commentary

42:10 Sing unto the Lord a new song. Singing a new song unto the Lord is mentioned ten times in the scriptures (see, for example, Ps. 40:3; 98:1; 149:1; Rev. 5:9; 14:3; D&C 84:98). Each time the song is one of praise. Such songs appear to be called new because they praise the Lord for new works of glory and blessing. The Lord commands the entire earth to sing a new song unto him.

end of the earth. To this phrase Isaiah adds ye that go down to the sea, the isles and their inhabitants, the wilderness and its cities, villages of Kedar, inhabitants of the rock, and islands. All peoples and creatures on the earth and in the sea are called to sing praises to the Lord, because he comes in power and glory to destroy the wicked and establish his reign.

42:11 the wilderness and the cities thereof/villages that Kedar doth inhabit. These phrases refer to the gentile nations who will sing praises to the Lord (regarding Kedar, see commentary on 21:6-7).

top of the mountains. This phrase often refers to temples, holy places, or other places of worship. It is from this location that the inhabitants of Zion, like the gentile nations, will sing a "new song" to God.

42:13 mighty man/man of war. Isaiah describes the Lord as a mighty man, a man of war, one who will go forth, stir up, cry, roar, and prevail against his enemies.

stir up jealousy. "Jealousy" here should read "zeal" (NIV) or "fury" (JB).

roar. The Lord will prevail against his enemies with the power of a lion (31:4).

42:14 I have . . . refrained myself. For a long time the Lord held his peace, he has been still, and he has refrained himself from destroying the wicked (64:12; D&C 121:1-6).

cry like a travailing woman. The Lord cries out like a woman in labor, perhaps similarly pained because of the wicked acts of humanity or perhaps because he, in pain, is bringing forth a great work.

I will destroy and devour. Devour (like a lion) recalls roar in 42:13. The Lord destroys the wicked (D&C 105:15).

42:15 I will make the rivers islands. Isaiah prophesies a great drought that will make the rivers into islands. Twice in this verse he uses the expression dry up.

42:16 I will bring the blind by a way. The Lord now leads us, the spiritually blind, down the gospel paths and into his marvelous light.

make darkness light. The Lord will bring his people out of spiritual darkness and into the light of the gospel (2 Ne. 3:5). He will not forsake them.

crooked things straight. Crooked represents the disorderly, dishonest ways of men, and straight represents the order of God (40:4; see also Luke 3:5).

42:17 They shall be turned back . . . that trust in graven images. In the Day of Judgment, those who said to their idols and images, Ye are our gods, will be turned away from receiving inheritance in the kingdom of God, and they will reap shame instead of glory.

The Servant to the Blind (42:18-25)

Isaiah makes numerous references to Israel's sinful state—her people are spiritually deaf and blind (mentioned four times), they have sinned, they did not walk in God's ways, and they were disobedient to his law. Therefore, the Lord permitted them to be robbed, spoiled, snared, thrown in prison, and burned—all these having reference to Israel's captivity by other nations.

After Isaiah declares the blindness of Israel, he provides hope by prophesying that Jesus Christ, who is the servant and messenger, will "open the eyes of the blind," so that "they shall be made perfect notwithstanding their blindness, if they will hearken unto" the Lord. This prophecy may also find fulfillment in those who go forth as Christ's servants—including Isaiah and others—bringing the light of truth to the world.

Isa. 42:18-25

Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see. (42:18) [For I will send my servant unto you who are blind; yea, a messenger to open the eyes of the blind, and unstop the ears of the deaf; And they shall be made perfect notwithstanding their blindness, if they will hearken unto the messenger, the Lord's servant]. [^6] (42:19) [Thou art a people,] seeing many things, but thou observest not; opening the ears [to hear], but [thou] [ear[est] [^7] not. (42:20) The Lord is [not] well pleased [with such a people, but] [^8] for his righteousness' sake; he will magnify the law, and make it honorable. (42:21) [Thou art] a people robbed and spoiled; [thine enemies, all of them, have snared thee] in holes, and they [have hid thee] in prison houses; they [have taken thee] [^9] for a prey, and none delivereth; for a spoil, and none saith, Restore. (42:22) Who among [them] will give ear [unto thee, or] hearken and hear [thee] for the time to come? [and] who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord, he against whom [they] have sinned? (42:23-24a) [For they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his law;] therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle; and [they have] set [them] on fire round about, yet [they] knew not; and it burned [them], yet [they] [^10] laid it not to heart. (42:24b-25)

Notes and Commentary

42:18 Hear, ye deaf/look, ye blind. The Lord commands the spiritually blind and deaf children of Israel (6:9-10) to hear and see the truth. This passage may also apply to Jesus Christ's mortal ministry, when he healed the blind, the sick, and others with infirmities related to mortality.

42:19 send my servant/messenger. Jesus Christ is God's primary servant and messenger. One aspect of the Lord's mortal mission was to open the eyes of the children of Israel to the truth of the everlasting covenant and to extend that truth to the Gentiles. (Prophets, including Isaiah, also serve God in this capacity.) By abiding by the everlasting covenant and receiving all the blessings of the Atonement, men are made perfect despite their blindness. Concerning this prophecy Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "Truly this is what has been and is transpiring in this day. The scattered remnants of Israel, hearing again the voice of their Shepherd, are believing his gospel, accepting baptism at the hands of his servants, . . . taking upon themselves his name, and once again becoming his sons and his daughters." [^11]

42:20 seeing many things, but thou observest not. Many truths were revealed to the house of Israel, but they did not observe them, showing their lack of obedience. Many of us find ourselves in a similar situation.

42:21 not well pleased with such a people. Denying or ignoring the truths of the Lord always brings his displeasure.

righteousness' sake. Although the Lord is not pleased with the disobedient, because of his goodness "he will magnify the law and make it honorable" (NIV translates this phrase as the Lord will "make his law great and glorious"), meaning he will make the gospel great in the eyes of the world. Despite the unfaithful and hypocritical nature of some of the house of Israel, the honest in heart accept Christ because of the greatness of his law.

42:22 Thou art a people robbed and spoiled. Because of their wickedness, Israel was temporarily robbed of her political freedom and her inheritance in Palestine. She was caught like prey in the "snare" (24:18) of her wicked neighbors, taken captive, and put in prison houses. Her possessions were "spoiled," or taken or destroyed in war.

none delivereth/none saith, Restore. Because Israel turned her back on God, no one is left to fight for her cause and restore her inheritance.

42:23-24a Who among them will give ear unto thee. Isaiah asks, "Who among Israel's enemies will hear the cries of the people of Israel and free them?"

who gave Jacob for a spoil. Isaiah asks, "Who delivered Israel to be robbed and spoiled [looted]?" Then he answers his own question, Did not the Lord, he against whom [Israel] have sinned?

42:24b-25 would not walk in his ways. Isaiah lists two ways in which the people of Israel sinned against the Lord: they would not walk in his ways (meaning, adhere to the ordinances), and they were disobedient unto his law (the commandments).

fury of his anger/strength of battle. Because of the Israelites' rebellion, the Lord's anger was poured out upon them in the form of war and captivity.

set them on fire/burned. Again, because of the Israelites' rebellion, the Lord destroyed them with burning and fire; yet, Israel did not recognize the full meaning of the destruction and did not take to heart the warnings of the Lord.

---
Notas:
[^1] NIV Isa. 43:4.
[^2] We have replaced the archaic KJV shew.
[^3] Literally, "also from a day."
[^4] The KJV "let" is more correctly rendered "prevent" in modern English.
[^5] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 265; see also D&C 58:6; McConkie Promised Messiah, 17.
[^6] Hebrew taniym. Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 1072.
[^7] DSS Isa. Scroll adds more to the end of the verse.
[^8] All bracketed changes in this verse come from JST Isa. 42:22.
[^9] All bracketed changes in this verse come from JST Isa. 42:23.
[^10] All bracketed changes in this verse come from JST Isa. 42:24-25.
[^11] Promised Messiah, 359.
