Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 43

Likening Isa. 43 unto Ourselves

The Lord has done many things in our behalf. He provides us with safety as we pass through dangerous territory, whether physical or spiritual. Even as ancient Israel passed safely through the waters of the Red Sea, with the Egyptian armies in pursuit, so will we pass unharmed through our own difficult waters. God promises, "When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee" (43:2). Also, as Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego came out of Nebuchadnezzar's fiery furnace with not "an hair of their head singed, neither were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them" (Dan. 3:26-27), so God promises us, "When thou walkest through the fires thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee" (43:2).

Prophecy of Redemption (43:1-7)

As Isaiah emphasized Israel's punishment in the previous section, so his focus now is on Israel's redemption (43:1). The Lord provides us, members of the house of Israel, with great comfort and many promises. We, like ancient Israel, are promised safety as we pass through waters and rivers, fire and flames (43:2). We are comforted to know that Jehovah created us for his glory (43:1, 7)—we are not upon this earth by chance. We are also comforted to know that the Lord has redeemed us (43:1) and that he is our "God" and our "Savior" (43:3). We are told that others have given their lives in our behalf, because we are "precious" to the Lord (43:4). Finally, the Lord promises to gather Israel's scattered seed from the "ends of the earth" (43:6).

Isa. 43:1-7

But now thus saith the Lord that created thee, O Jacob , and he that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine. (43:1) When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. (43:2) For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Savior: I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee. (43:3) Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been [honored], [^1] and I have loved thee: therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life. (43:4) Fear not: for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west; (43:5) I will say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth; (43:6) Even every one that is called by my name: for I have created him for my glory, I have formed him; yea, I have made him. (43:7)

Notes and Commentary

43:1 created thee/formed thee. The Lord created the people of Israel, just as he created all other people on the face of the earth, but he also formed (molded) them as a covenant, chosen people.

redeemed. Jesus Christ is the Redeemer who purchased Israel with his own blood.

I have called thee by thy name. The Lord gave Jacob the new name Israel to set him apart as His servant. We continue to bear his name, which sets us apart from other people.

thou art mine. We belong to God's family; we are his children, "spiritually begotten" of Christ (Mosiah 5:7).

43:2 passest through the waters/rivers . . . not overflow thee. Isaiah recalls the exodus of ancient Israel from Egypt by mentioning her miraculous passage through the Red Sea (Ex. 14:21-22) and the Jordan River (Josh. 3:13-17). The gathering of modern Israel calls to mind the exodus from Egypt, and modern Israel will likewise be safely guided through the hardships and dangers of the world.

when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned. This statement refers to the Lord's judgments that fall upon Israel (42:25) and the world (24:6) because of wickedness, with specific application to Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego (Dan. 3:27). It also applies to the last days, when the wicked are destroyed by the burning that will accompany the Lord's coming, while the righteous of Israel remain unscathed.

43:3 Holy One of Israel. See commentary on 1:4.

Savior. Jesus is our Savior, who delivers us from sin and death.

I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee. The meaning here is unclear, but the sense of this statement seems to be that Israel was so precious to the Lord that he was willing to give away kingdoms to deliver her. Of course, God has power over all and need not make such sacrifices. But the intent seems to be emotional rather than literal: Thou wast precious in my sight, the Lord says (43:4), and he will spare no cost to rescue us.

43:4 thou wast precious in my sight. Because the people of Israel had been chosen by the Lord as his people (43:1), they were precious to him. He honored them by calling (Eph. 1:18) them to serve him (Ex. 19:4-6), and he loved them.

I have loved thee. The New International Version places this phrase in the present tense, "I love you" (see 63:9).

therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life. Many people lost their lives for the benefit and salvation of the Lord's people. These include the firstborn of Egypt (43:3), the Canaanite nations that were destroyed by Joshua and the Israelites, the prophets who were martyred while prophesying and bearing witness, and most important, Jesus Christ, who gave his own life to bring salvation to his people.

43:5 I will . . . gather thee. The Lord promises to gather the posterity of the children of Israel from the four corners of the earth.

43:5-6 east/west/north/south. The directions encompass the entire earth, and for emphasis the Lord adds, "from far" and "from the ends of the earth."

43:7 called by my name. To be called by the Lord's name is to accept the covenants and ordinances, such as baptism and temple work. By accepting these covenants and ordinances, we will be gathered by the Lord in the last days (43:5-6).

created/formed. Compare 43:1, which also uses the terms created and formed.

my glory. Moses 1:39 explains God's glory—"to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man."

We Are to Witness That Jehovah Is God (43:8-13)

Twice the Lord tells us, "Ye are my witnesses" (43:10, 12). We are to witness and bear testimony to "all the nations" (43:9) that Jehovah is "God" (43:12) and "Savior" (43:11). Note Jehovah's repeated self-testimony—"I am he" (43:10), "before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me," "I, even I, am the Lord," "beside me there is no savior," "I am God," "I am he" (43:13).

Isa. 43:8-13

Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears. (43:8) Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be assembled: who among them can declare this, and [show] [^2] us former things? let them bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: or let them hear, and say, It is truth. (43:9) Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me. (43:10) I, even I, am the Lord; and beside me there is no savior. (43:11) I have declared, and have saved, and I have [shown], when there was no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, that I am God. (43:12) Yea, before the day was [^3] I am he; and there is none that can deliver out of mine hand: I will work, and who shall [prevent] [^4] it? (43:13)

Notes and Commentary

43:8 blind people that have eyes. This passage may refer to the people of the house of Israel (6:9-10), who have the ability to see and comprehend spiritual truths and yet do not (42:16). They are brought before the nations of the earth to witness that Jehovah, or Jesus Christ, is God (42:10).

43:9 Let all the nations be gathered together. The Lord symbolically gathers the nations and peoples together and challenges them to "bring forth their witnesses," such as false prophets or gods, to show that they have, in the past, prophesied of something that has come to pass. If they do so, they will "be justified," or proved right. Otherwise, let them "hear" God's witnesses (our prophets, apostles, and missionaries) and agree that they speak the truth ("It is truth").

43:10 Ye are my witnesses. This phrase is repeated in 43:12. The children of Israel were chosen to be witnesses of Jehovah and bear testimony of him to the world. Sometimes Israel has failed to do so, because her people were spiritually blind. In our own day we, the house of Israel (especially Ephraim and Manasseh), are instructed to bear witness of our God, as modern-day prophets have explained. [^5]

know and believe me/understand. We are told to seek knowledge of the Lord's nature and character so we are able to understand who he is and can bear a stronger witness of him (D&C 19:23).

I am he. This clear statement answers the question asked in 43:9: "Who among them can declare this?" The expression also recalls Jehovah's title—I Am (Ex. 3:14).

before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me. In Isaiah's great discussion of false gods and idols (chapters 40-46), he assures both ancient and modern Israel that Jehovah is God.

43:11 beside me there is no savior. Jehovah, who is Jesus Christ, is the Savior of the world. There is no other Savior.

43:12 I have declared, and have saved, and I have shown. Jehovah has spoken his word; he has performed the acts of salvation; he has shown the truth to the world. We, having received these things, witness that he is "God."

when there was no strange god among you. Jehovah was Israel's God before they worshiped false deities.

43:13 before the day was. Jehovah existed before the first day of Creation.

I will work, and who shall [prevent] it. The New International Version reads, "When I act, who can reverse it?" Jehovah will perform the works he has promised, and no one can hinder him from accomplishing what he has determined to do.

Jehovah Provides Water for Us (43:14-21)

God destroyed Babylon for the sake of ancient Israel, and for our sake he will destroy modern Babylon, or the world (43:14). As we travel through this telestial world, the Lord provides for us a "way," which is the gospel with its ordinances; and "rivers" and "waters" (43:19-20), which refer to spiritual drink. In return, we are required to "shew forth [the Lord's] praise" (43:21), or to witness to the world that Jehovah is our God.

Isaiah uses several titles that describe God's relationship to us: Lord (Hebrew Yahweh), Redeemer, Holy One of Israel, Holy One, and King.

Isa. 43:14-21

Thus saith the Lord, your redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their nobles, and the Chaldeans, whose cry is in the ships. (43:14) I am the Lord, your Holy One, the creator of Israel, your King. (43:15) Thus saith the Lord, which maketh a way in the sea, and a path in the mighty waters; (43:16) Which bringeth forth the chariot and horse, the army and the power; they shall lie down together, they shall not rise: they are extinct, they are quenched as tow. (43:17) Remember ye not the former things, neither consider the things of old. (43:18) Behold, I will do a new thing; now it shall spring forth; shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert. (43:19) The beast of the field shall honor me, the [jackals] [^6] and the owls: because I give waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen. (43:20) This people have I formed for myself; they shall [show] forth my praise. (43:21)

Notes and Commentary

43:14 redeemer. See commentary on 41:14.

Holy One of Israel. See commentary on 1:4.

I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their nobles. The Lord sent powerful armies (including Assyria) to ancient Babylon to destroy her and her powerful and affluent citizens (nobles). She was brought down. In the future, the wicked world, or spiritual Babylon (D&C 1:16) will be destroyed by Jesus Christ at his second coming.

Chaldeans. The Chaldeans is another name for the Babylonians; in some periods the Chaldeans appear to have been the scholarly segment of the Babylonians (Dan. 2:2-10).

cry is in the ships. The Babylonians were active in trading and shipping at this time. They gloried in their prosperity, but they will cry out in pain from their ships at their destruction.

43:15 creator of Israel, your King. The Lord, who brought Israel into being both as a people and as a nation (see commentary on 43:1) is her rightful King (6:5; 9:6; Ps. 10:16).

43:16 the Lord . . . maketh a way in the sea/a path in the mighty waters. This passage seems to refer to the exodus of Israel from Egypt through the Red Sea and her entry into the promised land through the Jordan River. These events from the past exemplify how the Lord provides for his people in their time of need.

43:17 chariot/horse/army. These three words are mentioned in connection with Pharaoh—Pharaoh's army, chariots, and horses were destroyed at the Red Sea; not one survived (Ex. 14:16-28), for they were "quenched as tow," meaning they were extinguished as one puts out a wick. Just as the Lord has fought Israel's battles in the past, he will continue to fight our battles now and in the future.

43:18 Remember ye not the former things. In comparison with historical religious events, such as the destruction of Pharaoh's armies by God, the Lord declares that he is going to do new and greater things.

43:19 I will do a new thing; now it shall spring forth. The new thing that will spring forth is "a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert." In other words, the new thing appears to be the restoration of the gospel in the last days (in the midst of the wilderness of sin and the desert of apostasy) and the establishment of Zion prior to the Lord's millennial reign.

way in the wilderness. The description of the "new thing" here compares with the "former things" described in 43:18. Way echoes "way in the sea," and rivers echoes "waters" (43:16). That is to say, God formerly provided a way in the Red Sea for Israel to escape from Egypt's Pharaoh, armies, and wickedness, and God's new thing includes a way for us (modern Israel) to escape through the wilderness, or the telestial nature of this world. Formerly, the way was an actual path, but now the way is a spiritual path. The way in the wilderness is the gospel of Jesus Christ.

rivers. Not only does the Lord provide a way in the wilderness but he also provides rivers in the desert for his people to drink from as they travel through forsaken territory. Christ himself is the living water in the wilderness of mortality.

43:20 beast of the field/jackals/owls. The wild beasts and desert creatures probably represent the nations that have not been "tamed" by the gospel and that thirst for the living water. They will yet come to that water (the gospel) and will therefore have cause to honor the Lord.

waters in the wilderness/rivers in the desert. These waters are provided to God's people for drink. They are the waters that bring spiritual life (41:18; 35:1, 7; 51:3).

my people, my chosen. The covenant children of Israel (43:1, 5-7) not only anciently but in our own day.

43:21 This people have I formed for myself. See commentary on 43:1.

show forth my praise. We show forth God's praise as we bear testimony and spread the gospel throughout the world.

Israel Has Forgotten the Lord (43:22-28)

Israel ceased worshiping the Lord through prayer and temple sacrifices (43:22- 24), but the Lord promised to forgive her (43:25) if her people would repent and remember him. We repeat history if we fail to pray sincerely and regularly and to worship at the temple.

Isa. 43:22-28

But thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob ; but thou hast been weary of me, O Israel. (43:22) Thou hast not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt offerings; neither hast thou honored me with thy sacrifices. I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense. (43:23) Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices: but thou hast made me to serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities. (43:24) I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. [^7] (43:25) Put me in remembrance: let us plead together: declare thou, that thou mayest be justified. (43:26) Thy first father hath sinned, and thy teachers have transgressed against me. (43:27) Therefore I have profaned the princes of the sanctuary, and have given Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproaches. (43:28)

Notes and Commentary

43:22 not called upon me/weary of me. Israel did not pray to the Lord with a true heart, and she had become weary of the commandments and rituals required by God (1:10-15).

43:23 Thou hast not brought me . . . burnt offerings. The children of Israel had ceased to honor the Lord with their sacrifices. They did not bring the best of their flocks to him (43:24; Mal. 1:6-7), and some neglected to offer a sacrifice at all, denying themselves purification from sin.

I have not . . . wearied thee with incense. The offerings and incense were meant not to weary the Lord's people but to strengthen them.

43:24 bought me no sweet cane. Sweet cane is fragrant calamus (Ex. 30:23-25; Jer. 6:20-25), used with other spices to make the holy anointing oil. The priests and people of Israel had ceased to purchase the items required to purify the Lord's house; hence it was unclean.

filled me . . . fat of thy sacrifices. Israel had not filled (satisfied) the Lord by bringing the fat of their sacrifices, or the Lord's designated portion (Lev. 3:16-17) before him in repentance.

thy sins/thine iniquities. Instead of serving the Lord in righteousness, the children of Israel wanted him to serve them in their sins. And as Israel grew weary of righteousness, they had wearied the Lord in their sins. The New International Version further clarifies this phrase by saying, "You have burdened me with your sins and wearied me with your offenses."

43:25 blotteth out thy transgressions. The Lord reminds his people that he is capable of forgiving and forgetting their sins (6:7; 55:6-7). This beautiful promise also applies to us.

will not remember thy sins. A latter-day revelation reads similarly, "Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more" (D&C 58:42). Isa. 43:25-26 corresponds with Isa. 1:18.

for mine own sake. The Lord is glorified by the purification and salvation of his people. Note in Moses 1:39 the Lord's words: "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (emphasis added). Note also Isa. 48:11, in which the words "For mine own sake" are found twice.

43:26 Put me in remembrance. The Lord pleads with his people to remember him—perhaps he is asking them to live true to the baptismal and sacramental covenant to "always remember him" (D&C 20:77).

let us plead together. This phrase parallels "let us reason together" (1:18). See commentary there.

43:27 Thy first father hath sinned. This statement seems to refer to Adam and his transgression (Gen. 3:17-19; 2 Ne. 2:22).

thy teachers have transgressed. The leaders (teachers) of the people of Israel were steeped in wickedness, and the people of Israel followed their example.

43:28 I have profaned the princes of the sanctuary. The heads (princes) of the priestly families were no longer holy or temple worthy. Therefore, the Lord "profanes" them, meaning he removes their authority to act in his name. Likewise, the people of Judah will be["curse[d]" if they do not repent.

---
Notas:
[^1] DSS Isa. Scroll adds is his name.
[^2] Shew is an archaic form of show.
[^3] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150.
[^4] From Hebrew chamad, meaning "desire, take pleasure in." Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 326. MT has their delectable things.
[^5] This is the sense of a number of other translations, including JB, NAB, NIV, and NRSV.
[^6] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 1062.
[^7] Footnote c to 45:1 in the LDS edition of the Bible suggests strengthened as a substitute for holden.
