Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 44; 45:1-6

Likening Isa. 44 unto Ourselves

Isaiah's words remind us that it is a privilege to be a descendant of that great patriarch Israel and a recipient of the blessings attendant on that heritage (44:3). Isaiah prophesies that the Lord's Spirit will be poured out upon Israel's seed abundantly, as "floods upon the dry ground." We who are of Israel will be pleased to say, "I am the Lord's." We will be happy to proclaim, "I have the name of Jacob," or "my surname is Israel."

In ancient days, Israel was in bondage to an earthly conqueror, but God called up a deliverer (Cyrus) to rescue his people. We also are in bondage, but our enslavement is to the powers of sin, tradition, and death. In his great power, God has sent us a deliverer in Jesus Christ. He has the power to liberate us from our bondage and to set us free spiritually, if we will but turn to him and hearken with honest hearts. But to receive his blessing, we must be willing to submit to him, even as the clay does to the potter.

Israel Receives a Multitude of Blessings in the Last Days (44:1-8)

This prophecy sets forth Jehovah's relationship to us, members of the house of Israel. Jehovah is represented by the words Lord (Hebrew Yahweh), King of Israel, redeemer, Lord of hosts, first, last, God, Rock, and the personal pronouns I and me. We (Israel) are represented by the words Jacob, servant (twice), chosen (twice), Israel, Jesurun, thirsty, dry ground, willows, ancient people, and several pronouns.

Members of the house of Israel are spiritually thirsty, and Jehovah promises to provide them with water, refreshing floods, and water courses, all of which represent the Lord and his Spirit and accompanying blessings.

Isa. 44:1-8

Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant; and Israel, whom I have chosen: (44:1) Thus saith the Lord that made thee, and formed thee from the womb, which will help thee; Fear not, O Jacob, my servant; and thou, Jesurun, whom I have chosen. (44:2) For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring: (44:3) And they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by the water courses. (44:4) One shall say, I am the Lord's; and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob ; and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel. (44:5) Thus saith the Lord the King of Israel, and his redeemer the Lord of hosts. [^1] I am the first, and I am the last; and beside me there is no God. (44:6) And who, as I, shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in order for me, since I appointed the ancient people? and the things that are coming, and shall come, let them [show] [^2] unto them. (44:7) Fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not I told thee from that time, and have declared it? ye are even my witnesses. Is there a God beside me? yea, there is no God; I know not any. (44:8)

Notes and Commentary

44:1 servant/chosen. This prophecy is directed to us (the opening words say "hear"), members of the house of Israel, who are the Lord's servant, his chosen. As such, we are his witnesses and need to bear our testimonies to the world of his divine work (see commentary on 43:10). Servant and chosen are repeated in 44:2 for emphasis.

44:2 formed thee from the womb. Before the nation of Israel was born, the Lord covenanted with Abraham that his seed would be a chosen people and a great nation (Abr. 2:8-11). Before that, it is likely that things pertaining to Israel were decided in premortal councils.

Jesurun. This name, which means "righteous," was given to the house of Israel (Deut. 32:15; 33:5, 26). It reminds us of our calling as a holy nation and our status as the Lord's covenant people.

44:3 I will pour water upon him that is thirsty. These are the living waters of Jesus Christ and his Spirit (12:3; 55:1; John 4:7-14). The thirsty are those who thirst not for actual water but for the spiritual salvation that only Jesus Christ can provide.

floods. God is generous with salvation; he will send floods, not simply a canteen full of water upon us to quench our thirst.

dry ground. This term refers to Israel's offspring who, upon receiving the spiritual water and floods, will spring up like willows (44:4). They will recognize the source of their spiritual light and will say, "I am the Lord's" (44:5).

I will pour my spirit upon thy seed. This phrase parallels I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, for the words I will pour and upon are found in both phrases. The Lord promises to pour his Spirit on Israel's seed (which includes us) as one pours water on the thirsty (32:15; Ezek. 39:29). This prophecy was partially fulfilled when the Spirit descended upon many of Christ's followers after Christ was resurrected (Acts 2:1-4) however Peter indicated that the fulness of this prophecy would "come to pass in the last days" (Acts 2:17; see D&C 95:4).

44:4 grass/willows. Grass represents humanity or all flesh (37:27; 40:6-7), and the willows are members of the house of Israel who will grow or spring up among the grass by the water courses nourished by the power of Jesus Christ. As willows stand apart from grass and are far fewer in number; so will it be with members of the house of Israel. Note that willows grow quickly when they have sufficient water.

water courses. This phrase corresponds with "water" and "floods" above.

44:5 One shall say/another shall call/another shall subscribe. These three are not opposed to each other; they are not in different camps. Instead, Isaiah is showing three different ways that people appropriately declare their allegiance to the true God.

I am the Lord's. Those who partake of the water (44:3) will become part of Jehovah's spiritual family and accept his covenants (subscribe with his hand).

call himself by the name of Jacob. Those who partake of the water (44:3) will become members of the house of Israel. This phrase parallels "surname himself by the name of Israel" (44:5).

subscribe with his hand. The upraised hand, both anciently and today, represents one's taking the name of the Lord upon himself by covenant. It is frequently connected to ordinances, such as baptism and those performed in the temple. The righteous will "write (subscribe) on their hand" the phrase "the Lord's" as a constant reminder that they belong to him (NIV, RSV, JB, NEB). This writing is not literal but symbolic, pointing to sacred ordinances, where we pledge with the hand.

surname himself by the name of Israel. Those who accept the gospel and receive the gift of the Spirit become the "seed of Abraham" [^3] and members of the house of Israel.

44:6 Lord/King of Israel/redeemer/Lord of hosts/the first . . . and the last. These titles of Jehovah describe his relationship with his people (41:14; 43:15).

44:7 who, as I, shall call. The New International Version reads, "Who then is like me?" The Lord once again (41:21-24) challenges all to do the great and marvelous things he has done, including calling a chosen people, setting the kingdom in order, and prophesying ("declare") of things that are to come (43:10-13; Moses 1:6). Jehovah's challenge goes unanswered, because no one is his equal: "Beside [him] there is no God" (44:6).

ancient people. The nation of Israel is God's ancient people.

44:8 Fear ye not, neither be afraid. The Lord instructs Israel not to fear the idols and graven images, which are identified in Isa. 44:9-20. Then the Lord asks, "Is there a God beside me? yea, there is no God; I know not any" (44:8), implying that Israel must fear God and none other.

witnesses. The people of Israel are again reminded of their calling as the Lord's witnesses.

Rock. Christ, or Jehovah, is the Rock, representing permanence, stability, and eternality (see commentary on 2:21; 8:14).

The Foolishness of Idolatry (44:9-20)

Isaiah illustrates the foolishness of those who worship false gods. Such are extremely vain, and one day they will be ashamed for their abominations. Those who cut down a tree and use one piece of the wood for cooking and another piece to fashion a god "have not known nor understood: . . . they cannot see . . . they cannot understand" (44:18). They will not find salvation (44:20).

Although Isaiah speaks specifically of idols made from wood, he refers to false gods of any type, including money, worldly possessions, and power.

Isa. 44:9-20

They that make a graven image are all of them vanity; and [the things in which they delight] [^4] shall not profit; and they are their own witnesses; they see not, nor know; that they may be ashamed. (44:9) Who hath formed a god, or molten a graven image that is profitable for nothing? (44:10) Behold, all his fellows shall be ashamed: and the workmen, they are of men: let them all be gathered together, let them stand up; yet they shall fear, and they shall be ashamed together. (44:11) The smith with the tongs both worketh in the coals, and fashioneth it with hammers, and worketh it with the strength of his arms: yea, he is hungry, and his strength faileth: he drinketh no water, and is faint. (44:12) The carpenter stretcheth out his rule; he marketh it out with a line; he fitteth it with planes, and he marketh it out with the compass, and maketh it after the figure of a man, according to the beauty of a man; that it may remain in the house. (44:13) He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cypress and the oak, which he strengtheneth for himself among the trees of the forest: he planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish it. (44:14) Then shall it be for a man to burn: for he will take thereof, and warm himself; yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; yea, he maketh a god, and worshippeth it; he maketh it a graven image, and falleth down thereto. (44:15) He burneth part thereof in the fire; with part thereof he eateth flesh; he roasteth roast, and is satisfied: yea, he warmeth himself, and saith, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire: (44:16) And the residue thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image: he falleth down unto it, and worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me; for thou art my god. (44:17) They have not known nor understood: for [they have] [^5] shut their eyes, that they cannot see; and their hearts, that they cannot understand. (44:18) And none considereth in his heart, neither is there knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burned part of it in the fire; yea, also I have baked bread upon the coals thereof; I have roasted flesh, and eaten it: and shall I make the residue thereof an abomination? shall I fall down to the stock of a tree? (44:19) He feedeth on ashes: a deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? (44:20)

Notes and Commentary

44:9 vanity. The root of the word vanity (Hebrew tohu) means "emptiness, or nothingness" [^6] (24:10; in 41:29 the KJV translates this word as "confusion"). Those who create or worship idols will be empty and as "nothing"—without an eternal inheritance and without eternal increase. The gods "in which they delight" will not benefit ("shall not profit") them.

they are their own witnesses. As the followers of the Lord serve as his witnesses (see 44:8), so the makers of idols are derided as witnesses of their idols. The idol makers are not credible witnesses, however, because they are "vanity," "they see not, nor know" the truth.

they may be ashamed. Ashamed is used three times in 44:9 and 44:11. Shame is an awareness of a loss of honor and glory. Isaiah says that he who "formed a god" along with his worshiping companions ("his fellows") will "be ashamed together," probably at the Day of Judgment.

44:11 the workmen, they are of men. The workmen who form the idols are mere mortals, incapable of giving life to their creations.

44:12 The smith . . . is hungry, and his strength faileth. The smith, who works with his tools to fashion an idol "with the strength of his arms," grows weak with hunger and faint with thirst. Ironically, it is upon the smith's tools, talent, and skillful arm that the god's existence depends, and yet the smith cannot maintain his own strength without outside assistance. How can a supernatural being be created by a frail mortal? (40:19; Jer. 10:3-4).

44:13 carpenter. Like the smith, the woodworker uses his tools and imagination to create an idol, making it in the form ("figure") of a man and adorning it with the things men find beautiful so that it will be placed in a house (temple) of a god.

44:14-17 heweth him down cedars . . . he maketh a god, even his graven image. Isaiah points out the contradiction of creating and worshiping idols. The same tree a man uses for fuel to keep himself warm ("he warmeth himself, and saith, Aha, I am warm"; 44:16) and to cook meals ("baketh bread"; 44:15; "he roasteth roast"; 44:16) is used to make an idol—and the residue [of the tree] he maketh a god, even his graven image. The man takes a piece of the wood that was not used for fuel, and he takes his tools (ruler, marker, chisel, and compasses; 44:13) and carefully fashions a god. He then worships and prays to it, the work of his own hands, saying, "Save me, you are my god" (NIV 44:17).

44:18 shut their eyes, that they cannot see. The idolaters have shut their eyes and closed their hearts to the truth by worshiping man-made idols (Ps. 115:4-8) rather than the living God.

44:19 none considereth in his heart. Those who create and worship false gods do not consider their folly, which is this: "'I have burned part' of the tree and used its coals to bake bread and roast flesh, 'and shall I make the residue thereof an abomination [false god]?' Shall I worship a tree trunk?"

44:20 feedeth on ashes. The soul that looks for spiritual nourishment from false gods partakes of nothing but the ashes that remain after the wooden idol is burned. Contrast that with those who feed on the living water and bread of eternal life.

he cannot deliver his soul. His heart "deceived" by idolatry and his soul unable to receive the spiritual nourishment it requires, the idol worshiper cannot find the Lord and thereby deliver his soul from the gates of hell (D&C 76:81-86). In other words, even if the idolater can create his own god, he still cannot save himself.

Is there not a lie in my right hand? Right hand here speaks of covenant making. An individual blinded by idolatry cannot recognize that covenants made with idols are nothing more than lies (Ps. 144:8). This also means that by creating his god with his own (right) hand, the idolater relies on his own hand ("the arm of flesh") for salvation, which is a lie.

The Lord Has Redeemed Israel (44:21-23)

The Lord reminds the children of Israel of their preferred status as his servants (44:21), adding that he will forgive them and forget their sins if they will return to him. Indeed, the Atonement has already been firmly decreed, and mankind's sins can be blotted out by the Redeemer (44:22). Because of this great gift of redemption, all of God's creations sing praises to him (44:23).

Isa. 44:21-23

Remember these, O Jacob and Israel; for thou art my servant: I have formed thee; thou art my servant: O Israel, thou shalt not be forgotten of me. (44:21) I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a cloud, thy sins: return unto me; for I have redeemed thee. (44:22) Sing, O ye heavens; for the Lord hath done it: shout, ye lower parts of the earth: break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest, and every tree therein: for the Lord hath redeemed Jacob , and glorified himself in Israel. (44:23)

Notes and Commentary

44:21 Remember these. We, members of the house of Israel, are commanded to remember the idolaters spoken of in the last section. In other words, the Lord is saying, "Don't forget the idolaters and their foolishness—remember them so you don't become like them."

thou art my servant . . . thou shalt not be forgotten. This passage refers also to us, the children of Israel who live in this dispensation (3 Ne. 16:11-12). We are to take comfort that we are still the Lord's servants (44:1; 48:20)—he has not forgotten us.

44:22 blotted out, as a thick cloud. As a thick cloud blots out the sky, the Lord will blot out and remove our sins from his memory (Heb. 10:16-17; D&C 58:42).

return unto me. In Hebrew, to return (shub) is to repent.

I have redeemed thee. This statement refers to Christ's atonement, wrought on our behalf.

44:23 Sing, O ye heavens . . . break forth into singing, ye mountains. All the Lord's creations sing praises to the Lord because he redeemed Israel (49:13; 55:12; D&C 128:22-23).

shout, ye lower parts of the earth. This passage may refer to those who dwell in the spirit world (see commentary on 8:21-22).

O forest, and every tree. These may represent people who break forth into singing (see commentary on 2:13).

glorified himself in Israel. The obedience of the righteous Saints in all ages brings glory to the Lord himself (Moses 1:39).

Cyrus, the Lord's Anointed (44:24-28; 45:1-6)

The Lord who created all things (44:24) addresses Cyrus (who has not yet been born), calling him by name (45:4) and appointing him to serve as a deliverer of captive Israel (45:1-2). Cyrus was a type of Christ, the preeminent Anointed One who delivered us from our captivity of sin and death. The Lord prepared the way for Cyrus to conquer Babylon by opening doors and making rough places smooth (45:1-2). In the same way, the Lord will open doors and prepare the way for us to come to Zion. The result of the Lord's power in all these cases (the sending forth of Cyrus, the coming of Christ, and the establishment of Zion) is that all the world may know that Jehovah is the true God, greater than all others (45:5-6).

Isa. 44:24-28; 45:1

Thus saith the Lord, thy redeemer, and he that formed thee from the womb, I am the Lord that maketh all things; that stretcheth forth the heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself; (44:24) That frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and maketh diviners mad; that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish; (44:25) That confirmeth the word of his servant, and performeth the counsel of his messengers; that saith to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited; and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall be built, and I will raise up the decayed places thereof: (44:26) That saith to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers: (44:27) That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid. (44:28) Thus saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have [strengthened], [^7] to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; [^8] and the gates shall not be shut; (45:1) I will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight: I will break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut [asunder] [^9] the bars of iron: (45:2) And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that I, the Lord, which call thee by thy name, am the God of Israel. (45:3) For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee, though thou hast not known me. (45:4) I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God beside me: I girded thee, though thou hast not known me: (45:5) That they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that there is none beside me. I am the Lord, and there is none else. (45:6)

Notes and Commentary

44:24 redeemer. See commentary on 41:14.

formed thee from the womb. See commentary on 44:2; see also 1 Ne. 21:5.

I am the Lord that maketh all things. By reminding us that he made all things and that by himself he "stretcheth forth the heavens" and "spreadeth abroad the earth," the Lord gives us confidence in his ability to raise up Cyrus to deliver the Jews from Babylonian captivity and to raise up Jesus Christ to deliver all of us from death and sin.

44:25 frustrateth the tokens of the liars. The Lord alone knows the future. He is able, therefore, to frustrate (make ineffectual) the tokens, signs, and omens of the false prophets, priests, and diviners.

turneth wise men backward/maketh their knowledge foolish. The diviners and wise men who counsel the kings of the ancient Middle East believe they have access to supernatural counsel, but their knowledge and promises are useless, for only God's true servants and messengers are able to confirm God's word. The wise men here refer to those who are "learned" and "think they are wise," but "they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves" (2 Ne. 9:28).

44:26 confirmeth the word of his servant. The Lord fulfills every prophecy made by his servants, the prophets (Luke 24:44; 2 Ne. 10:17; D&C 1:38).

Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited/cities of Judah, Ye shall be built. This prophecy was to be fulfilled at least twice: once when Cyrus permitted the exiled Jews to return to their homeland, and again when the Jews return to their homeland in this dispensation. This latter fulfillment is occurring at the present time.

44:27 That saith to the deep, Be dry. The great seas are often referred to by the prophets as the deep (D&C 133:20; 2 Ne. 4:20). By pointing out that the Lord can command the deep (and the rivers; 44:27) to dry up (Hel. 12:16; Jer. 51:36) Isaiah implies that restoring Judah to their lands is, by comparison, much more simple.

44:28 Cyrus/shepherd. This is the first time Cyrus is mentioned by name in Isaiah's prophecy. He is called my shepherd, a common title of kings (Ezek. 34). Shepherd is one of the names of Christ, who is the King of Israel (43:15) and of whom Cyrus was a type.

Cyrus was the king who freed the people of Israel from political bondage and provided a way for them to return to their homeland. Christ is the King who frees all people from the bondage of death—and the repentant from spiritual death—and provides a way for us to return to our original home in God's presence. This temporal appointment was given to Cyrus, as it was to Peter, "according to the foreknowledge of God the Father" (1 Pet. 1:2). This prophecy concerning Cyrus was given by Isaiah approximately two hundred years before Cyrus ruled Babylon.

shall perform all my pleasure. Cyrus will do all the Lord asks of him; specifically, he will allow both Jerusalem and the temple to be rebuilt.

saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built. See commentary on 44:26.

saying . . . to the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid. All that the Lord promised concerning Cyrus was accomplished, including the rebuilding of Jerusalem and the establishment of the temple (46:10; 2 Chr. 36:23; Ezra 1:1-2). The rebuilding of the temple by Jews who returned to their homeland in Cyrus' day anticipates a future time when the temple will again be built in Jerusalem.

45:1 his anointed. The kings of Israel were known as "the anointed of Jehovah"; they were anointed with oil at their coronation. Cyrus was made king, or leader, over God's people (1 Sam. 10:1; 16:13; 1 Kgs. 1:39; 2 Kgs. 9: 3, 6). But there may be a second meaning here: the Hebrew word anointed becomes Messiah in English and Christ in Greek. By calling Cyrus his anointed, the Lord may be pointing out that Cyrus is a type of Christ. In addition, the anointed may be interpreted to mean any of God's servants who are anointed to do his work.

Cyrus. Cyrus was a historical ruler and conqueror who was also a type of Christ.

Biblical scholar John D. W. Watts commented on Isaiah's prophecy about Cyrus: "This description [in Isa. 45] fits Cyrus's career. He had profited from many circumstances other than his military strength. He had gained the following of all the Persian tribes with singular ease. . . . Two successive Median armies that were sent against him decided to join forces with him instead. . . . He marched without opposition into Armenia and won a surprise victory over the Lydians when their horses were frightened by the smell of Persian camels. And now Babylon, the world's most heavily fortified city, opens its gates to him without a fight. . . . Truly doors and gates had been opened for Cyrus." [^10]

right hand. Grasping another by the right hand indicates friendship, acceptance, guidance, and protection (41:13). It was the practice of the Babylonian ruler to take the hand of the idol Bel in the New Year's festival as a sign of union between him and Bel. Here Jehovah, the true God, indicates that Cyrus can have union, not with a false idol, but with God himself.

subdue nations. The role of conqueror is one of the roles of David (Ps. 21, 110). By acting in this role, Cyrus becomes a type of David who is a type of Christ. The collective strength of nations would not be able to resist Cyrus, nor would individual kings.

subdue/loose/open . . . gates/not be shut. All these words suggest the great power the Lord would vest in Cyrus. Nothing would be able to stand in his way.

loose the loins of kings. To ungird their loins means to strip them of their weapons, making it impossible for them to fight. This verse not only tells how God will aid Cyrus but also proclaims God's power.

two leaved gates. These are not single doors but rather the wide, main, double doors (two leaved) of the city. The gates both grant and bar entrance. This passage seems to say the Lord will open cities to Cyrus as conqueror; in the same way, the Lord will remove barriers for his anointed ones in any age.

45:2 I will go before thee. This promise is the same one the Lord gave to Israel as she prepared to make her exodus out of Egypt (Ex. 23:20; 32:34) it is the promise he gives us as we come to Zion (D&C 103:17-20). The Lord attends those who do his will, blessing them on their way (Mosiah 24:17; Eth. 1:42; D&C 39:12).

make the crooked places straight. The Lord will remove obstacles in Cyrus's way or in the way of any of his anointed ones. This expression is also used in prophecies concerning the first coming of the Lord (40:4; 42:16; Eccl. 7:13; Luke 3:4-5).

break . . . brass/cut . . . iron. God will exercise his power to break even the most imposing barriers in Cyrus's way. In a similar manner, God will exercise power to remove the barriers that prevent us from doing his will, if we will trust in him.

bars of iron. Iron gates, or the bars that help secure the gates (Deut. 3:5; Neh. 7:3; Ps. 107:15-16; Jer. 51:58; Nahum 3:13).

45:3 treasures/darkness/hidden riches. Cyrus will be given the spoils of war, even though they be hidden in dark places. Another possible interpretation is that God will give his true servants the hidden treasures of revelation.

call . . . by thy name. God's word to Cyrus was specifically directed to him. That it was a personal call is reemphasized in the next verse. So also does God call us (40:26; 43:1).

45:4 my servant's sake. Cyrus was not given victory or spoils for his own benefit. God called him to his work for the benefit of Israel so that ultimately the world would come to the knowledge of God (45:6). The same principle holds when we receive divine calls: we are not called just for our own benefit. Joseph Smith taught: "That we may learn still further that God calls or elects particular men to perform particular works, or on whom to confer special blessings, we read, . . . 'For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee [Cyrus] by thy name,' to be a deliverer to my people Israel, and help to plant them on my holy mountain." [^11]

mine elect. The elect are those who "hear my voice and harden not their hearts" (D&C 29:7). They are "holy and beloved" (Col. 3:12). They are people of faith (Titus 1:1; D&C 84:33-34). The elect are those who are righteous, who love the Lord with all their hearts, and, in the ultimate sense, have made their calling and election sure (2 Pet. 1:10).

surnamed thee. The Hebrew word here (kaneak) can mean either a surname or an honorary title. Perhaps the Lord gave Cyrus the surname of Israel, adopting him into the chosen people (44:5), or perhaps the Lord was honoring Cyrus's own name for the work Cyrus would do.

45:5 I am the Lord. Jehovah declares himself to his people (43:10-11; 46:9; D&C 76:1).

I girded thee. The Lord equipped Cyrus with the means to win in battle, in contrast to the kings in 45:1, who were stripped of their weapons. The Lord will equip his servant (see 49:1, 3; 50:4-9; 52:13-15; and 53:1-12 for discussions on the identity of the Lord's servant), of whom Cyrus is a type, in spiritual battle, girding him with power from on high. Some translations give this as "I will strengthen you" (NEB, NIV).

thou hast not known me. Even though Cyrus was unacquainted with the true God, he did God's work. Contrast this statement with the blessing to those who benefit from the labors of Cyrus: "That they may know . . . that there is none beside me" (45:6). The real fulfillment of this promise would come through the labor of God's anointed servant, Jesus Christ, of whom Cyrus was a type. The promises Cyrus receives are similar to those given to David, another type of Christ, in Ps. 2:8-10 and 72:8-10.

Interestingly, the Jewish historian Josephus, who wrote only a few years after the crucifixion of Christ, recorded that Cyrus may have learned something of the true God:

"In the first year of the reign of Cyrus [539 b.c.], which was the seventieth from the day that our people were removed out of their own land into Babylon, God commiserated the captivity and calamity of these poor people, . . . for he stirred up the mind of Cyrus, and made him write this throughout all Asia:—'Thus saith Cyrus the King:—Since God Almighty hath appointed me to be king of the habitable earth, I believe that he is that God which the nation of the Israelites worship; for indeed he foretold my name by the prophets, and that I should build him a house at Jerusalem, in the country of Judea.'

"This was known to Cyrus by his reading the book which Isaiah left behind him of his prophecies; for this prophet said that God had spoken thus to him in a secret vision:—'My will is, that Cyrus, whom I have appointed to be king over many and great nations, send back my people to their own land, and build my temple.' This was foretold by Isaiah one hundred and forty years before the temple was demolished. Accordingly, when Cyrus read this, and admired the divine power, an earnest desire and ambition seized upon him to fulfil what was so written." [^12]

It may be that Cyrus read the prophecy in which he was named and that he acknowledged Jehovah as the true God—but at the same time he "played both sides of the field" by also giving credit to the Babylonian god Marduk and other gods. Thus he did not truly know Jehovah as God, exactly as Isaiah prophesied.

45:6 rising of the sun/west. These two lines denote that Jehovah is the God of the whole earth and will yet be known as such. Revealing Jehovah to all nations is part of the peculiar mission of Israel (42:1-4, 6-8), and we of the Church are latter-day Israel. This prophecy is similar to the one made by Malachi: "For from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same my name shall be great among the Gentiles; . . . for my name shall be great among the heathen, saith the Lord of hosts" (Mal. 1:11).

---
Notas:
[^1] This replaces the KJV potsherd.
[^2] This replaces the KJV potsherds.
[^3] Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon, 96.
[^4] History of the Church, 2:358.
[^5] Doctrines of Salvation, 2:30-31.
[^6] Brown, Driver, and Briggs, Hebrew and English Lexicon, 1062.
[^7] Footnote c to 45:1 in the LDS edition of the Bible suggests strengthened as a substitute for holden.
[^8] Or double doors. See footnote e to 45:1 in the LDS edition of the Bible.
[^9] This replaces the KJV in sunder.
[^10] Isa. 34-66, 156.
[^11] History of the Church, 4:257.
[^12] Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews, 11.1.1-2.
