Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 45:7-25

Likening Isa. 45 unto Ourselves

The Lord has great power over all his creations. He can bring light or darkness, peace or misfortune. Isaiah compares God to a potter and us to the pots; he compares God to a parent and us to a little child. The Lord has created earth and man, and he stands at the head of all the armies of heaven. Even the heathen will come to recognize his supremacy. With such power, the Lord can direct the events of earth as he desires—and we would be wise to submit ourselves to his will.

The Lord's Power and Dominion (45:7-13)

There is opposition in all things—light and darkness, peace and evil (or trouble)—yet the Lord has power over all (45:7). Those who question the Lord in his works are as foolish as a pot would be to question the work of its potter; they are as foolish as an infant would be to question its parents (45:9-10). The Lord commands all the host of heaven (45:12), and he can raise up a deliverer unto Israel (45:13).

Isa. 45:7-13

I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all these things. (45:7) Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down righteousness: let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation, and let righteousness spring up together; I the Lord have created it. (45:8) Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! Let the [fragment of pottery] [^1] strive with the [pottery fragments] [^2] of the earth. Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no hands? (45:9) Woe unto him that saith unto his father, What begettest thou? or to the woman, What hast thou brought forth? (45:10) Thus saith the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, and his Maker, Ask me of things to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands command ye me. (45:11) I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I commanded. (45:12) I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his ways: he shall build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for price nor reward, saith the Lord of hosts. (45:13)

Notes and Commentary

45:7 light . . . darkness. This phrase echoes the account of the Creation: "And God said, Let there be light: and there was light. And . . . God divided the light from the darkness" (Gen. 1:3-4). Jehovah says he is above both light and darkness, having created them (Ezek. 32:8).

create evil. Certainly the Lord is not the originator of evil; that is made clear in Moro. 7:12: "That which is evil cometh of the devil." But evil can also mean "ill fortune, trial, or difficulty." As the New International Version says, "I bring prosperity and create disaster." Job gave expression to this idea of the duality of God's power when he said, "Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?" (Job 2:10). As the New International Version puts it: "Shall we accept good from God, and not trouble?" The point of 45:6-7 seems to be that God is in charge: he has power over all things and directs the affairs of men to their ultimate good.

45:8 Drop down, ye heavens . . . righteousness. Instead of the sky dropping rain, it is dropping down righteousness. Perhaps this phrase refers to revelation, which comes down from the heavens and enables us to come to righteousness.

earth open. This expression has at least two meanings. One is to receive the righteousness (and revelation) from above, even as the earth receives the rain. Another, according to Elder Orson Pratt and others of the early Brethren of this dispensation, is to prophesy of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. [^3]

bring forth/spring up. This sweet prayer is a blessing the Lord pronounces on us, that righteousness, like plants, will spring forth on the earth. As Creator, the Lord implies, he has the power to bring about such a blessing (26:19). With our agency, we can choose to participate in this blessing. This passage may also refer to the coming of the Messiah, whose name is Son of Righteousness (3 Ne. 25:2).

salvation. The Hebrew word used here, yesha—also meaning "deliverance"— comes from the same root as the names Isaiah and Joshua. In the Greek New Testament the name became Jesus. Could Isaiah be saying in a symbolic way, "Let the heavens and the earth bring forth Jesus, our deliverer"?

45:9 Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker. Here the Lord warns those who will not accept his will and his plan. In particular, the people of Israel seem to have questioned the Lord's plan to use a gentile conqueror (Cyrus) to liberate them from their oppressors. Their logic told them that replacing one heathen ruler with another was not the way to freedom and self-rule. But the Lord, in his wisdom, sought to direct the affairs of his people in the way that would most bless them. Like those of ancient Israel, too often the Lord's people in our day doubt and question him: "What makest thou? . . . What begettest thou? . . . What hast thou brought forth?" We have no more right to question the work of the Lord than a pot has to question the potter who fashioned it. Instead, we should trust the Lord, whose foreknowledge is perfect: "Ask me of things to come" (45:11). His power is supreme: "I have made the earth, and . . . all their host have I commanded" (45:12). In addition, we should accept any servants the Lord raises "up in righteousness," for the Lord's true servants allow him to "direct all [their] ways" (45:13). We should accept the Lord's divinely ordained and revealed plans, even when we cannot understand how they could work.

Let the fragment of pottery strive with the pottery fragments of the earth. We are as a fragment of pottery, the Lord being the potter. If we must strive or question, let it be with other human beings, certainly not with the Lord, who is our Maker.

clay/him that fashioneth it. The Lord uses the image of the clay and the potter in other places as well (29:16; Jer. 18:1-6; Rom. 9:20-21). The clay, of course, is man, and the potter is God. This image is also reminiscent of God's forming the body of Adam from the clay of the earth (Gen. 2:7; Job 33:6).

no hands. It is foolishness for a created thing to say that its creator has no hands. Yet that is what man does when he says that God has no power to do his work. Contrast no hands in this verse with 45:12: "I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens."

45:10 him/father. Just as it is improper for us to question our parents concerning our begetting, so it is improper for us to question our Heavenly Father, in a spirit of doubt, concerning his works and his motivations.

45:11 the Holy One of Israel. This term refers to Jehovah, who is holy indeed (29:23; 57:15; Lev. 11:45; see also commentary on 1:4).

Ask me of things to come. The Lord is willing to prophesy to us if we will ask.

Ask/command. It is improper to question the Lord in a spirit of doubt (45:9-10), but the Lord is willing to tell us much if we ask in humility and meekness. As footnote 11c in the LDS edition of the Bible says, "This invites one to tell the Lord what one wants to know." The New International Version gives an alternative reading, putting this verse as a continuation of the questions asked in verses 9 and 10: "Concerning things to come, do you question me about my children, or give me orders about the work of my hands?"

my sons. The true followers of Christ are born again as his sons and his daughters.

hands. God is the one whose hands made the heaven and the earth.

45:12-13 made the earth/stretched out the heavens/host . . . commanded. These expressions demonstrate the power of God (40:26; 42:5; 44:24). He created the earth, he constantly extends his dominion, and he commands all his children.

host. Those who dwell in the heavens, meaning gods and angels.

I have made/my hands/I commanded/I have raised/I will direct/my city/my captives. The Lord's repeated use of the first person seems to emphasize that he is God and that it is he who works through his servant (see commentary on 45:13).

45:13 raised him up. As the Lord has exercised power over the elements to create the heavens and the earth, so also has he exercised power over the affairs of men by raising up a deliverer. The person referred to here could be either Cyrus or Christ; the verse probably has a dual meaning and thus may refer to both. In fact, the description of the Lord's servant in this verse can apply to any righteous man or woman of God who hearkens to the Lord and helps to free those in bondage to sin (see D&C 101:80 for another instance of the Lord raising up men to do his work).

my city. This city may be Jerusalem or the great city of Zion, or the New Jerusalem (Heb. 12:22; 3 Ne. 21:23; Ether 13:8). Modern revelation further clarifies that it is the righteous of Israel who will build the Lord's city (D&C 109:58). This may indicate that righteous Israel as a body is the servant mentioned in this passage, or the servant could be Cyrus or another leader of Israel. Joseph Smith described this city of Zion as "the city of righteousness . . . where the people shall be of one heart and one mind, when the Savior comes; yea, where the people shall walk with God like Enoch, and be free from sin." [^4]

captives. This term has three possible meanings, all of them true: Israel, who has been in bondage to a foreign nation; the Lord's people on earth, who have been in bondage to sin; and the prisoners in the spirit world (42:7; 49:9; Zech. 9:11-12).

not for price/reward. Captives traditionally became property for the captor to use or sell as slaves or to trade for ransom. But Israel's deliverance from bondage (through Cyrus or at any other time) would not come because Israel made any payment; it would come as a gift from God (53:6). In the same way, our deliverance from the bondage of sin does not come because we pay a price, but because Christ has paid in our behalf, so it also is a gift of God (52:3). Salvation is free to those who accept and follow Christ (55:1; 2 Ne. 9:50; 2 Ne. 26:25; Alma 5:34).

This phrase may also have another meaning. The deliverer performed his work to bless the people and to please the Lord, not because of any price or reward he himself would receive.

Lord of hosts. The Lord is a God who rules multitudes, even the hosts of heaven.

The Heathen Will Acknowledge the Lord (45:14-17)

Israel has been in bondage, subject as slaves to the will of foreign oppressors. But through the deliverance that God will send, she will yet receive the wealth ("labour," "merchandise") and respect ("fall down unto thee," "make supplication") of many nations (45:14). The peoples of these nations will confess the true God ("Surely God is in thee," 45:14), while those who make and worship idols will be "ashamed" and "confounded" (45:16). But Israel "shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end" (45:17). We are all in bondage to sin, but if we qualify, the Lord will give us rich blessings and will stand by us eternally.

Isa. 45:14-17

Thus saith the Lord, The labour of Egypt, and merchandise of Ethiopia and of the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto thee, and they shall be thine: they shall come after thee; in chains they shall come over, and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall make supplication unto thee, saying, Surely God is in thee; and there is none else, there is no God. (45:14) Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the Saviour. (45:15) They shall be ashamed, and also confounded, all of them: they shall go to confusion together that are makers of idols. (45:16) But Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation: ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end. (45:17)

Notes and Commentary

45:14 labour/merchandise. The gentile nations, bringing their wealth with them, will help to build Zion (18:7; 23:18; 60:3-14).

Egypt/Ethiopia/Sabeans. These nations, which formerly had oppressed Israel (43:3), will now submit themselves to the Lord's people. In a broader sense, this may refer to all gentile nations (14:1; 60:14).

men of stature. This represents those who are important in the eyes of the world.

come over unto thee/be thine/fall down/make supplication. The Gentiles will come unto Israel and acknowledge that the true God is with them.

chains. They come as slaves, not free men. These chains most likely are spiritual chains, binding the people in spiritual bondage.

there is no God. That is, the Gentiles acknowledge that there is no other God besides Jehovah.

45:15 hidest thyself. God remains hidden to the disobedient and unbeliever. Sometimes he also remains hidden to the righteous, to try their faith (8:17; Ps. 10:1; 44:23; 88:14; D&C 101:89; 121:1; 123:6). The expression can also mean that he does his work through others and remains unseen.

45:16-17 ashamed/confounded/not be ashamed nor confounded. The wicked idolaters will be ashamed of their works and be confounded (meaning disgraced, confused, or destroyed), while the righteous are justified in their course and will be saved (41:11; 50:7; 54:4; Ps. 70:2; 2 Ne. 6:7, 13; D&C 109:29 ).

45:17 everlasting salvation. Eternal life is everlasting salvation (Mosiah 5:15; D&C 43:25).

world without end. This phrase means through all eternity (Eph. 3:21; D&C 76:112).

The Lord Is God of the Whole Earth (45:18-25)

This passage illustrates some of the roles and attributes of God: He is the Creator ("created the heavens; . . . formed the earth"), the Revealer ("I have not spoken in secret"), and the "Savior" (45:18, 19, 21). He is "just" (45:21) and gives us power to do righteousness ("in the Lord have I righteousness and strength"; 45:24). He is a God of truth and equity ("I . . . speak righteousness"; 45:19). He is the source of true prophecy, as contrasted with false gods ("Who hath declared this from ancient time? . . . have not I the Lord?"; 45:21). He is the only true God ("no God else beside me"; 45:21). He is the God of the whole earth ("look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth"; 45:22). Eventually, all must acknowledge him ("every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear"; 45:23). In him, the faithful will be "justified" and have cause to "glory" (45:25). All this stands in contrast to the gods of the heathen, which "cannot save" (45:20). It also stands in contrast to the things of our day that we embrace in place of the one true God.

Isa. 45:18-25

For thus saith the Lord that created the heavens; God himself that formed the earth and made it; he hath established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited: I am the Lord; and there is none else. (45:18) I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth: I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain: I the Lord speak righteousness, I declare things that are right. (45:19) Assemble yourselves and come; draw near together, ye that are escaped of the nations: they have no knowledge that set up the wood of their graven image, and pray unto a god that cannot save. (45:20) Tell ye, and bring them near; yea, let them take counsel together: who hath declared this from ancient time? who hath told it from that time? have not I the Lord? and there is no God else beside me; a just God and a Saviour; there is none beside me. (45:21) Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is none else. (45:22) I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, That unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear. (45:23) Surely, shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength: even to him shall men come; and all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed. (45:24) In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory. (45:25)

Notes and Commentary

45:18 established it. The Lord set it (the earth) in place.

created it not in vain. The Lord has a purpose for the earth, which purpose will be fulfilled.

45:19 secret . . . a dark place. Although the Lord is hidden to the unbeliever (45:15), he speaks openly, not in hiding, to those who will hear (43:10; 44:8). This phrase may also refer to the common practice of seeking revelations among the dead, which was often done "in secret, in a dark place of the earth" (1 Sam. 28:13). The oracles at Delphi, for example, prophesied in secret and then took credit in public for having foretold whatever happened.

seed of Jacob. The seed of Jacob are the literal or spiritual descendants of Jacob or Israel, the heirs of the covenant (3 Ne. 5:24-25; Morm. 7:10; D&C 103:17).

45:20 Assemble yourselves and come. The call for Israel to gather represents the work of gathering in our day, which is accomplished through missionary work.

escaped of the nations. These are the righteous who are gathered to Zion, leaving the nations of the world.

45:21 counsel together. Those who make and worship idols are to ask if they can find any evidence that the idols have been able to prophesy accurately, as the Lord has done.

declared this from ancient time. The Lord has declared his sovereignty and dominion from the beginning, whereas the idols have consistently shown themselves to possess neither.

no God else beside me. This idea is repeated three times in this verse and the next. The nations may worship many gods, but there is only one true God, with power to declare and to bring to pass. That God is Jehovah.

45:22 all the ends of the earth. Every part of the earth. This phrase is repeated more than sixty times in the scriptures.

Look unto me/be ye saved. The idols (45:20) have no power to save. It is Christ and the power of his atonement that save.

45:23 sworn by myself. Christ has taken an oath upon his own name. As God is unchanging and infallible, so is that which he promises.

word . . . shall not return. His oath is final and irrevocable: "Though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled" (D&C 1:38).

every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear. All people will acknowledge the Lord's supremacy with physical obeisance and verbal testimony. In Mosiah 16:1-2, Abinadi indicates that this prophecy will be fulfilled at the time of the Second Coming, "when all shall see the salvation of the Lord." President Joseph Fielding Smith taught that those who so bow are not necessarily candidates for celestial glory but also include those who will inherit a terrestrial and telestial glory [^5] (Rom. 14:10-12; Mosiah 27:31; D&C 76:110-11; 88:104).

45:24 in the Lord have I righteousness and strength/to him shall men come. It is by coming to Christ that we are able to develop righteousness and spiritual strength. As Moroni said, "Come unto Christ, and be perfected in him" (Moro. 10:32), suggesting that perfection (or righteousness and strength) comes only by coming to the Savior and receiving of the blessings of his atonement.

incensed. Being incensed means being deeply angered.

45:25 seed of Israel. See commentary on 41:8.

justified. One who is justified is judged and found worthy.

glory. In this context, glory means having cause to rejoice and give praise to God.

---
Notas:
[^1] This word replaces the KJV hoar. This change is suggested in the LDS edition of the Bible, footnote b to 46:4.
[^2] This word replaces the archaic KJV shew.
[^3] Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon, 96.
[^4] History of the Church, 2:358.
[^5] Doctrines of Salvation, 2:30-31.
