Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 46

Likening Isa. 46 unto Ourselves

The idols of ancient nations had no power to help themselves against the encroachments of enemies. They were carried away on the backs of beasts and could not prevent it; they were equally powerless to help the people who worshiped them. So also are our material accumulations and our temporal pursuits unable to help us in times of need.

In contrast, the Lord not only has power to help but he carries us through our times of trial. He will support us from beginning to end. Even time and space are no obstacles to him. Whatever he decides to do, he will accomplish.

Idols Have No Power (46:1-7)

Bel and Nebo, two chief pagan gods, are carried away on the backs of beasts into captivity (46:1-2). In other words, the idols are carried by those who made them (46:7). In contrast, Jehovah has carried his people on his own back "from the womb," and he will continue to carry them "even to your old age" (46:3-4). While the idols have no power to deliver even themselves, Jehovah will deliver his people (46:2, 4). The idol worshipers may spend a fortune in making their images, but idols cannot help them in their time of "trouble" (46:6-7). Jehovah, who made us (46:4), will help us through every difficulty (D&C 3:8).

Isa. 46:1-7

Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, their idols were upon the beasts, and upon the cattle: your carriages were heavy laden; they are a burden to the weary beast. (46:1) They stoop, they bow down together; they could not deliver the burden, but themselves are gone into captivity. (46:2) Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel, which are borne by me from the belly, which are carried from the womb: (46:3) And even to your old age I am he; and even to [grey] [^1] hairs will I carry you: I have made, and I will bear; even I will carry, and will deliver you. (46:4) To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare me, that we may be like? (46:5) They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in the balance, and hire a goldsmith; and he maketh it a god: they fall down, yea, they worship. (46:6) They bear him upon the shoulder, they carry him, and set him in his place, and he standeth; from his place shall he not remove: yea, one shall cry unto him, yet can he not answer, nor save him out of his trouble. (46:7)

Notes and Commentary

46:1 Bel/Nebo. In the belief system of the Assyrians and Babylonians, Bel was the chief god, the father of all other gods. Nebo was the god of learning and wisdom. Bel seems to have been the pagan equivalent of God the Father or of Jehovah; Nebo was the pagan equivalent of the Holy Ghost. These idols should be seen as symbolic of all things in our lives that we love more than God and obedience to his will.

46:1-2 boweth down/stoopeth/stoop/bow. The idols are brought low into captivity.

46:2 captivity. The pagan gods (idols) are literally carried away by the enemy, just as their worshipers are made captive to sin.

46:3 house of Jacob/Israel. This phrase refers both to the literal descendants of Jacob, or Israel, and to those who become heir to the Abrahamic promise by obedience to the gospel covenant.

remnant. The surviving descendants of Jacob, both literally and spiritually, are the remnant (10:20-21; Micah 5:7-8; Alma 46:23-24; 3 Ne. 5:24; D&C 52:2).

borne by me from the belly/carried from the womb. Israel was carried, or protected, by God as a mother carries her unborn child, in a perfect protective and nourishing position, in contrast to the idol gods that had to be borne by their worshipers (44:2, 24). God likewise carries and protects his faithful ones of all ages.

46:3-4 womb/old age. The Lord will support and help us from the beginning of our lives to the end (Ps. 71:16-18, 21).

46:5 liken me/equal/compare me. No god or any other person or thing can be compared to the Lord; all else is nothing compared to him (40:25).

46:6 lavish gold/weigh silver. Though the idol gods are made of precious materials, they still have no power (44:15-17).

46:7 bear him/carry him. When we turn to other people or things in place of God, they become in the end only burdens for us to carry rather than blessings to help in time of trouble. This emphasizes again that these are man-made gods that have no power of their own.

The Lord Will Accomplish All His Purposes (46:8-13)

God commands us to remember his power, to remember his dealings in earlier times, such as when he delivered Israel from Egypt ("the former things of old"; 46:9). "I am God, and there is none else," he says. "There is none like me" (46:9). He has power to declare events before they happen (46:10). He has power to do whatever he pleases (46:10). He can call helpers from faraway places ("ravenous bird," "man that executeth my counsel"; 46:11). Those who are stubborn ("stouthearted") and wicked ("far from righteousness") need to take heed, for the Lord will be victor and Zion and righteous Israel will triumph with him (46:12-13).

Isa. 46:8-13

Remember this, and [show] [^2] yourselves men: bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors. (46:8) Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me, (46:9) Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure: (46:10) Calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man that executeth my counsel from a far country: yea, I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it. (46:11) Hearken unto me, ye stouthearted, that are far from righteousness: (46:12) I bring near my righteousness; it shall not be far off, and my salvation shall not tarry: and I will place salvation in Zion for Israel my glory. (46:13)

Notes and Commentary

46:8 show yourselves men. Demonstrate that you are people of integrity and honor.

46:9 former things of old. Remember the historical evidences, including the Exodus and Israel's conquest of Canaan (43:18), that the Lord is a God of power.

46:11 ravenous bird from the east. This image may refer to Cyrus, who came from the east (Persia) to deliver Israel from bondage (Ezek. 17:3). But more completely, it may refer to the second coming of Christ, who will come from the east to execute God's judgment (41:2; Rev. 7:2).

executeth my counsel. This statement refers to obedience to God's direction.

far country. Cyrus came from a far country (Persia) to deliver Israel, just as Christ will return from afar, at his second coming, to bring deliverance.

purposed it. The sense here is that God willed it, or established it as one of his purposes (14:24-27; Jer. 4:28).

46:12 stouthearted. This word means hard-hearted, stubborn, or rebellious, rather than courageous (as we more often think of it).

46:12-13 righteousness. In this context, righteousness is rectitude, or right action. The rebellious resist righteousness, but God will bring his own righteousness (or salvation) to bless those of Zion. As Paul taught, our diligent efforts to be righteous help us come unto Christ, who then blesses us with salvation (Rom. 3:20-24; 5:19). Some versions of the Bible use the word victory instead of righteousness (JB, NEB, TEV). The Lord brings victory over sin and death, which is his salvation.

46:13 salvation. In the immediate sense, this word refers to deliverance from Israel's enemies; in a more complete sense, it signifies deliverance from sin and death. These blessings accompany the gathering to Zion, the union of true Saints in the last days.

---
Notas:
[^1] This word replaces the archaic KJV shew.
[^2] Nibley, Approaching Zion, 325.
