Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 47

Likening Isa. 47 unto Ourselves

Babylon is not only an ancient, powerful nation but a symbol of the wicked world in all ages. In our time, the last days, she reigns supreme, and many swear allegiance to her, loving the praise and comforts and riches of the worldly life. Ancient Babylon thought she was invincible, as does the modern incarnation. But suddenly, without warning, the Babylon of the last days will be thrown down, as was ancient Babylon, and all those who ally themselves to her will be destroyed with the world they loved so much.

This is a prophecy many of us may see come to pass in our time, some in horror and some in gratitude. The destruction of powerful Babylon can be a reminder to us to trust in the Lord and in nothing else. The Lord will be patient. He will refine us in the furnace of affliction. And he will give us prophets, to guide us and teach us truth. Those who hearken will enjoy unceasing peace and righteousness and will receive of the blessings of Abraham. To come to such peace, we must repent and flee from Babylon— the world and its pride and sinfulness.

The prophecies in this chapter apply both to the fall of the ancient kingdom of Babylon and to the fall of the wicked world in the last days.

Babylon Shall Be Destroyed (47:1-15)

These verses have a dual meaning, referring both to the ancient kingdom of Babylon and to the wicked kingdom of the world. As Babylon was thrown down by God's power anciently, so will the world be destroyed in the end. Babylon's fate will take the people of Babylon (both the temporal and the spiritual Babylon) by surprise: "Thou saidst, I shall be a lady for ever" (47:7). The destruction will come suddenly, "in a moment in one day," and it will be complete—"they shall come upon thee in their perfection" (47:9). And what are Babylon's sins? She is "given to pleasures" (47:8); she has "trusted in [her] wickedness" (47:10); she has been "perverted" by her "wisdom" and "knowledge" (47:10); and she has rejected the true God, saying in her heart, "I am, and none else beside me" (47:8, 10).

When the day of destruction comes, Babylon turns to her "enchantments," "sorceries," and "astrologers" for help (47:12-13)—the wisdom and power of the devil and his deceptions—but they will all fail her (47:14, 15).

It is interesting to note here that Babylon is consistently depicted as feminine— Lady Babylon, the embodiment of all evil—in direct opposition to Lady Zion, the embodiment of all that is good. Many terms in this passage present Babylon as feminine: "virgin" (47:1), "daughter" (47:1, 5), "tender and delicate" (47:1), "locks" (47:2), "lady" (47:5, 7), "widow" (47:8, 9). Compare these with the depiction of Lady Babylon in Revelation, who is called "whore" (17:1, 15, 16), "woman" (17:3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 18), "mother of harlots" (17:5), "queen" (18:7), and "widow" (18:7).

Why does the Lord use feminine symbols in this way? Perhaps it is because he regards righteous woman as the epitome of his creation, which makes the corrupted woman more abhorrent by contrast. Also, the holy woman, as partner in the process of procreation, is essential for the perpetuation of God's plan. The evil woman not only brings herself to destruction but also frustrates the plan itself.

Isa. 47:1-15

Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate. (47:1) Take the millstones, and grind meal: uncover thy locks, make bare the leg, uncover the thigh, pass over the rivers. (47:2) Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be seen: I will take vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a man. (47:3) As for our redeemer, the Lord of hosts is his name, the Holy One of Israel. (47:4) Sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called, The lady of kingdoms. (47:5) I was wroth with my people, I have polluted mine inheritance, and given them into thine hand: thou didst [show] [^1] them no mercy; upon the ancient hast thou very heavily laid thy yoke. (47:6) And thou saidst, I shall be a lady for ever: so that thou didst not lay these things to thy heart, neither didst remember the latter end of it. (47:7) Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to pleasures, that dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me; I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss of children: (47:8) But these two things shall come to thee in a moment in one day, the loss of children, and widowhood: they shall come upon thee in their perfection for the multitude of thy sorceries, and for the great abundance of thine enchantments. (47:9) For thou hast trusted in thy wickedness: thou hast said, None seeth me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted thee; and thou hast said in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me. (47:10) Therefore shall evil come upon thee; thou shalt not know from whence it riseth: and mischief shall fall upon thee; thou shalt not be able to put it off: and desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shalt not know. (47:11) Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth; if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail. (47:12) Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee. (47:13) Behold, they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them; they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame: there shall not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit before it. (47:14) Thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou hast laboured, even thy merchants, from thy youth: they shall wander every one to his quarter; none shall save thee. (47:15)

Notes and Commentary

47:1 sit in the dust. Those who sat in the dust to do their work were the slaves. As a slave, Babylon is forced to grind meal with hand stones, to remove her veil and expose herself to public view, to immodestly "make bare the leg" (47:2) so that her skirts don't obstruct her work, and so forth. It is also likely that slaves were poorly dressed and thus inadequately covered. Sitting in the dust was also a sign of mourning (3:26; Lam. 2:10; Ezek. 26:15-17). This passage refers both to the captivity of the literal Babylon and Chaldea (seen through the eyes of prophecy) and to the loss of freedom and power suffered by those who belong to spiritual Babylon, which is the wicked world (contrast with 52:2).

virgin daughter. This term characterizes the offspring of Lady Babylon (the world). Even those who are young and seemingly innocent in Babylon will suffer the consequences of Babylon's downfall.

Babylon. Babylon is the world of wickedness, meaning those who live by a telestial law (Jer. 51:33-58; Zech. 2:7-9).

no throne. Those who had ruled on thrones in the wicked world are now slaves. This phrase may be symbolic: those who were the leaders of society in the wicked world are thrown down.

Chaldeans. The Chaldeans were the learned class of Babylon, the magicians and sorcerers (see commentary on 43:14).

tender/delicate. Those in the wicked world led pampered lives (Deut. 28:56).

47:2 millstones/grind meal. This work of slaves (Judg. 16:21; Lam. 5:11-13) symbolizes the servitude into which Babylon (the wicked world) will be forced, as well as the end of a life of ease and opulence. In a literal sense, Babylon was forced to serve her masters when she fell. In a symbolic sense, the wicked (Babylon) serve their master, Satan. Satan promises the wicked a life of pleasure but delivers only bondage and pain. Only righteousness brings lasting rewards.

pass over the rivers. The conquered of Babylon will be sent into exile. Passing over rivers may represent passing over borders into other lands, or it may symbolize moving from one state of being to another.

47:2-3 uncover/Thy nakedness shall be uncovered. Perhaps ancient Babylonian women would be sexually abused in the fall of their empire. Those who belong to spiritual Babylon (the world of wickedness) will be exposed, meaning their sins will be seen by all.

will not meet thee as a man. The Lord will treat the wicked not as peers or equals but as subordinates or slaves. The Lord will not be Babylon's bridegroom, as he will be for Israel.

47:4 the Lord of hosts . . . the Holy One of Israel. See commentary on 1:4, 9.

47:5 Sit thou silent/get thee into darkness. This passage describes the silence and darkness of grief, sorrow, or humiliation (42:7; 50:10).

Chaldeans. See commentary on 47:1.

The lady of kingdoms. The wicked will no longer have this title, which may suggest the Saints as the bride of Christ.

47:6 I have polluted mine inheritance. The Lord's inheritance is his people, those who will carry on his work and his name. Because of their agency, they have chosen to pollute themselves; as a result, they have been given into the hand of an enemy (43:28), who, ultimately, is Satan. Perhaps this phrase means that the Lord has disinherited them.

upon the ancient . . . laid thy yoke. Aged people, who should be given honor, instead are burdened by slavery or servitude. The yoke may also represent the yoke of sin, which all those who ally themselves with the world receive.

47:7 I shall be a lady for ever. Babylon thought she would rule in royal supremacy forever. Likewise, some Church members mistakenly think they will always receive the blessings of the covenant, despite their lack of righteousness.

lay these things to thy heart. The heart is the seat of true belief. Lady Babylon did not believe the prophecies of the judgments and destruction that would come if she did not repent.

latter end. This phrase means the final result.

47:8 given to pleasures. This term represents those who are more concerned with selfish and sensual desires than with the needs of others or with God (Luke 8:14; 2 Tim. 3:4).

carelessly. This word means without care for what God desires or requires (Ezek. 39:6).

I am, and none else beside me. This statement is something God says of himself (45:5-6, 18, 21-22; Ex. 3:13-14). Now Babylon (or the wicked world) is saying it of herself, suggesting she needs no God and is independent and self-sufficient (Zeph. 2:15). By saying "I am," Babylon is also saying, "I am God."

not sit as a widow/neither shall I know the loss of children. Babylon feels secure: she is convinced she will never lose her source of strength (husband) or continuance (children; see Rev. 18:7-8). Similarly, the loss of husband (bridegroom) and children symbolize the loss of the Abrahamic covenant. Some self-sufficient but unworthy Church members feel they are exempt from God's judgments.

47:9 in one day. The events will occur suddenly, all at once.

perfection. Perfection means completion, wholeness, fulness.

sorceries/enchantments. These are the world's attempts to gain power and dominion without righteousness; such things come from Satan, whether the practitioner of them acknowledges it or not (Lev. 19:31; 2 33:6; Rev. 18:23; Chr. Alma 1:32).

47:10 thou hast trusted in thy wickedness. Babylon (the wicked world) thought her way of life was sufficient to fulfill all her needs—in short, that it would save her. As Hugh Nibley wrote, "Babylon is firm in the conviction that her system is a permanent one. . . . In such possession of power, she can get away with anything and keep power indefinitely by crooked means, concealing her acts." [^2]

wisdom/knowledge/perverted thee. The wisdom and the knowledge that pervert are the learning and the philosophies of men, in contrast with those of God.

47:11 evil. This evil is not wickedness—Babylon is already steeped in that—but tragedy. The New International Version uses the word disaster. "Babylon is always reserved for the burning . . . her fate is to be overthrown, violently, suddenly, unexpectedly, and completely by the direct intervention of God." [^3]

thou shalt not know from whence it riseth. The destruction of the world will come suddenly and unexpectedly, and it will come from the Lord, in whom the world does not believe.

mischief. Other translations interpret this as "calamity" (NIV) or "disaster" (RSV).

desolation/thou shalt not know. No one could have anticipated such a "catastrophe" (NIV) or "ruin" (RSV).

47:12 enchantments/sorceries. See commentary on 47:9.

laboured from thy youth. This phrase suggests that the world has used sorceries almost from the beginning.

profit/prevail. The wicked can seek to succeed or conquer through the powers given them by Satan, if they so choose, though of course they will ultimately fail.

47:13 wearied/multitude of thy counsels. Lady Babylon's counselors have given so much advice that those listening have grown tired of it. The counsels likely come from astrologers, stargazers, monthly prognosticators (all of which are synonyms), from whom people foolishly still seek counsel in the latter days.

47:14 stubble. Farmers burn their land to clear and cleanse it. The Lord will do the same at the end of the world. After he has harvested the wheat (the righteous), he will burn the remainder (the chaff, or the wicked) with the fire of his coming (33:11- 12; Mal. 4:1; 1 Ne. 22:15; 2 Ne. 26:4-6; D&C 64:24).

coal/fire. The fire of the Lord's coming will not be the comfortable fire of the hearth but a fire that devours all before it.

47:15 merchants/wander every one to his quarter. The merchants who built the wealth of Babylon (the world) will desert the wicked at the end, being unable to save them (Rev. 18:15).

---
Notas:
[^1] The New Jerusalem Bible, 1265.
[^2] 1 Ne. 20:1 makes several changes in this verse, including the addition of the explanatory phrase or out of the waters of baptism.
[^3] The changes in this verse are from 1 Ne. 20:2.
