Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 49

Likening Isa. 49 unto Ourselves

We are of the house of Israel, and here the Lord calls us to hearken. He has sent a servant to testify of truth and to help restore Israel to her promised blessings. Through the efforts of such servants, the Lord will gather Israel from all parts of the earth. We in the latter days are privileged to help in this gathering work. As we stand as missionaries to our neighbors, inviting them to come and partake of the blessings of the gospel, we are joining the Lord's servant in his work and helping to bring to pass the prophecies about the deliverance and the gathering of Israel. Those who are so gathered will be greatly blessed. The Lord will open the way for them to return to him; he will lead and guide them and provide for their every spiritual need.

This passage has a wonderful message of comfort to all who suffer and feel lost in the world. "Can a woman forget her sucking child?" the Lord asks. "Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee" (49:15)

In the gathering, the Lord will send many helpers: kings and queens will bring in their arms and on their shoulders those who have been lost.

Song of the Lord's Servant (49:1-7)

This passage introduces us to a servant of the Lord who has been called "from the womb" (49:1, 5), or from premortality. He has been hid and prepared of the Lord (49:2) and is promised glory (49:3). But the servant is discouraged, saying, "I have labored in vain" (49:4). The Lord reminds him of his mission and his promises: he is to help gather Israel and is to be a light to the Gentiles (49:6). Men despise the servant and nations abhor him, but kings and princes will yet give him respect and honor (49:7; the identity of this servant is discussed in the commentary on 49:1).

President Wilford Woodruff said of Isaiah 49: "The revelations that are in the Bible, the predictions of the Patriarchs and Prophets who saw by vision and revelation the last dispensation and fullness of times, plainly tell us what is to come to pass. The 49th chapter of Isaiah is having its fulfillment." [^1]

Isa. 49:1-7

[Hearken, O ye house of Israel, all ye that are broken off and are driven out because of the wickedness of the pastors of my people; yea, all ye that are broken off, that are scattered abroad, who are of my people, O house of Israel.] [^2] Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; The Lord hath called me from the womb; from the [womb] [^3] of my mother hath he made mention of my name. (49:1) And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of his hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver hath he hid me; (49:2) And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified. (49:3) Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought, and in vain: . . . [^4] surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. (49:4) And now, saith the Lord that formed me from the womb [that I should] [^5] be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him— Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. (49:5) And he said, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob , and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth. (49:6) Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, . . . his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the[nation[s] abhorreth, to . . . servant of rulers, Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because of the Lord that is faithful. . . . [^6] (49:7)

Notes and Commentary

49:1 broken off/driven out/scattered abroad. Members of the house of Israel have been broken off from the main group, as a branch is broken off a tree, and scattered around the world.

wickedness of the pastors. The pastors who should have cared for Israel as spiritual leaders have instead led her astray.

isles. This word refers not only to islands but also to the continents of the earth (2 Ne. 10:20). It may also mean any place not immediately accessible to Israel by land.

hath called me. The one called is God's servant, Israel, as we learn in 49:3 (43:1; 48:12). The name Israel, however, may be symbolic for another servant (Jesus Christ, Isaiah, Joseph Smith, another prophet, the tribe of Ephraim, or each of these in turn).

womb/womb of my mother. This expression suggests foreordination, an experience similar to that of Jeremiah recorded in Jer. 1:4-5 (44:2, 24; 49:5).

name. The Lord knows us individually; he knows our names, thoughts, intents, and all our deeds. The Lord also knows us by the covenant names Israel and Christ. In addition, he made mention of my name could mean that, as well as being foreordained, the servant has been mentioned in prophecy.

49:2 mouth like a sharp sword. This term refers to the power of the message brought by God's servant. It is an expression common in revelation (Heb. 4:12; Rev. 1:16; D&C 6:2, for example). Nephi spoke of the truth cutting people "to the very center" (1 Ne. 16:2).

shadow of his hand. A place of ultimate safety (51:16).

in his quiver hath he hid me. This phrase may refer to God's protection: God may have hidden the servant from the knowledge of the world, or He may have sheltered him from harm. Alternatively, the Lord's covenant with Abraham declares that even though Abraham's righteous seed were lost, or hid, from the world, both literally and figuratively (D&C 86:8-9), God knows where they are and protects them "in the shadow of his hand . . . in his quiver."

sharp sword/polished shaft/quiver. Through God's power, the servant is fully prepared and ready for the accomplishment of his mission. Though lacking sharpness of himself, he will be refined and "polished" by the Lord. Joseph Smith referred to this prophecy in relation to himself: "I am like a huge, rough stone rolling down from a high mountain; and the only polishing I get is when some corner gets rubbed off by coming in contact with something else, striking with accelerated force against religious bigotry, priestcraft, . . . corrupt men and women—all hell knocking off a corner here and a corner there. Thus I will become a smooth and polished shaft in the quiver of the Almighty." [^7] Joseph Smith also applied phrases from this verse to his brother Hyrum, [^8] and they could be applied to anyone who is polished to the point of having his or her calling and election made sure.

49:3 my servant . . . Israel. This servant was introduced in 41:8-9 and 42:19. Israel comprises the literal and spiritual descendants of Abraham, specifically the members of the Church (D&C 103:17; 132:30). For more on the servant's identity, see commentary on 49:1, hath called me. For other references to Israel as God's servant, see 43:10; 44:1, 2, 21; 45:4; 48:20.

I will be glorified. God's glory or brightness increases when we come to the blessings of immortality and eternal life (Moses 1:39). Those who help to promote God's work contribute to God's glory.

49:4 laboured in vain/spent my strength for nought. The servant laments that the people will not listen to him, but he acknowledges that God is his judge and ultimately it is He whom the servant must seek to please.

judgment is with the Lord. Perfect judgment is one of God's characteristics, and he reserves to himself the right to render judgment on the earth.

49:5 formed me from the womb. See commentary on 49:1, womb.

bring Jacob again. This passage refers to the gathering, both physically and spiritually, of the descendants of Jacob.

shall I be glorious. We become glorious—bright and shining in righteousness— through the Lord, who shines through us (49:3). As we become glorious through him, we please him and become glorious in his eyes.

God/my strength. God is the source of our power and prosperity (Ps. 81:1; 84:5). Contrast this statement with 49:4, in which the servant says that he has spent his strength in vain.

49:6 a light thing. This term means "a small matter." The New International Version clarifies the meaning of this verse: "It is too small a thing for you to be my servant to restore the tribes of Jacob and bring back those of Israel I have kept. I will also make you a light for the Gentiles, that you may bring my salvation to the ends of the earth." In other words, the Lord has a much greater work for the servant than to simply bless Israel—the servant is destined to bless the whole earth.

raise up. In this context raise up refers to bringing forth or lifting up through the covenant.

tribes of Jacob. The twelve tribes of Israel are also called the tribes of Jacob.

preserved of Israel. This term may refer to those who have remained true to God, who have been preserved in faith, or it may mean those in the last days who are delivered from spiritual bondage and restored to the blessings of the gospel covenant.

light to the Gentiles. God's servant not only will gather and restore the descendants of Abraham but will also reach out to the Gentiles. Thus salvation will reach "unto the end of the earth." The light to the Gentiles is variously defined in the scriptures as Jesus Christ (42:6-7; Luke 2:32), the priesthood (D&C 86:11), and Zion (60:3). If the servant referred to in this section is not the Messiah himself, he certainly will shine with the light of the Messiah.

end of the earth. "Every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people" (Rev. 14:6; 1 Ne. 19:16; D&C 133:37).

49:7 him whom man despiseth/nations abhorreth/servant of rulers/Kings . . . arise/princes . . . worship. In a great contrast, men despise the servant, showing their lack of respect for the Master (Luke 10:16), but kings will yet arise in respect to him (Judg. 3:20) and princes will worship him (49:23; 60:3, 11, 16). These may well be kings and princes (or priests) before God, having received the fulness of the priesthood in the temple.

faithful. The Lord keeps all his promises; he never fails.

Israel's Return in the Last Days (49:8-12)

Isa. 49:8-12 describes the time of the gathering of Israel from her long dispersal. The gathering will take two forms: first, descendants of Abraham (both literal and adoptive) throughout the world will hear the gospel message and will enter into the Abrahamic covenant through baptism. Second, the covenant people (members of the Church and the Jews) will eventually gather to New and Old Jerusalem.

The gathering will come when the Lord hears the cries of scattered Israel (49:8). In that day ("a day of salvation"; 49:8) he will help them return to their land of promise, both spiritually and temporally. That day began with the opening of the last dispensation. Israel will receive again her ancient inheritance of land, which has become "desolate" because of the wars and judgments of the last days (49:8).

Israel has been in a form of spiritual prison ("darkness") because of the loss of the truth; her people have also often been in physical bondage to foreign nations (49:9). But on her return, they will go forth in the care of the Lord ("feed in the ways, . . . not hunger nor thirst: . . . he that hath mercy on them shall lead them"; 49:9-10). In gathering to Zion, Israel will receive of living water and the bread of life ("not hunger nor thirst," "springs of water"; 49:10). Israel will be led by the Lord ("he . . . shall lead them";["[he] shall . . . guide them"; 49:10). Her people will receive the blessings of the temple ("high places," "mountains," "highways shall be exalted"; 49:9, 11).

The covenant people will be gathered from all parts of the earth: "from far," "from the north," "from the west," "from the land of Sinim" (49:12).

Isa. 49:8-12

Thus saith the Lord, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, [O isles of the sea,] [^9] and in a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and give thee [my servant] for a covenant of the people, [^10] to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages; (49:8) That thou mayest say to the prisoners, Go forth; to them that [sit] in darkness, [Show] yourselves. [^11] They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all high places. (49:9) They shall not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor [the] [^12] sun smite them: for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them. (49:10) And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be exalted. (49:11) [And then, O house of Israel,] [^13] behold, these shall come from far: and, lo, these from the north and from the west; and these from the land of Sinim. (49:12)

Notes and Commentary

49:8 acceptable time/day of salvation. This phrase speaks of the period and the specific time when the Lord chooses to do his work. At least one fulfillment of this expression came in the meridian dispensation, when Paul wrote, "Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation" (2 Cor. 6:2). Another time of fulfillment appears to be the last days, when Israel is gathered.

my servant for a covenant. The existence and work of the servant is a sign that God is fulfilling his covenant with the people (42:6-7; see commentary on 49:1, hath called me, for the possible identity of the servant).

establish the earth. The New International Version and the Jerusalem Bible translate this phrase as "restore the land": Israel's rightful inheritance will be restored to her. The Lord's people—and his servant—will establish his kingdom in the earth.

inherit the desolate heritages. Israel will inherit her promised land, though it has been made desolate. Desolate often refers to the destruction of the temple—the blessings of which will be restored to the Lord's people.

49:9 prisoners/in darkness. This term may refer to those in the spirit prison (D&C 128:22) or in spiritual bondage (42:22; 1 Ne. 22:12; see also Ps. 146:7-8).

feed in the ways/pastures . . . in all high places. Those who are physically gathered from lands of oppression will be cared for by the Lord. Those brought forth from spiritual prisons, on earth and in the spirit world, will be nourished with the word of life. High places signify barren hillsides—even these will provide sufficient sustenance for the Lord's flock. High places also signify temples, in which the faithful will find an abundance of spiritual food. He who has power to so bless his flock is the Savior. As the psalmist said: "The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters" (Ps. 23:1-2).

49:10 not hunger nor thirst/neither shall the heat/sun smite them. This passage refers to the Lord's blessings to those who are returning from exile, as well as to those returning from spiritual bondage. Whether in physical or spiritual captivity, they suffer both hunger and thirst, and the heat and sun threaten them; in their deliverance the Lord protects and nourishes them. In all circumstances, it is only through Christ that our spiritual hunger can be satisfied (John 6:35; Alma 31:38; 32:42; 3 Ne. 12:6; 20:8).

springs of water. This term symbolizes living water (35:6-7; 41:17-18; 43:19- 20), or Jesus Christ.

49:11 mountains a way/highways shall be exalted. The Lord will open the way for the return of the exiles from captivity, as well as the return of those who are captives to sin (35:8-10; 40:3; 62:10). A possible alternative meaning is that the mountain that is the temple will mark an exalted way for the Saints to walk.

49:12 come from far/north/west. Israel was scattered to all parts of the earth, from whence she shall return (Luke 13:29; 3 Ne. 20:13).

land of Sinim. This phrase may refer to Syene, in southern Egypt, also known as Aswan, where there was a large Jewish colony after the Exile. Or it may refer to the desert of Sin, which is in the peninsula of Sinai. The point is that the Lord will gather his people from wherever they have been scattered. The same is true spiritually. The Lord will find us wherever we are and bring us back to our inheritance, if we will hearken to him and do our part.

The Lord Comforts His Returning Children (49:13-21)

The gathering of Israel will be an occasion of great joy for both heaven and earth ("Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth"; 49:13) and a great blessing to those gathered ("smitten no more; for the Lord hath comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted"; 49:13).

Despite these promises, the people of Israel feel that they have been forgotten by the Lord (49:14). In tender expressions of love, the Lord assures them that he has not forgotten (49:15). He compares himself to a loving mother and says his love for his covenant people are found in the marks on his hands (49:16). Though a mother may forget her child, the Lord will hold his children in remembrance forever.

In the gathering, the descendants of Israel ("thy children"; 49:17) will come in great numbers (49:19-20). Though many may be lost through the dispersal and through apostasy, in the gathering, Zion will multiply with many inhabitants, so many that she will require more space to dwell in than before. Israel, who has felt abandoned and desolate, will be amazed to see so many descendants (49:21).

These prophecies have an application both for the Jews and for those who enter the Lord's covenant through baptism into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Lord will never forget his promises to the Jews and will bring them back to the land of Palestine in great numbers. The Lord will also make good on his promises to other people throughout the world, sending forth missionaries and bringing into the fold all who will come.

Isa. 49:13-21

Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; [for the feet of those who are in the east shall be established;] [^14] and break forth into singing, O mountains: [for they shall be smitten no more;] [^15] for the Lord hath comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted. (49:13) But, [behold,] Zion [hath] said, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me[—but he will show that he hath not]. [^16] (49:14) [For] can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, [O house of Israel]. [^17] (49:15) Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before me. (49:16) Thy children shall make haste [against] [^18] thy destroyers[;] and they that made thee waste shall go forth [from] thee. (49:17) Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all these gather themselves together, and [they shall] come to thee. [And] as I live, saith the Lord, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on [even] as a bride . . . [^19] (49:18) For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away. (49:19) The children [whom] thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the [first], shall . . . again in thine ears [say], [^20] The place is too [constricting] [^21] for me: give place to me that I may dwell. (49:20) Then shalt thou say in thine heart, Who hath begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro? and who hath brought up these? Behold, I was left alone; these, where had they been? (49:21)

Notes and Commentary

49:13 Sing, O heavens/be joyful, O earth/break forth into singing, O mountains. The very creations of God will rejoice at the salvation he will send forth (44:23; 52:9-10; 55:12; D&C 128:22-23).

those who are in the east/mountains. Those in the east may be the Israelites in Jerusalem; mountains may refer to Zion in America. The heavens and the earth shall join in rejoicing when the Lord's people in both his capital cities are protected, comforted, and established.

his people/his afflicted. The Lord's people are afflicted because of their dispersion and long exile. They also are afflicted spiritually as a consequence of sin, but through the Atonement the Lord will comfort and be merciful to the repentant, who are truly the Lord's people.

49:14 Zion. Zion can refer to the Lord's people or to a geographical location. In this context it seems to refer to scattered Israel, who felt that God had forgotten her.

The Lord hath forsaken me. So many millennia have passed since the Lord made his promises that the people of the covenant feel the Lord has turned his back on them (compare Gideon's expression in Judg. 6:13). When we as individuals have such feelings, we can lay claim to these same assurances.

49:15 woman forget her sucking child/son of her womb. It seems unlikely that a loving mother would ever forget her precious baby, the son of her womb. Unfortunately, even such powerful love as that can be transitory. But the Lord's love is ever constant—he will never fail us (43:4; 44:21; 46:3-4).

49:16 graven thee/palms of my hands. This phrase refers to the crucifixion of Christ, in which nails pierced his hands and left scars that remained after his resurrection (Luke 24:38-40; 3 Ne. 11:13-14). These nail marks are a sign to Israel—and to the world—that Christ has indeed fulfilled his mission as Savior (22:23, 25; John 20:25; 3 Ne. 11:14-15; D&C 6:37; 45:48). Marks in the palm of the hand are also a constant reminder to the Savior, who bears those marks and is always mindful of us.

walls/before me. The walls of Jerusalem are ever present in the consciousness of those who dwell in the city. In the same way, an awareness of Israel is ever present with the Lord (60:18).

49:17 Thy children shall make haste against thy destroyers. The children are the descendants of ancient Israel. The destroyers are the nations that attacked and captured ancient Israel. In the days when Israel shall be restored to her former blessings, the descendants of ancient Israel will quickly turn against their ancient enemies. This passage may also refer to the success the faithful of Israel will have against those who would destroy them spiritually—including Satan and his followers.

made thee waste/go forth. Those who conquered and wasted Israel will depart.

49:18 clothe/ornament. As additional souls are gathered unto Zion, they will add to the glory of those already there. As fine clothing or expensive jewelry are to a bride, so will the souls of those gathered be to the Church.

bind/bride. In Zion, we bind ourselves to others with a bond of charity. This binding, which brings us to union and oneness, is the very essence of Zion. Binding might also refer to the ordinance of sealing. In various scriptures, the bride is depicted as being the Saints (61:10), the Church (D&C 109:73-74), and the New Jerusalem (Rev. 21:2). In this verse, the bride represents those who join Zion.

49:19 waste/desolate places/narrow. Israel's promised land has been laid waste and made empty, but when the gathering occurs, the available land will be too small for the great influx of those who are gathered (54:1-3). The waste places of Zion are symbolic of Israel's loss—both spiritual and physical—that shall be restored (58:12; D&C 101:75; 103:11). The restoration of the waste places thus brings joy and comfort (51:3; 52:9).

they that swallowed thee . . . far away. Israel's enemies, or our spiritual enemies, will be far from us.

49:20 children. Those who come unto Zion are God's children.

lost the first. The first were the earlier generations of Israel; some of these fell away in apostasy, and others were carried away into captivity.

constricting. Constricting gives the sense of narrow, small, crowded, restricted.

49:21 lost my children. This phrase may refer to Israel's captivity or to apostasy.

desolate/captive. Possible interpretations include Jerusalem's being made desolate and Israel taken captive; Jerusalem's losing her temple and becoming captive to spiritual death; and the world's becoming victim to spiritual desolation and captivity.

Gentiles Shall Assist Returning Israel (49:22-26)

In the gathering, the Lord will provide loving caretakers to help Israel on her way. "The Gentiles . . . shall bring thy sons in their arms, . . . and kings shall be thy nursing fathers" (49:22-23). These people of power, rather than requiring that Israel bow down to them, "shall bow down" to Israel, giving great respect and honor to the returning children of Israel (49:23). These gentiles and kings and queens will "know that I am the Lord" (49:23) and that returning Israel is on the Lord's errand. Even those who are "captives" will come (49:24). The Lord will take them away from their captors, and he will "contend with him that contendeth with thee" (49:25). Captives might be those in bondage to political systems, to false religions, or to sin.

Apparently during this same time there will be great and devastating civil wars on the earth (49:26). As a result of God's judgments, all the earth will know that Jehovah is the Savior (49:26).

Isa. 49:22-26

Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people: and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders. (49:22) And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their [ace[s][toward[s] [^22] the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord: for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me. (49:23) [For] shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful[captive[s] delivered? [^23] (49:24) But thus saith the Lord, Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered; for [the Mighty God shall deliver his covenant people. For thus saith the Lord:] . . . I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children. [^24] (49:25) And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; and [^25] they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine: and all flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob. (49:26)

Notes and Commentary

49:22 lift up mine hand. This phrase may signify the Lord's lifting his right arm in covenant, stretching forth his hand to accomplish his work, or perhaps reaching out to invite the Gentiles to come unto him (5:26; 13:2; see Gen. 14:22; Deut. 32:39-40).

Gentiles. Gentiles are all those who are not of Israel, with Israel being either the literal descendants of Jacob or those who have come spiritually unto the God of Jacob.

standard. A standard is a flag or ensign that serves as a rallying point around which people may gather. The scriptures define the standard as God's words (specifically, the Book of Mormon; 2 Ne. 29:2), the everlasting covenant (D&C 45:9), the great Zion of the last days (D&C 64:41-43), and the light of the righteous or the Church and its faithful members (D&C 115:3-5). Overall, the standard is the true gospel and church of Jesus Christ (5:26; 11:10-12; 62:10; Zech. 9:16).

49:22-23 thy sons/thy daughters/kings/queens. Nephi comments on 49:22-23 in 1 Ne. 22:6-9, explaining that the Gentiles will bless his seed both temporally (meaning with physical nourishment) and spiritually (with spiritual nourishment, the gospel). Jacob casts a different light on this prophecy of Isaiah. In 2 Ne. 10:5-9 he explains that when the Jews come to believe in Christ, they will be "gathered in from their long dispersion, . . . and the nations of the Gentiles shall be great in the eyes of me, saith God, in carrying them forth to the lands of their inheritance. Yea, the kings of the Gentiles shall be nursing fathers unto them, and their queens shall become nursing mothers" (see also 45:14; 49:7; 60:4).

One interpretation of these words was given by Elder Spencer W. Kimball: "The brighter day has dawned. The scattering has been accomplished; the gathering is in process. May the Lord bless us all as we become nursing fathers and mothers (see Isa. 49:23 and 1 Ne. 21:23) unto our Lamanite brethren and hasten the fulfillment of the great promises made to them." [^26] The kings and queens may well be the righteous men and women who have entered into the covenants of the fulness of the priesthood in the temple of God.

49:23 bow down/faces towards the earth/lick up the dust. In the ancient Near East, these actions were signs of submission to a king or ruler (Gen. 42:6; 1 Sam. 24:8; Ps. 72:8-11; 2 Ne. 6:13). In times past, Israel was repeatedly conquered and forced to submit to the kings of the earth. But in the last days kings and queens will bow in obeisance and submission to the children of Israel.

not be ashamed that wait for me. Those who wait for the Lord are those who trust patiently in his plan. Their faith will be vindicated; they will not be ashamed that they believed, because all God's promises are fulfilled. The psalmist said, "O my God, I trust in thee: . . . let none that wait on thee be ashamed" (Ps. 25:2-3).

49:24 the prey/mighty/captives. The context of 49:24 tells us that prey/captives refers to God's "covenant people," who are in bondage to the gentiles. The mighty (called "the terrible" in 49:25) could also refer to Satan, who makes us his captives when we sin. The prey shall indeed be "taken from the mighty," by God, who is mightier than all.

lawful captives. The description of being made captive by legal right may suggest that Israel was taken legitimately according to the rules of warfare, or that she is captive to Satan according to the law of justice. But, in his mercy, God's claim to his children supersedes the claims of all others.

49:25 captives/the prey. See commentary on 49:24.

thy children. The descendants of the Israelites are thy children.

49:26 feed/own flesh/drunken/own blood. In 1 Ne. 22:13, Nephi tells us that in the last days the great and abominable church "shall war among themselves, and the sword of their own hands shall fall upon their own heads, and they shall be drunken with their own blood." In the next verse, he explains that the same fate will befall "every nation which shall war against thee, O house of Israel"; they "shall be turned one against another, and they shall fall into the pit which they digged to ensnare the people of the Lord." Scriptural instances of kingdoms that have turned against themselves include Egypt (19:2), Babylon (Ezek. 38:21; Zech. 14:13), and, of course, the Jaredites (Ether 14-15).

all flesh. This term may refer to all human beings (Ezek. 21:4-5; D&C 63:5-6; 84:97) or even all members of the animal kingdom (Gen. 6:17, 19; Lev. 17:14). Perhaps the Lord's manifestation of power will be so great that all creatures will know he is God.

Saviour/Redeemer/Mighty One of Jacob. These three titles of Jehovah signify his power to rescue and succor us from death and sin (Savior), to ransom us and purchase us from the demands of justice (Redeemer), and to deliver us from all our enemies (Mighty One).

---
Notas:
[^1] The changes in the first part of this verse appear in the JST and 2 Ne. 7:1.
[^2] The many changes in this verse are found in both the JST and 2 Ne. 7:2. They are identical with only one exception: The 2 Ne. reading includes the yea on the second line; the JST does not.
[^3] Millennial Messiah, 39.
[^4] This verse has been changed from the KJV in both the JST and 2 Ne. 7:4, though some punctuation differs between the two.
[^5] The changes shown are found in the JST; 2 Ne. 7:5 reads the same as the KJV.
[^6] 2 Ne. 7:6 changes the KJV smiters to singular smiter.
[^7] The changes to this verse are from the JST and 2 Ne. 7:8.
[^8] The changes in this verse are found in both the JST and 2 Ne. 7:9.
[^9] Young, Book of Isaiah, 3:300.
[^10] Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:439.
[^11] This verse, which is quoted in 2 Ne. 7:10, omits the final phrase from the KJV reading.
[^12] The changes to this verse are from the JST and 2 Ne. 7:11.
[^13] This addition is found in 1 Ne. 21:12.
[^14] This addition is found in 1 Ne. 21:13.
[^15] This addition is found in 1 Ne. 21:13.
[^16] The changes in this verse are from 1 Ne. 21:14.
[^17] The changes in this verse are from 1 Ne. 21:15.
[^18] 1 Ne. 21:17 introduces against and the semicolon after destroyers. In the process, the meaning is changed and clarified. The KJV punctuation suggests that thy children shall make haste against both the destroyers and they that made thee waste, leaving shall go forth of thee as a confusing clause with uncertain meaning. With the Book of Mormon punctuation, the last clause is made separate and independent.
[^19] The changes in this verse are from 1 Ne. 21:18.
[^20] The changes in this verse are from 1 Ne. 21:20.
[^21] This word replaces the KJV strait.
[^22] The changes in this verse are from 1 Ne. 21:23 and 2 Ne. 6:7.
[^23] The changes in this verse are from 1 Ne. 21:24 and 2 Ne. 6:16.
[^24] In 1 Ne. 21:25, this verse appears without change from KJV. The changes shown in this verse appear in the JST and, in part, in 2 Ne. 6:17.
[^25] 1 Ne. 21:26 omits this and; 2 Ne. 6:18, KJV and JST all retain it.
[^26] Conference Report, Oct. 1965, 72.
