Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 50

Likening Isa. 50 unto Ourselves

Even if we of the Church, as the bride of Christ, have not kept faith with the Lord, yet he will not cast us off or put us away. We are separated from God, but Isaiah promises that there is One who has the power of reconciliation. This restoration to a union with God is made possible by the atonement of Jesus Christ, who submitted himself to shame and pain, both physical and emotional, so that he could bless us. If we will fear the Lord and obey his servants, we will have his light.

Israel Is Faithless, Despite God's Power (50:1-3)

The Lord introduces the image of a marriage between God and Israel, with Israel (or the Church) being the bride and the Lord being the bridegroom (this metaphor is repeated in 62:4-5). The Lord speaks of the practice of a husband["put[ting] away" his wife by giving her a legal bill of divorcement (50:1). The law of Moses required that a husband give his wife such a "bill," or certificate, for a divorce to be valid (Deut. 24:1-4). But there is no such bill in this case. The Lord has not divorced Israel. He also speaks of Israel as his children, asking to which creditor he has sold them. In ancient Israel, a creditor could take a debtor's children and sell them into slavery to pay the debt (Ex. 21:7-8; 2 Kgs. 4:1; Neh. 5:1-5). The Lord assures Israel that he has not sold her (50:1).

But though the Lord (the husband) has been constant, Israel (the wife) has removed herself from his presence by sin (50:1). Because of this, "when [the Lord] came, there was no man" to meet him; and when he called, "there was none to answer" (50:2).

God has power to redeem and to deliver, just as he has all power over the elements (50:2-3). He will render both mercy and justice, according to our faith and our works.

Isa. 50:2-3 are repeated, with changes, in D&C 133:66-69, which puts this passage in the context of the Second Coming.

Isa. 50:1-3

[Yea, for thus saith the Lord: Have I put thee away, or have I cast thee off forever? For] thus saith the Lord, Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement? [To] whom [have I] put [thee] away, or [to] which of my creditors . . . [have I sold you? Yea,] to whom [have I] sold you? [^1] Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away. (50:1) Wherefore, when I came, [there was] no man? when I called, [yea,] [there was] none to answer? [O house of Israel,] is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem, or have I no power to deliver? Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make [their] rivers a wilderness [and] their fish [to] [stink], because [the waters are dried up], and [they die because of] thirst. [^2] (50:2) I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their covering. (50:3)

Notes and Commentary

50:1 put thee away/cast thee off. Under Jewish law a husband separated from or divorced his wife by putting her away or casting her off. The Lord affirms that Israel had been put away, but it was Israel that turned away, not the Lord.

bill of your mother's divorcement. According to the law of Moses, a man could not divorce his wife without presenting her with a legal bill of divorcement (Deut. 24:1-4). At one point the Lord actually did separate himself from ancient Israel, as Jeremiah declared: "When for all the causes whereby backsliding Israel committed adultery I had put her away, and given her a bill of divorce" (Jer. 3:8). Perhaps the Lord's reassurances here apply to latter-day Israel (54:6-8; see Hosea 2:4-9).

creditors . . . have I sold you. It was the custom in ancient Israel for some creditors to take the children of their debtors and sell them as slaves for payment of an overdue debt (Ex. 21:7-8; Neh. 5:1-5; Matt. 18:25). But the Lord has no creditors— he is in debt to no one—and he has not sold Israel into slavery. Ultimately, God and Israel are separated because of Israel's choices, not God's.

sold yourselves/put away. The children of Israel have sold themselves into the bondage of sin. And the mother has been set aside, or divorced, because of unfaithfulness. Perhaps the children here represent the sons and daughters of the covenant, and perhaps the mother represents the nation of Israel as a whole.

50:2 no man. When Jehovah came to apostate Israel, there was no one to receive him. Unfortunately, in every generation there are few or even none to receive the Lord.

I called/none to answer. Too many of Israel were like Amulek before he repented: "I was called many times and I would not hear" (Alma 10:6).

hand shortened. The scriptures testify repeatedly of God stretching out his hand to deliver his people. His hand is indeed stretched out, not shortened (59:1-2; Num. 11:23), or inadequate to save.

50:2-3 dry up the sea/rivers a wilderness/fish to stink/waters are dried up/clothe the heavens with blackness. The Lord uses these as examples of his power. These phrases may refer to drought and to the smoke of war (which, although perpetrated by man, can also be a judgment of God) that obscures the sky, and they remind us of the miracles of Moses in Egypt (Ex. 7:18-21; 10:21; 14:26). They may also refer not only to events of the past but also to the Second Coming, an event of the future (Rev. 6:12; 8:12; D&C 45:42; 133:66). The Lord gave the same prophecy through Jeremiah (Jer. 51:36). Just as the Lord has great power over the elements, so also does he have power to redeem and deliver.

50:3 heavens/blackness. The dark sky heralds the coming judgments, as well as Christ's second coming. As the Lord said in Matthew 24: "Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken: And then . . . they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory" (Matt. 24:29-30; see D&C 29:11-14; 45:39). Perhaps earthquakes and volcanic activity in the last days will cover the heavens with blackness.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie gave another interpretation: "'I clothe the heavens with blackness' (Isa. 50:3), and there is no more revelation. . . . Thus saith our God. Such is his promise, spoken prophetically of our day. And here, given in modern times, is his announcement that as he spake, so has it come to pass: 'Verily, verily, I say unto you, darkness covereth the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the people, and all flesh has become corrupt before my face.' (D&C 112:23)." [^3]

sackcloth. Sackcloth is the clothing of mourning. Here, the darkness of the heavens may symbolize the mourning of the wicked at the second coming of Christ. Or it may symbolize the mourning of the righteous, and of the heavens and earth.

Prophecies of the Messiah (50:4-9)

Isa. 50:4-9 is known as a "servant song." (Other servant songs are found in 42:1-9; 49:1-7; 52:13-15; 53:1-12.) The servant in this case seems to be Christ in the meridian of time. As the headnote to this chapter in the LDS edition to the Bible says, "Isaiah speaks Messianically—Messiah shall have the tongue of the learned." These verses also apply to Isaiah or to any true servant of the Lord who obeys despite persecution.

The Lord enables the servant to speak and hear as a learned one does (50:4). This servant is faithful, "not rebellious" (50:5). He submits himself to the persecutions that come: "I gave my back to the smiter. . . . I hid not my face from shame and spitting" (50:6). He trusts in the Lord: "The Lord God will help me," he says (50:7, 9). He knows that his life and ministry please the Lord: "The Lord is near, and he justifieth me" (50:8). At the same time, the servant knows that his enemies will not stand: "I will smite him with the strength of my mouth . . . the moth shall eat them up" (50:8, 9).

This passage stands in contrast to earlier ones. Here, the servant receives the Lord's word (50:4); earlier, "no man" would listen (50:2). Here, the servant is confident in the Lord's help (50:7-9); earlier, the people doubted the Lord's love and power (49:14, 21). Here, the servant suffers because he is obedient (50:5-6); earlier, the people suffered because of their iniquities (50:1-3). Here, the servant is innocent of all charges (50:8-9), with the Lord supporting him; earlier, the Lord is an accuser and the people are guilty (50:1). Of course, we can and should be like the servant, rather than the sinful people; the servant is an example and model for us all.

Isa. 50:4-9

The Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season [unto thee, O house of Israel. When ye are] weary he [waketh] morning by morning. He [waketh] mine ear to hear as the learned. [^4] (50:4) The Lord God hath appointed mine ears, [^5] and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back. (50:5) I gave my back to the [smiter], [^6] and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting. (50:6) For the Lord God will help me; therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. (50:7) [And the Lord] is near, [and he] justifieth me; who will contend with me? Let us stand together. Who is mine adversary? Let him come near . . . me, [and I will smite him with the strength of my mouth.] [^7] (50:8) [For] the Lord God will help me. [And all they who shall condemn me, behold,] they all shall wax old as a garment [and] the moth shall eat them up. [^8] (50:9)

Notes and Commentary

50:4 tongue of the learned/know how to speak. The Lord has blessed the servant with knowledge and eloquence. His speaking ability is in marked contrast to that of Enoch (Moses 6:31), Moses (Ex. 4:10), and Jeremiah (Jer. 1:6).

speak a word in season. The servant delivers the word of the Lord to those he serves. The Lord enables the servant to speak the right words at the right time.

weary/waketh morning by morning. Though Israel would rather slumber spiritually, the Lord repeatedly awakens her to his word of truth and righteousness. Or the he in this verse may refer to the servant rather than the Lord. As a contrasting interpretation, then, the servant speaks to those who are weary because of the burdens of the world, offering daily comfort and blessings. Contrast these verses with Isa. 28:11-12: "For with stammering lips and another tongue will he speak to this people. To whom he said, This is the rest wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest; and this is the refreshing."

waketh mine ear. The Lord speaks to the servant's responsive ear in continuing revelation.

hear as the learned. Those who know the most are most able to learn more. Through God's gift, the servant not only speaks as the learned do but hears (or learns) as the learned do as well.

50:5 appointed mine ears. The Lord speaks to the servant by revelation (1 1 Sam. 9:15; Job 36:10, 15).

turned away back. The servant did not turn from his appointed mission, nor did he turn off the strait and narrow path.

50:6 back/smiter/cheeks/plucked off the hair. The servant submitted himself to great insult for his testimony (Jer. 20:7-9). "The striking language calls to mind . . . the physical sufferings of our Lord (cf. Matt. 26:67ff; John 19:1ff). . . . Beating on the back would seem also to be the custom in [punishing] evil men (cf. Prov. 10:13; 19:29; 26:3; Ps. 129:3).

"In addition the servant gave his cheeks to those who pluck out the hair. . . . The Oriental regarded the beard as a sign of freedom and respect, and to pluck out the hair of the beard (for cheek in effect would refer to a beard) is to show utter contempt" [^9] (Neh. 13:25; 2 Sam. 10:5.).

hid not my face. The servant did not try to hide or escape from persecution. As Nephi wrote regarding Christ: "And the world, because of their iniquity, shall judge him to be a thing of naught; wherefore they scourge him, and he suffereth it; and they smite him, and he suffereth it. Yea, they spit upon him, and he suffereth it, because of his loving kindness and his long-suffering towards the children of men" (1 Ne. 19:9).

50:7 God will help/not be confounded. The servant knows that God will stand by him in his faithfulness (Jer. 1:18; Ezek. 3:8-9)—just as the Lord will stand by us, if we are faithful.

set my face like a flint. A sign of firmness or determination. Speaking of Jesus, Elder Bruce R. McConkie said: "The course of his life was toward the cross, and he was steadfast and immovable in his determination to follow this very course, one laid out for him by his Father. He had said of himself through the mouth of Isaiah, 'I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed.' (Isa. 50:7.) Clearly, there was to be no turning back." [^10]

50:7-8 not be ashamed/Lord . . . justifieth. The servant knows that the Lord will bring his prophecies to pass and will validate all he has done in his ministry (62:1).

50:8 contend/stand together/adversary/come near. In an ancient Middle Eastern civil court, the two opponents stood together to hear the judge's decision. In a criminal court, the accuser made the charge personally to the defendant. Here, the servant is persecuted from all sides, but "the Lord is near, and he justifieth me."

strength of my mouth. God's words, whether directly or through his servants, have great power, enabling the servant to overcome all his enemies (1 Ne. 17:26-31; Morm. 9:17; Ether 4:9; Moses 1:32; 6:47; 7:13).

50:9 wax old as a garment/moth shall eat them. The servant's enemies will slowly but surely be destroyed, even as clothing is destroyed by time and pests (51:6- 8; Job 13:28; Ps. 102:25-28).

Trust in the Lord (50:10-11)

Two classes of people are contrasted in these two verses. One class consists of those who fear the Lord and obey his servant (50:10). They will not walk in spiritual darkness but will have spiritual light (50:10). The other class consists of those who seek to be spiritually self-sufficient, relying on themselves instead of on God. They attempt to create their own light (50:11), but their efforts produce no more than sparks (50:11) when compared to the bright light that comes from God. Those in this group will eventually receive judgments from the Lord, resulting in sorrow (50:11).

Isa. 50:10-11

Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? [^11] (50:10) Behold, all ye that kindle . . . fire, that compass yourselves about with sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks [which] [^12] ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand—ye shall lie down in sorrow. (50:11)

Notes and Commentary

50:10 feareth the Lord/obeyeth . . . servant/walketh in darkness/no light. Isaiah asks who fears the Lord and obeys God's servant, yet still walks in darkness. The answer is, No one. Therefore, since Israel is walking by her own light rather than God's, her people were obviously not fearing God and obeying his servant.

walketh in darkness. Being without spiritual light is walking in darkness (58:8- 10; 59:9-10).

50:11 kindle . . . fire/sparks/walk in the light of your fire. This expression refers to those who walk in their own way, according to their own will, rather than according to the will and direction of the Lord. The Lord's will comes to us through the Holy Ghost, which ministers truth as by fire (D&C 9:8). Speaking to the people of our dispensation, the Lord said, "They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god" (D&C 1:16; 88:35).

Commenting on this chapter of Isaiah, Jacob said: "O that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish" (2 Ne. 9:28).

have of mine hand. This phrase refers to that which we receive from the Lord.

lie down in sorrow. Lie down probably means to die. Latter-day revelation gives us a valuable context for this passage, placing it in the last days at the time of the Second Coming: "Upon them that hearken not to the voice of the Lord shall be fulfilled that which was written by . . . the prophet Malachi: For, behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

"Wherefore, this shall be the answer of the Lord unto them: In that day when I came unto mine own, no man among you received me, and you were driven out. When I called again there was none of you to answer; yet my arm was not shortened at all that I could not redeem, neither my power to deliver. Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea. I make the rivers a wilderness; their fish stink, and die for thirst. I clothe the heavens with blackness, and make sackcloth their covering [note that this passage draws from Isa. 50:2-3]. And this shall ye have of my hand—ye shall lie down in sorrow.

"Behold, and lo, there are none to deliver you; for ye obeyed not my voice when I called to you out of the heavens; ye believed not my servants, and when they were sent unto you ye received them not. Wherefore, they sealed up the testimony and bound up the law, and ye were delivered over unto darkness. These shall go away into outer darkness, where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. Behold the Lord your God hath spoken it. Amen" (D&C 133:63-74; emphasis added. See Isa. 52:5, 8, 13).

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 297.
[^2] Millennial Messiah, 514-15.
[^3] The changes to this verse are from the JST and 2 Ne. 8:1.
[^4] The changes to this verse are from 2 Ne. 8:2.
[^5] The change to this verse is from 2 Ne. 8:4.
[^6] The change to this verse is from 2 Ne. 8:7.
[^7] History of the Church, 3:291.
[^8] See, for example, Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 1:72-73.
[^9] History of the Church, 6:477.
[^10] The changes in this verse are from 2 Ne. 8:9.
[^11] The change in this verse is from 2 Ne. 8:10.
[^12] This addition is found in the JST and in 2 Ne. 8:11.
