Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 53

Likening Isa. 53 unto Ourselves

Isa. 53 is one of the greatest prophecies of the Messiah found in the Old Testament. It gives us great insight into the work of the mortal Jesus and the blessings he offers us. We learn from this chapter that he will bear our transgressions and iniquities, taking them upon himself so that we can be cleansed of them. He will also bear our grief and sorrow, our emotional pain and suffering. If we will turn to him, he will heal us of all these infirmities.

This chapter also bears testimony that Christ will die, not for his own transgressions but for the transgressions of the people. He will submit in all things to the will of the Father. His offering will bear wonderful fruit, for many will be justified by him. We can be among that number if we will receive him and his covenant and walk in righteousness.

Suffering and Triumph of the Messiah (53:1-12)

Isa. 53 is often called the "Song of the Suffering Servant." Both Abinadi and Philip clearly tell us that the servant described here is Jesus Christ (Mosiah 15; Acts 8:26-35). Matthew, Peter, and Paul also understood that at least parts of this chapter referred to Jesus (Matt. 8:17; 1 Pet. 2:24-25; Rom. 4:25). The headnote to Isa. 53 in the LDS edition of the Bible says, "Isaiah speaks Messianically—Messiah's humiliation and sufferings set forth—He makes his soul an offering for sin and makes intercession for transgressors." This passage has four recurring themes: the Messiah's sufferings, his assumption of our burdens and our sins, his death, and his reward.

First, the Messiah's sufferings: "He is despised and rejected of men" (53:3). "He is . . . a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief" (53:3). "He was despised, and we esteemed him not" (53:3). "We did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted" (53:4). "He was wounded [and] bruised" (53:5). "He was oppressed, and he was afflicted" (53:7). "It pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief" (53:10). "He shall see the travail of his soul" (53:11).

Second, his assumption of our burdens and sins: "He hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows" (53:4). "He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities" (53:5). "The Lord hath laid on him the iniquities of us all" (53:6). "For the transgressions of my people was he stricken" (53:8). "He shall bear their iniquities" (53:11). "He bare the sin of many" (53:12).

Third, his death: "He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter" (53:7). "He was cut off out of the land of the living" (53:8). "He made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death" (53:9). "He hath poured out his soul unto death" (53:12).

Fourth, his reward: "He shall see his seed" (53:10). "He shall prolong his days" (53:10). "The pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand" (53:10). "He . . . shall be satisfied" (53:11). "Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great" (53:12). "He shall divide the spoil with the strong" (53:12).

Isa. 53:1-12

Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? (53:1) For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of . . . [^1] dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. (53:2) He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not. (53:3) Surely he [has] [^2] borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. (53:4) But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed. (53:5) All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the [iniquities] [^3] of us all. (53:6) He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he [opened] [^4] not his mouth. (53:7) He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the[transgression[s] [^5] of my people was he stricken. (53:8) And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no [evil], [^6] neither was any deceit in his mouth. (53:9) Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. (53:10) He shall see . . . [^7] the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities. (53:11) Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the [in[s] [^8] of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. (53:12)

Notes and Commentary

53:1 report. This term likely refers to the report of the prophets, or the revelation they have reported to the people about the life and mission of Christ. John observed that many did not believe the report about the works and mission of Christ: "Though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him: That the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spake, Lord, who hath believed our report? and to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed? Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias said again, He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart; that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them. These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spake of him" (John 12:37-41; Rom. 10:13-17).

arm of the Lord revealed. In Deut. 7:18-19, the acts of the Lord's arm (which represents his power) were seen, but the arm itself remained unseen. In the birth and ministry of Christ, the Lord's arm is visibly revealed.

53:2 tender plant. The Father would watch over the young Jesus as a careful gardener watches a tender plant. Luke records, "The child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom: and the grace of God was upon him" (Luke 2:40).

root. The root here is Christ himself. Christ is the vine, or root, and we are the branches (John 15:5). He came forth not in a fertile land but in dry ground, both temporally and spiritually.

dry ground. The spiritual barrenness of the Jewish apostasy. The dry ground is the opposite of streams of water, which usually denotes temporal happiness and prosperity. Streams of water also represent the spiritual life brought by the gospel.

no form nor comeliness/no beauty. Scholars conjecture that this passage refers not to the Savior's physical appearance but to the fact that Jesus would not come in the glorious manner the Jews were expecting. President Joseph Fielding Smith interpreted these words to mean that Jesus would look like an ordinary man and thus the Jews would not recognize him as the Son of God. [^9]

53:3 despised and rejected of men. Jesus was rejected by his community and the Jewish nation as a whole (Mark 9:12; Luke 4:28-30; John 1:11; 5:18; 7:5; 1 Ne. 19:7-10).

"Jesus had come unto his own, and his own received him not!" wrote Elder Bruce R. McConkie. "The leaders of the people rejected his words when he preached in the temple at Passover time. The common people of Nazareth hardened their hearts against his words when he spoke to them in their synagogue. And so it would be throughout his whole ministry; save for a few believing souls, he was 'despised and rejected of men' (Isa. 53:3) and eventually his own would . . . [c]rucify him." [^10]

hid . . . our faces. The Living Bible says, "We turned our backs on him and looked the other way when he went by." A note in the Jerusalem Bible says that this "expression was used of lepers." In other words, not only did people refuse to follow him but they shunned him. Even though many people followed Christ for a time, in the end most turned from him. The same is true of people in all ages—most ("we") turn from a full and correct understanding of Jesus Christ and his gospel.

despised/esteemed him not. Though Christ had a few who followed him and remained faithful to the end, most viewed him as one of no worth.

53:3-4 man of sorrows/borne our griefs/carried our sorrows. The mortal Jesus was surely filled with sorrow over the sin of the people of the world. He suffered sorrow in contemplating the fate of those who rejected him (Matt. 23:37-39). In addition, in the Garden of Gethsemane, he took upon himself our griefs and sorrows, as well as our sins. Through the atonement of Christ we can find peace in the midst of grief and trouble. It is because of the Atonement that the Comforter has power to accomplish his work of bringing solace to troubled souls. The word sorrows may also be translated pains; Christ carried our infirmities and sickness. As Matthew wrote,["[He] healed all that were sick: That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses" (Matt. 8:14-17). These infirmities and sicknesses, are, of course, both physical and spiritual.

53:4 stricken. This particular verb is used sixty times in Lev. 13 and 14, always with the same meaning—that of suffering the emotional pain of having leprosy. The Servant will be viewed with the same disdain as the Jews viewed a leper.

smitten of God/afflicted. It has been common in many ages for people to assume that someone who suffers is being punished by God. Those who see the Servant consider that he is being punished for sin. Ironically, they are correct, but it is not his own sin that causes him to suffer; rather, it is ours.

53:5 wounded for our transgressions/bruised for our iniquities. Wounded (Hebrew chalal) is better translated as "pierced fatally." Bruised (Hebrew daka') is more correctly "crushed." The Servant suffered these pains because of what we had done. President Ezra Taft Benson wrote:

"He suffered the pains of all men, . . . He suffered as only God could suffer, bearing our griefs, carrying our sorrows, being wounded for our transgressions, voluntarily submitting Himself to the iniquity of us all, just as Isaiah prophesied. (See Isa. 53:4-6.)

"It was in Gethsemane that Jesus took on Himself the sins of the world, in Gethsemane that His pain was equivalent to the cumulative burden of all men, in Gethsemane that He descended below all things so that all could repent and come to Him.

"The mortal mind fails to fathom, the tongue cannot express, the pen of man cannot describe the breadth, the depth, the height of the suffering of our Lord—nor His infinite love for us." [^11]

chastisement of our peace was upon him. This passage might read, "He suffered the chastisement that brings us peace." The suffering of his atonement, which Christ bore, brings us peace as we partake of the blessings of that atonement.

with his stripes we are healed. When Jesus was scourged by Pilate's men, the whip left stripes on his back (Matt. 27:24-26). With prophetic sight, Isaiah apparently saw that event, which he then used as a symbol of Christ's atoning sacrifice. The symbol is a paradox: through the wounding of one person, another's wounds are healed. Jesus is healer of our physical and mental infirmities as well as of our spiritual sicknesses. The risen Lord, who rose "with healing in his wings" (2 Ne. 25:13), invited the Nephites to "return unto me, and repent of your sins, and be converted, that I may heal you" (3 Ne. 9:13). Peter interpreted the purpose and result of Isa. 53:5-6 when he wrote: "Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes ye were healed. For ye were as sheep going astray; but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls" (1 Pet. 2:24-25).

53:6 All we like sheep have gone astray/own way. Every one of us has gone astray from the strait and narrow path; every soul who has ever lived—except for Jesus—has sinned (Rom. 3:23; 1 Pet. 2:25; 1 Jn. 1:8, 10). Rather than walking the Lord's path, we walk our own way.

laid on him the iniquities. This passage harks back to the meaning of the ritual of the Day of Atonement (Lev. 16), when the high priest laid his hand on the head of the victim and, in essence, transferred to him the sins of the people. Jesus suffered "for our offences" (Rom. 4:25), not his own.

53:7 oppressed/afflicted. Jesus was oppressed and afflicted throughout his ministry, as the Gospels record. But this passage seems to refer particularly to the legal trials he suffered immediately before his crucifixion (Matt. 26:67-68; 27:29).

he opened not his mouth. This prophecy was fulfilled when Jesus appeared before Herod, who "questioned with him in many words; but he answered him nothing" (Luke 23:9). When Jesus stood before Pilate, Mark records, "the chief priests accused him of many things: but he answered nothing. And Pilate asked him again, saying, Answerest thou nothing? behold how many things they witness against thee. But Jesus yet answered nothing" (Mark 15:3-5).

lamb to the slaughter. Not only is Christ the Good Shepherd (John 10:14) but he is also the sacrificial lamb, which went without protest or resistance to his death. This is in contrast to us, as the sheep of the previous verse, who willfully went astray. The sacrifice of an unblemished lamb under the law of Moses prefigured the atoning sacrifice of Christ (Gen. 22:7-8; Ex. 12:3; Lev. 5:7): the Atonement fulfills the symbolism of the lamb.

53:8 taken from prison/judgment. He was taken by force (Hebrew 'utser) and without justice (Hebrew mishepat).

who shall declare his generation? The New International Version renders this phrase as "who can speak of his descendants?" implying that because he was "cut off from the land of the living" he had none. But Jesus did indeed have descendants, those who become his children through righteousness; see the commentary on 53:10, he shall see his seed.

cut off. He was cut off, or removed, from the land of the living.

stricken. This word repeats the word used in verse 4. There, he was considered stricken by those who would not recognize him. Here, he truly is stricken as he bears on himself the "transgressions of my people."

53:9 grave with the wicked. This prophecy may have been fulfilled when Christ was crucified between two thieves (Matt. 27:38). It may also mean that his grave was with those who had sinned, unlike him, who had not sinned.

with the rich. This prophecy that Jesus would be buried with the rich was fulfilled when he was buried in the tomb of the wealthy Joseph of Arimathea (Matt. 27:57-60).

he had done no evil/deceit. Peter referred to Jesus as["[he] who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth" (1 Pet. 2:22). Jesus' life was perfect in deed and word. Even Jesus' judge, Pilate, declared he could find no fault in Jesus (Matt. 27:22- 24; Luke 23:1-4, 13-24).

53:10 pleased the Lord to bruise him. Certainly the Father took no pleasure from the suffering of his Son. But the Father was pleased that his Son would obediently offer such a sacrifice, meaning the sacrifice was according to the Father's wishes and his will. The Father was pleased further because of the love manifest by his Son and also because of the blessings that would come to the rest of his children.

he shall see his seed. Abinadi interpreted this expression in Mosiah 15:10-13, saying that the seed of Christ are the righteous who have heard the good word of salvation and believed and obeyed: "These are his seed, or they are the heirs of the kingdom of God. For these are they whose sins he has borne; these are they for whom he has died, to redeem them from their transgressions." Elsewhere we learn that the seed of Christ are those who are "spiritually begotten" as his sons and daughters (Mosiah 5:7), born of water and the Spirit (Moses 6:64-68). Beginning with this expression, we move from Isaiah's prophecy of the Lord's suffering to his prophecy of the Lord's triumph.

prolong his days. This expression means to lengthen his life. Isaiah has already written that Christ would be killed ("cut off out of the land of the living"); now he says Christ will have a long and prosperous life. This paradox contains a wonderful gospel truth: The righteous who die will enjoy a life of glory that never ends.

pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. Christ will exercise his agency to truly fulfill all the will of the Father.

53:11 travail of his soul. Jesus suffered so mightily in the Garden of Gethsemane in the process of bearing our iniquities that he bled from every pore (Luke 22:44; Mosiah 3:7; D&C 19:18). The suffering that Christ will undergo in performing the Atonement—which will result in his "seeing his seed," or those spiritually reborn in Christ—is likened to the travail, the pain and suffering, of a woman which precedes her being able to see her own seed, or her newborn child.

He . . . shall be satisfied. It is unclear whether the pronoun he in this sentence refers to the Father or to the Son. But ultimately it does not matter: Both the Father and the Son were well satisfied by what Jesus had accomplished in the Garden of Gethsemane.

his knowledge. The Lord would have the knowledge he needed to perform the Atonement, something that is simply beyond comprehension to the rest of us. Some scholars recognize this phrase as "experience," "humiliation," "suffering," "affliction."

righteous servant. Christ the Lamb was a perfect and unblemished sacrifice.

justify. This word means accounted righteous, or judged, in a legal sense, to be innocent. We will not be justified, or accounted righteous, through our own merits but because of the sufferings of Christ. Paul wrote that by Christ "all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses" (Acts 13:38-39). Lehi taught, "The law is given unto men. And by the law no flesh is justified; or, by the law men are cut off. . . . Wherefore, redemption cometh in and through the Holy Messiah; for he is full of grace and truth" (2 Ne. 2:5-6).

bear their iniquities. Christ carries their sins metaphorically on his shoulders. This use of bear is the same as that in 53:4, "hath borne our griefs." The Israelite high priest symbolically bore the sins of Israel (Lev. 10:17), pointing forward to Christ's atonement.

53:12 divide him a portion/the spoil. As conqueror, Christ has won the right to the rewards of his efforts. The portion he will receive is to be an heir of God, receiving all the Father hath. So also do all the righteous (D&C 84:37-38), but on Christ's merits, not their own.

great/strong. Christ's portion among the great and strong ones is the first and greatest.

numbered with the transgressors. Mark referred to this prophecy when he wrote: "And with him they crucify two thieves; the one on his right hand, and the other on his left. And the scripture was fulfilled, which saith, And he was numbered with the transgressors" (Mark 15:27-28; Luke 22:37).

poured out his soul unto death. The scriptures suggest that pouring out the soul is to experience great pain and sorrow (Job 30:16; Lam. 2:12), which Christ experienced unto death. Another interpretation may be based on the idea of pouring out the soul in prayer (1 Sam. 1:15; Enos 1:9; Alma 19:14; Hel. 7:14). When we pour out our souls in prayer, we express our deepest, most heartfelt desires to the Lord, holding nothing back. So it was with Christ—and as he poured out his soul unto his father, he also fully yielded to his will, even unto death.

bare the sins. See commentary on 53:11, bear their iniquities.

made intercession for the transgressors. Jesus Christ is the one who makes intercession for us. Paul wrote, "It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us" (Rom. 8:34). Lehi said that Christ "shall make intercession for all the children of men; and they that believe in him shall be saved. And because of the intercession for all, all men come unto God; wherefore, they stand in the presence of him, to be judged of him" (2 Ne. 2:9-10). With the role and power of intercessor, Christ stands between us and the Father, seeking blessings in our behalf. He prays for us, mediates, petitions, and intercedes, requesting mercy for the repentant. Christ has this power because he took our sins upon himself in his great atoning sacrifice. Wonderful examples of Christ acting in his intercessory role are found in prayers he offered that are recorded in John 17 and 3 Ne. 19.

---
Notas:
[^1] This change is from 3 Ne. 22:2.
[^2] Isaiah, 459.
[^3] Come unto Christ, 101.
[^4] This change is from 3 Ne. 22:4.
[^5] 3 Ne. 22:5 makes some small but important clarifying changes in this verse.
[^6] The changes in this verse are from 3 Ne. 22:9.
[^7] The JST changes the KJV peace to people.
[^8] History of the Church, 5:141.
[^9] The changes in this verse are from 3 Ne. 22:15 and, to a lesser extent, from the JST.
[^10] 3 Ne. 22:17 changes the KJV rise.
[^11] Benson, Come unto Christ, 6-7.
