Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 54

Likening Isa. 54 unto Ourselves

In the last days, or the time in which we now live, the Lord will bring many people to Zion. They will be so many that they cannot all fit in one place. Rather than there being only one land of Zion, she will be established in many stakes.

The Lord tells us not to fear. He remembers all his promises to establish Zion in the latter days. The Saints may at times have cause to feel forsaken, but the Lord has not forgotten us, and he will have mercy on us. Even if the mountains were to flee, he would not forget his covenant, and his mercy would continue. He will establish the righteous in the beautiful city of New Jerusalem. All our enemies will be put down.

These promises give comfort to us as a people and as individuals. The Lord will not forget us in our trouble. He always reaches out to comfort and to bless. He will bring us, individually, to his precious promises, if we are worthy.

Zion Shall Be Established (54:1-3)

This passage is an invitation for Zion to rejoice. Zion, who has heretofore not brought forth the desired children (54:1), will nevertheless have children "on the right hand and on the left" (54:3). The children are those who have gathered to the family of Christ as members of the Church. No longer will all the righteous fit in the existing "habitations" of Zion, so her tent will need to be enlarged (54:2). They will also "inherit the [lands of the] Gentiles" (54:3), and stakes of Zion will be established and strengthened (54:2).

The resurrected Jesus quoted this chapter during his visit to the Nephites, telling them it would come to pass after the work of the Father had commenced "among all nations" (3 Ne. 21:28). In 3 Ne. 20-21 Jesus told the Nephites some of the things that would transpire before the events recorded in Isa. 54. Among them were the following: the gospel would go forth to the Gentiles (20:27-28; 21:2), the Jews (20:29-31), the Lamanites (21:4-7), and the dispersed of Israel (20:13; 21:26-28); the remnants of Israel would gather to Zion (21:1); and the covenant people of the Lord would be restored to the lands of their inheritance (20:14, 22, 29, 33, 46; 21:26- 28).

Isa. 54:1-3

Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear; break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child: for more are the children of the desolate than the children of the married wife, saith the Lord. (54:1) Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of [thy] [^1] habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes; (54:2) For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left; and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited. (54:3)

Notes and Commentary

54:1 barren. The barren woman seems to be Israel, who had not previously borne the promised fruit of her covenant with God. She has never travailed with child but will rejoice to have children (meaning the blessings of the covenant) as a result of another's travail, that of Christ (53:11).

children of the desolate/married wife. The married wife (or bride of Christ) appears to be both the Church and the New Jerusalem (Rev. 21:2, 9; D&C 109:73- 74). The children of the married wife may be the members of the Church, or those who inhabit New Jerusalem. The children of the desolate may be the Israelites who are scattered around the earth. When Jesus was teaching the Nephites, he put this verse in the context of the New Jerusalem (3 Ne. 21:22-29; 22:1). Thus the children of the married wife appear to be those who first build up New Jerusalem, and the children of the desolate are those who are gathered later (62:4). It seems clear that the children of the desolate are greater in number.

Latter-day Saint scripture scholar Victor Ludlow has a different view: "The desolate woman and her relationship to the wife can be understood in two ways: (1) The desolate woman represents the gentiles, and the wife Israel; thus the gentiles will bring forth greater spiritual fruits than Israel has delivered; (2) the desolate woman is Israel in her scattered condition, while the wife is those people remaining in the Holy land. Thus Israel will bring forth more children (both physically and spiritually) outside the land of her original inheritance than in it. (See Gal. 4:22-31; Rev. 12:1-6.) In either case, Isaiah uses these images to symbolize the relationship of the Lord to Israel; those who join with covenant Israel are the children of that relationship." [^2]

54:2 tent/curtains/cords/stakes. The tent is reminiscent of the tabernacle of Moses, a tent to which all Israel was invited to come. The word stakes here is the source of the latter-day ecclesiastical division of the Church called a stake. Tent stakes (or pegs) help hold up and enlarge the tent of Zion. Each stake must be strong to keep the tent stable. The five command forms in this verse—enlarge, stretch forth, spare not, lengthen, and strengthen (see also Moro. 10:31; D&C 133:9)—teach us what we should be doing to build Zion in these last days. One way that Zion will enlarge her tent and strengthen her stakes is to practice the law of consecration (D&C 82:12-15).

President Ezra Taft Benson wrote: "To members, the term stake is a symbolic expression. Picture in your mind a great tent held up by cords extended to many stakes that are firmly secured in the ground. The prophets likened latter-day Zion to a great tent encompassing the earth. That tent was supported by cords fastened to stakes [see 3 Ne. 22:2; Isa. 54:2]. Those stakes, of course, are various geographical organizations spread out over the earth. Presently Israel is being gathered to the various stakes of Zion." [^3]

54:3 break forth on the right hand/left. Israel will grow and expand in all directions. Other versions translate the idiom break forth as "burst out" (JB), "spread out" (NIV), or "spread abroad" (RSV).

seed shall inherit the Gentiles. This passage seems to mean that the Lord's people will dispossess the Gentiles of their lands and inheritances and that Israel will then inherit what has been vacated (Deut. 2:12, 21, 22).

the desolate cities . . . inhabited. The children of Israel will inherit the cities of the gentiles, which will have become desolate and empty, most likely because of the wars and upheavals of the last days (49:19). The New International Version says, "Your descendants will dispossess nations and settle in their desolate cities."

God's Everlasting Kindness (54:4-10)

The headnote to this chapter in the LDS edition of the Bible says, "Israel shall be gathered in mercy and tenderness." This passage is indeed one of tenderness and comfort. "Fear not," the Lord says to Israel (54:4). She shall not be confounded; she shall not be brought to shame; in her blessings she will even forget the shame of her past (54:4). "For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather thee," the Lord says (54:7).

Like others, this passage is filled with references to Israel as a wife, clearly calling the Lord her "husband" (54:5). The Lord notes that she is a widow who will no longer remember her reproach (54:4), a woman who had been forsaken (54:6), a wife of youth who was refused (54:6). Though Israel has suffered much, the Lord will restore to her all blessings and will bring her unto himself.

Marriage represents the most intimate, most joyful, most fulfilling relationship on earth. That is the kind of relationship the Lord is inviting us to join with him. The union of the Saints in a Zion society (in which they are of one heart and one mind; Moses 7:18; John 17:11, 22) and the turning of the Saints' hearts to the Lord make such a relationship with the Lord possible. These blessings come through the Atonement (at-one-ment) of Christ, which was performed so that we might repent and return to God, becoming one with him as Christ is one with him (John 17:21, 23; 3 Ne. 19:23, 29).

To illustrate how serious he is about this covenant, the Lord reminds Israel of his promise after the great flood of Noah. Just as he promised that never again would there be such a flood, in the same way he promises that his anger against Israel will pass (54:9) and that then he will have mercy (54:8, 10). Even though the mountains and hills shall be moved from their seemingly everlasting foundations, the Lord will continue in his kindness (mentioned twice; 54:8, 10) and the "covenant" of his people (54:10).

Isa. 54:4-10

Fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed: neither be thou confounded; for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy [youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy] [^4] widowhood any more. (54:4) For thy maker, . . . [thy] husband, the Lord of Hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel—the God of the whole earth shall he be called. [^5] (54:5) For the Lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God. (54:6) For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather thee. (54:7) In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer. (54:8) For this, . . . the waters of Noah unto me, for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee. . . . [^6] (54:9) For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my [people] [^7] be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee. (54:10)

Notes and Commentary

54:4 shame of thy youth/reproach of thy widowhood. From youth to widowhood covers the whole of life. Even though Israel has suffered shame and reproach, both in youth and in old age, in the latter days the Lord will cause these things to be put behind her in the midst of his blessings. Youth may refer to Israel's days of sin before the exile; widowhood may refer to the time of the exile itself, when Israel was separated from her land and her God. In the day of blessing, Israel will remember no more her days of trial.

54:5 thy husband. Once again the Lord identifies himself as the husband of Israel, or the righteous (50:1; 62:5; Matt. 25:1-13; 2 Cor. 11:1-4; Rev. 19:7-9; D&C 33:17; 133:10, 19). When the Lord returns to redeem Zion, he will be as a loving and tender bridegroom coming to claim his beloved bride.

Lord of Hosts. See commentary on 1:9.

God of the whole earth. Idol worshipers felt that each of earth's many gods held jurisdiction over a limited area. But the true God rules over all. In truth, Jehovah is the God not only of the Israelites or the Latter-day Saints but of all creatures on the face of the earth (3 Ne. 11:14).

54:6 called thee. The Lord calls latter-day Israel to gather unto Zion and unto him (54:7). To put it another way, he calls the righteous to join him in the marriage.

woman forsaken/wife of youth . . . refused. Israel has been cast off because of her sins, as a wife might be forsaken or refused. But the rejection is temporary, "for a small moment," and then the Lord will bless Israel "with great mercies" (54:7; 50:1; Prov. 5:18; Mal. 2:14).

grieved in spirit. Like a wife forsaken, Israel grieves because of her separation from her Lord.

54:7 small moment. This term means only a short time. Joseph Smith also felt a degree of abandonment by the Lord and cried out, "O God, where art thou?" The Lord answered, "My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment" (D&C 121:1, 7). The Prophet promised the Saints that if they were faithful, their sufferings "will be but a little season, and all these afflictions will be turned away from us." [^8]

gather. In the latter days, the Lord will gather Israel back into his fold as a shepherd gathers his sheep into the fold at night, or as a farmer gathers his crops into his barn at harvest time. The gathering will occur primarily through missionary work, as the Lord's servants range throughout the world seeking the honest in heart who will come unto Christ and his true Church. In addition to this gathering of hearts and souls, the Jews will gather to their land of promise in Palestine. It also appears that there will be a gathering of a large group of the ten tribes, who may return en masse from the land or lands of their exile (D&C 133:26-34).

54:8 hid my face. The Lord turned away from his people because of their wickedness, but he will yet turn to them in kindness and mercy.

54:9 waters of Noah. This metaphor symbolizes a great and terrible judgment for wickedness. But in the same way that the Lord swore never to flood the earth again, here he swears that in the end he will no longer be angry with Israel.

54:10 mountains shall depart/hills be removed. Mountains and hills are symbols of stability (Ps. 36:6). For them to shake or move indicates significant changes in the earth, but there shall be no changes in the Lord's kindness, his mercy, or his covenant.

my kindness. The Revised Standard Version reads "my steadfast love."

covenant of my people. The Joseph Smith Translation changes the peace in this phrase to people, underscoring that the Lord's covenant is indeed with his children. The expression my people suggests a relationship and a bond between God and us.

At the same time, 3 Ne. 22:10 retains the wording found in the King James Version: "covenant of my peace." With that reading, the phrase refers to the Lord's everlasting promise to give us peace (of heart, of soul) when we come unto him. The covenant of peace, and the covenant of "my people," is the covenant of the gospel (Lev. 26:3-6; Ps. 29:11; 85:8; Ezek. 37:26).

New Jerusalem Shall Be Established (54:11-17)

The Lord continues his promises to latter-day Israel: He will establish her in righteousness and protect her from oppression (54:14). Those who seek to fight against her will fail (54:15, 17); those who speak against her will be condemned (54:17). Her city, the New Jerusalem, will be beautiful (54:11-12), and her children will "be taught of the Lord" and will have peace (54:13).

This passage promises rich blessings to the faithful: The promise of peace (54:14) fulfills the covenant spoken of in 54:10. The blessing of righteousness (54:14, 17) flows from Christ's atonement (54:11). Those now afflicted by life's storms (54:11) will yet be established on safe, firm foundations (54:11, 14). And the people "not comforted" (54:11) will be taught, protected, and blessed (54:13-17).

These things come to the faithful through right of inheritance (54:17). Though our diligent efforts are necessary to bring us to the Lord, ultimately it is his grace that enables us to receive his blessings: "their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord" (54:17).

Isa. 54:11-17

O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted! Behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colours, and lay thy foundations with sapphires. (54:11) And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones. (54:12) And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children. (54:13) In righteousness shalt thou be established: thou shalt be far from oppression; for thou shalt not fear: and from terror; for it shall not come near thee. (54:14) Behold, they shall surely gather together [against thee], . . . not by me: [^9] whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake. (54:15) Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument for his work; and I have created the waster to destroy. (54:16) No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall [revile] [^10]against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord. (54:17)

Notes and Commentary

54:11 afflicted/tossed with tempest. The New English Bible reads, "O storm-battered city, distressed and disconsolate," referring to the troubled city of Jerusalem, which shall be given peace by the Lord. Jerusalem here stands as a symbol for the people of the covenant.

stones with fair colours. Some versions indicate that the stones will be laid with antimony, which women used as a cosmetic to enhance the color of their eyes (2 Kgs. 9:30; Jer. 4:30). In the same way, the mortar in the foundation and walls will help to set off the beauty of the precious stones. Jerusalem, which was once destroyed and left desolate, will be restored and beautified by the Lord in the form of a new Jerusalem.

54:11-12 foundations/windows/gates/borders. These elements of the city's architecture symbolize the whole city. Windows is more correctly translated as battlements or towers, which are set atop walls and used for defense. Borders are the outer walls of the city. The precious stones that form the city's architecture symbolize the love and care the Lord will lavish on his people.

sapphires/agates/carbuncles/pleasant stones. These precious stones seem to symbolize the spiritual and temporal blessings the Lord will pour out on his people (60:17; Rev. 21:18-21). Sapphires were sparkling blue stones, but probably not the sapphires of today—they may have been lapis lazuli (NEB, NIV, NRSV); agates likely were what we know as rubies; carbuncles may have been clear crystals; pleasant stones can better be translated as "precious stones" (NKJV, NIV, JB).

54:13 taught of the Lord. Jesus quoted these words in saying: "No man can come to me, except he doeth the will of my Father. . . . And this is the will of him who hath sent me, that ye receive the Son; . . . It is written in the prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto me" (JST John 6:44-45). It is uncertain from the context whether this phrase means that the children will be taught about the Lord or that they will be taught by the Lord—perhaps both interpretations are correct. Virtually all other major English translations (including GNB, JB, NAB, NEB, NIV, NKJV, and NRSV) provide some variation of the reading, "All thy children shall be taught by the Lord."

54:14 oppression/terror. The millennial Zion will not be troubled by unjust rulers who will oppress, neither by invasion of enemies (26:1-3; 32:17-18; 33:20-22).

54:16 I have created the smith/I have created the waster. The Lord has created both the man who creates and the man who destroys. All are subject to God's power (for God as a destroyer, see Jer. 13:7-14; 18:4).

instrument for his work. The blacksmith seems to be creating a tool to help him in his work.

54:17 No weapon. This promise was repeated in our dispensation (D&C 71:9; 109:25) ultimate triumph over enemies is the heritage of the Lord's people. Weapons, of course, may come in many forms, such as instruments of physical harm and destruction, lies and slanders, or efforts to harm another economically (D&C 122:4- 7).

every tongue that shall revile against thee in judgment. The Lord's people will be able to stand against gossip, slander, and accusations in a court of law.

heritage. The servants of the Lord may look forward to and expect blessings that are theirs by right or inheritance or birthright, even as children may expect to share in their parents' estate.

their righteousness is of me. Ultimately, our righteousness is insufficient to save us. Though our obedience with broken hearts is required to bring us unto Christ, it is his righteousness that saves (2 Ne. 2:4-8).

---
Notas:
[^1] Nephi gives a helpful paraphrase to this verse in 2 Ne. 25:26.
[^2] The changes in this verse are from 2 Ne. 9:51.
[^3] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 453.
[^4] For a discussion on the identity of the latter-day David, see Turner, "Two Davids," 240-60.
[^5] 3 Ne. 22:5 makes some small but important clarifying changes in this verse.
[^6] The changes in this verse are from 3 Ne. 22:9.
[^7] The JST changes the KJV peace to people.
[^8] History of the Church, 5:141.
[^9] The changes in this verse are from 3 Ne. 22:15 and, to a lesser extent, from the JST.
[^10] 3 Ne. 22:17 changes the KJV rise.
