Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 56:1-8

Likening Isa. 56 unto Ourselves

Chapter 56 contains a powerful message on the meaning of the Sabbath. Sabbath worship is a key indicator of our obedience to the covenant. The Lord invites all to join with his people in proper observance of the Sabbath. Those who do so will be given great blessings, even the blessings of the temple.

We too may seek and receive these blessings. Even though we may have already joined ourselves to the covenant of the Lord through baptism, we can grow in his blessings and his grace by observing the Sabbath with full purpose of heart.

The Gentiles Are Welcomed to the Covenant (56:1-8)

"Keep my sabbaths," says the Lord, obey my commandments, and "take hold of my covenant" (56:4). "Love the name of the Lord" and "serve him" (56:6). Then, even though you may not be of the covenant race ("son of the stranger"), and though you once may have been excluded ("eunuch," representing those not allowed an inheritance under the law of Moses), you may receive the full blessings of the temple ("in mine house") and of exaltation ("an everlasting name") (56:3, 5). "All people" who come unto Christ will enjoy temple blessings (56:7).

A theme repeated in this passage is the temple: "mine house" and "within my walls" (56:5) and "my holy mountain," "my house of prayer," "mine altar," "mine house," and "an house of prayer" (55:7).

Isa. 56:1-8

Thus saith the Lord, Keep ye judgment, and do justice: for my salvation is near to come, and my righteousness to be revealed. (56:1) Blessed is the man that doeth this, and the son of man that layeth hold on it; that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and keepeth his hand from doing any evil. (56:2) Neither let the son of the stranger, that hath joined himself to the Lord, speak, saying, The Lord hath utterly separated me from his people: neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree. (56:3) For thus saith the Lord unto the eunuchs that keep my sabbaths, and choose the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant; (56:4) Even unto them will I give in mine house and within my walls a [hand] [^1] and a name better than of sons and of daughters: I will give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off. (56:5) Also the sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him, and to love the name of the Lord, to be his servants, every one that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold of my covenant; (56:6) Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar; for mine house shall be called an house of prayer for all people. (56:7) The Lord God which gathereth the outcasts of Israel saith, Yet will I gather others to him, beside those that are gathered unto him. (56:8)

Notes and Commentary

56:1 Keep ye judgment/do justice. Do what is lawful and fair.

salvation. Salvation brings deliverance, both temporal and spiritual.

righteousness. Goodness and righteousness are basic elements in the Lord's character. His righteousness will be shown forth to all who keep his Sabbath.

56:2 blessed. The Hebrew word here, 'asherey, means "happy," as does the word used by Jesus in the Beatitudes (Greek makario_s).

layeth hold. This verb refers to making something part of one's life.

sabbath. To the Israelites, a Sabbath was not only the holy day on which they worshiped once a week but also the periodic religious holidays they observed. Keeping a true Sabbath is symbolic of keeping the whole covenant (58:13; Ezek. 20:12- 26; 22:8, 26).

hand. This term symbolizes the whole being. The person who keeps his hand from doing evil keeps his whole person from evil.

56:3 son of the stranger. This phrase describes a foreigner. The Gentiles who come unto Christ are promised all the blessings of faithful members of the house of Israel.

the eunuch. A eunuch is a man who has been emasculated and therefore is physically unable to beget children. Under the law of Moses, eunuchs were denied full fellowship with the Israelites (Lev. 21:17-23; Deut. 23:1-2) and had no inheritance in Israel because they had no offspring. The Lord promises that they will receive full blessings in the gospel if they will receive and keep his laws. Among these blessings is the Abrahamic covenant, which includes a promise of endless seed.

dry tree. A dry tree is one that cannot bear fruit. In reference to a person, a dry tree, like a eunuch, is one that cannot have children.

56:5 mine house/within my walls. Such terms refer to the temple (Matt. 21:12- 13).

a hand and a name better than of sons and of daughters/everlasting name. The Lord promises those who come into "mine house," or his temple, a hand and a name. Hands and names are important parts of the temple covenants (D&C 88:119-21, 130-36; 130:11). The New English Bible may help clarify the meaning of this verse when it says,["[they] shall receive from me something better than sons and daughters, . . . I will give them an everlasting name, a name imperishable for all time." The name may be the new name given to those who are exalted (D&C 130:11), or it may be the name that King Benjamin gave to his people, which "never should be blotted out" (Mosiah 5:11)—that is, the name of Christ. Compare this usage of "everlasting name, that shall not be cut off" with the usage in 55:13.

56:6 polluting it. Any activity counter to the sacred and holy purposes of the Sabbath pollutes it.

taketh hold of my covenant. This phrase refers to those who receive and honor the covenants of the gospel.

56:7 my holy mountain. The temple (see commentary on 11:9).

house of prayer. When Jesus cleansed the temple in Jerusalem for the second time, he quoted this phrase from Isaiah, saying, "It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves" (Matt. 21:13; Mark 11:17; Luke 19:46).

The temple has ever been a house of prayer for the faithful. The Psalmist wrote, "One thing have I desired of the Lord, . . . that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple" (Ps. 27:4). In the latter days the Lord commanded, "Organize yourselves; . . . and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, . . . a house of God" (D&C 88:119; 109:16).

all people. The blessings of the covenant and the temple will be offered to everyone, regardless of race or physical imperfection (Alma 19:86; D&C 38:16).

offerings/sacrifices. Offerings and sacrifices are offered to the Lord in the temple, according to his command. The sacrifices and offerings of the faithful will be effective in helping us to draw nearer to him.

mine altar. The place of sacrifice in the temple is the altar.

56:8 gathereth the outcasts of Israel/gather others. The Lord reaches out to all people, including those who have been judged unworthy or who have been scattered, both literally and spiritually (2 Ne. 26:33).

---
Notas:
[^1] In the JB the last line reads, you send your envoys far afield, down to Sheol itself. The note adds, By sacrificing infants.
