Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 56:9-12; 57

Likening Isa. 57 unto Ourselves

Isa. 57 contains a description of gross idol worship and temple prostitution. Israel seemed to go out of her way to offend the Lord by participating in religious practices that not only rejected him but also caused them to commit the very sins that were most abhorrent to him.

One message of Isaiah seems to be a reminder of the first of the Ten Commandments: "Thou shalt have no other gods before me" (Ex. 20:3). It is not only the abhorrent that can turn our hearts. Even good things can take us away from God. We let other things become our God when we give them first place in our lives, whether the primary object of our affection is our family, work, money, recreation, sports, or a particular sin.

The Lord concludes by reminding us of his mercy when we repent. We will be gathered to Zion; he will heal us and comfort us and remove obstacles from our way.

Israel's Wicked Leaders (56:9-12; 57:1-2)

In these verses, Israel's enemies are invited to come and destroy the Lord's people (56:9). The watchmen called to protect and care for Israel are slothful, selfish, and uncaring; having only contempt for their sacred stewardships, they look to their own interests while their charges perish or are enslaved (56:10-11).

The Lord's criticism of these unrighteous leaders is scathing. He calls them blind watchmen, "ignorant," "dumb dogs," "greedy dogs," "shepherds that cannot understand" (56:10-11). Despite the Lord's warnings, the watchmen will not listen, desiring only to "eat, drink, and be merry" (2 Ne. 28:7; Isa. 56:12). Even though the righteous perish from the land, those who remain appear indifferent (57:1). Yet the righteous who have perished will be blessed to pass "into peace" (57:2). These prophecies likely have a dual fulfillment, applying both to ancient Israel and to people of the last days.

Isa. 56:9-12; 57:1

All ye beasts of the field, come to devour, yea, all ye beasts in the forest. (56:9) His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. (56:10) Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter. (56:11) Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and tomorrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. (56:12) The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart: and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come. (57:1) He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness. (57:2)

Notes and Commentary

56:9 beasts of the field/forest. These terms seem to refer to foreign nations that will invade Israel, both before the exile and perhaps also immediately before the Millennium (Jer. 12:9).

56:10 watchmen are blind/ignorant/sleeping. Watchmen are those, particularly leaders, who have the gospel and are charged to protect it from apostasy. In this passage, the watchmen themselves have become apostates. In 56:11, they are referred to as shepherds who have turned from their care of the flock. Like watchdogs who have become lazy, blind, and incapacitated, or like shepherds who have lost sight of their calling and are no longer able to recognize the enemy, these watchmen have left off caring for their flock and have turned instead to caring for their own needs and desires (Jer. 6:17; Ezek. 3:17; 34:1).

Besides describing Israel's religious leaders in ancient times, this prophecy may also refer to leaders of apostate religions in our day (2 Ne. 28:3-9; Morm. 8:31-33, 37-39).

56:10-11 dumb dogs/greedy dogs. Dumb dogs are watchdogs that cannot bay or bark, and thus they are incapable of sounding a warning (Ezek. 33:2-6). Greedy dogs, instead of selflessly protecting their flocks, feed themselves and perhaps even turn on the sheep to satisfy their own ravenous appetites (Ezek. 34:3, 10). Like dumb, greedy dogs, Israel's religious leaders lost the power to warn Israel of sin, selfishly thinking more of their own needs than of those of the people (5:13). That is also true of some religious leaders in all time periods.

shepherds. Shepherds are the leaders of the flock of God, in this case leaders who desire their own advancement and thus practice priestcrafts (2 Ne. 26:29).

own way/his gain/his quarter. The shepherds are charged with willfulness, seeking that which will bring profit to themselves rather than blessings to the people. Our purpose in life is to be tested and proved, "to see if [we] will do all things whatsoever the Lord [our] God shall command [us]" (Abr. 3:25). But like those in this passage, many seek their own will and their own desires, rather than the Father's (53:6; Judg. 17:6; 1 Cor. 13:5; Philip. 2:21; Mosiah 16:5; D&C 1:16). Even some of those who are called to be shepherds concentrate on worldly pursuits and pleasures, neglecting the flock. As in all things, Jesus Christ set the great example for us in these things, saying, "Not my will, but thine, be done" (Luke 22:42).

56:12 wine/strong drink. Symbolic of revelry and seeking the unlawful pleasures of life, the wine here is contrasted to the offer of wine at the Lord's table in 55:1. Anything that dulls the senses also dulls one's commitment to God and his ways (Hosea 4:11), making it more difficult to detect the still, small voice of the Spirit. Those who persist in such a path will be given to drink of a different kind of wine, "the wine of the fierceness of his wrath" (Rev. 16:19).

57:1 The righteous perisheth/no man layeth it to heart. The righteous generation passes away, yet the wicked take no notice, or, if they do, they are untroubled by it.

righteous is taken away/evil to come. God's judgments (evil) will come upon the wicked, because the righteous will have perished from the land.

57:2 He shall enter into peace/rest in their beds. This statement refers to the righteous mentioned in 57:1. As the LDS edition of the Bible states in the headnote to 57, "When the righteous die they enter into peace" (57:2; Ps. 37:37; 119:165; Alma 40:12; D&C 45:46).

Israel's Gross Wickedness (57:3-13a)

The ancient and abhorrent practice of temple prostitution, a practice engaged in even by the Jews, is described in this passage from Isa. 57. This sinful practice was triply offensive to the Lord: it brought people into both immorality and idolatry, and it sometimes also involved human sacrifice. In doing so, of course, it took them far from their God.

Though temple prostitution is a thing of the past, among those who profess Christ there exists another form of spiritual adultery that is also damning. The scriptures make it clear that Christ is the bridegroom and that the Church is the bride. When the bride turns her affections from the Lord to someone or something that will lead her away from Christ, she is committing a form of spiritual adultery that will keep her from God and his blessings. For other powerful descriptions of spiritual adultery, see Ezek. 16:1-63 and 23:1-49.

Isa. 57:3-13a

But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the whore. (57:3) Against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood, (57:4) Enflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree, slaying the children in the valleys under the clifts of the rocks? (57:5) Among the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion; they, they are thy lot: even to them hast thou poured a drink offering, thou hast offered a meat offering. Should I receive comfort in these? (57:6) Upon a lofty and high mountain hast thou set thy bed: even thither wentest thou up to offer sacrifice. (57:7) Behind the doors also and the posts hast thou set up thy remembrance: for thou hast discovered thyself to another than me, and art gone up; thou hast enlarged thy bed, and made thee a covenant with them; thou lovedst their bed where thou sawest it. (57:8) And thou wentest to the king with ointment, and didst increase thy perfumes, and didst send thy messengers far off, and didst debase thyself even unto hell. [^1] (57:9) Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way; yet saidst thou not, There is no hope: thou hast found the life of thine hand; therefore thou wast not grieved. (57:10) And of whom hast thou been afraid or feared, that thou hast lied, and hast not remembered me, nor laid it to thy heart? have not I held my peace even of old, and thou fearest me not? (57:11) I will declare thy righteousness, and thy works; for they shall not profit thee. (57:12) When thou criest, let thy companies deliver thee; but the wind shall carry them all away; vanity shall take them: (57:13a)

Notes and Commentary

57:3 sons of the sorceress/seed of the adulterer and the whore. Lady Israel has committed spiritual adultery, and her children no longer qualify for Jehovah's blessings (1:21; Jer. 3:1-20; Ezek. 16). This condemnation can be directed at many in our day, as well as anciently.

57:4 sport yourselves make ye a wide mouth . . . tongue. These are types of mockery, or making fun of someone else. Against whom do they sport themselves? Probably the prophet, but any who mock the prophet are also mocking God.

children of transgression/seed of falsehood. The New International Version says "brood of rebels, the offspring of liars." The sin of Israel has become so pervasive that it passes from generation to generation, ever perpetuating itself (1:2). Children of transgression—those who follow the ways of the world and the whisperings of the adversary—are called a variety of names in the scriptures: "children of this world" (Luke 16:8; 20:34), "children of disobedience" (Eph. 2:2), "children of wrath" (Eph. 2:3), "children of the kingdom of the devil" (Alma 5:25), and "the children of them which killed the prophets" (Matt. 23:31). Jesus said bluntly that they follow their "father the devil" (John 8:44).

57:5 Enflaming yourselves/green tree/slaying the children/rocks. This passage refers to the evil fertility rites in groves and on high places, rites that often included child sacrifice (Ezek. 23:38-39; Jer. 2:20; 7:31; 19:4). Some people in all ages choose gross sin in the name of religion.

57:6 stones. These may have been stones that were set up for a male fertility deity (Jer. 32:35). Or perhaps these stones refer to the smooth stones from a stream that David used to slay Goliath (1 Sam. 17:40-50). The people here were choosing the smooth stones of the stream instead of the Rock who is their Redeemer (Ps. 78:35; Moses 7:53).

stream. The Hebrew word used here, nachal, can also mean "valley." The wicked reject the living waters for unholy streams.

portion/lot. The Lord should be the lot, portion, or inheritance for covenant Israel (Ps. 16:5; 119:57). But in rejecting him and turning to false gods, her inheritance is only what the false gods made of stone could give her (Ezek. 6:13). That is also true of us in the latter days, when we choose things of the world over God. Another interpretation is that the lot of idol worshipers is death and destruction, the just desserts of their sinfulness.

drink offering/meat offering. These are sacrifices that God required to be made in the temple (Lev. 6:14-18, 23) instead they are given to idols. The greatest sacrifice, of course, is our hearts, but most people give their hearts to the wrong things.

57:7 mountain. Mountains can be temples of the Lord. Here, a mountain serves as a pagan temple, which in turn symbolizes all false worship.

set thy bed. This metaphor represents the fertility couch of pagan religions. Instead of giving one's whole being to the true God, many people give themselves to worship of other gods and other things.

thither. This word suggests going to the bed of spiritual adultery.

57:8 doors/posts. The New International Version translates, "Behind your doors and your doorposts, you have put your pagan symbols." Israel has made their false god an integral element of their homes and their lives. This stands in contrast to the Lord's command that Israel keep the law of the Lord written on their doorposts (Deut. 11:20) as a sign of dedication and for remembrance of the Lord.

thy remembrance. Remembrance means a memorial to an idol. The Jerusalem Bible identifies this as "a domestic idol standing by the threshold or over the door." Their false god is an integral element of their lives.

discovered thyself/gone up/enlarged thy bed. The New International Version renders this statement in painful plainness: "Forsaking me, you uncovered your bed, you climbed into it and opened it wide; you made a pact with those whose beds you love, and you looked on their nakedness." This phrase has a literal meaning, referring to the pagan practices of temple prostitution, and also a symbolic meaning, referring to the unfaithfulness of Lady Israel (in our age, as well as anciently) in joining herself to other gods after making a covenant with Jehovah.

57:9 wentest to the king. The Hebrew suggests that the people may have gone to Molech, or Melech, the idol representing the terrible Canaanite god. (Melech is the Hebrew word for king.) Another possible meaning is that the Lord's people dishonored their covenants by seeking security in earthly powers instead of trusting in the Lord (see, for example, 2 Kgs. 16:7).

ointment/perfumes. These adornments are used to make oneself more attractive to a lover and symbolize the ways people seek to please false gods.

messengers far off. The Israelites looked to the gods of other nations (for ex- ample, the gods of Assyria and Tyre), rather than to their own true God (17:7-8; 30:1-2; 1 Sam. 28:13). The messengers may be those who are sent to look for new gods to worship in many places.

debase thyself . . . unto hell. The Revised Standard Version translates this as "sent down even to Sheol." Not only did apostate Israel send messengers afar seeking false gods but she even looked to the pagan god of Sheol, the underworld (28:14-15). Some today are so far removed from the truth that they seek in "far places" for spiritual fulfillment, forgetting the only true source of blessings.

57:10 wearied . . . greatness of thy way/saidst not . . . no hope. Lady Israel's quest after other gods is a wearisome one (Jer. 2:25; 18:12). But despite the greatness of the undertaking, Israel (like apostates in all ages) continued in her false search.

life of thine hand/not grieved. According to the Revised Standard Version, "You found new life for your strength, and so you were not faint." Though Israel's quest after other gods seemed hopeless, she redoubled her efforts and continued on. Some people today do the same thing—they continue to seek fulfillment in the wrong places even though the desired happiness does not come.

57:11 afraid or feared/hast not remembered. The Lord's people have become more fearful of displeasing false gods than the true God. The result: Israel has lied to God and has not remembered either him or his covenants. Remembered in this context means to turn to and obey.

laid it to thy heart. Israel has not let the Lord's displeasure trouble her. She has not taken it to heart.

held my peace/fearest me not. The Lord has chosen not to speak to Israel for a time, and in response Israel has forgotten him.

57:12 declare thy righteousness . . . works/shall not profit. The Lord knows Israel's works and the level of her righteousness, and he knows that they are wanting. They are insufficient to gain the reward Israel seeks.

57:13a When thou criest, let thy companies deliver. Let your idols answer your prayers (2:20; 31:7), which, of course, they cannot do.

wind . . . carry them all away. The New International Version translates this passage as "the wind will carry all of them [the idols] off, a mere breath will blow them away." Those to whom apostate Israel looks for help are powerless and are quickly removed.

vanity shall take them. Trust in idols shall prove vain, or transitory and useless.

Blessings for the Contrite (57:13b-21)

After condemning the wicked, the Lord now gives promises of blessings to the faithful:

If they put their trust in God, they will "possess the land" (57:13), meaning the land of their inheritance.

They will be gathered to Zion without stumbling blocks to hinder them (57:14).

If they are humble and contrite, the Lord will revive their flagging spirits and troubled hearts (57:15).

The Lord will remove his wrath from them (57:16).

The Lord will heal them (57:18, 19).

The Lord will lead them down life's paths (57:18).

The Lord will comfort them (57:18).

The Lord will give them peace, whether they are physically near or far (57:19).

The wicked, of course, receive no such promises. Instead, they are assured that they will have no peace but will be like troubled waters that cannot rest. Waters in constant motion continually stir up dirt and mire, and the wicked do the same (57:20- 21).

Isaiah 57:13b-21

but he that putteth his trust in me shall possess the land, and shall inherit my holy mountain; (57:13b) And shall say, Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumblingblock out of the way of my people. (57:14) For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. (57:15) For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth: for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made. (57:16) For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he [continued willfully] [^2] in the way of his heart. (57:17) I have seen his ways, and will heal him: I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him and to his mourners. (57:18) I create the fruit of the lips; Peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, saith the Lord; and I will heal him. (57:19) But the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. (57:20) There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked. (57:21)

Notes and Commentary

57:13b possess the land. Those who trust in the Lord will be joint heirs to his promises with the rest of the righteous. The land symbolizes security and stability, as well as the blessing of having temporal needs met. Further, the land is where the temple is built; the two are often inextricably connected. [^3]

inherit my holy mountain. Those who trust in the Lord will have a legitimate place in the temple and, by extension, in the presence of the Lord.

57:14 Cast ye up. The righteous will join the call to build up the way whereby Israel may return from her long spiritual and physical dispersion.

prepare the way. This phrase has reference to the "highway of salvation" of 40:3 and 62:10. It often refers to the return of the ten tribes, but here it seems to have reference to preparing the way for a spiritual return to God.

stumblingblock. The righteous pray that the path on which we return to the Lord will have all obstacles removed from it, so that we do not stumble in our journey.

57:15 high and lofty One . . . name is Holy. The Lord is high and lofty in that he dwells in the heavens and rules over all (6:1; D&C 88:13). The Lord is called Holy because his righteousness and purity are essential and eternal elements of his character.

inhabiteth eternity. The Lord inhabits eternity in the sense that he dwells in a state beyond time—past, present, and future are always before him (D&C 130:7). Joseph Smith taught: "When his commandments teach us, it is in view of eternity; for we are looked upon by God as though we were in eternity. God dwells in eternity, and does not view things as we do." [^4]

high and holy place. In the ancient temples of Israel, the two most sacred, innermost rooms were called the holy place, which only the priests could enter, and "the most holy place," or "the holy of holies," which only the high priest could enter and even then only on the most holy day of the year (Day of Atonement). A holy place would be in the temple; a high and holy place would be the temple in heaven, the celestial kingdom.

contrite and humble spirit. Those who are sorrowful for their sins, repentant, and fully reliant on God have a contrite and humble spirit. These are they who will dwell in the house of the Lord forever; these are they who are invited to live with him in his "high and holy place" in the celestial world.

revive the spirit/revive the heart. Those who are humble and contrite will be given new life and energy in Christ, despite their own weakness (61:1-3; Ps. 51:10).

57:16 will not contend for ever. The New International Version reads, "I will not accuse forever." The Lord will not forever accuse us of our sins if we are humble, contrite, and repentant.

wroth. The Lord will not always be angry with us if we are repentant.

spirit . . . fail/and the souls. God is our Father, having made our souls. If he were to remain ever angry at us, we would fail to attain any degree of glory, which would go contrary to his work and glory, which is to bring to pass our immortality and eternal life (Moses 1:39).

57:17 iniquity of his covetousness. Covetousness, the sin of greed, is another form of idolatry, in which mankind worships wealth instead of the Lord (Col. 3:5). Joseph Smith said that "God had often sealed up the heavens because of covetousness in the Church." [^5]

was wroth, and smote him. The Lord was deeply angry with the wicked and punished them.

I hid me. In his anger, the Lord removed himself from the wicked (54:8; Ps. 27:9; 88:14; 104:29).

continued willfully in the way of his heart. The wicked did what they wanted, following their own desires rather than the Lord's.

57:18 seen his ways. The Lord knows all our wickedness, and he knows our repentance.

heal him/lead him/restore comforts. When we repent and turn to Christ, he will heal our spirits and give us his Comforter. This promise of healing, leading, and comforting is reminiscent of the spirit of the Twenty-third Psalm.

his mourners. Those who have mourned the ways of the wicked will be comforted when the wicked repent. This may also be an expression of the promise in Matt. 5:4, "Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted."

57:19 create the fruit of the lips. The Lord gives us power to speak (Heb. 13:15). In this context, the Lord gives words to those who mourn because of the sin they see; these likely are words of prayer, praise, thanksgiving, and pleading for grace in behalf of the sinner.

Peace. The true source of peace is Christ, as Paul points out (Eph. 2:12-17). This cry of "peace, peace" may also be the Lord's greeting to those who are coming to Zion: "Shalom, Shalom!" (Ps. 37:11, 37; 119:165; Philip. 4:7; 2 Thes. 3:16).

far off. Israel has been scattered to distant places. Also, many are spiritually far off; those who "draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me" (JS- H 1:19; Isa. 29:13) may find peace through repentance.

57:20 troubled sea/waters cast up mire and dirt. The wicked have not the peace promised in the previous verse; they toss like a troubled sea, and the result of their movement through life is mire and dirt. Elder Bruce McConkie has described a troubled sea: "The sea—a raging, restless sea—is a symbol of a sinful and wicked world. The beasts seen by Daniel in vision and used as types of worldly kingdoms came up out of the sea. . . . (Dan. 7.) And the Lord said to Isaiah: 'The wicked are like the troubled sea. . . . ' (Isa. 57:20-21)—leaving us to conclude that when Christ calms the seas of life, peace enters the hearts of men." [^6]

57:21 no peace . . . to the wicked. This statement is a repetition of 48:22, but here it forms a contrast to the peace offered to the repentant in 57:19. Peace is the reward for those who come unto Christ, but those who refuse receive no peace.

---
Notas:
[^1] Most modern translations use rearward or rearguard to replace the archaic KJV rereward.
[^2] Miracle of Forgiveness, 27.
[^3] Davies, Gospel and the Land, 94, 153.
[^4] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 356.
[^5] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 9.
[^6] Mortal Messiah, 2:278.
