Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 58

Likening Isa. 58 unto Ourselves

This chapter outlines the true law of the fast. In our fasting we are to do far more than simply abstain from two meals, nor are we to put on an appearance of one who is making a sacrifice. In a true fast we seek to help and bless others. We remove heavy burdens from the shoulders of others. We share our substance. If we do these things, we will be blessed spiritually and temporally. Our portion of light will increase. Our health will be strengthened. The Lord will be our guide in all things.

The Lord speaks again of the Sabbath. He promises that if we will turn away from our own pleasures on the Sabbath and turn to the things that will delight the Lord, he will lift us up to spiritual richness and bestow on us all the blessings of Jacob.

The True Law of the Fast (58:1-12)

As the headnote to Isa. 58 in the LDS edition of the Bible reads, 58:1-2 gives us the "true law of the fast, with its attendant blessings." That fasting is more than going without food and drink for a period of time is made unmistakably clear.

The passage opens with the Lord instructing Isaiah to proclaim the sins of the house of Israel (58:1), the people of the covenant both then and now, with boldness. They appear to be righteous, the Lord observes, being prayerful and obeying the ordinances of the gospel (58:2). Yet, as we soon learn, their righteousness is that of outward obedience only and not of the heart.

Israel asks why the Lord has not blessed them for their sacrifice in fasting (58:3). The Lord answers that in their fasting they have not turned to him. They continue to seek pleasure and do business (58:3). They care more for the show of fasting—to afflict their soul, to bow the head, to sit on sackcloth and ashes (58:5)—than to attend to the true purposes of the fast: to help themselves and others to repent, to find respite from the emotional burdens they carry, and to help others with their problems and afflictions (58:6, 9-10). True fasting involves sharing with the hungry, the poor, and the naked, including needy members of one's own family (58:7, 10).

Those who obey this law are promised great blessings, including spiritual light (58:8); physical health (58:8); increased righteousness (58:8); answers to prayer (58:9); continual guidance from the Lord (58:11); a plenitude of spiritual food and water, representing the full blessings of the Atonement, even when others lack (58:11); and a restoration of their lands of inheritance (58:12). This passage parallels 1:10-20, in which the Lord rebukes the people for outward obedience without a true yielding of the heart.

Isa. 58:1-12

Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and [show] my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins. (58:1) Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their God: they ask of me the ordinances of justice; they take delight in approaching to God. (58:2) Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not? wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? Behold, in the day of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact all your labours. (58:3) Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness: ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to be heard on high. (58:4) Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict his soul? is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? wilt thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord? (58:5) Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? (58:6) Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh? (58:7) Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the Lord shall be thy [rear guard]. [^1] (58:8) Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Here I am. If thou take away from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity; (58:9) And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noonday: (58:10) And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not. (58:11) And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places: thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations; and thou shalt be called, The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dwell in. (58:12)

Notes and Commentary

58:1 voice like a trumpet. Alma longed to speak with a voice like a trumpet, in loudness and clarity, when he cried out, "O that I were an angel, . . . that I might go forth and speak with the trump of God, with a voice to shake the earth. . . . Yea, I would declare unto every soul, as with the voice of thunder, repentance and the plan of redemption, that they should repent and come unto our God, that there might not be more sorrow upon all the face of the earth" (Alma 29:1-2).

58:2 ordinance of their God. In this context, this expression refers to the laws of God.

ordinances of justice. This phrase may refer to righteous judgments, just laws, or ordinances that help to justify us before God.

58:3 Wherefore have we fasted. Here the people ask why the Lord doesn't recognize their efforts to fast.

afflicted our soul. Some have viewed fasting as a time to seek suffering or self- abasement (Lev. 16:29, 31; 23:27, 32). In 58:5, the Lord rebukes such attitudes, saying he has not commanded a fast wherein a person would "afflict his soul."

ye find pleasure/exact all your labors. Here the prophet explains why the people's fasting and prayers for deliverance went unheard. They were not sincere in their devotion, they turned to their own pleasures "in the day of [their] fast" instead of losing themselves in the Lord and his work, and they required others to work instead of allowing them to participate in the spirit of the fast.

exact all your labours. This phrase may mean "inflict travail on others." Though the Israelites themselves may not have been working on their fast days, they were requiring others to work, most likely hired laborers.

58:4 fast for strife and debate/smite with the fist of wickedness. What should have been a religious observance that increased love and holiness led only to hunger and irritability, strife, debate, and physical fighting.

58:5 bow down his head as a bulrush. This expression means hanging the head to give the appearance of suffering.

sackcloth and ashes. These signs of self-abasement and mourning (22:12; 1 Kgs. 21:17-29; Job 42:6) were parts of a true fast in ancient Israel. For example, Daniel said, "I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes: And I prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my confession" (Dan. 9:3-4). But outward signs of fasting, when they are performed to be seen by men, do not fulfill the requirement of the true fast.

58:6 the fast that I have chosen. To fast in the Lord's way, we must repent of our willful sins, our unkindnesses, and our selfishness (1:16-17).

loose the bands of wickedness. The bands of wickedness may be the chains or bonds of sin (2 Ne. 1:13, 23; 9:45). As President Spencer W. Kimball put it, "Sin [is] like handcuffs on the wrists, a ring in the nose, and slave bands around the neck." [^2] The bands of wickedness may also refer to the bonds of slavery and oppression discussed below.

undo the heavy burdens. These burdens might be those a master would place on a servant, or they could refer to the emotional burdens people carry.

let the oppressed go free. People were oppressed under slavery or other forms of servitude. For instance, it was the practice in ancient times to take the property of the poor—even the clothes from their backs—as collateral for a debt. With no property, including clothing, the poor had no option but to stay in the servitude of their creditor (Job 22:6). The Lord urges mercy (Ezek. 18:7, 16), even to a removal of the debt (Deut. 24:12-13; Ex. 22:25-26).

break every yoke. Yokes are used to control beasts of burden to keep them in a straight path of servitude. The mentality and practice of using other human beings in this manner must be broken. Also, the bondage of sin is a yoke to the soul that fasting can help to break.

58:7 bread to the hungry/bring the poor/cover him. These actions are the essence of pure religion (Matt. 25:31-46; James 1:27). Those who have done these things will receive God's blessings (Ezek. 18:7-9, 16-17): their fasting will be recognized and their prayers heard.

hide not thyself. When someone is in distress we must not pretend that we do not see or["[pass] by on the other side" (Luke 10:31-32) and refuse to help (Deut. 22:1- 4). This injunction applies particularly to "thine own flesh," meaning members of our own families.

thine own flesh. Footnote c to 58:7 in the LDS edition of the Bible equates this phrase with "thy brother, or relative." In a broader sense, however, all men are children of the same God (Job 31:15) and should be treated as brothers.

58:8 light break forth as the morning. Spiritual light in our lives brings happiness and joy (9:2; 60:1-3), and spiritual darkness brings misery (59:10). It is in turning from wickedness to righteousness that a spiritual dawning may occur (Job 11:13-17), as was promised here to Israel as a people.

thine health shall spring forth speedily. The word translated as health (or healing, in some versions) means the growth of new flesh in the place of the old wound. Those who fast properly will enjoy greater health and healing of spiritual wounds. In addition, the prophets use this figure in speaking of the restoration of Israel to her blessings (30:26; Jer. 8:22; 30:17; 33:6).

righteousness . . . go before thee/glory of the Lord . . . thy rear guard. As he did in 52:12, the prophet here refers to the pillar of light that went before the children of Israel during their exodus from Egypt (Ex. 13:21-22). Those who fast in a manner pleasing to the Lord will grow in righteousness and will have the glory of the Lord as a guide, presence, and protector in their lives.

58:9 call . . . answer/cry . . . Here I am. The Lord will be near us and will readily grant that which we seek in righteous prayer.

yoke. See 58:6.

putting forth of the finger. This is a gesture of insult (Prov. 6:13). Isa. 59:3 speaks of hands "defiled with blood" and fingers "with iniquity"; perhaps this expression refers to using the fingers (or hands) to harm another or steal his property.

speaking vanity. "Vain speaking" might include "malicious talk" (NIV), "spreading vicious rumors" (LB), "speaking wickedness" (RSV), and["lay[ing] false charges" (NEB). Avoiding these is part of the spirit of fasting.

58:10 draw out thy soul to the hungry. This phrase means to let your heart and feelings be turned to those in need.

satisfy the afflicted soul. To satisfy means to give what is needed.

thy light rise in obscurity/thy darkness be as the noonday. This passage refers to the future glory of Israel (54:1-13; 55:13). Her humiliation and captivity are as the darkness just before daybreak. And just as her (and our) deliverance from slavery and oppression is as the dawn (v. 8), so the eventual state of Zion will be as the brightness of the sun at noon (Job 11:17). This also has an individual application: As we fast, we seek to become like the Bright and Morning Star (Rev. 22:16), the Dayspring (Luke 1:78), the Light of the World (John 8:12; Alma 38:9; D&C 11:28), Jesus Christ.

58:11 the Lord shall guide thee/satisfy thy soul in drought/make fat thy bones. As a shepherd, the Lord leads his flock (which also includes us in the latter days), providing for their every need (Ps. 23:2-3). For those who become his sheep, he provides living water in times of spiritual drought. Bones were considered the gauge of the body's vitality—they become dry and brittle with age and illness but are moist and fresh with youth, health, and vigor (Job 21:24). Bones that are made fat are renewed and made strong (66:14). Make fat thy bones may also refer to the resurrection.

like a watered garden/like a spring. In a garden, the source of life, or water, comes from the outside. So shall it be with the righteous, who will receive sustenance from the Lord (51:3; Num. 24:5-6). This situation contrasts with the curse in 1:30: "For ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth, and as a garden that hath no water." With a spring, the waters come from within rather than from without. Jesus said, "He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water" (John 7:38). In this dispensation the Lord promised, "Unto him that keepeth my commandments I will give the mysteries of my kingdom, and the same shall be in him a well of living water, springing up unto everlasting life" (D&C 63:23).

58:12 they that shall be of thee. This phrase refers to our descendants, or generations yet to come (Prov. 20:7). Those who hear our testimony and return to God may also be included.

build the old waste places. The old waste places were laid waste by the invasion of enemies. The descendants of ancient Israel will, however, be restored to their inheritance, with the means to repair and restore Israel. This expression could also have a spiritual application—the waste places might refer to Israel's sin and separation from God, which chasm the descendants will repair through repentance. (This verse is virtually repeated in 61:4; see also 44:26, 28.)

raise up the foundations of many generations. Israel will rebuild her cities on their ancient foundations. Symbolically, this expression may refer to the Lord's covenant to give Abraham countless offspring (Gen. 17:4, 6), or it may refer to the eternal increase of all the righteous.

repairer of the breach/restorer of paths. The New English Bible translates this expression as "You shall be called Rebuilder of broken walls, Restorer of houses in ruins." Symbolically, this passage may suggest that the righteous of Israel will help to repair broken relationships, especially the relationship between God and man, and broken homes, perhaps through the sealing power.

Blessings of the Sabbath (58:13-14)

Here we are given the true law of the Sabbath: Do not seek your own will or pleasure on the Lord's holy day but seek to do his will (58:13). In contrast to those who fast according to the law but not with purity of heart, we must keep the law of the Sabbath with "delight" (58:13). If we keep the Sabbath with such an attitude, we will "delight" ourselves in the Lord (58:14). The Lord will then give us high and lofty blessings, even those promised to "Jacob thy father" (58:14).

Isa. 58:13-14

If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honourable; and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words : (58:13) Then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord; and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. (58:14)

Notes and Commentary

58:13 turn away thy foot from the sabbath/doing thy pleasure. The New International Version renders this passage: "If you keep your feet from breaking the Sabbath and doing as you please on my holy day."

honourable. The Lord would have us consider the Sabbath worthy to be honored.

not doing thine own ways/nor finding thine own pleasure. On the Sabbath, only the Lord's work is to be accomplished. Yet even in the earliest days of Israel as a nation, some resented the Sabbath's interruption of their merchandising and worldly pursuits (Amos 8:5). Here the Lord challenges his people to do his will on the Sabbath, not their own.

speaking thine own words. This phrase means speaking idle words. The words we use in our lives matter, and the words we use on the Sabbath should reflect the sanctity of the day.

58:14 delight thyself in the Lord. If we obey the Sabbath with pure hearts, not only will we find joy in our obedience but we will find joy in the Lord himself.

high places of the earth. The holy mount, or the temple, would be the high places on which the Lord treads (Deut. 33:29; Micah 1:2-3; Hab. 3:19). Thus, those mortals who "ride upon the high places" are those who are blessed to be where the Lord is. This verse compares very closely with Deut. 32:13, which speaks of Israel's conquest of Canaan. Thus Isaiah's prophecy may refer to the renewal of the covenant between God and Israel and to the reconquest of the promised land.

feed thee with the heritage of Jacob. When we keep the Sabbath, the Lord will enable us to partake freely of the blessings promised to Jacob.

the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. This passage testifies of the source of the promises in this passage. The same words are recorded in 1:20 and 40:5.

---
Notas:
[^1] Isaiah, 492.
[^2] Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, 220, defines cockatrice as "a legendary serpent that is hatched by a reptile from a cock's egg and that has a deadly glance."
