Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 59

Likening Isa. 59 unto Ourselves

When we feel lost from God, he has not lost his power to bless and help us, and he continues to hear our prayers. But our iniquities can separate us from him. The Lord here speaks plainly against those who give themselves to sin. Israel apparently is aware of her state, for she laments her darkness and blindness. The state of those who choose sin is truly a miserable one.

When the Lord comes again, he will come in vengeance, and he will punish the wicked for their sins. But he will also come in mercy and love, bringing blessings to the repentant in Zion. It is a regular duty of the Lord's people to search their hearts, always seeking to know if they are clean and worthy. When the Lord comes again, will we rejoice to see him? Or will we tremble and fear because of our unworthiness?

Condemnation of Sin (59:1-8)

Chapter 59 begins with a stern condemnation of Israel's sinful state. Their iniquities have separated them from God (59:2). They are so sinful that every part of their being is corrupted: hands, fingers, lips, tongue, feet, even their very thoughts (59:3, 7). Isaiah emphasizes this sinfulness again and again, using such words as iniquities (or iniquity, repeated four times), sins, defiled with blood, lies (repeated once), perverseness, vanity, mischief, violence, evil, innocent blood, wasting, destruction, crooked paths. The people care nothing for justice, truth, peace, or judgment. They are compared to such vile things as the cockatrice's eggs, spider's webs, and vipers (59:5). Their sins will turn to their own destruction, the Lord says (59:7), and they know no peace (59:8).

Isa. 59:5-7 illustrates the justice of God: Those who sin (eat cockatrices', or serpents', eggs) bring punishment and destruction upon their own heads (die), and all their evil efforts will bring them nothing good or profitable (see Job 8:14).

Paul paraphrases some of these verses in Rom. 3:12-18: "There is none that doeth good, no, not one. Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips: Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness: Their feet are swift to shed blood: Destruction and misery are in their ways: And the way of peace have they not known: There is no fear of God before their eyes." Unfortunately, what Isaiah and Paul saw in their days, we can see in our own— even some who once were of the covenant have forgotten their God and have turned to wickedness.

Victor Ludlow observes: "In chapters 59 and 60, Isaiah describes a complete transformation of Israel as she moves from wickedness to righteousness through a sequence of changes: sin (59:1-8), repentance (59:9-15a), deliverance (59:15b-21), gathering (60:1-9), rebuilding (60:10-13), prosperity (60:14-18), and the presence of the Lord (60:19-22). . . . Isaiah portrays a pattern of progression as Israel rises from the depths of spiritual death to eternal life in God's presence." [^1]

Isa. 59:1-8

Behold, the Lord's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear: (59:1) But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. (59:2) For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muttered perverseness. (59:3) None calleth for justice, nor any pleadeth for truth: they trust in vanity, and speak lies; they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity. (59:4) They hatch cockatrice' eggs, and weave the spider's web: he that eateth of their eggs dieth, and that which is crushed breaketh out into a viper. (59:5) Their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their works: their works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands. (59:6) Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood: their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity; wasting and destruction are in their paths. (59:7) The way of peace they know not; and there is no judgment in their goings: they have made them crooked paths: whosoever goeth therein shall not know peace. (59:8)

Notes and Commentary

59:1 the Lord's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save. The Lord does not lack strength or power to save his children (50:2; Num. 11:23).

ear heavy/cannot hear. The Lord does not lack the capacity or readiness to hear us and attend to our needs.

59:2 hid his face from you. The Lord withholds his presence and other blessings when we remove ourselves from him through sin (8:17; 57:17).

59:3 hands are defiled with blood. In a specific sense, this passage may refer to bloodshed; in general, it refers to wickedness and sin.

hands/fingers/lips/tongue. These parts of the human body express the agency to act and to do wickedly. A fifth body part leads the people to evil: the feet (59:7). The hands that people use to reach out in pleading to God are the same hands they use to injure their fellowman; the same lips and tongue used in prayer for deliverance and blessing are those that speak deception (1:15; 5:7; 58:9).

perverseness. The New International Version reads this as "wicked things."

59:4 None calleth for justice, nor any pleadeth for truth. These phrases use legal imagery, the former representing a plaintiff and the latter a defendant in a suit (Job 9:15; 13:22).

vanity. The New International Version reads "empty arguments."

mischief. Wickedness abounds.

59:5 hatch. Rather than hatch, the true meaning appears to be that the eggs are broken open for the purpose of eating the contents. Job 20:12-16 uses the same imagery to develop the idea that sin is like eating a seemingly delicious food, only to discover that one has swallowed poison.

cockatrice/viper. Most translations replace the word cockatrice, a legendary serpent, [^2] with adder, a real one. The adder and the viper are particularly poisonous snakes. The people have sunk so low in their wickedness that they are killing themselves spiritually. The snakes probably represent Satan, and the spider's web, the bonds of sin.

59:6 webs . . . not . . . garments. Their evil plans and sins (compared to webs) will not provide for their temporal or spiritual needs.

act of violence is in their hands. These wicked people are using their agency to choose violent, unrighteous behavior.

59:7 feet run to evil/make haste to shed innocent blood. The people described are so wicked that they rush—run, make haste—to sin (Prov. 1:16; Rom. 3:15).

wasting and destruction are in their paths. These sinners leave a trail of trouble behind them. Their paths are in contrast to that of Prov. 16:17, "the highway of the upright" which["depart[s] from evil."

59:8 The way of peace they know not. The wicked cannot know peace because true peace is a gift of the Spirit, available only to the righteous. The fruits of hatching the works of Satan and weaving "spiders' webs" (59:6) are emptiness and futility, not peace and well-being.

no judgment in their goings. There is no equity or justice in their way of life. The wicked do not follow the path of justice toward God (Prov. 10:9) or to hear their fellowmen, nor do they feel that God has dealt justly with them (Job 27:8-10).

crooked paths. A twisted, perverted, unrighteous way of life is contrasted with the strait and narrow path. These are the same paths as in 59:7, which lead to waste and destruction.

Confession of Iniquity (59:9-15a)

Those speaking in this passage are probably those once of the covenant who come to realize their spiritual plight. They walk in darkness (59:9), looking for justice and salvation but finding neither (59:11). They know they are in sin (59:12). They have transgressed against the Lord and lied to him, they oppress others, and their society is so corrupt that justice, truth, and equity are far from them (59:14). In fact, those who seek to live righteously become "a prey" to all the others (59:15).

The repetition of certain words and concepts in this passage clearly shows the emphasis on Israel's sin and its consequences: There is no "judgment" (59:9, 11, 12), "justice" (59:9, 14), "salvation" (59:11), "truth," or "equity" (59:14-15). The people suffer "obscurity," "darkness," and "blindness" (59:9, 10); they "grope" and "stumble" (59:10). They "are in desolate places as dead men" (59:10), and they "roar" and "mourn sore" (59:11). They know their "transgressions" and "iniquities"; they know they have departed from God (59:12-13). They confess to "lying," "speaking oppression and revolt," and "uttering" falsehoods (59:13). All in all, it is a dismal picture of a people lost in sin, a people who know their sinfulness but who have not yet come to repentance.

Isa. 59:9-15a

Therefore is judgment far from us, neither doth justice overtake us: we wait for light, but behold obscurity; for brightness, but we walk in darkness. (59:9) We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as if we had no eyes: we stumble at noonday as in the night; we are in desolate places as dead men. (59:10) We roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves: we look for judgment, but there is none; for salvation, but it is far off from us. (59:11) For our transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins testify against us: for our transgressions are with us; and as for our iniquities, we know them; (59:12) In transgressing and lying against the Lord, and departing away from our God, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood. (59:13) And judgment is turned away backward, and justice standeth afar off: for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter. (59:14) Yea, truth faileth; and he that departeth from evil maketh himself a prey: (59:15a)

Notes and Commentary

59:9 Therefore. This word ties the troubles of this passage with the wickedness of the previous passage; it establishes a cause-and-effect relationship.

judgment far/neither . . . justice overtake us. Because of their iniquity, the people receive neither God's judicial verdict in their favor (mishepat) nor God's justice in their behalf, meaning his righteous (tsedaqah) power of deliverance.

light/brightness/obscurity/darkness. Israel seeks the light of deliverance but sees only the darkness of continuing bondage, both to sin and to foreign oppressors. Why can someone who looks for light not find it? Perhaps these people are those who draw near only with their lips, while, as the previous verses make clear, their hearts remain far from their God (Job 19:8; 30:26; Isa. 29:13; Matt. 15:8).

59:10 grope . . . like the blind/as if we had no eyes/stumble at noonday as in the night. Those who have turned from the light, at least in their hearts, are unable to find their way through life. Not only are they like those who are blind, but even worse, it is as if they have no eyes at all. As a consequence, night and noon are the same to them; spiritual brightness and darkness are indistinguishable to those who have no spiritual eyes. This is the fulfillment of a curse pronounced on the wicked by the Lord in Deuteronomy (Deut. 28:28-29). The Lord has power to heal this blindness, if we will repent and return unto him.

in desolate places as dead men. Israel has become spiritually dead, lost in a desolate world without God.

59:11 We roar . . . like bears/mourn . . . like doves. Sometimes Israel's anguished laments are loud like the angry roaring (or growling) of bears; sometimes they are soft and subdued, like the sad moaning of doves. The wickedness of Israel, and the fruits of that wickedness, makes them angry at the troubles of sin while at the same time giving them cause for true mourning (38:14; Ezek. 7:16).

judgment/salvation. These words repeat the idea expressed in 59:9.

59:12 transgressions/sins/iniquities. The people have many sins, or rebellions, that condemn them. But they do not sin in ignorance—they are well aware of their sins.

59:13 lying against the Lord/speaking oppression and revolt/uttering . . . words of falsehood. These are sins of expression, of lying and bearing false witness to the Lord himself. The New International Version puts the situation in an even more serious light: "We acknowledge our iniquities: rebellion and treachery against the Lord, . . . uttering lies our hearts have conceived."

59:14 judgment is turned away backward/justice standeth afar off. This statement is another repetition of the idea expressed in 59:9 and 11.

truth is fallen in the street. Integrity has collapsed; it is not even to be found in public (as the street is public), where people are inclined to put on their best appearance.

equity cannot enter. Justice, honesty, and integrity are not allowed as part of Israel's life.

59:15a truth faileth. This expression echoes the idea found in 59:14.

he that departeth from evil maketh himself a prey. Those who repent and turn to righteousness are at the mercy of those who have no moral sense. Those who choose good are subject to being victimized by those who choose evil.

Salvation for the Righteous, Vengeance for the Wicked (59:15b-21)

The Lord beholds the great wickedness described in the previous passage, and he is much displeased (59:15). (The Jerusalem Bible reads "indignant" and the New American Bible "aggrieved.") Even worse, there is no one to make intercession for the few righteous in Zion (59:16). The Lord himself therefore brings salvation, sustained by the power of his own righteousness (59:16-17).

But in going forth as Savior, he goes also as Judge, bringing vengeance upon the unrepentant (59:17), both at the time of the Second Coming and in all ages. He will bring punishments according to their deeds (59:18), and all the wicked of the earth will know of his judgments and shall fear (59:19). No enemy of Zion shall stand, though they come in great multitudes, for the Lord will rise up against them (59:19).

Then he will come to his people in Zion and to all those of the house of Jacob who have repentant hearts (59:20). This coming can properly be seen as the Second Coming; it can also be understood to be the coming of the Lord to the hearts of the faithful of all ages. When the Lord visits the faithful, he brings his covenant.

Finally, the Lord promises that his Spirit and his truths will continue with his anointed servant and the seed of the servant forever (59:21).

Isaiah 59:15b-21

and the Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there was no judgment. (59:15b) And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no intercessor: therefore his arm brought salvation unto him; and his righteousness, it sustained him. (59:16) For he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head; and he put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloke. (59:17) According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay, fury to his adversaries, recompence to his enemies; to the islands he will repay recompence. (59:18) So shall they fear the name of the Lord from the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun. When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him. (59:19) And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord. (59:20) As for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the Lord; My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. (59:21)

Notes and Commentary

59:15b Lord saw it. The Lord is always aware of our sinfulness, both public and private.

judgment. There was no justice in the affairs of men.

59:16 no man. No one could be an intercessor for Zion (63:5).

wondered. Several versions of the Bible render this word as "appalled" (NIV, NAB, NRSV). Perhaps the idea here is that the Lord desired to raise up some kind of intercessor among mortals and was troubled that there was none.

no intercessor. There was no one to intercede for the Lord's covenant people, no one to help them in their bondage. The context suggests that the intercession here may not be that of the Atonement but of the Second Coming.

his arm brought salvation unto him. The Lord himself became the intercessor. His arm, which symbolizes his power, became the force that brought salvation or deliverance to his people.

his righteousness . . . sustained him. The Lord was able to deliver Zion because of his personal righteousness.

59:17 breastplate/helmet. The Saints have repeatedly been commanded to put on the "armour of God" (Eph. 6:13), including the "breastplate of righteousness" (Eph. 6:14), and the "helmet of salvation" (Eph. 6:17; 1 Thes. 5:8; D&C 27:15-18), but here the Lord tells us he will put on such armor to pour out vengeance on the wicked. In the Second Coming, he will fight Israel's battles (Israel being both the Jews and the Lord's Zion) and win her deliverance from her enemies (40:10; 42:13; 49:24-26; 52:10).

garments of vengeance/zeal as a cloke. As garments or a cloak cover a person, so is the Lord enveloped in his desire to exact punishment on the enemies of the latter- day Zion. The Revised Standard Version uses the word fury instead of zeal.

59:18 According to their deeds . . . he will repay. The Lord, who is perfectly just, will bring the wrath of his judgments against those who deserve them.

fury to his adversaries/recompence to his enemies. The Lord's enemies are those who choose willfulness and sin (Luke 19:27). Even worse are those who fight against Zion and the prophets (D&C 101:43-62; 103:1). All such will receive their just reward, or recompense, the punishing wrath of God.

the islands. Islands symbolize the uttermost parts of the earth (11:11; 42:12). No nation, people, or individual will escape the just wrath of the Lord.

59:19 fear the name of the Lord . . . and his glory/the west/the rising of the sun. Those who receive God's judgments will be afraid of both death and eternal punishment, and they will fear the Lord who brings both. When the Lord comes in his glory, "every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess, . . . saying: Fear God, and give glory to him" (D&C 88:104). These responses will occur from the west to the east, over the entire globe (40:5; 52:10).

like a flood. The enemies of the Lord's people will come with such power and in such numbers that they cannot be stopped or turned (8:6-8). But the Lord will stop them nonetheless.

a standard against him. Just as the Lord will lift a banner or ensign as a rallying point for the righteous, so will he lift a banner or ensign as a rallying point in the battle against evil (49:22; Alma 46:11-21, 36; 62:4).

59:20 Redeemer shall come to Zion. When Christ comes again, before he appears in glory, he will first come to Zion, both to the temple and to the gathering at Adam-ondi-Ahman (Mal. 3:1). [^3] Moroni gave a valuable context to this prophecy when he quoted it to Joseph Smith on 22 September 1823. He said that the Church would prosper and grow despite persecution, "increasing in knowledge till they shall be sanctified and receive an inheritance where the glory of God will rest upon them; and when this takes place, and all things are prepared, the ten tribes of Israel will be revealed in the north country, whither they have been for a long season; and when this is fulfilled will be brought to pass that saying of the prophet . . . [quotes 59:20]." [^4]

Not only will Christ come to Zion but he will then go forth from Zion. Paul wrote: "Blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in. And so all Israel shall be saved: as it is written, There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob: for this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins" (Rom. 11:25-27). Elder Orson Pratt declared, "The Zion of the last days . . . is the Church and kingdom of God; and out of that Church or kingdom or Zion is to come a Deliverer, who will turn away ungodliness from Jacob after the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled." [^5]

them that turn from transgression in Jacob. The Lord will "come to" the repentant among those who receive the Abrahamic covenant (66:5). This seems to refer to the Second Coming.

59:21 this is my covenant. "There is an eternal decree, issued in heaven above by the Lord himself. It is that in the day of gathering, when for the last time he as- sembles the outcasts of Israel, he will never again forsake them. They and their seed forever shall remain steadfast to the truth. The gospel will never be given to another people, nor the kingdom placed in other hands. The Lord's work will roll forward until the conversion of the world is completed" (see also 54:10). [^6]

them/thee. These pronouns refer to righteous Israel in the latter-day Zion. The Lord's promise to them is that his words and his Spirit will continue with them and their descendants forever. Paul cited this prophecy twice, both times indicating that it would come to pass when Israel was cleansed from sin (Rom. 11:26-27; Heb. 10:15- 17). Alternatively, them may refer to the covenant people and thee may refer to one through whom the covenant is fulfilled—perhaps the Lord's servant. This servant could be the Messiah, all of righteous Israel, or perhaps a great prophet yet to come forth (see 49:1-10 and commentary).

my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth. The Lord's words will be treasured and not lost (51:16; Ezek. 36:26-27; Jer. 1:9). The Lord gives this promise to Zion and his servant, who will bless all the righteous in Israel.

mouth. This expression suggests that Zion and the servant will be true to the Lord's word.

thy seed/thy seed's seed. The seed is the children and descendants of those in Zion or of the servant (53:10; Gen. 22:18). This also is part of the covenant to Abraham and his seed that the gospel (and its word) would continue among them in all ages (Abr. 2:10-11; D&C 132:30).

---
Notas:
[^1] Isaiah, 492.
[^2] Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, 220, defines cockatrice as "a legendary serpent that is hatched by a reptile from a cock's egg and that has a deadly glance."
[^3] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 157.
[^4] Cowdery, Messenger and Advocate (Oct. 1835): 199.
[^5] Journal of Discourses, 14:64.
[^6] McConkie, New Witness for the Articles of Faith, 571.
