Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 60

Likening Isa. 60 unto Ourselves

In the last days Zion will be established, shining like a light to the world. The glory of the Lord will be there, and many will seek to join themselves to her, bringing their wealth with them. Zion will be found in the beautiful city of New Jerusalem, which will be nothing less than a city of God. It will be a place of peace and righteousness, with no violence or war. These are blessings the Lord delights to bring us; we should earnestly seek to belong to that Zion.

The Glory of New Jerusalem (60:1-22)

The first part of Isa. 60 deals with the New Jerusalem and the Zion condition that will be found there; the individual addressed is the personified New Jerusalem. The headnote to this chapter in the LDS edition of the Bible verifies that this passage speaks first of the last days and finally of the splendor of the celestial Zion.

The Lord invites the New Jerusalem to "arise, shine." The light and glory of the Lord have come to rest on her (60:1). In contrast to the light of the New Jerusalem is the darkness that covers the earth and its people (60:2). The light of God in Zion will be seen by outsiders, and the Gentiles will be attracted by it to join her (60:2-3). The Gentiles will add much wealth and strength to Israel, symbolized by such terms as "forces," "multitude of camels," "gold," "incense," "flocks of Kedar," "rams of Nebaioth," "ships of Tarshish," "silver," and "glory of Lebanon" (60:5-13). The many references to wealth may also refer to spiritual gifts and treasures.

The coming of the Gentiles is combined with the coming of the lost ones of Israel; many shall be gathered to New Jerusalem from all parts of the world. Verse after verse of this passage speaks of that gathering: "all they gather themselves together, . . . thy sons shall come from far" (60:4); "thou shalt . . . flow together, . . . and be enlarged" (60:5); "all they from Sheba shall come" (60:6); "all the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered" (60:7); "Who are these that fly as a cloud?" (60:8) "ships . . . to bring thy sons from far" (60:9); "men may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles" (60:11); "The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee" (60:13); "The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee" (60:14).

Another recurring theme is that of kings coming: kings will "come to" Zion's brightness (60:3); kings will "minister" to her (60:10); kings will be "brought" to her (60:12); and in Zion, Israel will be nourished by kings (60:16).

Conditions in the New Jerusalem will be peaceful and glorious: "the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee" (60:1); "the Lord shall arise upon thee" (60:2); "Gentiles shall come to thy light" (60:3); "I will glorify the house of my glory" (60:7); "he hath glorified thee" (60:9); "I will make the place of my feet glorious" (60:13); "I will make thee . . . a joy of many generations" (60:15); "I will also make thy officers peace" (60:17); "thou shalt call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise" (60:18); "the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory" (60:19); "Thy people also shall be all righteous" (60:21).

Part of the reason for Zion's glory is the temple in New Jerusalem. The gold and incense in 60:6 are a feature of the temple. The flocks and rams of 60:7 appear to be temple sacrifices "with acceptance on mine altar" in the "house of my glory." And 60:13 speaks of beautifying "the place of my sanctuary," which is the temple.

Joseph Smith's words about temples in general also apply to the temple in Zion, the New Jerusalem: "What was the object of gathering . . . the people of God in any age of the world? . . . The main object was to build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of His house and the glories of His kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation; . . . It is for the same purpose that God gathers together His people in the last days." [^1]

Joseph Smith recorded a vision similar to the one Isaiah describes here: "And with one heart and with one mind, gather up your riches that ye may purchase an inheritance which shall hereafter be appointed unto you. And it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God; And the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be called Zion" (D&C 45:65-67; see also 45:68-71).

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 308.
