Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 63:1-14

Likening Isa. 63 unto Ourselves

The Lord has suffered greatly for us, as is symbolized by the blood-red color of his garments when he returns. He will come in fury and in anger to punish the wicked. Will we be among that group? Or will we be among those who feel his mercy and loving-kindness? With Isaiah, we can plead with the Lord for his mercy, asking him to return to earth with his deliverance.

The Lord's Vengeance in the Second Coming (63:1-6)

The opening verses of Isa. 63 give two important questions and answers about the second coming of Christ. The first question is, "Who comes with dyed garments, . . . traveling in the greatness of his strength?" The answer: "The Righteous One, who is mighty to save" (63:1; see Rev. 19:13, 15; 14:20; D&C 133:46-48). The second question is, "Why are your garments red, as one who has been treading in the winefat?" The answer: "Because I have trodden the winepress alone, and I will trample the wicked and stain my garments with their blood" (63:2-3).

The second coming of the Lord will be a "day of vengeance," but it will result in "the year of my redeemed" (63:4). D&C 133:50-53 quotes Isa. 63:3-9 with a few slight changes. Isa. 63:1-9 and 64:1-5 are both quoted in D&C 133 but in reverse order.

Isa. 63:1-6

Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save. (63:1) Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the [winevat] [^1]? (63:2) I have trodden the winepress alone; and of the people there was none with me: for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. (63:3) For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come. (63:4) And I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none to uphold: therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me; and my fury, it upheld me. (63:5) And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth. (63:6)

Notes and Commentary

63:1 Edom/Bozrah. In Hebrew, the consonants of Edom are the same as those in the word translated as red; the consonants of Bozrah may be interpreted as one who takes part in processing grapes into wine. (As a rule, Hebrew is written without vowels.) This parallel of red apparel and wine making is made even plainer in 63:2, in which we have the repetition of red and winevat.

Edom is called Idumea, which the Lord equates with "the world" (D&C 1:36). In this sense, the Lord is coming from the world, referring, perhaps, to his atonement, in which he took upon himself the sins of the world, though he himself was without sin. Edom was also a land in the ancient Near East, of which Bozrah was the capital; both may symbolize worldliness. The Lord "descended below all things" (D&C 88:6) in performing the Atonement—we might say he went to the center and chief part of the world's wickedness. Having done so, he will return in fury to punish the unrepentant in the last days.

dyed garments. The Lord's garments are dyed red or stained a crimson color.

63:2 red in thine apparel. When Christ returns, his garments will be red, as John saw: "And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood" (Rev. 19:13; D&C 133:48). The red clothing symbolizes at least three things: the blood Christ shed in performing the Atonement (Luke 22:44; D&C 19:18) the blood (or sins) of the wicked that he took upon himself (blood and sins are equated in Jacob 1:19; see also 1 Pet. 3:18; Alma 33:22; 3 Ne. 11:11) and the blood of the unrepentant wicked he has slain in his wrath (63:3; Lam. 1:15; D&C 133:48, 50-51). The blood symbolism is repeated here in the use of the words Edom, dyed garments, garments like him . . . in the winevat, winepress, blood . . . upon my garments, and stain all my raiment.

treadeth . . . winevat. The Jerusalem Bible reads, "Yahweh is represented as one who treads the grapes, his garments stained red. But what he has been treading are the nations, whose blood has spattered him, and who are represented by Edom. Some emend 'Edom' and 'Bozrah' and translate 'Who is this that comes all in red, in crimson garments like a wine-harvester?'"

63:3 have trodden the winepress alone. When Christ offered the Atonement in the Garden of Gethsemane, his agony was so great that "his sweat was as it were great drops of blood" (Luke 22:44), which presumably stained his garments. In addition, the blood of our sins—the signs of our wickedness—will stain his garments. This blood of atonement is symbolized by the image of a man who treads red grapes in a winepress, staining his clothing with the juice. But, with Christ, not only his hem but his whole garment will be stained. His whole being was engaged in the work of atonement. He trod the winepress alone because he alone could and did perform the Atonement, kneeling alone in the Garden of Gethsemane, hanging alone on the cross. "I . . . have trodden the winepress alone, even the winepress of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God" (D&C 76:107; 88:106).

will tread them in mine anger/trample them in my fury. Christ has trodden the winepress in offering the Atonement in the Garden of Gethsemane; but he will yet tread the nations in vengeance, even as in the winepress one treads on the grapes to force out the juice. Both acts stain his garments with blood (34:6; Joel 3:13; Lam. 1:15).

63:4 day of vengeance/year of my redeemed. The Lord is a God of both justice and mercy. Yet it appears that his blessings will continue far longer (year) than his punishments (day), at least in relation to this temporal earth (see commentary on 61:2). The "year of my redeemed" may refer to the jubilee year, when Israelite slaves were freed (Lev. 25:39-40; Ex. 21:2; Deut. 15:12). When the Lord comes, we will be freed from all the bonds of our enemies and oppressors.

63:5 there was none to help/mine own arm. Jehovah is the only one who can bring about the redemption of Israel. His arm brings vengeance to the wicked, salvation to the righteous. This verse closely parallels 59:16.

63:6 make them drunk in my fury. He will cause them to drink the cup of his wrath (51:17), just as he himself earlier had to drink the bitter cup of atonement (3 Ne. 11:11; D&C 19:18).

bring down their strength. Other translations read, "poured their lifeblood on the ground." The day of vengeance is finished.

Psalm of Mercy (63:7-14)

This passage is a beautiful psalm of the Lord's loving-kindness, great goodness, and mercy to the repentant (63:7). Isaiah notes that the Lord claims faithful Israel as his people and his children. He was not only a father but a Savior (63:8). He bore their afflictions; he redeemed them "in his love and in his pity"; he carried them in their time of need (63:9). "But they rebelled," making God their enemy, "and he fought against them" (63:10). Then they remembered his goodness to the people in the time of Moses. He had led them (an idea repeated three times in 63:11-13) and blessed them with his Spirit (63:14), and, by implication, so will he do again.

Isa. 63:7-14

I will mention the lovingkindnesses of the Lord, and the praises of the Lord, according to all that the Lord hath bestowed on us, and the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he hath bestowed on them according to his mercies, and according to the multitude of his lovingkindnesses. (63:7) For he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not lie: so he was their Saviour. (63:8) In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old. (63:9) But they rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit: therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them. (63:10) Then he remembered the days of old, Moses, and his people, saying, Where is he that brought them up out of the sea with the shepherd of his flock? where is he that put his holy Spirit within him? (63:11) That led them by the right hand of Moses with his glorious arm, dividing the water before them, to make himself an everlasting name? (63:12) That led them through the deep, as an horse in the wilderness, that they should not stumble? (63:13) As a beast goeth down into the valley, the Spirit of the Lord caused him to rest: so didst thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name. (63:14)

Notes and Commentary

63:7 lovingkindnesses of the Lord/praises/great goodness/mercies. These words refer particularly to Jehovah's goodness and kindness in delivering the children of Israel from their Egyptian bondage (Ps. 89; 22:3; 44:1; Neh. 9:6-15). That bondage—and the Lord's deliverance—are types of our spiritual bondage and our deliverance through his loving-kindness, goodness, and mercy. Joseph Smith added his testimony to Isaiah's by saying, "Our heavenly Father is more liberal in His views, and boundless in His mercies and blessings, than we are ready to believe or receive." [^2]

63:8 Surely they are my people. The Lord's people are not simply those descended from Abraham but those who have broken hearts and contrite spirits (2 Ne. 2:7).

children that will not lie. The Lord testifies that his true children will not deal falsely with him. In other words, they will keep their covenants.

he was their Saviour. As people become the sons and daughters of Christ, he becomes their Savior (Mosiah 5:7-8).

63:9 the angel of his presence saved them. The Lord himself saved Israel (Ex. 33:12-15; Deut. 4:37) he is the angel of his presence. Moses proclaimed the same blessing in Ex. 33:12-17 (see also D&C 133:52-53).

in his love and in his pity he redeemed them. Christ redeems us from the de- mands of justice, setting us free from the bonds of sin and death. He is motivated by love for his Father and for us (John 15:9-10, 12-14; D&C 34:3).

bare them/carried them. God is always there to tenderly care for his people, as he did in leading Israel forth from bondage in Egypt and caring for them in the desert (Deut. 32:11; Isa. 46:3-4; Acts 13:17-18). Descriptions of bearing and carrying another usually refer to a mother and her child. The Lord would have us see that he cares for us as a mother cares for her newborn child.

all the days of old. This phrase means the time of Israel's exodus from Egypt and her wanderings in the wilderness (63:11).

63:10 But they rebelled. Despite his love and mercy, Israel rebelled against her God (Deut. 32:15; Ps. 78:8; Neh. 9:16-18). Her people thus became enemies of God, as are all natural men and women (Mosiah 3:19).

vexed his holy Spirit. The Lord's people offended or grieved the Spirit (Eph. 4:30; D&C 121:37). When we make choices that turn us from the Spirit of God, that Spirit must leave us, and we, at the same time, become estranged from our Father and our God.

their enemy/he fought against them. The Lord punishes his people solely to motivate them to turn to him (Deut. 32:20-25; Judg. 2:14-15).

63:11 he remembered. According to footnote a to 63:11 in the LDS edition of the Bible and the opinions of other scholars, this statement means "his people remembered." Specifically, they remembered the Lord's blessings to Moses and the people of old. The purpose of the Lord's chastisement of the people Israel, as always, is to cause them to turn back to him. When they do, he blesses and delivers them (Judg. 2:16; see Job 36:10-12).

Where is he . . . ? After remembering how Jehovah saved the people during the Exodus, the people now long for his saving presence in their lives, for his guidance, for his loving comfort and tenderness (Jer. 2:6).

out of the sea. The Lord delivered Israel by miraculous means, taking them through the Red Sea. He does the same with us, bringing us safely past seemingly impassable obstacles in our lives.

shepherd of his flock. Moses was the shepherd the Lord used to bring his flock (the Israelites) through the Red Sea to safety (Ps. 77:19-20; Micah 6:4). Ultimately, of course, the good shepherd for us all is Christ (John 10:14).

put his holy Spirit within him. The him used here seems to refer to Moses, the shepherd, rather than to Israel, the flock. Moses was blessed with the Spirit (Num. 11:17, 25).

63:12 right hand of Moses/his glorious arm. "Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the Lord caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided" (Ex. 14:21). As we learn from Exodus, Moses used the priesthood to divide the waters of the Red Sea. The waters divided not by Moses' power but by the power of God, symbolized in the expression his glorious arm.

everlasting name. The Lord forever established his reputation as a God of supreme power when he led the children of Israel out of Egypt.

63:13 led them through the deep. The Lord took Israel safely through the waters of the Red Sea.

horse in the wilderness. A horse in the wilderness is sure and steady of foot. In the same way, the Lord helped Israel to flee Egypt into the wilderness with steadiness, without faltering. Likewise he will help us flee our captivity to sin (Prov. 21:31).

63:14 beast . . . into the valley. The valley represents a place where beasts find water and grass, the sustenance they need. In the same way, the Lord makes all his children to "lie down in green pastures" (Ps. 23:2).

Spirit of the Lord caused him to rest. The Lord gave ancient Israel rest from bondage, rest from care, peace of heart, and peace of conscience, which are gifts of the Spirit. So will he also do for all his children, in any age.

make thyself a glorious name. This statement is spoken in the same sense as the phrase "make himself an everlasting name" in 63:12. Through the Lord's mercy, goodness, and power, he has established his reputation as a God of such qualities forever.

---
Notas:
[^1] The JST changes the KJV made to suffered and and hardened our heart to to harden. These changes place the responsibility for error where it belongs, on the people, who have the agency to choose good or evil.
[^2] The changes in this verse are from the JST.
