Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 63:15-19; 64

Likening Isa. 63:15-19; 64 unto Ourselves

In this chapter Isaiah offers a prayer to the Lord, pleading for him to return in his glory. Do we join him in such a prayer? Or do we hope that he will delay his coming, so that we might have longer to repent? Isaiah acknowledges our weakness and sinfulness, but he also knows—as we should—that if we will submit ourselves to him in all things, we can trust in his mercy. And, in the end, the Lord will bring with him blessings that exceed our greatest imaginings.

Isaiah's Intercessory Prayer (63:15-19; 64:1-12)

Isaiah pleads in behalf of his people, asking the Lord to look down from heaven in mercy (63:15). The Lord is their Father and Redeemer (63:16). The enemies of Israel have defiled the Lord's temple, and they do not acknowledge Jehovah as God. But Israel has been called by his name (63:18-19).

Come down in power and glory, Isaiah pleads. Let the Second Coming bring salvation to Israel (64:1-3). Bring the blessings promised, even those greater than ear has heard or eye seen (64:4). We know that thou dost rejoice over the righteous, bringing them salvation (64:5). We are unclean and unworthy (64:6)—we have forgotten our God and know we have angered thee (64:7). But we submit ourselves to thy hands as clay (64:8). "Thou art our father" (63:16; 64:8). Turn from thine anger for our sakes (64:9). Jerusalem has been laid waste (64:10). The temple has been destroyed (64:11). O Lord, avenge us and thyself of these wrongs (64:12).

The entire passage is a prayer, offered powerfully in poetry. Isaiah directly addresses the Lord eight times here ("O Lord," "O God," "thou art our father"). It is a prayer not only from those of old but from the hearts of God's covenant people in our time as well.

D&C 133:40-45 quotes Isa. 64:1-4 with changes and additions.

Isa. 63:15-19; 64:1

Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory: where is thy zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward me? are they restrained? (63:15) Doubtless thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou, O Lord, art our father, our redeemer; thy name is from everlasting. (63:16) O Lord, why hast thou [suffered] us to err from thy ways,

and [to harden][1] our heart from thy fear?

Return for thy servants' sake, the tribes of thine inheritance. (63:17) The people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little while: our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary. (63:18) We are thine: thou never barest rule over them; they were not called by thy name. (63:19) Oh that thou wouldest rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence, (64:1) As when the melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the waters to boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at thy presence! (64:2) When thou didst terrible things which we looked not for, thou camest down, the mountains flowed down at thy presence. (64:3) For since the beginning of the world men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, O God, beside thee, what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him. (64:4) Thou meetest him that . . . worketh righteousness, [and rejoiceth him] that [emember[eth] thee in thy ways: [in righteousness there] is continuance, and [such] shall be saved. [^1] (64:5) But [we have sinned]; [^2] we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away. (64:6) And there is none that calleth upon thy name, that stirreth up himself to take hold of thee: for thou hast hid thy face from us, and hast consumed us, because of our iniquities. (64:7) But now, O Lord, thou art our father; we are the clay, and thou our potter; and we all are the work of thy hand. (64:8) Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever: behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy people. (64:9) Thy holy cities are a wilderness, Zion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation. (64:10) Our holy and our beautiful house, where our fathers praised thee, is burned up with fire: and all our pleasant things are laid waste. (64:11) Wilt thou refrain thyself for these things, O Lord? wilt thou hold thy peace, and afflict us very sore? (64:12)

Notes and Commentary

63:15 Look/behold. Isaiah is asking the Lord to note the plight of his people. This could also be a prayer offered by the covenant people themselves.

heaven/habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory. The earthly temple is God's dwelling place on earth; the heavenly temple is his habitation in heaven (Rev. 7:15; 16:17).

where is thy zeal and thy strength. These phrases may be interpreted as meaning passion and power. Isaiah is asking the Lord if he has lost interest in his people—are his desires for them restrained or held back?

sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies. "Your tenderness, the yearning of your heart, and compassion are withheld from us" (NIV, RSV). To sound can mean to measure the depth of, to probe, explore or examine; it can also mean to signal or proclaim, to make known. In Near Eastern thought, the bowels and the womb are the seat of compassion, of tenderness and mercy (3 Ne. 17:6). God had in his displeasure hidden himself from his people. Isaiah here pleads for God's love and intervention.

63:16 thou art our father. Abraham and Jacob were Israel's earthly ancestors, but they are long since dead and unable to help. Jehovah is their eternal Father, whose help will never fail. [^3]

redeemer. The Lord pays the price to ransom us from sin and death. The term redeemer is used eighteen times in the Bible, thirteen of those in Isaiah (for example, 41:14; 43:14; 48:17; 54:8).

thy name is from everlasting. The Lord is God from all eternity to all eternity (63:12; Mosiah 3:5).

63:17 suffered us to err from thy ways, and to harden our heart. Isaiah asks why the Lord allowed his people to sin (6:9-10).

Return . . . the tribes of thine inheritance. Because of their sins, the seed of Abraham (the twelve tribes of Israel) have been separated from their promised blessings. Isaiah asks the Lord to help them to return to their promised inheritance.

for thy servants' sake. This phrase means "for the sake of those who are faithful." Even though many of the covenant people have turned to sin, Isaiah asks that the Lord remember his promises to them because of the worthiness of a few. This is the same argument Abraham made when the Lord informed him of the pending destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah (Gen. 18:23-24, 26).

63:18 The people of thy holiness. The people to whom the temple belongs are the people of [God's] holiness.

trodden down thy sanctuary. This phrase refers to the destruction of the temple in Jerusalem in 587 b.c.

63:19 We are thine. Israel remembers that Jehovah is her God, her king, her Savior, and she desires a renewal of the covenant made in former times (Deut. 7:6). This statement also reminds us of Paul's expression that we belong to God, having been bought with a price (1 Cor. 6:19-20).

thou never barest rule over them/not called by thy name. Isaiah here sets up a difference between the chosen, covenant people, and their adversaries. The true people of God have been known to him by covenant; they have subjected themselves to him. Others have refused to humble themselves and receive the Lord as their God and their king. Through covenant and submissiveness, a people can become the Lord's people—"we are thine"—and, in turn, lay claim to his blessings.

64:1 rend the heavens/mountains . . . flow down at thy presence. To rend the heavens is to tear open the veil, so that God can be seen. Additionally, trembling, moving, and melting of mountains are manifestations of the presence of God (Ex. 19:18; Ps. 18:6-8; D&C 133:40-41). Isaiah asks the Lord to come to the deliverance of his people, tearing open the veil and bringing the fervent heat of his glory, which will literally melt the mountains. These are images directly related to the Lord's second coming. This expression may have another meaning: The Lord has power over heaven and earth, and he has power over all other gods. In his coming, Jesus will throw down the mountains, which here may represent the temples of false gods.

64:2 melting fire. This is a fire so hot that it will melt the very elements of the earth, causing the mountains to flow down and the oceans to boil. Speaking in our dispensation, the Lord said: "Every corruptible thing, . . . that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed; and also that of element shall melt with fervent heat" (D&C 101:24-25).

make thy name known to thine adversaries. The Lord's friends know him by covenant, by obedience, and by the still small voice of the Spirit. But the Lord's adversaries, who refuse these blessings, shall know him only by the power of his judgments. Isaiah asks the Lord to come with his burning fire so that all nations will know him and tremble at his presence.

64:3 terrible things which we looked not for. These are things of wonder and amazement, things beyond expectation, things fearful to God's enemies, such as those seen preceding the Exodus (Deut. 10:21; 2 Sam. 7:23; Ps. 106:22).

thou camest down, the mountains flowed down. These phrases reinforce the cause-and-effect relationship between the Lord's coming and the burning of the earth (64:1).

64:4 men have not heard. The blessings the Lord will bring with him—including those of the millennial reign and celestial glory—are beyond the comprehension and imagination of man. There is no other who can save and bless as can Jehovah. His power and love can bring grace and mercy greater than we can even imagine (45:22; 43:11-12). As Paul wrote, "As it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him" (1 Cor. 2:9).

what he hath prepared. The Lord's blessings are already in place for the righteous, though we must endure to the end to receive many of them.

waiteth for him. Those who wait faithfully for the coming of the Lord.

64:5 Thou meetest him that . . . worketh righteousness. Meetest (Hebrew paga') means "reaches out to" or "makes intercession for." The Lord will reach out to the righteous, making intercession for them. The New International Version gives this statement as "you come to the help of those who gladly do right."

rejoiceth him that remembereth thee in thy ways. The Lord blesses not only those who remember his ways (meaning, his commandments, the path he would have us walk) but also those who remember him. That, of course, is part of the covenant made by all members of the Church: "that they do always remember him" (D&C 20:79). As we remember the Lord, he will bring us to a state of rejoicing.

in righteousness there is continuance. Continuance (Hebrew 'olam) means eternity, always, everlasting, perpetual, worlds without end. The righteous will be blessed with everlasting life, with blessed life for all eternity.

such shall be saved. Those who meet the requirements—work righteousness, remember the Lord, and remember his ways—will be saved, gaining exaltation in the celestial kingdom. When we combine 64:5 with 63:19, which implies that the chosen people have been "called by thy name," we have all three elements of the sacramental covenant: "they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him and keep his commandments." Those who keep their covenants will "always have his Spirit to be with them" (D&C 20:77), which brings such blessings as those mentioned in this passage: the Lord reaches out to them, intercedes for them; he brings them the gift of joy and promises eternal life and blessings greater than man ever has or ever could imagine.

64:6 unclean thing/righteousnesses are as filthy rags. Under the Mosaic law the term unclean often applied to those with a bodily discharge (whether male or female) or with leprosy. Commanded to live outside the bounds of normal society, such people symbolized those whose sins made them spiritually unclean and unfit to live with God and his holy ones. Filthy rags were those stained with menstrual blood, a reminder of our mortal, fallen state. The implication here is that even though we perform righteous acts, we are still fallen, imperfect, and unclean before the Lord. Because of our fallen nature, our righteousness is insufficient to save us. Only when our righteousness is combined with the righteousness of Christ can we receive exaltation (2 Ne. 15:23).

fade as a leaf, iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away. Sin saps our moral strength and leads us to spiritual death (see Ezek. 18:24; 33:12). Our desire for righteousness fades, and we are swept away as the wind blows the dried autumn leaves (17:13; 29:5; Ps. 1:4).

64:7 none that calleth upon thy name. No one is praying to the Lord. By implication, no one is trusting or relying on the Lord and his mercy.

stirreth up himself. No one makes the effort to become worthy of the Lord's name or blessings. To stir ourselves up is to exercise our agency, to act—in this case, to come unto Christ.

take hold of thee. To take hold of is to grab onto, to cling to, to rely on for one's support. Israel has failed to take hold of the Lord and thus is left alone.

hid thy face. The people's sins have so clouded their spirits that they no longer recognize God's presence in their lives. They have completely turned away from him, but in their minds he has turned away from them and left them to their iniquitous lives (Rom. 6:16).

hast consumed us, because of our iniquities. The Hebrew reads, "melted us by the hand of our iniquities."

64:8 thou art our father. This plaintive appeal is to a God who is also a Father, one who knows and loves his children. To paraphrase, "Even though we have sinned and fallen short of our potential as thy children, we know that thou art our father and we desire to repent and be worthy of thee" (63:8, 16).

we are the clay/potter. The people are acknowledging their true relationship to their creator; as clay, they are nothing without the creator, having no shape and no power to mold themselves. They are in all things subject to the potter. See also commentary on 45:9.

64:9 behold, see, we beseech thee. Israel asks the Lord to notice that she is once again calling upon him.

we are all thy people. Israel, both anciently and in the present, represents the Lord's people by ownership and by covenant.

64:9-10 thy people/Thy holy cities. The people plead with the Lord, arguing that he is being asked to save his own: his people who are enslaved, his land that is besieged, his city that lies wasted, his temple that has been defiled.

64:10 holy cities/wilderness/desolation. The city of Jerusalem, which is the holy city, and all other cities of the land have been laid waste by Israel's enemies. They are empty of the Lord's people, and the Lord's promises do not seem to be fulfilled. When we sin and turn from God, our lives become a wilderness, and that which once was holy for us becomes common.

Zion. Zion can be a synonym for Jerusalem or for the state of true unity between the Saints and God. When we turn from God, we lose our claim on his promises of Zion.

64:11 Our holy . . . house . . . burned up. This expression refers to the destruction of the temple in Jerusalem in 587 b.c. The loss of the temple meant the loss of Israel's ability to practice her religion. It meant the loss or postponement of the covenant and its promises.

where our fathers praised thee. The ancestors of Israel in Isaiah's time praised the Lord in their temple, until it was destroyed by enemies.

all our pleasant things are laid waste. One translation is "All that we treasured lies in ruins" (NIV), perhaps referring to the sacred vessels and other accoutrements of the temple, or possibly the temple itself. Other translations read, "All our pleasant places have become ruins" (RSV); and "All the things of beauty are destroyed" (LB).

64:12 Wilt thou refrain thyself for these things? Isaiah asks the Lord whether after all the destruction and trouble our enemies have brought on us, he will hold back in avenging our loss and in restoring us.

hold thy peace, and afflict us. "You hold yourself back? Will you keep silent and punish us beyond measure?" (NIV). Now that the people acknowledge their unworthiness before him and seek his face, now that they and their land are in the direst of circumstances, will he still withhold his help and allow them to suffer more? Or will he reveal himself and come to their aid? According to the Interpreter's Bible, "This is an argument from man at his tenderest to the most loving God. It is the plea of heartbroken sinners to . . . a heartbroken God. Calvin, who shared their feeling of the inward filthiness, the total ruination, and the iron slavery of sin, [offers the] prayer: 'Lord, let the bottomless depth of thy mercy swallow up the bottomless depth of my sin.'" [^4]

---
Notas:
[^1] The changes in this verse are from the JST.
[^2] The changes in this verse are from the JST.
[^3] The changes in this verse are from the JST.
[^4] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 524.
