Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Isa. 66

Likening Isa. 66 unto Ourselves

We can do many works of obedience, but they are as naught if we do not give the Lord the sacrifice he really desires: a broken heart and a contrite spirit. Those of such a spirit are those who come to Zion. If we are so blessed, we will feel God's love and care as a child feels the love and care of his mother.

We are living in a day in which great prophecies are being fulfilled. We can see the Lord gathering his children from all parts of the world. Many of us may see the Lord come in his glory, though no man knows when that will be. Those who witness his coming will see the beginning of the millennial day, with the creation of a new heaven and a new earth. These are blessings to be sought in faith.

The Righteous Shall Be Justified, the Wicked Punished (66:1-6)

To the righteous the Lord says, in effect, "You can build me a temple, but that which I desire most is the person with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, a person who hearkens to my word (66:1-2). I will come to justify you in your righteousness, while your enemy will be ashamed" (66:5).

To the wicked the Lord seems to say, "Those who choose their own way, who will not hearken unto me, will have their worst fears come upon them (66:3-4). Those who persecute the righteous will be ashamed (66:5). I come in power to bring justice on my enemies" (66:6).

Isa. 66:1-6

Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool: where is the house that ye build unto me? and where is the place of my rest? (66:1) For all those things hath mine hand made, and those things have been, saith the Lord: but to this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word. (66:2) He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man; he that sacrificeth a lamb, as if he cut off a dog's neck; he that offereth an oblation, as if he offered swine's blood; he that burneth incense, as if he blessed an idol. Yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul delighteth in their abominations. (66:3) I also will choose their delusions, and will bring their fears upon them; because when I called, none did answer; when I spake, they did not hear: but they did evil before mine eyes, and chose that in which I delighted not. (66:4) Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word; your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name's sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed. (66:5) A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of the Lord that rendereth recompence to his enemies. (66:6)

Notes and Commentary

66:1 The heaven is my throne/the earth is my footstool. The Lord rules over heaven and earth; all things in all places are subject to him. As the Lord said to Abraham, "I am the Lord thy God; I dwell in heaven; the earth is my footstool; I stretch my hand over the sea, and it obeys my voice; I cause the wind and the fire to be my chariot; I say to the mountains—Depart . . . and behold, they are taken away" (Abr. 2:7).

The throne represents the Lord's role as eternal king (D&C 128:23). All heaven is his throne in that it is from there that he rules. But, more particularly, the Lord dwells in the heavenly temple, which is heaven itself, and in that temple is his throne (Ps. 11:4; Rev. 4:2; 20:11).

The earth as a footstool suggests a position of complete submission. The Lord rules from his throne, but he puts the earth under his feet. People on earth, even those of great power and wealth, are as nothing compared to the Lord. Yet this image of the earth is not entirely negative. In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus taught that we should not swear by the earth, because it belongs to the Lord (Matt. 5:34-35; 3 Ne. 12:34-35). When the Lord spoke in our day of the earth as his footstool, he did so saying he would yet stand on it again (D&C 38:17).

where is the house that ye build unto me? The Lord spoke to King David through the prophet Nathan, saying, "Shalt thou build me an house for me to dwell in? . . . I have not dwelt in any house since the time that I brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt, . . . but have walked in a tent and in a tabernacle" (2 Sam. 7:5-6). The Lord's question was asked anew by Solomon when he exclaimed upon completion of the temple: "But will God indeed dwell on the earth? behold, the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that I have builded?" (1 Kgs. 8:27).

66:2 For all those things hath mine hand made, and those things have been. The Lord created all things in heaven and on the earth. Other translations clarify the second phrase: "by my hand all those things have been."

to this man will I look. The Lord has power over all, but he looks to a few with joy; he looks to a few to help him with his work. Those few are the obedient and contrite.

poor and of a contrite spirit. "Blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me," Jesus said, "for theirs is the kingdom of heaven" (3 Ne. 12:3). A contrite spirit is often given as one of the principal requirements for receiving the saving grace of Christ (2 Ne. 2:7; Hel. 8:15). A contrite spirit is penitent and sorrowful for sin. A poor spirit is a humble spirit. Those with a humble and a contrite spirit are those to whom the Lord will bring his greatest blessings.

trembleth at my word. The Lord is most pleased with those who desire to receive his word of revelation, both through his prophets and through the Holy Spirit, and who then are filled with awe, amazement, and reverence at that word. Those with such an attitude, of course, are those who love and obey the Lord's word with all their hearts.

66:3 killeth an ox/slew a man/sacrificeth a lamb/cut off a dog's neck. This verse means that our sacrifices and oblations are not acceptable to God if at the same time we transgress his laws by our worship of other things or by hating our brethren. A man might sacrifice a lamb to the Lord, for example, but if he did so with an impure heart he might as well have cut through a dog's neck. A man might offer an oblation to the Lord, but if his heart was impure, he might as well have offered swine's blood, which would be abhorrent to the Lord. The parallels in this verse illustrate how men may outwardly appear to worship Jehovah while in reality continuing their sinful ways, whether outwardly or in their hearts (James 3:9-10). Certainly the Lord wants our sacrifices, the outward signs of our devotion. But he also wants us to understand that outward symbols are empty without the inward devotions: obedience, repentance, humility, gratitude (1:11-13).

they have chosen their own ways. Isaiah speaks frequently about the way of the Lord in contrast to the way of man (55:8-9). Those who are righteous live their lives according to the laws and covenants of the gospel and by the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord (2:3; 26:7; 48:17). Others choose their own way and are condemned by the Lord (53:6; 56:11; 59:8; 65:2).

their soul delighteth in their abominations. Not only do these people choose to do evil works but they find delight in them. In other words, they have no remorse.

66:4 I also will choose their delusions, and will bring their fears upon them. For delusions, other versions read, "affliction" (RSV), "harsh treatment" (NIV), or "hardships" (JB). In turning to other gods, the Israelites sought to avoid judgment from Jehovah. But now their worst fears will be realized; they will learn that they cannot escape justice (65:6-7). The Lord will choose their afflictions and troubles; they will not choose them. As for the Lord deluding us, or causing us to be deluded, Joseph Smith said, "The devil could not compel mankind to do evil; all was voluntary. . . . God would not exert any compulsory means, and the devil could not." [^1] In other words, we are deluded because of our choices and desires, not because of the works or actions of either the Lord or Satan.

when I called/evil before mine eyes/chose that in which I delighted not. The contrast between 65:3 and 65:4 demonstrates that the things that delight the people are exactly the things that do not delight the Lord. See commentary on 65:12.

66:5 tremble at his word. See commentary on 66:2.

your brethren that hated you, that cast you out. This statement suggests division within Israel itself, wherein the wicked cast out the righteous (51:7). The verb in Hebrew means "to excommunicate" but also suggests "to cast down" or "to reject." Those who treated the righteous in this manner will eventually "be ashamed." The righteous here are being cast out "for my name's sake" or because of their fervent belief in the Lord. That is the lot of the righteous in all dispensations (Matt. 5:11-12).

Let the Lord be glorified. These are not the true followers speaking here, rejoicing in their Lord; rather, they are the errant Israelites mocking their believing brethren. The prophet had earlier declared, "The glory of the Lord shall be revealed" (40:5), and the unbelievers were using these same words to jeer and ridicule those who indeed looked forward to Jehovah's intervention on their behalf (5:19). The wicked may actually believe they are doing God's will in casting out the righteous. They may be deceived into seeing evil as good and good as evil (5:20; Mal. 2:17).

he shall appear to your joy/they shall be ashamed. When the Lord comes again, the righteous will be filled with joy and the wicked (including the persecutors mentioned above) with great shame.

66:6 A voice of noise. Those who do not "tremble at [his] word" will tremble at the sound of his vengeance (Joel 3:16-17; Amos 1:2).

from the city/from the temple. The noise from the city may be the sound of the mourning of the wicked as they experience God's judgments, which may come forth from his temple. The word translated here as temple (Hebrew heykal) also means "palace," as in 39:7 and 13:22. Because the city is where the people live, and the palace where the rulers live, the meaning here may be that the destruction will reach into every dwelling place.

the Lord that rendereth recompence to his enemies. The Lord will bring the appropriate judgment upon all those who fight against him, according to their works.

Blessings to Zion (66:7-14a)

Zion will come to the fulness of her being suddenly, as a woman who gives birth without any pains or travail (66:7). And just as surely as a woman comes to the point of delivery and gives birth, so surely will Zion come to her fruition when her time has come (66:8-9). Those who now mourn because Zion has not yet come will then rejoice and be glad (66:10). She will have peace from the Lord, and he will give her spiritual sustenance, comfort, and care, even as a mother cares for her infant child (66:11-14).

The repetition of the image of woman and mother here is notable. We have a woman bearing a child (66:7-9), Jerusalem as a female (66:10), a mother nourishing her children at her breast (66:11-12), and a mother giving comfort to her children (66:13). By using these images, the Lord shows us how thoroughly the children of Zion, after their long trials, will be blessed and comforted.

Isa. 66:7-14a

Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child. (66:7) Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation be born at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children. (66:8) Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth? saith the Lord: shall I cause to bring forth, and shut the womb? saith thy God. (66:9) Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her: rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her: (66:10) That ye may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations; that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory. (66:11) For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream: then shall ye suck, ye shall be borne upon her sides, and be dandled upon her knees. (66:12) As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you; and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. (66:13) And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb: (66:14a)

Notes and Commentary

66:7 Before she travailed, she brought forth. The Living Bible translates this passage as follows: "In one day, suddenly, a nation, Israel, shall be born, even before the birth pains come." Isaiah's words make it plain that the creation of Zion is a miracle, as miraculous as would be the painless, effortless birth of a child. Suddenly and miraculously, it seems, a whole new society or a holy nation—Zion—is born. In viewing this same event, John the Revelator saw that there was indeed travail as the woman (the perfected "church of God," or Zion) brought forth the man child ("the kingdom of our God and his Christ") (JST Rev. 12:1-7). By combining Isaiah and Revelation, we come to this possible reading: "Before Zion travailed to bring forth the multitude of her children, she travailed to bring forth the perfected kingdom of God, which will rule all nations with a rod of iron."

delivered of a man child. Elder Bruce R. McConkie interpreted this passage as meaning the birth of the kingdom of God, which accords with Joseph Smith's translation of Rev. 12:7. [^2] The headnote to Isa. 66 in the LDS edition of the Bible identifies the child as "Israel, as a nation," placing the event at the Second Coming.

66:8 bring forth in one day/nation be born at once. Victor Ludlow gives this helpful commentary on this phrase: "In this prophecy, Isaiah apparently promises that shortly after Zion is established in Jackson County, great numbers of unexpected peoples, including the Ten Tribes and other Israelite remnants, will join with Zion to prepare the earth for the Millennium. These verses convey the feeling of suddenness and surprise at Zion's rapid growth." [^3]

brought forth her children. The children of the woman are the people of Zion, who are of one heart and one mind, prepared to greet the Lord at his coming.

66:9 bring to the birth . . . shut the womb. In the natural world, once a woman comes to the point of travail, where labor has begun and the baby is ready to be born, the baby is indeed brought forth. The Lord does not at that point "shut the womb." In the same way, he will not cause Zion to come to the point of giving birth to her children of righteousness and then shut the womb. The birth of the children of Zion is as certain as the birth of any infant.

There is also another possible way to understand this phrase. Anciently, the birth of infants was not always certain. A woman could come to the point of delivery and yet because of complications (such as the cord being around the baby's neck or the baby being in an unworkable position), she would find her womb, in effect, to be "shut," and both she and the baby could die without delivery. The Lord says, however, that what he brings to delivery will indeed come forth.

66:10 Rejoice/be glad/rejoice for joy. The cause of the rejoicing is the fulfillment of the Lord's promises: Zion shall be established, her children shall be born, and Jerusalem will be restored to her promised blessings.

ye that love her/ye that mourn for her. These are they who continue to trust in Jehovah's promises, not those who forgot him and forsook Zion, as in 65:11. These faithful ones have had cause to mourn for Jerusalem—she has been destroyed and her children scattered—but in the last days the Lord will give them abundant cause to rejoice. The loss of Jerusalem symbolizes the loss or postponement of the blessing of the covenant, but in the last days, both Jerusalem and the covenant will be restored.

66:11 That ye may suck, and be satisfied. The righteous will be like a child who is returned to its mother (49:15-17; 60:16). They will receive both nourishment and comfort from the mother, who is Zion (symbolized by Jerusalem).

breasts of her consolations. The inhabitants of Zion will be safe and at peace, content and satisfied.

ye may milk out. The children of Zion will be blessed with spiritual nourishment and emotional comfort (at the breast of their mother, Zion) without limit.

delighted with the abundance of her glory. The children of Zion will rejoice to receive of the blessings of Zion's glory, which will be available in great abundance.

66:12 peace . . . like a river. The Hebrew word here (shalom), usually translated peace, could more correctly be translated "prosperity." See commentary on 48:18.

the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream. The word glory (Hebrew kabod) may be translated "wealth." The wealth of the gentiles, both spiritual and temporal, will flow like a stream unto Zion. See commentary on 60:5; 61:6.

borne upon her sides. See commentary on 60:4.

dandled upon her knees. To dandle is to play with affectionately. The Lord is telling us that the people of Zion will be comfortable and happy.

66:13 As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you. After all the trials and tribulations of their history, the people of the Lord will come to a place of peace and safety in Zion, and there they will be comforted, even as a child is comforted by his mother.

66:14a your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb. Simply put, the righteous in Zion will be both happy and healthy. In old age and illness, bones are considered dry and brittle (Ps. 31:10; Lam. 1:13), but in youth and health they are thought of as fresh and moist (Job 21:24; Prov. 15:30). Herbs, like all other healthy green plants, grow readily and easily.

The Lord Shall Return in Power and Glory (66:14b-18a)

When the Lord comes in his glory, he will come with fire and the sword, bringing judgments on the wicked. The idea of fire is repeated five times in three verses: "fire" (three times), "flames," and "consumed" (66:15-17). The idea of the anger of the Lord is repeated four times in two verses with such words as indignation, anger, fury, and rebuke (66:14-15). Through the fire and the sword, many will die (66:16). None of the wicked will escape (66:17-18). These things are sent by way of deliverance to the Lord's servants but as a judgment against his enemies (66:14). Ps. 18:6-17 gives us an interesting parallel description of this same event.

Isaiah 66:14b-18a

and the hand of the Lord shall be known toward his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies. (66:14b) For, behold, the Lord will come with fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire. (66:15) For by fire and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh: and the slain of the Lord shall be many. (66:16) They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves in the gardens behind one tree in the midst, eating swine's flesh, and the abomination, and the mouse, shall be consumed together, saith the Lord. (66:17) For I know their works and their thoughts: (66:18a)

Notes and Commentary

66:14b hand of the Lord shall be known. When the Lord comes again, he will bring terrible judgments and destructions on the wicked (his enemies). But those same judgments will serve to bless and deliver the righteous (his servants) from the wicked world.

his indignation toward his enemies. The enemies of God are all those who persist, unrepentant, in their ways as natural men and women (Mosiah 3:19). Further, God's enemies are those who participate in the grosser sins, who encourage others in sin, and who fight against the right. God's indignation, meaning anger or wrath, will be known toward all such.

66:15 the Lord will come with fire/chariots/whirlwind/flames of fire. When the Lord returns he will bring with him a devouring fire, which shall burn the wicked as stubble and cleanse the world with flame (Mal. 4:1; D&C 29:9). Fire and flames of fire also symbolize God's glory and unapproachable holiness (30:27; Ex. 3:2). Chariots and the whirlwind symbolize God's power in bringing justice; the whirlwind also suggests the swiftness with which the Lord comes to destroy the wicked (19:1; Jer. 4:13; Ps. 104:3; Abr. 2:7).

anger/fury/rebuke. The Lord has reached out to the wicked in long-suffering and patience for many generations. When he returns in his second coming, the time for patience will have passed, and the time for judgments will have arrived.

66:16 by fire and by his sword. Jehovah comes as a warrior to mete out justice. The wicked will be destroyed by the terrible wars of the last days (D&C 87:2-6) as well as by the fire of the Lord's coming (27:1; 30:30-33; 31:8; 33:12).

plead with all flesh. The Lord's judgments are designed to plead with us—everyone on the earth—to come to repentance. Other versions read "execute judgment" (see, for example, RSV, NIV).

slain of the Lord shall be many. "I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, saith the Lord of hosts. . . . And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth" (Jer. 25:29, 33). "And the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred thousand thousand: . . . And thus . . . was the third part of men killed" (Rev. 9:16-18).

66:17 They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves in the gardens behind one tree. The Lord's anger is aroused at idol worshipers who seek to cleanse and purify themselves in pagan rites. One tree may refer to a rite performed under the direction of one leader (57:5; 65:3; Ezek. 8:11).

eating swine's flesh/abomination/mouse. Abomination refers to all unclean animals (Lev. 7:21; Isa. 65:4; 66:3). Swine and mice were both forbidden as food for the Lord's covenant people under the law of Moses (Lev. 11:7, 29).

consumed together. All the wicked will be destroyed at the time of the coming of the Lord (JST Matt. 13:41-51).

66:18a I know their works and their thoughts. God knows all things (Morm. 8:17). He knows and judges us by our words, our thoughts, our works, even the intents of our hearts (Heb. 4:12; Alma 12:14; 18:32).

Gathering from All Nations (66:18b-21)

In preparation for the Second Coming and the Millennium, the Lord will gather the righteous from all nations (66:18). Missionaries will go forth to declare his glory among the Gentiles, even to far-off places that do not know the true God (66:19). The missionaries will bring the gentile converts to the temple (holy mountain), as an offering unto the Lord (66:20). The Gentiles will be granted the privilege of holding the priesthood and of participating in temple worship (66:21).

Isaiah 66:18b-21

it shall come, that I will gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come, and see my glory. (66:18b) And I will set a sign among them, and I will send those that escape of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow, to Tubal, and Javan, to the isles afar off, that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory; and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles. (66:19) And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto the Lord out of all nations upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the Lord, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel into the house of the Lord. (66:20) And I will also take of them for priests and for Levites, saith the Lord. (66:21)

Notes and Commentary

66:18b I will gather all nations and tongues. The gathering of Israel was prophesied by Moses (Deut. 30:3). The Lord allowed the dispersion of Israel because of her wickedness; but he also promised her return (11:12; 43:5; 49:18). The gathering involves bringing souls unto the gospel covenant; it also involves a physical gathering of people to the land and city of Zion.

they shall come, and see my glory. When the righteous gather to Zion, they will behold the glory of the Lord. This statement may refer to standing in the presence of the Lord in the New Jerusalem, where "the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory" (60:19; 60:3; 62:2; Rev. 21:23-24). The righteous may also behold the glory of the Lord in his temple.

66:19 a sign. Elder Orson Pratt taught that this sign was the Book of Mormon. [^4] It may also be known as an ensign, whose purpose is to stand as a beacon to draw people to Zion.

I will send those that escape of them unto the nations . . . Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, . . . Tubal . . . Javan. Those that escape may be the Lord's faithful who do not perish in the latter-day destruction sent by Jehovah (see also 45:20). They may also be those who escape the bondage of sin. It will be their mission to tell the nations of the power, love, and glory of Jehovah. The place names were the extent of the known earth in ancient times, symbolizing the truth that the Lord will reach unto the ends of the earth.

Tarshish may have been in Spain (60:8-9); Pul and Lud are both probably in northern Africa (Gen. 10:6, 13; Jer. 46:9; Ezek. 30:5) Tubal is probably in Asia Minor near the Black Sea (Ezek. 32:26; 38:2; 39:1) and Javan is Greece (Ezek. 27:13). [^5]

that draw the bow. Perhaps the missionaries will be called to places where their lives may be in danger. Or this expression may simply refer to a nation famous for its archers.

to the isles afar off/not heard my fame/neither have seen my glory. In the scriptures, even continents are sometimes referred to as isles (1 Ne. 22:4; 2 Ne. 10:8, 20). The isles (or continents) to which the missionaries are sent do not know the true God, having neither heard of his fame nor seen his glory.

66:20 they shall bring all your brethren for an offering. They, the missionaries, will bring your brethren, the gentile converts, to Zion. Those who had been known as Gentiles now join the gathering as brothers (49:22; 56:8; 60:9-10; John 11:52).

The New International Version and Revised Standard Version interpret the offering as a grain or cereal offering, symbolizing the fruits of their labors. More likely, the missionaries sent to the nations (in 66:19) will bring their converts as their gift to Jehovah.

out of all nations. The missionaries will find converts among every nation of the world.

horses/chariots/litters/mules/swift beasts. The new converts will use whatever means of transport they can find to travel to Zion. Chariots, which are used for war, will be transformed into conveyances of peace. Litters will be used to carry the weak or infirm. Horses, mules, and swift beasts will be used by those who have access to them. Using all forms of transportation, the converts go to the Lord's holy mountain, his temple.

holy mountain. The holy mountain is the Lord's temple. See commentary on 65:25.

children of Israel. Specifically, the missionaries of the Church are the children of Israel.

an offering in a clean vessel. This phrase refers to an offering under the law of Moses. The offering may be the souls of converts, with the clean vessel being their pure bodies, or the offering may be the names of the dead we bring to the temple for vicarious ordinance work (D&C 128:24). Motyer sheds additional light: "The only offering brought in a container was the firstfruits (Dt. 26:2). The converts of the nations come as the firstfruits of the harvest of the world." [^6]

Blessings of the Millennial Day (66:22-24)

In the Millennium, the Lord will make new heavens and a new earth, as promised in the previous chapter. Here he tells us that the new heavens and new earth will endure forever, as will the seed and name of the righteous (66:22).

In that millennial earth, all people will know the Lord and faithfully worship him (66:23). But they will have a reminder of the fate of the wicked, for they will see the carcasses of those who transgressed against God, which will be disgusting to all who remain (66:24). Further, the righteous will know that though the bodies of the wicked will eventually rot away and disappear, their spiritual punishment will continue forever (66:24).

Isa. 66:22-24

For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed and your name remain. (66:22) And it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, saith the Lord. (66:23) And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the men that have transgressed against me: for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh. (66:24)

Notes and Commentary

66:22 new heavens/new earth. The Lord here promises that the new heavens and new earth will not be transitory, but will remain (see commentary on 65:17).

your seed and your name remain. The seed of the righteous is the eternal increase the Lord has promised to all who gain exaltation. Their name is the name of Christ, because they have become his sons and his daughters. As King Benjamin said, that is the name that will never be blotted out (Mosiah 5:10-11). The Lord here promises that the seed and the name of the righteous will remain as long as the new heavens and the new earth will remain, which is forever (see commentary on 62:2).

66:23 new moon/sabbath. One of Israel's greatest sins was her corruption of the Lord's ordained feasts and holy days (1:13), two of which are alluded to here, "in the sabbaths, in the new moons" (1 Chr. 23:31; Isa. 58:13-14). In the millennial Zion, these feasts will regain their intended respect and will be kept perfectly, symbolizing the perfect worship that will be found in Zion.

all flesh come to worship before me. All the nations, even those that formerly oppressed Israel, will worship the Lord in the temple together (Zech. 14:16). This continues the promise of verses 19-20, where the nations became "your brethren." According to the Interpreter's Bible, "These two verses form a fitting conclusion to a great prophetic book. . . . Israel is the nation of priests, but chosen [so] that along with her all flesh may pay homage to the God of the whole earth. It is in worship that the unity of the nations is realized—before me." [^7]

66:24 they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases. In the last of the last days, those who are slain by war and pestilence will be so numerous that they cannot be buried (Jer. 7:30-8:2 Jer. 7:32 refers to one location that will be called "the valley of slaughter: for they shall bury [there], till there be no place" (see also Ezek. 39:11-15). Those who go out into the land will see the dead bodies of those slain in the destruction of the wicked (Jer. 7:32-33). Motyer argues that inhabitants of Zion will deliberately "compel themselves to face the consequences of the last battle." They do so "to be repelled. To see and constantly refresh the memory that these are the consequences of rebellion, and so to turn in revulsion from such a thing and to be newly motivated to obedience by seeing that the wages of sin are indeed death." [^8]

their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched. The torments of the wicked will last forever. The worm represents the worms that eat the bodies of the dead. But here the body is never consumed and the worm will never die; the punishment will never end. The fire may refer to the terrible burning of a guilty conscience, which fire will never be put out (Alma 15:3-5). This scriptural terminology seems to refer to two different groups: those who are in hell and those who become sons of perdition (Mark 9:44-48; Luke 16:24; D&C 76:43-48).

an abhorring unto all flesh. The carcasses strewn around the ground will be abhorrent in two ways: First, because the sight and the stench will be so horrible; and second, because it was offensive to an ancient Israelite not to care properly for the dead. For an abhorring, other versions have "loathsome" (NIV, JB), "disgusting" (TEV), and "a spectacle" (LXX).

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 187.
[^2] See McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:516.
[^3] Ludlow, Isaiah, 535.
[^4] Pratt, Journal of Discourses, 18:16-17.
[^5] Dummelow, Commentary on the Holy Bible, 453.
[^6] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 542.
[^7] Interpreter's Bible, 5:772.
[^8] Motyer, Prophecy of Isaiah, 544.
