Tina M. Peterson, Jay A. Parry, Donald W. Parry, Understanding Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1998)

Appendix 3

Prophetic Speech Forms

An important literary device found in Isaiah's writings is prophetic speech forms, which is part of "the manner of prophesying among the Jews" (2 Ne. 25:1). These forms are also found often in the writings of Hosea, Ezekiel, Moses, Nephi, Alma, and Joseph Smith. Prophetic speech forms are brief revelatory statements that follow a set formula. They frequently contain the name of God, are often located at the beginning or the end of a revelation, and indicate prophetic authority. Those who are not prophets may not appropriately use these forms, for the authority attached to them originates from God. We know of two false prophets in the Old Testament who used the form "Thus saith the Lord" (Zedekiah, son of Chenaanah, and Hananiah) but they did so without authority from God, and one was destroyed by God for his presumption (1 Kgs. 22:11; 2 18:10; Jer. 28:10-11, 1 Chr. 15-17).

The first of these speech forms, "Thus saith the Lord," is called the messenger formula. This formula is found forty-six times in the writings of Isaiah. Its purpose is to set forth both the divine authority and the origin of the revelation.

The revelation formula, which is similar to the messenger formula, follows this format: "The word that Isaiah, son of Amoz, saw," or "the Lord spake also unto me again, saying. . . ." This form likewise indicates prophetic authority and the source of the revelation.

A third form, "Hearken unto me" or "Hear the word of the Lord," is called the proclamation formula. Its primary function is to call the people to attention, so that they can hear what the Lord would say to them through his prophet.

Another formula, the oath formula, reads "As the Lord liveth" or "The Lord of Hosts has sworn" (see 14:24). With this declaration the Lord essentially says, "As surely as I live, so surely will these prophecies come to pass," or "This will happen because I say it will, and I never lie."

A final prophetic speech formula is the woe oracle. (Oracle means essentially words of revelation from God.) This form can easily be recognized by the use of the word woe one or more times within the oracle. The characteristic woe oracle consists of the accusation ("wo" or "woe"), the person or group addressed ("Wo unto the kingdom of Moab," or "Wo unto Assyria," or "woe unto" other groups), the intent of the accusation ("Wo unto Moab because . . . ," or "Wo unto Judah because . . ."), and the promise of judgment ("Wo unto Moab because they have sinned against me, and they will be destroyed"). [^1]

Of course, revelations may lack such a formula and still have power and authority from God, but it aids our understanding to know what the prophetic speech forms are and to know that Isaiah wrote according to an ancient pattern given by the Lord.

---
Notas:
[^1] See Ricks, "I Have a Question," 28.
