“The Tradition of Light and Testimony,” page 10: Summarize the article and consider inviting your family to create a visual aid to demonstrate the purpose of scaffolding. Discuss how the Church gives your family “scaffolding” to reach higher to build your family and other aspects of your life.

“Prophets at Christmastime,” page 20: After reading several stories from the lives of prophets, consider sharing some experiences you have had in which your life or the lives of others were touched by a special experience during a past Christmas. You may want to discuss ways to follow the examples of our prophets during this season.

“The Safety and Peace of Keeping the Commandments,” page 32: Those with young children can have them draw pictures of people doing righteous things along a road leading to a temple. Other families might consider reading the entire article and discussing it, emphasizing that “the pathway to happiness begins with … obedience to the commandments.”

“How to Give Gifts to Christ,” page 48: Read the article from President Henry B. Eyring together. Perhaps your children could write down what they would like to give to the Savior for Christmas and wrap their commitments as a Christmas gift. Consider discussing people they know who could use physical or spiritual help or both.

“A Christmas Prayer Answered,” page 68: Read the story about Peggy Schonken with your family. You may want to share times when you have received answers to your prayers and encourage your children to do the same. Consider keeping track of all the answers to prayers your family receives during the Christmas season.

My son Derek has global apraxia, which means he has a hard time speaking. Derek loves family home evening and spends months preparing lessons to share with the family.

One of his most memorable lessons was “Lehi’s Dream.” He strung rope all over the house and outside too. We started the lesson by listening to a CD of the hymn “I Believe in Christ” and looking at a picture of Lehi’s dream displayed on the table. Derek then took us, one by one, along the rope.

As we walked along, there were pictures of Christ on one side and distractions (such as the radio, TV, and games) on the other. We knew we had reached the end when we heard music—Derek’s favorite song, “I Know That My Redeemer Lives.”

After everyone had gone through, Derek turned on the DVD The Testaments and had us watch the end, where Jesus Christ appears to the people of the Americas. The Spirit was so strong as my son conveyed his testimony of the Savior without using any words.

Wendy Thompson, USA
