On Sunday, April 29, 2012, Elder Erich W. Kopischke, then-Europe Area President, organized the first stake in Cape Verde (also known as Cabo Verde) in the capital city of Praia, with more than 1,000 Saints in attendance.

Called and set apart to preside over the new Praia Cape Verde Stake was Rosiveltt Teixeira, president, with Adilson Monteiro as first counselor and José Pires as second counselor.

The Church’s historic Hyde Park Chapel in London, England, was remodeled and rededicated as a chapel for worship services and as a visitors’ center just prior to the 2012 Olympics, on July 1, 2012.

Elder Erich W. Kopischke of the Seventy, then-President of the Europe Area, rededicated the building. “My hope is that literally hundreds of thousands of people over the years will come into the building to learn about the gospel of Jesus Christ,” he said.

On May 27, 2012, Elder James J. Hamula of the Seventy, Pacific Area President, organized the first stake in New Caledonia as 800 Church members looked on.

“Latter-day Saints and all of New Caledonia will be blessed as the gospel of Jesus Christ is taught and embraced by more and more people,” said Elder Hamula.

The new stake, the Noumea New Caledonia Stake, includes 2,000 members and eight meetinghouses.

“Our most important mission will be to preach the gospel and all its principles to the people of New Caledonia, which will bring happiness for them, for their families, and in their work environments and communities,” said Georgie Guidi, who was called to be the first president of the stake. Marc Mocellin and Thierry Gorodey were called as his counselors.

Members in Ethiopia are already seeing blessings come from the country’s first meetinghouse. Located on the highway between the cities of Addis Ababa and Adama, the building has three floors and includes an underground parking garage.

But more important than the technical aspects of the meetinghouse is how it serves as a symbol of faith to the branch members, who have been meeting in residential property not far from the new building.

Debre Zeit Branch president Efrem Aemero Mekonen said, “Every time I go by the new building I am reminded of our covenants. Like when Captain Moroni raised the title of liberty, I am strengthened.”
