LeGrand Richards, Israel! Do You Know? ( 1954)

CHAPTER 2

ISRAEL, GOD'S COVENANT PEOPLE

Israel to be a Special People

Great and mighty are the promises of the Lord unto the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob:

For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God: the Lord thy God hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all people that are upon the face of the earth. (Deuteronomy 7:6.)

Since the Lord hath chosen the seed of Abraham "to be a special people unto himself, above all people that are upon the face of the earth," it is of the utmost importance that they fully understand why the Lord has chosen them, and to learn of their great mission in the earth.

The Lord has planned His work from the beginning, just as the architect plans a building before it is built. The Lord has made His plans known in advance through His prophets. His plans never fail. The Lord said to Isaiah:

Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none else! I am God, and there is none like me,

Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure: (Isaiah 46:9-10.)

Isaiah fully understood that the Lord was working to a definite plan, "declaring the end from the beginning," and that His word would never fail:

The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God shall stand forever. (Isaiah 40:8.)

The Prophet Amos declared:

Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets. (Amos 3:7.)

Since the Lord has declared "the end from the beginning," and since "the word of our God shall stand forever," it is important that the seed of Abraham, through the loins of Isaac and Jacob, familiarize themselves with the word of their God spoken through the mouths of His prophets. It is important that they understand the promises of the Lord unto them, what He expects of them, that He may fulfill His promises to their fathers that "in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed." (See Genesis 1:4; 18:18; 22:18.)

The Lord's Covenant with Abraham

Let us therefore consider the promises of the Lord unto Abraham and his seed, the children of Israel:

And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do;

Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him? (Genesis 18:17-18.)

Abraham's complete willingness to offer up his son Isaac as a burnt offering, as he had been commanded, brought forth a confirmation of the covenant and an enlargement thereof:

And the angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time,

And said, By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son:

That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies;

And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice. (Genesis 22:15-18.)

Covenant Renewed with Isaac

The covenant the Lord made with Abraham was renewed with Isaac, his son:

And there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine that was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went unto Abimelech king of the Philistines unto Gerar.

And the Lord appeared unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt; dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of:

Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I will give all these countries, and I will perform the oath which I sware unto Abraham thy father;

And I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed;

Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws. (Genesis 26:1-5.)

Covenant Renewed with Jacob

The Lord made the same covenant with Jacob, the son of Isaac:

And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran.

And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to sleep.

And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it.

And, behold, the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed;

And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed. (Genesis 28:10-14.)

In summary, the promises made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were:

Jacob's Name Changed to Israel

In keeping with the wonderful promises of the Lord to the posterity of Abraham and Isaac, through Jacob, He gave them a special name by which they would be known among all peoples, even the name "Israel" or "Israelites," which name or designation has continued with them to this day. Their God is referred to as the "God of Israel."

At the time Jacob wrestled with an angel at Peniel, the angel changed Jacob's name to Israel:

And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.

And he said unto him, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob.

And he said, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed. (Genesis 32:26-28.)

Jacob's new name, Israel, became the family name. The posterity of Abraham and Isaac, through Jacob came to be known variously as "Israel," "Children of Israel," "House of Israel," "Tribes of Israel." Their descendants are known as "Israelites" to this day.

The following scriptures suggest the varied usage of the name "Israel":

And the sons of Jacob came out of the field when they heard it: and the men were grieved, and they were very wroth, because he had wrought folly in Israel. . . . (Genesis 34:7.)

Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and unto the judgments, which I teach you, for to do them, that ye may live, and go in and possess the land which the Lord God of your fathers giveth you. (Deuteronomy 4:1.)

The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spake to me, He that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. (II Samuel 23:3.)

Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel. (II Samuel 1:24.)

Who is there among you of all his people? his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and build the house of the Lord God of Israel, (he is the God,) which is in Jerusalem. (Ezra 1:3.)

And made him king over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over Jezreel, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel. (II Samuel 2:9.)

And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the cattle of the Israelites dead. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the people go. (Exodus 9:7.)

And these are the names of the children of Israel, which came into Egypt, Jacob and his sons: . . . (Genesis 46:8.)

A careful consideration of the 46th chapter of Genesis, naming the sons and daughters of Jacob and their families, will clearly establish the fact that all of the children of Jacob were called after his new name, "Israel," and were known as "Israelites." It should be emphasized that this designation applied to all the sons of Jacob, and not to the posterity of his son Judah only. Therefore, the fulfillment of the promises of the Lord unto Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, will not be realized through any one branch of the House of Israel, but through all of them.

Jacob's Sons Not to Share Equally in the Lord's Blessings

Through a careful study and consideration of the blessings of the Lord pronounced through Jacob, upon his twelve sons, it is evident that they were not to share equally in the promises of the Lord:

And Jacob called unto his sons, and said, Gather yourselves together, that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last days.

Gather yourselves together and hear, ye sons of Jacob; and hearken unto Israel your father.

Reuben, thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power:

Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou wentest up to thy father's bed; then defiledst thou it: he went up to my couch.

Simeon and Levi are brethren; instruments of cruelty are in their habitations.

O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honour, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their selfwill they digged down a wall.

Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.

Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand shall be in the neck of thine enemies; thy father's children shall bow down before thee.

Judah is a lion's whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up?

The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be.

Binding his foal unto the vine, and his ass's colt unto the choice vine; he washed his garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes:

His eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with milk.

Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea; and he shall be for an haven of ships; and his border shall be unto Zidon.

Issachar is a strong ass couching down between two burdens:

And he saw that rest was good, and the land that it was pleasant; and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute.

Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.

Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward.

I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord.

Gad, a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the last.

Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal dainties.

Naphtali is a hind let loose: he giveth goodly words.

Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall:

The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him:

But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel:)

Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and of the womb:

The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.

Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf: in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil.

All these are the twelve tribes of Israel: and this is it that their father spake unto them, and blessed them; every one according to his blessing he blessed them. (Genesis 49:1-28. See Deuteronomy, Chapter 33, for a record of the blessings of Moses upon the twelve sons of Jacob.)

It is evident that the blessings given to Judah and Joseph were choice above the blessings pronounced upon their brothers.

Israel Divided into Two Kingdoms

Israel was divided into two kingdoms, the Kingdom of Judah, and the Kingdom of Israel—the "Kingdom of Israel" under the leadership of Joseph and his sons, Ephraim and Manasseh. This is in keeping with the promise of the Lord to the sons of Joseph, as they were blessed by Jacob, their grandfather:

And Israel beheld Joseph's sons, and said, Who are these?

And Joseph said unto his father, they are my sons, whom God hath given me in this place. And he said, Bring them, I pray thee, unto me, and I will bless them. . . .

The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth. (Genesis 48:8-9, 16.)

Note Jacob's words: "let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac." And what was Jacob's name? "Israel." Thus the descendants of Abraham and Isaac through Jacob were called Israelites. The descendants and followers of Joseph were variously called the Kingdom of Israel, the House of Israel, or the House of Joseph or Ephraim. All these designations will be found in the scriptures.

Another reason why the two sons of Joseph are to be counted among the twelve tribes of "Israel" is that the birthright was taken from Reuben, the firstborn of Jacob, because of his transgression, and was given to the sons of Joseph:

Now the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel, (for he was the firstborn; but, forasmuch as he defiled his father's bed, his birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph the son of Israel: and the genealogy is not to be reckoned after the birthright.

For Judah prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the chief ruler; but the birthright was Joseph's:) (I Chronicles 5:1-2.)

This foreshadows the division of Israel into two kingdoms: "For Judah prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the chief ruler, but the birthright was Joseph's."

The Lord, "the God of Israel," inspired the Prophet Ahijah to predict the division of Israel:

And he said to Jeroboam, Take thee ten pieces: for thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, Behold, I will rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten tribes to thee:

(But he shall have one tribe for my servant David's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake, the city which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel:) (I Kings 11:31-32.)

Concerning the fulfillment of the words of the Lord that he would "rend the kingdom," we read the following:

And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David king over the house of Judah. . . .

But Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul's host, took Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim;

And made him king over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over Jazreel, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel.

Ishbosheth Saul's son was forty years old when he began to reign over Israel, and reigned two years. But the house of Judah followed David.

And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months. (II Samuel 2:4, 8-11.)

From the above it is plain that Ishbosheth the son of Saul was made king "over all Israel . . . but the house of Judah followed David."

It later appears that half of the tribe of Benjamin and the House of Judah constituted the Kingdom of Judah, while the remainder of the tribes were called the Kingdom of Israel or Ephraim.

Then rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and the priests, and the Levites, with all them whose spirit God had raised, to go up to build the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem. (Ezra 1:5.)

The following scriptures confirm the fact that the Twelve Tribes of Israel were divided into two kingdoms: Those of the Kingdom of Israel were often referred to as "the men of Ephraim," or "the Kingdom of Ephraim," since Ephraim was the son of Joseph, and since he and his brother Manasseh received the birthright of Reuben, the firstborn of the twelve sons of Jacob:

And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah, and said, We have ten parts in the king, and we have also more right in David than ye: why then did ye despise us, that our advice should not be first had in bringing back our king? And the words of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the men of Israel. (II Samuel 19:43.)

And the men of Ephraim said unto him, Why hast thou served us thus, that thou callest us not, when thou wentest to fight with the Midianites? And they did chide with him sharply. (Judges 8:1.)

And the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and went northward, and said unto Jephthah, Wherefore passedst thou over to fight against the children of Ammon, and didst not call us to go with thee? . . . (Judges 12:1.)

And Joab gave up the sum of the number of the people unto the king: and there were in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that drew the sword; and the men of Judah were five hundred thousand men. (II Samuel 24:9.)

So Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.

And it came to pass, when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was come again, that they sent and called him unto the congregation, and made him king over all Israel: there was none that followed the house of David, but the tribe of Judah only.

And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he assembled all the house of Judah, with the tribe of Benjamin, an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men, which were warriors, to fight against the house of Israel, to bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam the son of Solomon.

But the word of God came unto Shemaiah the man of God saying,

Speak unto Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and unto all the house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the remnant of the people, saying,

Thus saith the Lord, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren the children of Israel: return every man to his house; for this thing is from me. They hearkened therefore to the word of the Lord, and returned to depart, according to the word of the Lord. (I Kings 12:19-24.)

From the above quotations it will be noted that the Lord commanded Judah: "Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren the children of Israel." And that notwithstanding the wars, contentions and jealousies existing between the two kingdoms, the Lord reminded them that they were "brethren," for they were all descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and together constituted one great family, the House of Israel.

It is important, therefore, in looking for the fulfillment of the promises of the Lord unto the Fathers, that "in thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed," (Genesis 26:4) that we look not alone to the House of Judah, but to the House of Israel through Joseph and his sons Ephraim and Manasseh.

Notwithstanding the fact that the descendants of Jacob, all of whom were called Israelites, were divided into two kingdoms, nevertheless, the title "Israel" is often used in the Bible referring to the whole House of Israel, or all of the descendants of Jacob. By keeping this in mind, we will be less confused in our further consideration of the words and predictions of the prophets.

In our day, the term "Israel" often refers to the descendants of Judah only, since they have maintained their identity as a race, while the descendants of Joseph and the other sons of Jacob who constituted the Kingdom of Israel were sifted among the nations as the Prophet Amos declared they would be:

. . . I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, saith the Lord.

For, lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth. (Amos 9:8-9.)
