LeGrand Richards, Israel! Do You Know? ( 1954)

CHAPTER 3

THE HOUSE OF JUDAH

Promises to Israel Should be Remembered

We have endeavored to show the promises of the Lord to the seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, which included the promises that they would "surely become a great and mighty nation," that the Lord would multiply their seed "as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore"; that in their seed "shall all the nations of the earth be blessed," and that the Lord promised to give unto them "all these countries."

We have called attention to the promises of the Lord made by Jacob to each of his twelve sons.

We have also shown how Israel was later divided into two great kingdoms; how they left the countries or lands the Lord gave unto them. However, we should remember that all the promises of the Lord are to be fulfilled which means that Israel shall eventually be reestablished in the lands given to their fathers; that the two kingdoms will ultimately be reunited and the Kingdom of God be established among them, that the Lord may fulfill His promises to their fathers that "in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed."

It is important that all the seed of the fathers, Abraham and Isaac through Jacob, keep these promises in mind and familiarize themselves with all the promises of the Lord through His prophets pertaining to them, that they fail not in doing their part in bringing about a complete fulfillment of the word of the Lord unto them.

The Lord Reassures Wayward and Scattered Israel

The Lord knew, and permitted the Prophet Moses to declare that, because of Israel's transgressions (1) they would not be permitted to remain in the promised land to which Moses led them, (2) they would be scattered among the nations, (3) they would serve false gods.

Then the Lord promised them, through Moses, that, if they would repent, they would "find Him":

When thou shalt beget children, and children's children, and ye shall have remained long in the land, and shall corrupt yourselves, and make a graven image, or the likeness of any thing, and shall do evil in the sight of the Lord thy God, to provoke him to anger:

I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the land where-unto ye go over Jordan to possess it; ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall utterly be destroyed.

And the Lord shall scatter you among the nations, and ye shall be left few in number among the heathen, whither the Lord shall lead you.

And there ye shall serve gods, the work of men's hands, wood and stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.

But if from thence thou shalt seek the Lord thy God, thou shalt find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart and with all thy soul. (Deuteronomy 4:25-29.)

When Moses referred to the false gods to which Israel would turn, he indicated that they would neither be able to "see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell," classifying them as "the works of men's hands, wood and stone."

In those days it was customary for men to make their own gods fashioned after things upon the earth. As evidence of this we refer to the children of Israel while in the wilderness following their freedom from Egyptian bondage. When Moses returned from the mountain where he communed with the God of Israel, he found the children of Israel had made a "molten calf" from the ear rings of their wives, their sons and their daughters, and were worshiping it. (See Exodus 32:2-8.) It was, no doubt, because of this tendency of the people that the Lord gave as the first and second commandments:

Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth:

Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me;

And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments. (Exodus 20:3-6.)

Today, Israel does not worship gods of "wood and stone" who can "neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell," but they have turned, as has the Christian world, to the worship of a spirit god or spirit essence which is said to be everywhere present in the universe, a god that can no more "see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell," than could the gods of "wood and stone" to which Moses referred.

This is truly a departure from the worship of the true and living God, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, with whom Moses communed "face to face as a man speaketh unto his friend." (Exodus 33:9-11.)

The Lord permitted another one of His prophets to foretell the removal of the children of Israel out of the promised land:

And the Lord said, I will remove Judah also out of my sight, as I have removed Israel, and will cast off this city Jerusalem which I have chosen, and the house of which I said, My name shall be there. (II Kings 23:27.)

This prophecy, as history recounts, was literally fulfilled.

Israel was divided into two kingdoms, Judah and Israel, about 975 B.C. The Kingdom of Israel was overthrown and taken into captivity in the days of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, and Hoshea, king of Israel about 721 B.C. It is supposed that early in their captivity they made their escape, the main body going northward into unknown lands. Since then they have been known as the "lost tribes."

About a century later, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, took Jerusalem and carried the tribe of Judah and part of the tribe of Benjamin to Babylon, where Judah served in captivity for seventy years:

And I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast: they shall die of a great pestilence.

And afterward, saith the Lord, I will deliver Zedekiah king of Judah, and his servants, and the people, and such as are left in this city from the pestilence, from the sword, and from the famine, into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those that seek their life: and he shall smite them with the edge of the sword; he shall not spare them, neither have pity, nor have mercy. (Jeremiah 21:6-7.)

And they burnt the house of God, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed all the goodly vessels thereof.

And them that had escaped from the sword carried he away to Babylon; where they were servants to him and his sons until the reign of the kingdom of Persia:

To fulfill the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed her sabbaths: for as long as she lay desolate she kept sabbath, to fulfil threescore and ten years. (II Chronicles 36:19-21.)

Judah Restored—The Temple Rebuilt

After this captivity the Kingdom of Judah was restored to its lands by Cyrus, king of Persia. They rebuilt the city and the temple:

Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying,

Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, The Lord God of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth; and he hath charged me to build him an house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah.

Who is there among you of all his people? his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and build the house of the Lord God of Israel, (he is the God,) which is in Jerusalem. . . .

Then rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and the priests, and the Levites, with all them whose spirit God hath raised, to go up to build the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem. (Ezra 1:1-3, 5.)

This gathering of the House of Judah to their promised land, and the rebuilding of their city and temple under Cyrus, king of Persia, occurred about 538 B.C. They continued to occupy the land from this time on until 70 A.D. when Jerusalem was destroyed and the Jews taken captive under an order issued by Nero and executed by Titus, son of Vespasian. After an insurrection headed by Bar-Cochba, 132-135 A.D., Hadrian completely razed to the ground the remains of Jerusalem left by Titus, and erected in its place a Gentile city, with the title Aelia Capitolina. Jews were forbidden to enter this city on pain of death, and the name of Jerusalem was not revived until the time of Constantine.

This brief account of the House of Judah seems sufficient for our purpose to this point.

Judah's Population in the Nations of the Earth

Since the Jews, the House of Judah, have not intermarried, but have maintained their identity as a race, it is possible to follow them among the nations. The latest figures we have been able to obtain would indicate that there were about 16,000,000 Jews in the world in 1946 located in the various nations as follows:

United States .................4,228,000

Russia ........................3,261,000

Poland ........................3,029,000

Rumania ....................... 984,000

Germany and Austria ........... 690,000

Palestine ..................... 450,000

Hungary ....................... 445,000

Czechoslovakia ................ 357,000

Great Britain ................. 300,000

Argentina ..................... 260,000

France ........................ 240,000

Morocco ....................... 161,300

Netherlands ................... 156,800

Canada ........................ 155,600

Lithuania ..................... 155,100

Algeria ....................... 110,000

Others ........................1,017,200

————-

Total ......16,000,000

It has been estimated that the Jewish population in Palestine increased in three years (1948 to 1951) from 651,000 to more than 1,350,000.

These figures will indicate approximately where the House of Judah (the Jews) may be found among the nations of today. Their treatment and persecutions are a sad commentary and reflection upon the supposed civilized nations of the earth. For an account of their persecutions during the recent world war, we refer the reader to the book Behind the Silken Curtain, by Bartley C. Crum, published by Simon and Schuster, Inc. in 1947, in which the author points out that in Germany alone six million Jews had been killed.

Judah and Israel to be Brought Together

The Jews (Judah) have maintained their identity as a people because they have not intermarried with other peoples, while those of the Kingdom of Israel have been sifted among the nations:

For, lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth. (Amos 9:9.)

But the Lord, through His holy prophets, has made it clear that in the last days He would bring these two great kingdoms together again, and He would be their King:

And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own land:

And I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all:

. . . so shall they be my people and I will be their God. (Ezekiel 37:21-23.)

How could the Lord make a more positive promise that He would bring these two kingdoms together "and they shall be no more two nations"? This promise should cause the descendants of Judah (the Kingdom of Judah) and the descendants of Joseph (the Kingdom of Israel) to realize that until the two kingdoms are brought together that neither can look for the complete fulfillment of the promises of the Lord unto their fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

The Prophet Jeremiah speaks of reuniting the two kingdoms:

In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the land of the north to the land that I have given for an inheritance unto your fathers. (Jeremiah 3:18.)

The Prophet Isaiah also speaks of the time when the Lord would establish His Kingdom among men. He indicates they would be brought back together so that a common understanding would exist between them as one nation and one people, even the whole House of Israel:

And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.

The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. (Isaiah 11:12-13.)

Judah! "Turn to the Lord Thy God"

It is our purpose to help Israel find the true and living God, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, as the Lord promised through Moses, with whom he spake face to face as one man speaketh with his friend:

When thou art in tribulation, and all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and shalt be obedient unto his voice;

(For the Lord thy God is a merciful God;) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of thy fathers which he sware unto them. (Deuteronomy 4:30-31.)

Judah! Surely "thou art in tribulation." Surely we are living in "the latter days." It is, therefore, of the utmost importance that you "turn to the Lord thy God." By so doing, He has promised that "he will not forsake thee . . . nor forget the covenant of thy fathers which he sware unto them."

It is our purpose, therefore, Judah, to declare unto you the voice of the Lord, and what He is accomplishing in the earth looking to the complete fulfillment of all the promises of the Lord through His prophets. We remind you of the conditions imposed upon you by the Lord to entitle you to a complete fulfillment of His promises: "If thou turn to the Lord, thy God, and shalt be obedient unto his voice."

It is apparent therefore, that to apply the designation "Israel" and "Israelites" to the Jews alone is erroneous, since they constituted the small Kingdom of Judah when Israel was divided, while the followers of Ephraim and Manasseh, sons of Joseph, constituted the large Kingdom of Israel or Ephraim, and were as much the children of Israel as were the Jews. Therefore, if we are to find the fulfillment of the promises of the Lord unto the Fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, we must search the records and history of these two kingdoms, and the promises of the Lord through their prophets.

The Old Testament is generally conceded to contain the history of the Kingdom of Judah, and the words of her prophets to the time of Malachi about 420 B.C. However, the Old Testament contains only a part of the history of the Kingdom of Israel or Ephraim up to the time they were overthrown in the days of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, about 721 B.C. We will, therefore, consider other records which give an account of the descendants of Joseph, through his sons Ephraim and Manasseh, the Kingdom of Israel.
