LeGrand Richards, Israel! Do You Know? ( 1954)

CHAPTER 4

THE STICK OF JOSEPH

One Record of Judah—One Record of Joseph

The Bible contains no history of the House of Joseph after approximately 721 B.C. Since we have considered the wonderful promises of the Lord to Joseph and his seed, we cannot refrain from asking: "Where is the record of the fulfillment of these promises? Is it possible that the Lord would have given Joseph such outstanding promises, even above those given to any of his eleven brothers, and then have made no provision for a record of their fulfillment?" It should be kept in mind that the Lord promised Joseph a new land "unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills," and that this blessing would come upon the top of the head of him that was separated from his brethren." Let us see what the Lord has to say about a record of the House of Joseph.

Ezekiel was a prophet in Judah unto whom "the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God." (Ezekiel 1:1.) He was living about 600 years. B.C. Let us carefully consider a command Ezekiel received from the Lord, according to his own account:

The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,

Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions:

And join them one to another into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand.

And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying, Wilt thou not shew us what thou meanest by these?

Say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand.

And the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine hand before their eyes. (Ezekiel 37:15-20.)

In ancient times, in addition to keeping records on metal plates, it was the custom to write upon parchment, which was then rolled upon sticks for preservation. Thus when Ezekiel was commanded by the Lord to "take thee one stick and write upon it, For Judah . . . then take another stick and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim," in our present day language it was the equivalent of commanding the prophet to write one record for Judah and a separate one for Joseph.

It is evident that when this commandment was given to Ezekiel, the Lord did not anticipate that all His promises made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and to the twelve sons of Jacob, would be recorded in the record of Judah. Recall that at the time this command was given, the house of Joseph had already departed northward into unknown lands, where they had been for some one hundred twenty years. Nevertheless, the Lord wanted all Israel to know that there would be two records kept, one "For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions," and the other "For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions." The Lord made it plain that in His own due time He would "make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand."

Therefore, the earnest seeker after truth should realize that he cannot expect to have all the record of the Lord's hand-dealings with His children if he has but one of these records. Since we have had the record of Judah with us always, we must inquire, "Where is the record of Joseph?" Since the Lord promised that He would bring the two records together, other questions persist: "Has the Lord fulfilled this promise, or must we still look forward to its fulfillment? If the promise has been fulfilled, where is the record of Joseph?" Remember, the Lord considered them equal: "And they shall be one in mine hand."

Jerusalem to be Destroyed

As near as we can determine, the command of the Lord to Ezekiel that two records be kept was given about 600 B.C. Recall that when the kingdom of Israel was overthrown in the days of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, the main body of the Kingdom of Israel, or the House of Joseph, escaped, going northward into unknown lands. A remnant of the House of Joseph remained with the House of Judah. Of this remnant, there was one named Lehi, a descendant of Joseph, who had dwelt in Jerusalem all his days.

In the beginning of the first year of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah, there came many prophets prophesying unto the people that they must repent or the great city Jerusalem would be destroyed. Lehi was greatly concerned about this matter and prayed unto the Lord with all his heart in behalf of his people:

And it came to pass as he prayed unto the Lord, there came a pillar of fire and dwelt upon a rock before him; and he saw and heard much; and because of the things which he saw and heard he did quake and tremble exceedingly.

And it came to pass that he returned to his own house at Jerusalem; and he cast himself upon his bed, being overcome with the Spirit and the things which he had seen.

And being thus overcome with the Spirit, he was carried away in a vision, even that he saw the heavens open, and he thought he saw God sitting upon his throne, surrounded with numberless concourses of angels in the attitude of singing and praising their God.

And it came to pass that he saw one descending out of the midst of heaven, and he beheld that his luster was above that of the sun at noon-day.

And he also saw twelve others following him, and their brightness did exceed that of the stars in the firmament.

And they came down and went forth upon the face of the earth; and the first came and stood before my father, and gave unto him a book, and bade him that he should read.

And it came to pass that as he read, he was filled with the Spirit of the Lord.

And he read, saying: Wo, wo, unto Jerusalem, for I have seen thine abominations! Yea, and many things did my father read concerning Jerusalem—that it should be destroyed, and the inhabitants thereof; many should perish by the sword, and many should be carried away captive into Babylon. . . .

Therefore, I would that ye should know, that after the Lord had shown so many marvelous things unto my father, Lehi, yea, concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, behold he went forth among the people, and began to prophesy and to declare unto them concerning the things which he had both seen and heard. (I Nephi 1:6-13, 18.)

As Lehi went about among the people warning them of the judgments that would befall them and the city of Jerusalem, because of their wickedness, he incurred the displeasure of the people and they persecuted him and sought to take his life.

Lehi Commanded to Leave Jerusalem

In a dream, the Lord commanded Lehi that he take his family and depart into the wilderness. Lehi did as he had been commanded and, with his family, left his home, the land of his inheritance, his gold, his silver, his precious things, taking nothing with him save provisions, and tents. After three days travel in the wilderness, the Lord commanded Lehi that he send his sons back to Jerusalem to obtain from Laban the record of the Jews (the Stick of Judah), and also the genealogy of his forefathers, which was engraven upon plates of brass. Of the importance of taking these records with them into the wilderness, Nephi, son of Lehi, states:

And behold, it is wisdom in God that we should obtain these records, that we may preserve unto our children the language of our fathers;

And also that we may preserve unto them the words which have been spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets, which have been delivered unto them by the Spirit and power of God, since the world began, even down unto this present time. (I Nephi 3:19-20.)

After Nephi and his brothers had succeeded in obtaining the records, Lehi examined them:

And he beheld that they did contain the five books of Moses, which gave an account of the creation of the world, and also of Adam and Eve, who were our first parents;

And also a record of the Jews from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah;

And also the prophecies of the holy prophets, from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah; and also many prophecies which have been spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah.

And it came to pass that my father, Lehi, also found upon the plates of brass a genealogy of his fathers; wherefore he knew that he was a descendant of Joseph; yea, even that Joseph who was the son of Jacob, who was sold into Egypt, and who was preserved by the hand of the Lord, that he might preserve his father, Jacob, and all his household from perishing with famine.

And they were also led out of captivity and out of the land of Egypt, by that same God who had preserved them.

And thus my father, Lehi, did discover the genealogy of his fathers. And Laban also was a descendant of Joseph, wherefore he and his fathers had kept the records. (I Nephi 5:11-16.)

From this account we learn that Lehi was a descendant of Joseph who was sold into Egypt and that the writings his sons obtained from Laban contained "a record of the Jews from the beginning even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah." We also learn that Lehi left Jerusalem in the beginning of the first year of the reign of Zedekiah, which the Bible Commentary places at about 599 B.C., approximately the same time that the Lord commanded Ezekiel that two records be kept.

We learn that, as the heavens were opened to Ezekiel, so were they opened to Lehi, who prophesied of the destruction of Jerusalem and her inhabitants. To escape this destruction, the Lord commanded Lehi to leave Jerusalem with his family and flee into the wilderness. According to the Bible Chronological table, Jerusalem was destroyed and Judah carried captive about 588 B.C. as Lehi had prophesied, or from eleven to twelve years following his prediction.

Since God knows "the end from the beginning," it seems reasonable and consistent that, in His planning, Lehi and his family would be led to a new land; that the Lord would make provision that a record be kept of His hand-dealings with them; and that through them would come the fulfillment of the promises made to Joseph that he would be given a new land in "the utmost bound of the everlasting hills." These important events all seem to have taken place at approximately the same time, showing it was the work of the Lord.

Beginning of the Stick of Joseph

Lehi and his righteous son Nephi were God-fearing men. They were led out of Jerusalem by the hand of the Lord to escape death at the hands of their persecutors, or to escape their destruction with the de-destruction of Jerusalem. The Lord had shown Lehi what would befall Jerusalem because of her wickedness. Under the same divine guidance, they were inspired with the importance of keeping a record of the Lord's hand-dealings with them, and of their travels, etc. In other words, as the Lord commanded Ezekiel that two records be kept, one of Judah and one of Joseph, He inspired Lehi and Nephi to keep a record of what the Lord did for them and their families as part of the Stick of Joseph.

We quote from Nephi's own writings what he had to say about record keeping:

I, Nephi, having been born of goodly parents, therefore I was taught somewhat in all the learning of my fathers; and having seen many afflictions in the course of my days, nevertheless, having been highly favored of the Lord in all my days; yea, having had a great knowledge of the goodness and the mysteries of God, therefore I make a record of my proceedings in my days.

Yea, I make a record in the language of my father, which consists of the learning of the Jews and the language of the Egyptians.

And I know that the record which I make is true; and I make it according to my knowledge. (I Nephi 1:1-3.)

And now I, Nephi, do not give the genealogy of my fathers in this part of my record; neither at any time shall I give it after upon these plates which I am writing; for it is given in the record which has been kept by my father; wherefore, I do not write it in this work.

For it sufficeth me to say that we are a descendant of Joseph.

And it mattereth not to me that I am particular to give a full account of all the things of my father, for they cannot be written upon these plates, for I desire the room that I may write of the things of God.

For the fulness of mine intent is that I may persuade men to come unto the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and be saved.

Wherefore, the things which are pleasing unto the world I do not write, but the things which are pleasing unto God and unto those who are not of the world.

Wherefore, I shall give commandment unto my seed, that they shall not occupy these plates with things which are not of worth unto the children of men. (I Nephi 6:1-6.)

From these quotations three important facts are established:

Was not this the purpose the Lord had in mind when he commanded Ezekiel to keep two records, one of Judah and one of Joseph?

Thus, as the Stick of Judah, the Holy Bible, was to be an instrument in the hands of the Lord for the guidance of His children, so also was the Stick of Joseph when joined to the Stick of Judah. Let us not forget the Lord's command: "and make them one Stick, and they shall be one in mine hand." (See Ezekiel 37:18-19.)

Ishmael and His Family go into the Wilderness

The "Stick of Joseph" further reveals that after Lehi and his family had left Jerusalem, and after his sons had returned and obtained the brass plates from Laban, the Lord further commanded that he again send his sons back to Jerusalem, "saying that it was not meet for him, Lehi, that he should take his family into the wilderness alone; but that his sons should take daughters to wife, that they might raise up seed unto the Lord in the land of promise." They were therefore commanded that they "should again return unto the land of Jerusalem , and bring down Ishmael and his family into the wilderness:"

And it came to pass that the Lord did soften the heart of Ishmael, and also his household, insomuch that they took their journey with us down into the wilderness to the tent of our father. (I Nephi 7:5.)

Journey to "the Promised Land"

After they had journeyed in the wilderness for the space of eight years, (See I Nephi 17:4) they pitched their tents by the seashore, and the Lord gave to Nephi a commandment that he build a ship. The Lord instructed him how it should be built, where he could find ore to make tools, etc. When the ship was completed according to the word of the Lord, Nephi's brothers, Laman and Lemuel, who had complained against him, "beheld that it was good, and that the workmanship thereof was exceeding fine; wherefore, they did humble themselves again before the Lord."

And it came to pass that the voice of the Lord came unto my father, that we should arise and go down into the ship.

And it came to pass that on the morrow, after we had prepared all things, much fruits and meat from the wilderness, and honey in abundance, and provisions according to that which the Lord had commanded us, we did go down into the ship, with all our loading and our seeds, and whatsoever thing we had brought with us, every one according to his age; wherefore we did all go down into the ship, with our wives and our children. (I Nephi 18:5-6.)

They spent many days upon the water, and after having been driven by the wind, they reached the shore of "the promised land."

. . . and we went forth upon the land, and did pitch our tents; and did call it the promised land.

And it came to pass that we did begin to till the earth, and we began to plant seeds; yea, we did put all our seeds into the earth, which we had brought from the land of Jerusalem. And it came to pass that they did grow exceedingly; wherefore, we were blessed in abundance.

And it came to pass that we did find upon the land of promise, as we journeyed in the wilderness, that there were beasts in the forests of every kind, both the cow and the ox, and the ass and the horse, and the goat and the wild goat, and all manner of wild animals, which were for the use of man. And we did find all manner of ore, both of gold, and of silver, and of copper. (I Nephi 18:23-25.)

In reading Nephi's description of how their seeds did grow exceedingly, so that they were blessed in abundance, and his further description of what they found in the land upon their arrival in the Land of Promise, including animals of all kinds, and all manner of ore, both of gold, and of silver, and of copper, we would do well to refer again to the blessing pronounced by Moses upon the head of Joseph, the son of Jacob:

And of Joseph he said, Blessed of the Lord be his land, for the precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath,

And for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun, and for the precious things brought forth by the moon,

And for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting hills,

And for the precious things of the earth and fulness thereof, and for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush: let the blessing come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the top of the head of him that was separated from his brethren. (Deuteronomy 33:13-16.)

From this blessing, it is clear that Joseph was to have a new land; that it was to be a choice land producing "precious fruits," etc.; that it was to be "in the ancient mountains"; and that it would produce "the precious things of the lasting hills"; and that it would abound with "the precious things of the earth and fulness thereof." It is clear that this blessing was to come upon the head of Joseph who "was separate from his brethren." All these promises seem to have had a complete fulfillment when the Lord led Lehi and his company, descendants of Joseph, to the Land of Promise, the land of America. Their history seems to have been written largely in the western part of South, Central and North America, or in the Rocky Mountains—"the ancient mountains," and "the lasting hills."

As the people became better established in "the promised land," they were so prospered by the Lord, that they often called it "a land choice above all other lands." (See I Nephi 13:30; II Nephi 1:5.)

The Stick of Joseph covers a history of Lehi and his people from the time they left Jerusalem 600 years B.C. to 421 A.D., or a period of more than one thousand years.

The record of Joseph also gives an account of the people of Jared who were scattered at the time the Lord confounded the language of the people when they were building a tower to get to heaven: "So the Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth: and they left off to build the city." (Genesis 11:8.) Some of these people were led by the Lord, under Jared and his brother, to the land of America, a part of "the face of all the earth."

Mulekites Discovered

This Stick of Joseph also gives an account of the people of Mulek, known as the Mulekites. Concerning the time when king Nebuchadnezzar took the inhabitants of Jerusalem captive to Babylon, we read the following:

And they slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him with fetters of brass, and carried him to Babylon. (II Kings 25:7.)

Of this event, the Stick of Joseph states:

And now will you dispute that Jerusalem was destroyed? Will ye say that the sons of Zedekiah were not slain, all except it were Mulek? Yea, and do ye not behold that the seed of Zedekiah are with us, and they were driven out of the land of Jerusalem? . . . (Helaman 8:21.)

It will thus be seen that one of the sons of Zedekiah escaped and he and his people were led to the land of America. This seems to have been about 588 B.C., or twelve years after Lehi and his family left Jerusalem. It seems that the people of Mulek did not keep records but after a sojourn in the land of America for approximately 400 years, the Nephites discovered them, and the two peoples were united under king Mosiah of the people of Nephi:

Behold, it came to pass that Mosiah discovered that the people of Zarahemla came out from Jerusalem at the time that Zedekiah, king of Judah, was carried away captive into Babylon.

And they journeyed in the wilderness, and were brought by the hand of the Lord across the great waters, into the land where Mosiah discovered them; and they had dwelt there from that time forth. . . .

And it came to pass that the people of Zarahemla, (the Mulekites) and of Mosiah, did unite together; and Mosiah was appointed to be their king. (Omni 1:15-16, 19.)

American Indians are of Israel

Returning again to Lehi and his descendants who were called Nephites after the prophet Nephi, righteous son of Lehi, we learn that shortly after their arrival in "the promised land," [the land of America], because of the wickedness of the followers of two of the sons of Lehi—Laman and Lemuel—the Lord placed the curse of a dark skin upon them:

And he had caused the cursing to come upon them, yea, even a sore cursing, because of their iniquity. For behold , they had hardened their hearts against him, that they had become like unto a flint; wherefore, as they were white, and exceeding fair and delightsome, that they might not be enticing unto my people the Lord God did cause a skin of blackness to come upon them.

And thus saith the Lord God: I will cause that they shall be loathsome unto thy people, save they shall repent of their iniquities.

And cursed shall be the seed of him that mixeth with their seed; for they shall be cursed even with the same cursing. And the Lord spake it, and it was done. (II Nephi 5:21-23.)

Those who were thus cursed succeeded in destroying all the white people, save twenty-four souls, about 421 A.D., at which time, Moroni deposited in the Hill Cumorah, in the western part of the state of New York, the plates containing the history of this people, or the Stick of Joseph. The dark-skinned people who occupied this land of America from that time on were called "Lamanites," who are the people known generally as the American Indians, all of whom are of the house of Israel.

Stick of Joseph Speaks Low Out of the Dust

The Prophet Isaiah saw the coming forth of this record of Joseph as the voice of one that has a familiar spirit whispering out of the dust:

Woe, to Ariel, to Ariel, the city where David dwelt! add ye year to year, let them kill sacrifices.

Yet I will distress Ariel, and there shall be heaviness and sorrow: and it shall be unto me as Ariel.

And I will camp against thee round about, and will lay siege against thee with a mount, and I will raise forts against thee.

And thou shalt be brought down, and shalt speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice shall be, as one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust. (Isaiah 29:1-4.)

Isaiah saw the downfall of Ariel, or Jerusalem, at a time far in the future, "add ye year to year," or approximately 170 years before Jerusalem was destroyed as prophesied by Lehi. Then he seems to have been carried away in vision to witness a similar destruction of the cities of Joseph, "and it shall be unto me as Ariel." Then he describes how they would be besieged and forts would be raised against them. They would be brought down and would speak "out of the ground." Their speech would be low "out of the dust." Now, obviously, the only way a dead people could speak "out of the ground" or "out of the dust" would be by the written word which was accomplished through the "Stick of Joseph." Truly it has a familiar spirit, for it contains the words of the Nephite and Lamanite prophets of God.

The Prophet Nephi describes the coming forth of this record, speaking from the dust in these words:

After my seed and the seed of my brethren shall have dwindled in unbelief, and shall have been smitten by the Gentiles; yea, after the Lord God shall have camped against them round about, and shall have laid siege against them with a mount, and raised forts against them; and after they shall have been brought down low in the dust, even that they are not, yet the words of the righteous shall be written, and the prayers of the faithful shall be heard, and all those who have dwindled in unbelief shall not be forgotten.

For those who shall be destroyed shall speak unto them out of the ground, and their speech shall be low out of the dust, and their voice shall be as one that hath a familiar spirit; for the Lord God will give unto him power, that he may whisper concerning them, even as it were out of the ground; and their speech shall whisper out of the dust.

For thus saith the Lord God: They shall write the things which shall be done among them, and they shall be written and sealed up in a book, and those who have dwindled in unbelief shall not have them, for they seek to destroy the things of God. (II Nephi 26:15-17.)

Part of the Stick of Joseph is Sealed

It will be seen that Nephi was privileged to see in vision the final destruction of his people, and how they would be brought down and speak from the dust. He informs us that this would be done through their recording the things done among them, that they would "be written and sealed up in a book." This is in complete accord with the same vision given to Isaiah long before Nephi's time:

And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed: (Isaiah 29:11.)

A Marvelous Work and a Wonder

What Isaiah was privileged to see concerning the destruction of the Nephites and the coming forth of their record, as a sealed book, speaking from the ground, seems to have impressed him greatly:

Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men:

Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. (Isaiah 29:13-14.)

The bringing forth of the Stick of Joseph which the Lord has done, surely constitutes "a marvelous work and a wonder." It has truly caused "the wisdom of their wise men [to] perish, and the understanding of their prudent men [to] be hid." (Isaiah 29:14.) It is one of the great steps in the unfoldment of the Lord's eternal program looking to the uniting of the two great houses of Israel, Judah and Joseph, since now He has united their records.

The keeping of these two records, the Stick of Judah and the Stick of Joseph, was a very grave and important matter to the Lord. He commanded they be kept with the promise that He would join them together and make them one in His hand. We understand this to mean that when the "Stick of Joseph" would be joined to the "Stick of Judah," it would have the same significance to the Jews as their record, the Old Testament, the Stick of Judah, would have to the descendants of Joseph.

We of the House of Joseph cannot underestimate the value of the Stick of Judah. Of its importance, the Lord told Nephi, when they returned to Jerusalem to obtain the plates of Laban, that "it is better that one man should perish than that a nation should dwindle and perish in unbelief." (I Nephi 4:13.)

In the sight of the Lord, the Stick of Joseph was to be of equal importance and value to the House of Judah, at the time the Lord would see fit to bring it forth and join it to the Stick of Judah, and make them one in His hand.

We will, therefore, give consideration to some of the sayings of the prophets of Joseph, and their message to their brethren, the House of Judah, the Jews.
