LeGrand Richards, Israel! Do You Know? ( 1954)

CHAPTER 6

THE FIRST COMING OF JESUS CHRIST

One of the principal reasons why the Jews rejected Jesus Christ, as their promised Messiah, was because they failed to differentiate between the prophecies concerning His first coming, and those relating to His second coming. They seem always to have expected a complete fulfillment of all of the promises of the prophets concerning the Messiah when He came the first time. When this did not happen, they were disappointed and refused to accept Him as their Redeemer.

The Messiah Described

The Prophet Nephi describes who the Messiah would be:

And behold he cometh, according to the words of the angel, in six hundred years from the time my father left Jerusalem.

And the world, because of their iniquity, shall judge him to be a thing of naught; wherefore they scourge him, and he suffereth it; and they smite him, and he suffereth it. Yea, they spit upon him, and he suffereth it, because of his loving kindness and his long-suffering towards the children of men.

And the God of our fathers, who were led out of Egypt, out of bondage, and also were preserved in the wilderness by him, yea, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, yieldeth himself, according to the words of the angel, as a man, into the hands of wicked men, to be lifted up, according to the words of Zenock, and to be crucified, according to the words of Neum, and to be buried in a sepulchre, according to the words of Zenos, which he spake concerning the three days of darkness, which should be a sign given of his death unto those who should inhabit the isles of the sea, more especially given unto those who are of the house of Israel. (I Nephi 19:8-10.)

This Messiah, therefore, was to be "the God of our fathers . . . yea, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and the God of Jacob," for it was by Him that the Father created this world, and through whom He has directed all His prophets, and through whom the law was given to Moses.

Confirming this statement, we find in the writings of Abraham, that he received instructions from Jehovah who was the promised Messiah. (The writings of Abraham are contained in The Pearl of Great Price the origin of which will be explained later.)

And his voice was unto me: Abraham, Abraham, behold, my name is Jehovah, and I have heard thee, and have come down to deliver thee, and to take thee away from thy father's house, and from all thy kins-folk, into a strange land which thou knowest not of; (Pearl of Great Price, Abraham 1:16.)

Again, from the writings of Abraham:

My name is Jehovah and I know the end from the beginning; therefore my hand shall be over thee.

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations; (Pearl of Great Price, Abraham 2:8-9.)

Prophecies Concerning the First Advent of the Messiah

We should keep in mind the truth made plain in the Stick of Joseph that Jesus Christ is not only the promised Messiah but that He is literally the Son of God, the Jehovah of the Old Testament, manifest in the flesh:

For behold, the time cometh, and is not far distant, that with power, the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all eternity to all eternity, shall come down from heaven among the children of men, and shall dwell in a tabernacle of clay, and shall go forth amongst men, working mighty miracles, such as healing the sick, raising the dead, causing the lame to walk, the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear, and curing all manner of diseases.

And he shall cast out devils, or the evil spirits which dwell in the hearts of the children of men.

And lo, he shall suffer temptations, and pain of body, hunger, thirst, and fatigue, even more than men can suffer, except it be unto death; for behold, blood cometh from every pore, so great shall be his anguish for the wickedness and abominations of his people.

And he shall be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning and his mother shall be called Mary. (Mosiah 3:5-8.)

The above were the words of King Benjamin, recorded by his son Mosiah, from which we learn that Jesus Christ was "the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all eternity, . . . the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning,"—indeed the Jehovah of the Jews.

The Prophet Nephi spoke with great plainness concerning the coming of "the God of Israel," and His rejection by His own, as a result of which they would "perish, and become a hiss and a by-word, and be hated among all nations." Nephi further declared that when "they no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of Israel, then will He remember the covenants which He made to their fathers:"

And as for those who are at Jerusalem, saith the prophet, they shall be scourged by all people, because they crucify the God of Israel, and turn their hearts aside, rejecting signs and wonders, and the power and glory of the God of Israel.

And because they turn their hearts aside, saith the prophet, and have despised the Holy One of Israel, they shall wander in the flesh, and perish, and become a hiss and a by-word, and be hated among all nations.

Nevertheless, when that day cometh, saith the prophet, that they no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of Israel, then will he remember the covenants which he made to their fathers.

Yea, then will he remember the isles of the sea; yea, and all the people who are of the house of Israel, will I gather in, saith the Lord, according to the words of the prophet Zenos, from the four quarters of the earth.

Yea, and all the earth shall see the salvation of the Lord, saith the prophet; every nation, kindred, tongue and people shall be blessed. (1 Nephi 19:13-17.)

Jesus Christ Fulfilled the Law of Moses

When Jesus Christ appeared to the Nephites in the land of America, following His resurrection and ascension, He explained to them that He had come to fulfill the law of Moses, and that it was He who gave the law, thus indicating that He was the Jehovah of the Jews:

Behold, I say unto you that the law is fulfilled that was given unto Moses.

Behold, I am he that gave the law, and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel; therefore, the law in me is fulfilled, for I have come to fulfill the law; therefore it hath an end. (3 Nephi 15:4-5.)

Because the Jews have not understood that Jehovah of the Old Testament and Jesus Christ of the New Testament are one and the same person, they have felt there was no need for the coming of the Savior, the Redeemer. In this conclusion they have felt sustained by the following scriptures:

But now thus saith the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine.

For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour: I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee.

I, even I, am the Lord; and beside me there is no saviour.

I am the Lord, your Holy One, the creator of Israel, your King. (Isaiah 43:1, 3, 11, 15.)

Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the Saviour. (Isaiah 45:15.)

Tell ye, and bring them near; yea, let them take counsel together: who hath declared this from ancient time? who hath told it from that time? have not I the Lord? and there is no God else beside me; a just God and a Saviour; there is none beside me.

Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is none else.

I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, That unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear. (Isaiah 45:21-23.)

I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. (Isaiah 43:25.)

Thus saith the Lord, thy redeemer, and he that formed thee from the womb, I am the Lord that maketh all things; that stretcheth forth the heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself. (Isaiah 44:24.)

Because of this misunderstanding, the Jews felt no need of their Savior and Redeemer coming in the flesh, notwithstanding the fact that their prophets had clearly indicated that He would come and give His life for their redemption.

God the Father and the Son

There seems to be a feeling among the Jews that, according to the teachings of the prophets of the Old Testament, reference is made to but one God, while the New Testament clearly refers to God the Father, and to God the Son or Jesus Christ the Son of God.

We call attention to the following scripture:

And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. (Genesis I:26.)

Clearly God was speaking to one or more associated with Him in the creation. This statement can be better understood by referring to the following:

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

The same was in the beginning with God.

All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made. . . .

And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth. (St. John 1:1-3, 14.)

And I, the Lord God, said unto mine Only Begotten: Behold, the man is become as one of us to know good and evil; and now lest he put forth his hand and partake also of the tree of life, and eat and live forever,

Therefore I, the Lord God, will send him forth from the Garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken. (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 4:28, 29.)

Thus, in the Old Testament is recorded the fact that the Lord said: "Let us make man in our image." He surely was not talking to Himself. The person to whom He was talking was in the image of God, for He said: "Let us make man in our image." Therefore, He must have been talking to his Son, as is made very plain in the New Testament reference above quoted, and also the statement of the Lord found in the Book of Moses: "And I, the Lord God, said unto mine Only Begotten."

We quote further from the words of Moses:

And behold, the glory of the Lord was upon Moses, so that Moses stood in the presence of God, and talked with him face to face. And the Lord God said unto Moses: For mine own purpose have I made these things. Here is wisdom and it remaineth in me.

And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth.

And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten. (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 1:31-33.)

The oneness that existed between God the Father and his Only Begotten Son was clearly a oneness of purpose, for they were united in all things. Therefore the Son carried out the purposes and plans of his Father, and through Him, the Father created "worlds without number."

As the Son was the instrument in the hands of the Father in creating worlds, including the one upon which we live, so He was the Father's instrument in giving commandments to the children of men in various dispensations. Note His own declaration to the Nephites when He appeared to them following His crucifixion and resurrection:

Behold, I am he that gave the law, and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel; therefore, the law in me is fulfilled, for I have come to fulfil the law; therefore it hath an end. (3 Nephi 15:5.)

Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. I was with the Father from the beginning. I am in the Father, and the Father in me; and in me hath the Father glorified his name. (3 Nephi 9:15.)

In speaking of the work of the Messiah, the Prophet Isaiah fully understood that God would direct the work of his Son:

Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. (Isaiah 53:4.)

The statement that He would bear Israel's griefs, carry their sorrows, and that he would be "smitten of God," indicates that there were two Gods and not one. How could this Redeemer be smitten by Himself?

Consider also Isaiah's further statement:

All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all. (Isaiah 53:6.)

Of course the Lord did not lay upon Himself "the iniquity of us all," but upon his Only Begotten Son whom He sent into the world to redeem the world.

Again, Isaiah states: "Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him." (Isaiah 53:10.) Surely it did not please the Lord "to bruise" Himself.

The Prophet Isaiah further states the word of the Lord: "Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great." (Isaiah 53:12.) Who, except God, his Father, could "divide him a portion with the great?"

Consider further this statement of Isaiah:

Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel. (Isaiah 7:14.)

The "Lord himself" promised to give a sign, that a virgin would conceive, "and bear a son." Surely this is plain enough that there were two—the Lord who made the promise, and the Son who was to be born.

The Prophet Isaiah speaks of the ministry of the Messiah in these words:

I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles. (Isaiah 42:6.)

Here the Lord speaks of what He would do through Him whom He promised to send. There were, therefore, two persons.

Again, the Prophet Isaiah states:

The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound. (Isaiah 61:1.)

Surely the Lord did not anoint Himself "to preach good tidings unto the meek." He did not send himself "to bind up the brokenhearted."

The ancient prophets of Judah understood without a question that the promised Messiah would be sent by God. Thus there were two Gods—one to send, and one to be sent.

Birth and Mission of the Messiah Foretold in Stick of Judah

As we consider the words of the prophets of the Old Testament concerning the coming of Jesus Christ as the Redeemer of the world, we should keep in mind that prophecy is but history in reverse. Since all things are known to God from the beginning, as declared by the prophet Isaiah, He directed His prophets to speak from time to time declaring events which would come to pass in the unfoldment of the Lord's plan pertaining to the inhabitants of this earth, and the destiny of the earth itself.

Consider the following prophecy of Isaiah. It would seem that these words might have been written following the birth and life of Jesus Christ the Savior of the world instead of some 750 years before His birth:

Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?

For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.

He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not.

Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.

But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed.

All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.

He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth.

He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken.

And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth.

Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.

He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities.

Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the sins of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. (Isaiah, Chapter 53.)

In the life and mission of Jesus Christ He met every requirement necessary to fulfill all the prophet Isaiah predicted He would do, as herein set forth. Can anyone deny that Jesus Christ was "despised and rejected of men . . . wounded for our transgressions, bruised for our iniquities . . . oppressed, . . . afflicted, yet He opened not his mouth . . . brought as a lamb to the slaughter . . . cut off out of the land of the living . . . numbered with the transgressors; and He bare the sins of many, and made intercession for the transgressors?" Isaiah further declared how universal His rejection would be in these words: "All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all."

Isaiah understood that a son would be born of woman, and that His name would be called Immanuel:

Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel. (Isaiah 7:14.)

According to this statement, God himself promised to give a sign. Surely the birth of Jesus by the Virgin Mary was a complete fulfillment of this prediction. When Isaiah stated that His name would be called "Immanuel," he understood the meaning of that name, "God with us." (St. Matthew 1:23.) Therefore, he knew that the son to be born of the virgin would be the God of Heaven:

For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulders: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, the everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. (Isaiah 9:6.)

The child to be born of the virgin was to be "The Mighty God," or the God of Israel, the Jehovah, as declared by the Nephite prophets in the Stick of Joseph.

In this prophecy, Isaiah stated: "And the government shall be upon his shoulder." This statement was not understood by the Jews; they assumed that He would immediately take over their civil government and free them from the yoke of their oppressors. The government, however, to which Isaiah referred, was the organization of His Church, which was decreed to ultimately fill the whole earth, as we shall explain more in detail in the next chapter.

Prophet to be Raised Up Like unto Moses

The Lord promised that He would raise up a prophet like unto Moses:

I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him.

And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him. (Deuteronomy 18:18-19.)

Who among all the ancient prophets could be likened unto Moses except Jesus Christ? There was a great similarity in their ministries. On this parallel, the following quotation is illuminating:

MOSES—MESSIAH: A PARALLEL

Moses: And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face. (Deuteronomy 34:10.)

Messiah: "As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father" (St. John 10:15). "Not that any man hath seen the Father (God), save he which is of God, he hath seen the Father." (St. John 6:46).

Moses: Pharaoh sought the destruction of all the male children born of the Israelites, "and Pharaoh charged all his people saying, every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive." But Moses by faith of his mother had his life preserved, and became the adopted son of Pharaoh's daughter. (Exodus 1:22.)

Messiah: Herod ordered the slaughter of all the children of Bethlehem and in all the coasts thereof; but Jesus was preserved by the intervention of the Lord, for in a dream of the night, Joseph was commanded "to take the young child and his mother and flee into Egypt." Thus was his life preserved. (St. Matthew Chapter 2.)

Moses: And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the Lord caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided. (Exodus 14:21.)

Messiah: Crossing the Sea of Galilee there arose a great storm while the Christ slept in the boat until he was awakened by his frightened disciples. "Then he arose and rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a great calm. But the men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him!" (St. Matthew, Chapter 8.)

Moses: When Moses came down from the mountain with the tables of stone, whereon the ten commandments were written, "Moses wist not that the skin of his face shone," while he talked with him (i.e. with God), and the elders of Israel fled from him, and he (Moses) put a veil on his face. (Exodus 34:29-33.)

Messiah: The Christ went up into the mountain with Peter, James and John, "and was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light." (St. Matthew 17:2.)

Moses: And Miriam and Aaron, sister and brother to Moses, spake against Moses because of the Ethiopian woman he had married; and they said: "Hath the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? Hath he not spoken also by us?" But the Lord vindicated Moses. (Numbers 12:1-2.)

Messiah: His brethren mockingly challenged Jesus to go into the world and show himself—"for neither did his brethren believe in him." (St. John 7:5.)

Moses: "Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth." (Numbers 12:3.)

Messiah: "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls" (St. Matthew 11:29).

Moses: "By faith Moses, when he was come to years refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt." (Hebrews 11:24, 26.)

Messiah: "The devil taketh him up into an exceedingly high mountain, and sheweth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; and saith unto him: All these things will I give unto thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me. Then saith Jesus unto him: Get thee hence, satan; for it is written thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. Then the devil leaveth him." (St. Matthew 4:8-11.) (B. H. Roberts, Rasha The Jew, pp. 45-47.)

Surely Jesus Christ, the Son of God, met all the requirements necessary to justify our accepting Him as the promised prophet like unto Moses. When He came He was rejected by His own, and in this respect He was also like unto Moses, for when Moses went up into the mountain to commune with the Lord, the children of Israel turned away from Moses and made a molten calf from their jewels, and said:

These be thy Gods, O Israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. (Exodus 32:8.)

The prophet Nephi, as recorded in the Stick of Joseph, tells us who this prophet was, who was like unto Moses, whom the Lord promised to send:

And the Lord will surely prepare a way for his people, unto the fulfilling of the words of Moses, which he spake saying: A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass that all those who will not hear that prophet shall be cut off from among the people.

And now I, Nephi, declare unto you, that this prophet of whom Moses spake was the Holy One of Israel; wherefore, he shall execute judgment in righteousness. (I Nephi 22:20-21.)

Location of the Messiah's Birth Foretold

Concerning the coming of the promised Messiah, the prophets gave many details, that in their fulfillment He would be recognized. They even foretold the city in which He would be born:

But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting. (Micah 5:2.)

It must be more than a coincidence that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who answers all the requirements of the prophecies, should have been born in "Bethlehem Ephratah." How much better could Micah have described Him who was to be "ruler in Israel?"

The Messiah's Death Foretold

Details pertaining to His death were given by the Psalmist in these words:

. . . they pierced my hands and my feet. . . .

They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture. (Psalms 22:16, 18.)

That they pierced the hands and feet of the Christ is a well recorded fact of history. The prophets in declaring the second coming of the Messiah indicated that He would present the wounds that He received in the house of His friends as evidence that He was the promised Messiah whom they had rejected:

And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications: and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. (Zechariah 12:10.)

And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands? Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. (Zechariah 13:6.)

Consider the account of how they parted His garments and cast lots for His vesture:

And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, They parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots. (St. Matthew 27:35.)

The Prophet Zechariah even foretold the price that would be put upon His head:

So they weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver. (Zechariah 11:12.)

Matthew gives this account of the fulfillment of Zechariah's prophecy:

Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders,

Saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. And they said, What is that to us? see thou to that.

And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed and went and hanged himself. (St. Matthew 27:3-5.)

The Messiah to be Called Out of Egypt

The Prophet Hosea foretold that the Lord would call His Son out of Egypt:

When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out of Egypt. (Hosea 11:1.)

Concerning the fulfillment of this prophecy, we read:

And when they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him.

When he arose, he took the young child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt:

And was there until the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my son. (St. Matthew 2:13-15.)

Herod Slays the Children of Bethlehem

The Prophet Jeremiah foretold the sorrow among the people because of the children who would be put to death by Herod:

Thus saith the Lord; A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, and bitter weeping; Rachel weeping for her children refused to be comforted for her children, because they were not. (Jeremiah 31:15.)

The fulfillment of Jeremiah's prophecy is recorded as follows:

Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the wise men.

Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy [Jeremiah] the prophet, saying,

In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted because they are not. St. Matthew 2:16-18.)

The Ministry of the Messiah

The Prophet Isaiah spoke of the ministry of the Messiah:

I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people for a light of the Gentiles;

To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house.

I am the Lord: that is my name: and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images. (Isaiah 42:6-8.)

Luke gives us an account of Zacharias, the father of John the Baptist, and how John would be sent to prepare the way for the coming of the Messiah:

And his father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Ghost and prophesied, saying,

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for he hath visited and redeemed his people,

And hath raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David;

As he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been since the world began:

That we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us;

To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant;

The oath which he sware to our father Abraham.

That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies might serve him without fear,

In holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life.

And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest; for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways;

To give knowledge of salvation unto his people, by the remission of their sins,

Through the tender mercy of our God; whereby the dayspring from on high hath visited us,

To give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace.

And the child grew and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts till the day of his shewing unto Israel. (St. Luke 1:67-80.)

Under the promptings of the spirit, Isaiah further spoke of the ministry of the Messiah:

The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound;

To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn;

To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. (Isaiah 61:1-3.)

Luke gives the following account of the commencement of the ministry of Jesus Christ, the Messiah, after He had fasted forty days, and after He had been tempted by the devil:

And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost returned from Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness, . . .

And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up: and, as his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up for to read.

And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias. And when he had opened the book, he found the place where it was written,

The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised,

To preach the acceptable year of the Lord.

And he closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and sat down. And the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him.

And he began to say unto them, This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears. (Luke 4:1, 16-21.)

Jacob's Promise to Judah Concerning the Messiah

Concerning the coming of the promised Messiah, let us consider the promise of Jacob to his son Judah:

Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand shall be in the neck of thine enemies; thy father's children shall bow down before thee.

Judah is a lion's whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up; he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up?

The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be. (Genesis 49:8-10.)

"Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise . . . thy father's children shall bow down before thee." This promise clearly looks to the coming of the Messiah through the loins of Judah.

Time of the Messiah's Coming Foretold

Let us now consider the statement of Jacob as to the time of the Messiah's coming.

The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come. (Ibid.)

For an explanation and discussion of this promise, the following scholarly excerpt is presented:

This passage by the Jews, in ancient times, who believed in the coming of the Messiah at all, was allowed to have reference to the coming of their Messiah, and as in some way fixing the time and circumstances of his coming.

It is evident that by "Judah" is meant, not the person, but the tribe, and by "Sceptre" and "lawgiver" are obviously intended the legislative and ruling power. In the course of time this commenced in David, and for centuries afterwards was continued in his descendants. Whatever variety the form of government assumed the law and polity were the same.

"The versions," it is said, "generally read 'Shiloh' instead of 'Shilow,' and the words 'until Shiloh come' should be, 'till he come whose it is' i.e., whose the Sceptre is."

"Rabbi Johannan referring to Genesis 49:10 asked what was the name of the Messiah; they of the school of Rabbi Schilo, 1490 A.D., answered: 'his name shall be Shilo, according to that which is written—'until Shilo come.'"

Again: Lesser's Bible—Hebrew translator—not a Christian convert, 1900 A.D.—says: "The Scepter will return, when the Shilo, the King Messiah shall come, and to him shall be both the obedience and assemblance of the people or nations."

The Jewish Targums paraphrase the passage thus: "The Sceptre shall not depart from Judah until the King Messiah comes, to whom it belongeth." This is supported by the rabbis noted above.

This prediction of Genesis 49:10, all the older Jewish commentators, referred to as Messiah. Ben Uzzel, whose Commentaries are among the most ancient Targums, renders the passage: "Until the time when the King Messiah shall come." The Targum of Onkelos speaks of it to the same effect, and the Targum of Jerusalem paraphrases it thus: "Kings shall not cease, from the House of Judah, nor doctors that teach the law from his children until that the King, Messiah, do come, whose the kingdom is: and all nations of the earth shall be subject unto him."

For modern Jewish commentators, these admissions represent tremendous consequences. If the integrity of the prophecy be regarded, then, since the Sceptre—symbol of the legislative and ruling power—has departed from Judah, the Messiah must have come, and long since come, for Judah has not held legislative authority, nor the Sceptre of power for two thousand years! The last trace of legislative power in the Sanhedrin, and all administrative authority departed from Judah with the coming of Jesus, the Christ, and with the destruction of the temple and Jerusalem under the Romans, 70 A.D. (B. H. Roberts, Rasha The Jew, pp. 40-41.)

"Thy Dead Men Shall Live—Together With My Dead Body Shall They Arise"

There is another very important statement by the Prophet Isaiah when he takes the sorrows and afflictions of Israel to Jehovah which we should consider:

Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them.

Like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time of her delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in her pangs; so have we been in thy sight, O Lord. (Isaiah 26:16-17.)

To comfort Israel, the Lord replied:

Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. (Isaiah 26:19.)

We are informed:

This is Jehovah speaking. "Thy dead men," O Israel, "shall live"—the resurrection of the dead proclaimed! Together with Jehovah's dead body shall they arise! Jehovah, then, is to have a "body"! He is to become "dead", and to "arise". Jehovah is to dwell with men in the flesh, to be "Immanuel", to live with men, to die, to arise from the dead, and the dead men of Israel to rise with him! Can language more clearly outline the incarnation of Jehovah in the flesh, his death and his resurrection! Blasphemy this? Then it is Isaiah, the great Hebrew prophet who blasphemes; or rather, Jehovah, for it is he who is speaking. And who but the Christ of the New Testament fulfills, or can fulfill the inspired prophecy of Isaiah, on the incarnation of Jehovah, his death in that mortal state, his resurrection to immortality in that incarnation, and the resurrection of men to an immortality with him—"together with my dead body shall they arise"! (B. H. Roberts, Rasha the Jew, p. 16.)

Through Judah Came the "Chief Ruler"

It was through the coming of the promised Messiah through the loins of Abraham that the Lord promised His prophet that all the nations of the earth would be blessed:

Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him? (Genesis 18:18.)

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing:

And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. (Genesis 12:2-3.)

And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice. (Genesis 22:18.)

The Lord further promised that the "Chief Ruler" would come through Judah:

For Judah prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the chief ruler; but the birthright was Joseph's: (I Chronicles 5:2.)

Kingdom to be Established Through the Seed of David

David was promised by the Lord that through his seed He would set up His Kingdom which would stand forever:

And when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish his kingdom.

He shall build an house for my name, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom for ever.

I will be his father, and he shall be my son. If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men:

But my mercy shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee.

And thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever before thee: thy throne shall be established for ever.

According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so did Nathan speak unto David. (II Samuel 7:12-17. This same promise is also recorded in I Chronicles 17:11-15.)

Prophecies Fulfilled

The prophecies we have considered foretelling the coming of the Messiah, the Jehovah of the Old Testament, have all been fulfilled in the coming of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Redeemer of the World, the King of Israel. He did establish His Kingdom in the meridian of time as was foretold.

Kingdom Removed—To be Restored

But His Kingdom (His Church) was not destined to remain upon the earth uninterrupted until the fulfillment of all the promises of the Lord through all His holy prophets. Because of the wickedness of the House of Israel, the Lord took His Kingdom from the earth until it would be restored "in the latter days" that it may prepare the way for the second coming of the Messiah, who will possess the Kingdom to rule and reign forever and ever as "King of kings and Lord of lords." (Revelation 19:16; See also Zech. 14:9.)

Much would have to be done, according to the words of the prophets, to prepare Christ's Kingdom for His second coming. However, the Lord has made ample provision for the fulfillment of all His promises through His prophets.

In our next chapter we will consider the work necessary to prepare for the second coming of the Messiah, as foretold by the prophets.
